		
 
ACADEMIC FREEDOM

	The pursuit and dissemination of knowledge remained disproportionately dangerous activities as educators and their students were frequent targets of violence and repression sponsored or countenanced by regimes bent on stifling critical analysis and dissent. In the worst cases, these governments used intimidation, physical abuse, and imprisonment to punish campus-based critics, and, by example, to repress civil society.  More commonly, governments pursued the same ends by silencing academics and censoring their teaching, research, and publication on important subjects.  Many countries also continued to deny equal access to educational institutions to women and members of disfavored minority groups.  Ten years after the landmark World Conference on Education for All held in Jomtien, Thailand, a similar gathering held in April in Dakar, Senegal, found that despite some improvements in literacy rates and access to education, in many countries buffeted by political instability or financial downturns, education remained out of reach of significant portions of the population.  

Repression of Academics

	Due to their role in addressing controversial questions and shaping public debate, educators and researchers in many countries faced imprisonment, torture, and even murder.  These attacks  were more broadly aimed at discouraging other academics from pursuing politically sensitive lines of inquiry and ultimately at blocking social debate and dissent.    
    Separatist violence in Aceh, Indonesia, was the context for the murder of Afwan Idris, rector of the Ar Raniry State Institute of Islamic Studies (IAIN), who was shot on September 16 at his home in Banda Aceh, Acehs capital.  Idris was considered a strong candidate for the provinces governorship and served as a member of the independent commission set up by former Indonesian president Habibie to investigate past grave human rights abuses in Aceh.  Under Idris tenure, IAIN became a center for debate and discussion on Acehs political status for a number of nongovernmental groups.  Although at the time of writing no arrests had been made in connection with the murder, Acehnese NGOs reported that the motorcycle used by the gunmen was seen shortly after the shooting on the grounds of the Mobile Brigade (Brimob) police complex.
	The Egyptian government conducted a campaign of intimidation against academics, apparently alarmed by the possibility of critical analysis of the countrys October parliamentary elections.  Authorities closed the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies, a leading political science research center, on June 30, and detained sixteen of its staff, including Saad El-Din Ibrahim, chair of the Sociology Department at the American University in Cairo, for over five weeks without bringing any charges. The detainees were released on bail in mid-August, but several were rearrested on September 25 pursuant to various charges, ranging from accepting foreign funding without government approval (related to the Ibn Khaldun Centers financing by the European Union) to issuing negative statements about Egypts internal situation.  Ibrahim blamed the arrests on the Ibn Khaldun Centers documentation of widespread fraud during the previous Egyptian parliamentary elections.  
	As part of its broad pattern of attacks on academics, in March, the Egyptian Education Ministry docked the pay of thirty-six teachers and a headmaster, all from Qena in Upper Egypt, for having attended a training program aimed at promoting civic education.  The teachers were fined amounts ranging from nineteen days to two months salary.  At least one teacher was transferred to an administrative post.  The training sessions were organized by the Group for Democratic Development, a leading Egyptian NGO, whose earlier academic seminar on transforming Islamicist groups into legitimate political groups was cancelled by government order in January.  This harassment placed Egyptian academics and NGOs in a defensive position prior to the elections and prompted several NGOs to return grants from foreign funders, thus scaling back or altogether stopping their support of critical academic research.

	The Chinese government also continued to control academic life and in some areas increased pressure on educators whose work touched on sensitive issues of religious and ethnic identity, for instance in Tibet and in Xinjiang, a western province with a predominantly Moslem Uighur population.  On May 25, the head of a part-time Uighur school  was detained in Urumqi and, because he conducted classes in Arabic that drew Moslem students, accused of opening a religious school, although the bulk of the schools activity consisted of literacy classes and courses in Chinese, English, Russian, and Japanese.

Censorship and Ideological Controls

	The freedom of academics to research and teach was constrained in various countries either directly, through government control of faculty appointments, or indirectly, under stifling censorship laws.  Events in 2000 demonstrated that regardless of the means used, constriction of scholarship drove away qualified academics and coarsened the quality of public debate.   

	Academics in Serbia chafed under government limits on their work.  The University Act of 1998, imposed under pressure from former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic, subjected faculty members to political oversight and deprived them of the right to select their administrators.  At the time of writing, the act was still in force despite student demonstrations demanding its rescission. As a result of this law Belgrade University alone lost some 180 instructors and professors.  One prominent example was Obrad Savic, a professor for twenty-two years and a leading proponent of democratic reform and academic freedom. On May 16, the university terminated his contract after not paying his salary since May 1998. The decision to terminate Savic came shortly after he had published and distributed a publication entitled In Defense of the University, in which he criticized the Milosevic governments efforts to strangle free inquiry on university campuses. He postponed his most recent project, a series of international seminars on democracy organized in conjunction with the New School University in New York, fearing government retaliation against seminar participants.  Savic told Human Rights Watch that he was given no opportunity to contest the universitys decision to terminate his employment.

	Tunisian authorities also sought to stifle political dissent when they dismissed prominent human rights activist Dr. Moncef Marzouki on July 29 from his post as professor of medicine at the University of Sousse. Marzouki, a former president of the Tunisian League for Human Rights (LTDH), was the spokesperson for the National Council on Liberties in Tunisia (CNLT). Marzouki received a notice of dismissal from the Ministry of Health one day after President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali denounced critics of his government as mercenaries and traitors. Marzoukis dismissal followed years of persecution: In 1993, the Tunisian government prohibited him from carrying out any medical research and closed down the Center for Community Medicine, which he had founded; in June 1999, he was abducted by plainclothes security officials and held incommunicado for several days.  

	Kuwaiti academics faced legal attacks against their exercise of freedom of expression instigated by religious conservative groups using vaguely worded articles in Kuwaits Penal Code and Press Law.  These laws allow for sentences of up to one year in prison and a fine of up to 1,000 KD (U.S. $3,260) for disseminating opinions that include sarcasm, contempt, or belittling of a religion or a religious school of thought, whether by defamation of its belief system or its traditions or its rituals or its instructions.  Using these laws, on October 4, 1999, Kuwaits Misdemeanor Appeals Court sentenced Ahmad al-Baghdadi, then chair of Kuwait Universitys Political Science Department and an expert in Islamic law and history, to one month in jail for a 1996 article in a Kuwait University student newspaper (al-Shoula).  The article discussed popular acceptance of some religious notions in the context of a wider social debate regarding gender segregation in Kuwaiti universities.  One day after being imprisoned, Baghdadi went on a hunger strike and had to be hospitalized four days later due to heart problems.  On October 18, Amir Sheikh Jaber al-Ahmad al-Sabah, Kuwaits ruler, pardoned Baghdadi, who has since returned to teaching.  Another instructor at Kuwait University, philosophy professor Aliya Shuayb, had her two-month prison sentence reduced to a 100 KD (U.S. $326) fine after she was found guilty of defaming religion in her collection of poetry, although the book had been in circulation since 1993.  Shuayb contended that the charges against her stemmed from her studies of sexuality among students at Kuwait University.

	A controversy in Hong Kong highlighted the precarious position of universities there as they faced the encroachment of central control by the territorys Beijing-appointed administration.  Chung Ting-you, a prominent pollster and director of the Public Opinion Program at Hong Kong University (HKU), claimed on July 7 that HKU Vice-Chancellor Cheng Yiu-chung had pressured him on behalf of Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa to cease polling popular support for the chief executive. Chungs surveys, which had revealed deteriorating popular support for Tung, had been attacked by pro-Beijing administrators and media  as suffering from a pro-democracy bias.  In a welcome move, HKU responded to intense student and public demands for an inquiry by convening an independent panel of three prominents jurists and academics to investigate the matter.  The panel found on August 29 that Vice-Chancellor Cheng and Pro-Vice-Chancellor Wong Siu-lun had indeed pressured Chung.  The two resigned as a result of the findings.  Despite these resignations and the panels inquiry, several professors stated that the incident had signalled the academic community to avoid politically sensitive research.

	India, too, witnessed a deterioration in its academic freedom as Muslim and Christian educational facilities came under attack in states governed by the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party. At the institutional level, the BJP and its allies continued to implement their program of  Hinduizing education by mandating Hindu prayers in certain state schools and revising text books to include anti-Islamic and anti-Christian propaganda. On April 9, police searching for two suspects attacked the Jamia Millia Islamia, a Muslim institution of higher education in Delhi, and ransacked the dormitories and vandalized the campus mosque.  
	Muslim educational facilities also remained under pressure in Turkmenistan, where the government of Saparmurad Niazov banned all private Muslem religious education unless provided by the officially sanctioned Muftiat.  Niazovs educational plan also called for three-generation background checks of potential students moral character and the abolition of the teaching of foreign languages in the country.
.
Suppression of Student Activism

	Student groups constituted an important element of political life in many countries.  While at times their actions took them far outside of academic concerns,  more often students were subjected to scrutiny and repression because of their exposure to critical ideas and their ability to mobilize in the relative shelter of university campuses.

	In Yugoslavia, students played a critical role in the electoral defeat of Slobodan Milosevic, whose government had increasingly targeted students in response to the development of a loosely-structured, student-led opposition movement known as Otpor (Resistance).  Numerous university professors, human rights activists, artists, church representatives, and members of the Serbian Academy of Science and Arts publicly supported or joined the group. On May 16, Ivan Markovic, the former Yugoslav minister of telecommunications and a high official of the Yugoslav Left (JUL), one of the parties in Milosevics ruling coalition, accused Otpor of being a terrorist organization.  Authorities soon dropped this charge after it proved untenable, but continued to harass Otpor.  In May and June, the police detained and interrogated some 500 Otpor activists.  Authorities stepped up their attacks in August as the September national elections approached and Otpor launched a campaign calling for a high turnout of young voters. Otpor claimed that police detained hundreds of its members in August alone and beat at least ten who were in custody.  Furthermore, police refused to investigate attacks on Otpor activists by plainclothes thugs believed to have worked for the Milosevic government. 

	Iranian students also remained active in the ongoing struggle between reformists and conservatives. Repeated calls for self-restraint under the doctrine of  active calm by students prevented a reprise of the bloody riots that engulfed several campuses in July 1999, although attacks on student activists by mobs reportedly connected to government security forces continued.  In the worst such incident, on August 26 a mob attacked the seventh annual gathering of the largest student pro-reform organization, the Office for Consolidating Unity (Daftar Tahkim Vahdat), in the city of Khoramabad, and prevented prominent government critics Abdolkarim Soroush (a philosophy professor) and Mohsen Kadivar from addressing the group.  Government forces at the scene were reportedly unable or unwilling to protect the students.  Over the next several days of violence, dozens were injured and one police officer was killed.

	In a troubling development, in Lebanon, which had enjoyed a relatively open academic environment in the Middle East, students demonstrating peacefully in Beirut for the withdrawal of Syrian military forces from Lebanon faced an unduly forceful reaction from Lebanese security forces.  On April 17 and 18, army and security troops forcibly broke student-led demonstrations in Beirut, injuring thirteen people, two of them seriously.  Military tribunals sentenced at least ten students to prison terms ranging from ten days to six weeks for distributing leaflets.

 Access to Education

	Equal access to education is one of the most widely recognized principles of international human rights law, enshrined in article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the subsequent international conventions implementing it, including the Convention against Discrimination in Education, article 13 of  the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, and article 28 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The unfortunately broad catalogue of failures in achieving this ideal reflected the global prevalence of discrimination, especially when aggravated by conditions of poverty, conflict, and war.  
	On April 26, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan launched a ten_year initiative on girls education at the opening of the World Education Forum in Dakar, Senegal.  Forum participants pledged to ensure that all children, especially girls, have access to quality basic education by 2015.  Nevertheless, reports submitted by 180 countries regarding  their educational systems showed that women and girls remained the most widespread victims of educational discrimination. 

	Information gathered by Human Rights Watch mirrored these findings on the range of obstacles blocking equal access to education by girls and women.  These vary from the blatant discrimination by the Taliban in Afghanistan, which continued to bar females from all public educational institutions, to other less obvious though equally pernicious forms of discrimination around the globe.  Human Rights Watchs research in South Africa confirmed reports that sexual violence in schools against girls created a culture of violence that discouraged girls from continuing their education.  Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan continued to prohibit female students from wearing religious attire, thereby effectively blocking these students access to educational facilities.

	Discrimination on other grounds also was widespread.  In the United States, lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender students faced discrimination by their peers and, in some instances, public administrators.  As set out more fully in the chapter on Childrens Rights, these students were part of a large number of students around the world who were denied their right to education because of discrimination based on race, gender, religion, ethnicity, or nationality. 

	Ethnic discrimination against Roma continued on an institutional level in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, as Croatia, Macedonia, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Hungary, and the Czech Republic failed to provide equal access to educational facilities to Romani students and, in the latter two countries, channelled them toward corrective programs designed for mentally handicapped or learning disabled children in disproportionately high numbers.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Tunisia: The Administration of Justice in Tunisia: Torture, Trumped-Up Charges and a Tainted Trial, 3/00
Turkey: Human Rights and European Union Accession Partnership, 9/00
United States: Fingers to the Bone: United States Failure to Protect Child Farmworkers, 5/00
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: Curtailing Political Dissent: Serbias Campaign of Violence and Harassment Against government Critics, 4/00
Arms

Human Rights Developments
In 2000 the intractability of violent conflicts demonstrated the role of weapons transfers in fueling brutal warsand their tragic humanitarian consequences.  The continuation of armed conflicts across the globe was marked by the terrible toll of high civilian casualties, mass displacement, and the widespread destruction of civilian infrastructure.  In many cases, armed groups, including both government and rebel forces, routinely targeted civilians in clear violation of human rights and international humanitarian law.  In Africa in particular, wars resisted resolution, and associated human rights abuses continued unabated.  As the international community increasingly came to realize, unimpeded arms flows were an important part of the problem.
	Arms shipments to the Horn of Africa fed an internecine border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea, where fighting had already caused massive displacement of civilians and tens of thousands of mostly military casualties before an arms embargo was imposed and a cease-fire was agreed.  In the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) the continuous flow of arms to the wars many participants helped to undermine a 1999 peace agreement and prolong a highly abusive war.  Former allies Rwanda and Uganda turned their foreign-supplied guns on each other in DRC, leading to hundreds of civilian deaths and injuries.  In Burundi, the lack of so much as a pledge to halt weapons purchases, together with other factors, raised concerns that a shaky, hard-won peace deal would not last, and that as a result civilians would continue to fall victim to abusive armed forces.
	In Angola a peace process intended to end a longstanding, brutal war instead brought only disillusionment.  Poorly enforced sanctions, including embargoes on arms and diamonds, did little to curb the Angolan rebels ability to terrorize innocent civilians.  In Sierra Leone, a 1999 peace accord crumbled when rebels who were supposed to have disarmed instead captured hundreds of U.N. peacekeepers, seizing their weapons and holding them hostage for weeks.  After May 2000, the rebels who had long targeted civilians also turned their weapons against peacekeepers and pro-government forces.  As in Angola, a neglected arms embargo in Sierra Leone (as well as neighboring Liberia) allowed rebels to use diamond revenue to amass weapons and ammunition with which to commit horrific atrocities.
	As arms flows fed conflict in Africa and elsewhere, the search for solutions to this grave problem took many forms.  Governments, often acting through multilateral organizations, focused on imposing new sanctions or cracking down on illicit arms trafficking by tightening controls on arms brokers.  They also acted against the illicit trade in diamonds that, in some cases, facilitated illicit arms sales.  Civil society groups, many of them joined in a global campaign to tackle the proliferation of small arms, supported such measures, but also argued for concerted action to further regulate the legal trade in weapons and specifically prevent weapons transfers to areas of violent conflict.

Antipersonnel Landmines
	Overall, global progress toward the complete elimination of antipersonnel landmines continued at an impressive pace.  Extensive use of mines in the conflicts in Chechnya and Kosovo were disturbing reminders of how far there was to go.  Between November 1999 and October 2000, the number of nations ratifying the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines and On Their Destruction (Mine Ban Treaty) grew from eighty-seven to 107.   At the time of this writing, a total of 139 countries had signed, ratified, or acceded to the treaty.  
	The treatys intersessional work program, established in May 1999, was proven highly successful.  The five Standing Committees of Experts met regularly to identify areas of concern and develop plans to ensure swift and effective implementation of the treaty.  Their work served to facilitate better coordination and to spur progress globally on the range of mine issues.  In September 2000, the Second Meeting of States Parties to the Mine Ban Treaty was held in Geneva.  States Parties, in close cooperation with the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL), developed an extensive action program for the coming year.  Human Rights Watch headed the official delegation of the ICBL to this diplomatic conference.
	Parties to Amended Protocol II on landmines of the 1980 Convention on Conventional Weapons (CCW), which only restricted certain types of use of some antipersonnel mines, held their first annual conference in December 1999.  The United States made a number of proposals, primarily related to antivehicle mines.  A formal review conference of the CCW was  scheduled for late 2001.  For the fourth straight year, governments were unsuccessful in placing antipersonnel mines on the agenda of the Conference on Disarmament. 
	The International Campaign to Ban Landmines, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning coalition of more than 1,400 nongovernmental organizations (NGO)s in more than ninety countries, continued to play its lead role in promoting a comprehensive ban on antipersonnel mines and more resources for mine clearance and victim assistance programs.  The ICBL was extensively involved in the intersessional work program, and Human Rights Watch was the primary liaison to the key Standing Committee dealing with General Status and Operation of the treaty, as well as the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction.  The ICBL continued to develop its Landmine Monitor systemthe unprecedented initiative marking the first time that civil society groups monitored a disarmament or humanitarian law treaty in a systematic and coordinated way.  The Landmine Monitor network grew to 115 researchers in ninety-five countries. Human Rights Watch was the lead organization in developing, coordinating, and implementing the Landmine Monitor system.
	In September 2000, the ICBL released the 1,100-page Landmine Monitor Report 2000, with information on every country of the world with respect to mine use, production, stockpiling, trade, mine clearance, and victim assistance.  Human Rights Watch served as the coordinator, editor, and publisher of the report.   The report found that since the Mine Ban Treaty entered into force in March 1999, virtually every indicator of progress was positive: decreasing use and production, a near complete halt to trade, more than 22 million stockpiled mines destroyed by at least fifty nations, increased funding for mine clearance, more land returned to communities, and decreasing numbers of mine victims in heavily affected nations.  However, Landmine Monitor identified eleven governments that had apparently used antipersonnel mines in this period, including treaty signatories Angola, Burundi, and Sudan (none of which had ratified the treaty), as well as at least thirty rebel groups.   
	As part of its efforts to get all governments to ratify or accede to the Mine Ban Treaty, and to promote effective implementation of the treaty, the ICBL hosted or co-hosted with governments a number of regional conferences (in Azerbaijan, Belarus, Egypt, Georgia, Malaysia, and Slovenia), as well as national seminars and workshops (in India, Iran, Japan, Nepal, Nigeria, and the U.S.).  ICBL members also undertook advocacy missions to Kosovo, South Korea, and the United Arab Emirates, in addition to meetings at the United Nations in Geneva and New York. 

Conventional Weapons
	In 1999 global military spending rose, marking an end to the sharp decline in spending from Cold War-era peak levels.  According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), worldwide defense spending grew to approximately U.S. $780 billion in 1999 ($719 billion in constant 1995 U.S. dollars), the most recent year for which figures were available in October 2000.  SIPRI attributed this increase of about 2 percent from 1998 to resurgent spending by a handful of the worlds largest military spenders and higher military expenditures by African countries engaged in armed conflicts.
	Competition for weapons contracts remained intense, with many arms suppliers vying for clients and a few countries dominating the market for expensive weapons systems.  The United States Congressional Research Service (CRS) reported the delivery of arms worth $18.4 billion by the U.S., more than half the total value of arms deliveries worldwide.  The United Kingdom ranked second, delivering $4.5 billion in weapons, and Russia third, delivering $2.7 billion.  These top three arms exporters together accounted for 75 percent of global arms deliveries, which declined from $36.4 billion in 1998 to about $34 billion in 1999.
	In addition to completed arms deliveries, another $30.3 billion in arms sales were negotiated worldwide in 1999, a sharp increase over the previous years figure of $22.98 billion. The United States once again dominated the field, negotiating almost $11.8 billion in agreements, followed by Russia, whose efforts to boost arms exports resulted in $4.8 billion in agreements, a sizable jump from $2.6 billion the previous year.  The value of third-ranked Germanys arms transfers agreements slipped to $4 billion from $5.1 billion in 1998. 

Chemical Weapons
	At this writing 140 states had ratified or acceded to the 1993 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling, and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction (Chemical Weapons Convention, CWC).  The most notable addition in 2000 was the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which acceded in April.  Thirty-four states had signed the treaty but not yet ratified it.  While many states parties failed to comply with all aspects of the CWCs timetables, as of May 2000 all had submitted their initial declarations to the Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the body overseeing the implementation of the CWC.  However, well under a half of the states parties had enacted national legislation required by the CWC.  In addition, Russia had to ask the Fifth Conference of States Parties to extend the April 2000 intermediate destruction deadline (for the destruction of 1 percent of its chemical warfare munitions stockpile) mandated in the CWC.  The OPCW had conducted 739 inspections of 352 sites in thirty-five states parties by May 2000.  By the third year after entry into force of the CWC on April 29, 2000, non-states parties to the CWC could no longer import, or were severely restricted in importing, certain chemicals that could be used to synthesize chemical warfare agents.
	In an exception to this progress, the Iraqi government continued to reject cooperation with the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), the successor of the U.N. Special Commission (UNSCOM).  UNMOVIC, charged with inspecting Iraqs weapons of mass destruction (WMD), was again denied access in August, amplifying concerns that Iraq was seeking to revive its WMD programs.  An examination of available information and materials (primarily soil samples) by British, U.N., and other officials in response to claims that the government of Sudan had used chemical weapons in southern Sudan in 1999 found no concrete evidence to support the allegations.

Biological Weapons
	As of October 2000, 144 states had ratified the 1972 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Stockpiling, and Use of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction (Biological Weapons Convention, BWC), while eighteen states had signed but not yet ratified.  Negotiations continued on a legally binding protocol to improve implementation of the treaty.  An ad hoc group charged with developing verification mechanisms, which began negotiating a draft compliance protocol in 1997, found broad agreement on many key issues.  However, several issues remained unresolved after the groups July/August meeting, including definitions of which facilities should be required to submit declarations, the scope and purpose of visits, and procedures for launching and conducting investigations. The ad hoc group hoped to finalize the text of the protocol before the fifth review conference of the BWC in 2001.

Mechanisms of Arms Control

United Nations
	The member states of the United Nations, as well as the U.N. Secretariat, focused greater attention on international transfers of small arms and light weapons in 2000.  These weapons were a particular source of concern because of the enormous humanitarian impact of their widespread availability and misuse.  In areas of violent conflict in particular, well-armed, unaccountable actors often used small arms to carry out attacks on civilians.
	Following the recommendation of U.N. experts, the U.N. General Assembly agreed in December 1999 to hold in mid-2001 the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects.  As of October 2000, planning for the event had proceeded slowly.  An initial meeting of the preparatory committee for the conference, held in February/March 2000, yielded few results.  The venue and date remained undecided, and decisions on the scope of the conference, the desired outcome, and the participation of NGOs likewise remained unclear.  Further preparatory meetings were scheduled for January and March 2001.  In the interim, several regional conferences and initiatives on small arms allowed governments to develop and refine policy positions and build momentum for the 2001 U.N. conference.  For example, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) convened a small arms seminar in April 2000 and worked to  negotiate an OSCE text on small arms to be adopted later in the year.
	At U.N. headquarters, Secretary-General Kofi Annan continued broadbased consultations with governments and some NGOs to identify the magnitude and scope of illicit trafficking in small arms, measures to combat such trafficking, and possible U.N. contributions to information-sharing on small arms.  He released reports on these consultations in September 1999 and August 2000, for review in advance of the 2001 conference.  The U.N. group of experts on small arms also worked throughout the year to prepare a background study and recommendations for consideration at the conference, with special attention to the feasibility of limiting the manufacture and trade in small arms.  Only a handful of states had responded to a request by the secretary-general request for comments on the recommendations provided in earlier expert reports on small arms.  These replies were included in a July report to which future responses could be added.  The goal of curbing the small arms trade was noted repeatedly in different U.N. fora, including at the Millennium Summit of world leaders in September.   
	In 2000 the United Nations compiled information on weapons transfers for the eighth year.  The U.N. Register of Conventional Arms was established in 1992 as a transparency and confidence-building mechanism relying on data submitted voluntarily by states.  In 1999 eighty states supplied information to the register, a marked decline from ninety-seven responses the previous year.  As in the past, many states furnished incomplete information or supplied it late, while others declined to participate.  The 2000 register, which contained composite information regarding 1999 transfers, was issued in August and included information from eight-four states at that time.   Responding to a request by the General Assembly, a U.N. group of experts met in 2000 to consider the further development of the register, as well as mechanisms to increase transparency related to weapons of mass destruction, and their conclusions were described in a separate August report.  Government comments regarding the proposed expansion of the U.N. register were appended to the register itself. 
	In December 1999 the General Assembly requested states to furnish information about their military expenditures annually.  The first composite report with the resulting thirty-two responses was issued in July 2000.  The secretary-general also responded, in an August report, to a General Assembly request for information on international assistance to curb illicit arms trafficking and provide assistance with weapons collection programs.
	Under U.N. auspices, negotiations continued on an International Convention Against Transnational Crime, to be supplemented by three protocols.  The General Assembly requested an ad hoc committee to prepare a draft Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, as well as two protocols on other topics, for approval by the General Assembly before the end of 2000.  The ad hoc committee approved a draft of the convention itself in July, but had not finalized the draft firearms proposal as of October 2000, when another negotiating session was scheduled to take place.

European Union
	The European Union Code of Conduct on Arms Exports entered its second year in 2000.  Under the non-binding code, states agreed, among other provisions, not to authorize arms exports to human rights abusers, areas of violent conflict, or countries that might retransfer the weapons to unauthorized third parties.  The E.U. member states claimed the code was a success, but the lack of transparency about its implementation made it impossible to verify that the code had led to a convergence of arms export practices.  The first report on the implementation of the code was published under pressure from the European Parliament, NGOs, and others.  It was disappointingly short on information.  It was not clear at this writing whether the E.U. Council of Ministers would publish the second report, due before the end of the year. There were few indications that it would include information on the weapons sold or identify arms recipients, as urged by NGOs.
	The E.U. Code, already subscribed to by more than a dozen non-E.U. countries, further extended its reach when the United States endorsed the code in December 1999.  The E.U. hesitated to use this commitment to influence arms export policies of the countries in question, in particular the candidate countries for E.U. membership.  E.U. member states also were reluctant to strengthen the code by making it legally binding, improving end-user control, and introducing rules for brokering and licensed production.  The E.U. achieved agreement in 2000 on control lists for military goods and dual-use goods under the code.
	At the national level, the German cabinet in January 2000 adopted guidelines to bring its arms export controls in line with the E.U. Code, and Germany joined France in issuing its first national report on arms exports in 2000. This brought the number of member states that publish annual arms exports reports to eight (Belgium, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and U.K. being the others).  In the U.K., the ruling Labor Party announced in September that it would introduce a system of licensing for arms brokering and trafficking, as strongly advocated by NGOs.

North Atlantic Treaty Organization
	The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which had been slow to recognize the dangers small arms proliferation posed to human rights and the security interests of the alliance, made strides in 2000 to begin work in this area.  In February 2000 NATOs Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), which brings together NATO allies and former Warsaw Pact countries, incorporated a chapter on small arms into the work program of NATOs Partnership for Peace.  This move created new training and assistance programs to destroy surplus small arms and improve the management and security of weapons stockpiles in partner countries.  As of October 2000, few countries had taken up the offer of help.  Under an initiative sponsored by the U.S., Germany, and Norway and announced in September 2000, Albania was to destroy 130,000 small arms by the end of 2000.  A small arms destruction team traveled to Bulgaria in October for an assessment visit, but it was unclear at this writing whether the discussions would result in agreement to undertake a small arms destruction program.
	The EAPCs working group on small arms, which spurred creation of the new programs, as well as a series of seminars on various small arms topics, could not agree to take up concrete action on more politically sensitive topics, such as transparency in the arms trade and arms export controls.  A planned November seminar was expected to identify practical assistance needs related to export controls that could be met through partnership-sponsored assistance programs, such as the provision of software and equipment.  There was little expectation that a consensus would emerge to move forward on harmonization of such controls. 
	For the first time NATO aspirants were required in 2000 to report on participation in major arms control agreements in an appendix to their annual Membership Action Plans.  NATO, however, did not ask aspirant countries to report on compliance with key policy commitments, such as the E.U. Code of Conduct, that explicitly addressed the human rights implications of conventional arms transfers. 
	At a Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council ministerial meeting in May 2000, Canadian foreign minister Lloyd Axworthy linked NATO membership to responsible arms trading practices.  He stated that national parliaments would be unlikely to approve NATO enlargement unless candidates did their best to halt irresponsible flows of surplus weapons, echoing a warning that NATO officials said was communicated privately to aspirant countries.  Human Rights Watch had repeatedly called on the alliance and individual member states to use such leverage to press for reform of aspirant countries arms trade behavior.  
	Military modernization efforts in Central and Eastern Europe, linked to NATO enlargement, continued to result in vast quantities of surplus small arms, as well as heavy weapons, being offered for sale.  NATO member states made assistance available to partners to destroy surplus small arms, as noted, but did not adopt a broader approach.  Human Rights Watch called for NATO states to provide incentives for the disposal of excess weapons, including heavy military equipment, that otherwise risked being sold to human rights abusers.  To stem the dumping of Soviet-standard weapons into the marketplace, Human Rights Watch further called for the provision of newer, NATO-standard equipment to candidate countries and new allies to be made contingent on their responsible disposal of quantities of surplus arms.

Other Regional Mechanisms
	The Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls entered its fifth year of operation and the thirty-five participating states concluded the first overall assessment of its functioning in 2000.  Participants agreed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the General Information Exchange on non-participating states, and to improve transparency in the exchange of information on arms deliveries.  States also affirmed that: there should be strong, effective, transparent and national law-based enforcement of export controls.  The elements of export control enforcement include a preventive programme, an investigatory process, penalties for violations, and international cooperation.   Members also discussed for the first time including small arms and light weapons in the regime, as well as the possibility of also developing common export guidelines for man-portable surface-to-air missiles, a proposal heavily favored by the U.S.  The U.S. also proposed expanding the list of seven reporting categories for weapons to seventeen, and that member countries report all arms transfers to areas of armed conflict.  In addition, the U.S. publicly encouraged Wassenaar states to enhance the transparency of arms exports through the publication of annual reports. 
	In November 1999, members of NATO and the former Warsaw Pact agreed to update the 1990 Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty to impose national, rather than bloc-to-bloc, ceilings on holdings of certain heavy weapons.  The adapted treaty will take effect once thirty states ratify it.  
	Also in November 1999, on the occasion of an OSCE summit in Turkey, the participants in the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe issued a declaration on small arms and light weapons.  They agreed to combat illicit arms trafficking and to destroy surplus and seized weapons.
	Within the Organization of American States (OAS), at this writing the United States Senate had not acted to provide its advice and consent for ratification of either the 1997 Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Material or the 1999 Inter-American Convention on Transparency in Conventional Weapons Acquisitions.  Only one state, Canada, had ratified the Transparency in Conventional Weapons Acquisitions convention, which seeks to increase transparency and build confidence and security among American states.  At this writing, there were ten states party to the OAS illicit arms trafficking convention.
	At the December 1999 summit in Togo of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) the sixteen member states adopted an action plan to complement the three-year moratorium on the import, export, and manufacture of light weapons announced in 1998.  The action plan included a code of conduct outlining the procedures and requirements for obtaining a waiver, and the creation of a prototype arms register and weapons database for the West Africa region promoted as a forerunner for an Africa-wide register.  Although the small arms moratorium had great symbolic value, ECOWAS lacked the financial resources to provide for substantial monitoring and enforcement mechanisms to prevent highly abusive forces, including rebels in Sierra Leone, from receiving further weapons.  The moratorium therefore achieved little success in curbing the flow of small arms in West Africa, as arms continued to flow to member states such as Liberia and Sierra Leone and make their way into the hands of human rights abusers.  ECOWAS received some international assistance, including a grant from the United States to assess individual states ability to control the flow of small arms, as well as the support of NGOs who sought to strengthen the moratorium. 
	In Southern Africa, the states of the Southern African Development Community negotiated a draft of a Firearms Protocol to combat the illicit manufacturing, trafficking, possession, or use of firearms.  At this writing, the text had not been finalized and adopted.

Arms Embargoes
	There were important developments with regard to mandatory U.N. arms embargoes in 2000, including a groundbreaking U.N. report released in March detailing how a highly abusive rebel group in Angola breached a 1993 arms embargo.  The report was prepared by an expert panel overseen by the chair of the Security Council Angola sanctions committee, then Canadian ambassador to the U.N. Robert Fowler.  The Fowler report was remarkable for naming the individuals (including heads of state), companies, and countries implicated in sanctions-busting and also for calling for their punishment.  That call went unanswered, with the Security Council deferring action until a further investigation could be completed, anticipated for October 2000.  The government of Bulgaria and the presidents of Burkina Faso and Togo, for example, rejected charges that they helped Angolas UNITA rebels breach international sanctions.
	As was the case with a previous ad hoc U.N. arms inquiry on Rwanda, Human Rights Watchs efforts to document violations of embargoes imposed on human rights abusers helped pave the way for the U.N.s investigation.  In addition, Human Rights Watch offered a sympathetic critique of the Angola panels work, highlighting lessons that would later inform the creation of a dual arms/diamonds inquiry for Sierra Leone.  The Security Council mandated the Sierra Leone inquiry in July 2000, two months after Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels overran U.N. peacekeepers and NGOs, including Human Rights Watch, proposed this and other measures to prevent the RUF from rearming to continue an unspeakably brutal war.  At the same time, to cut off the RUFs source of financing, the Security Council imposed an embargo on all diamond sales that were not authorized by the government of Sierra Leone.  In line with the Fowler reports naming and shaming approach, several governments, particularly the U.S. and U.K., publicly chastised Liberia and its president for supporting Sierra Leones rebels, including by trading arms for diamonds, and named Burkina Faso as a transit point for illegal arms shipments.  These statements were repeated at a U.N. Sierra Leone sanctions committee hearing on the diamond and arms trades in Sierra Leone, at which Security Council members and others, including a Human Rights Watch representative, made statements.  The U.N.s Sierra Leone investigative panel was due to prepare a report by the end of October.  At this writing, the Security Council had not taken needed steps to ensure effective enforcement of the neglected arms embargoes on Sierra Leone and Liberia, for example the deployment of well-equipped U.N. forces to monitor borders (especially with Liberia), roads, and airstrips bordering on rebel-controlled areas and halt any weapons shipments they detect.
	As of October 2000, embargoes remained in place against grossly abusive non-state groups in Angola, Rwanda, and Sierra Leone, as well as against Iraq, Liberia, Somalia, and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.  The 1992 embargo on Libya was suspended in 1999.  A new mandatory arms embargo was imposed on Ethiopia and Eritrea in May 2000 in response to derailed peace talks and continued fighting, but was limited to a twelve-month time frame.  This move reflected an ongoing debate about reform of U.N. sanctions regimes.  The Security Council convened a special debate on sanctions in April 2000, and a Security Council working group subsequently began studying sanctions in order to propose measures to enhance their effectiveness.  This debate was informed by several initiatives both within and outside the U.N. to analyze weaknesses in U.N. sanctions regimes and develop recommendations for action.  A proposal, advanced by Human Right Watch and other nongovernmental organizations, to create a permanent U.N. embargoes unit appeared to gain support in 2000.

Tackling Small Arms Proliferation
	Small arms and light weapons continued to be the weapons of choice in wars around the world.   Plentiful, highly portable, easy to maintain, and relatively inexpensive, these weapons were often turned against civilians.  A 1999 study by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) noted that even by very conservative estimates drawing on the ICRCs database of treated weapons injuries, more than a third of all victims of armed attacks were civilians.  The ICRC argued for legal restraints on the trade in small arms based on respect for international humanitarian law.
	With the U.N. conference on small arms planned for 2001, NGOs geared up for the event.  The International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA), which counted well over two hundred participants, including Human Rights Watch, pressed for the conference to address the legal trade in arms, as well as illicit trafficking; to result in concrete actions rather than mere rhetoric; and to be inclusive of the views of civil society.  The formation of an Eminent Persons Group on Small Arms brought several high-profile figures to the global campaign.
	Although IANSA participants recognized that supply-side measures alone could not fully address the impact of arms flows on civilians, reining in weapons exporters and arms brokers continued to be an important element of the small arms campaign.  For example, tons of surplus arms sold cheaply by former Warsaw Pact countries that were new or aspiring members of NATO contributed to the widespread availability of small arms and their low price.  These countries, as well as several former Soviet republics and China, had much greater need for hard currency than for large stockpiles of aging Soviet-standard military equipment.  As with small arms originating in countries with lax controls, surplus heavy weapons were often sold without consideration for the dangers posed by arms sales to areas of conflict marked by gross human rights abuses.
	Bulgaria in particular was scrutinized for its record of arms transfers, with several governments and organizations joining Human Rights Watch in criticizing the countrys poor controls.  U.S. President Bill Clinton raised arms trade concerns with the Bulgarian prime minister during a November 1999 visit, and NATO officials also stated that the topic had been discussed at high levels with Bulgarian officials.  These efforts were reinforced by the U.N.s Angola panel, which named Bulgaria as the UNITA rebels main arms supplier in March 2000 and called for NATO to weigh Bulgarias membership bid with this behavior in mind.  The head of the panel also explicitly linked Bulgarias pending accession to the European Union with efforts to clean up its arms export practices.  
	These efforts began to bear modest fruit as the Bulgarian government, feeling the pressure, promised to tighten controls.  It undertook to restrict the use of falsified arms trade documents by working with other southeast European countries to develop standardized and hard-to-forge alternatives, moved to create an independent oversight agency for the arms trade, asked for help destroying surplus small arms stocks, and promised to push for adoption of reforms to the national arms trade law.  Still, much remained to be done.  Proposed legal changes were insufficient to close important loopholes, and neglected to incorporate into law human rights criteria for arms exports.  Bulgaria also repeatedly reneged on its pledge to adhere to the non-binding E.U. Code of Conduct on Arms Exports, while implementation and enforcement of the countrys existing arms trade law remained a serious problem.
	South Africa, another arms exporter, has disappointed human rights and arms control advocates with some of its sales.  While its arms control policy was in principle quite strong, Pretoria had furnished weapons to clients such as Algeria which did not meet South Africas code of conduct criteria on human rights and conflict.  Further, a long-awaited bill intended to formalize the remarkable arms control reforms made since 1994 (the end of the apartheid era) fell seriously short of expectations.  Among other shortcomings, the bill presented to parliament in July 2000 left out the human rights criteria at the core of South Africas ethical arms export policy.  After strong protest from NGOs, the bill was withdrawn for redrafting.

Weapons and the Conduct of War 

Targeting in Warfare and Civilian Casualties
	In a report released in February 2000, based on an investigative mission in August 1999, Human Rights Watch estimated that the seventy-eight-day bombing campaign against Yugoslavia resulted in about 500 civilian deaths in ninety separate incidents.  Human Rights Watch concluded that NATO violated international humanitarian law, but did not commit war crimes.  One-third of the incidents and one-half of the deaths were the result of attacks on illegitimate or questionable targets, including Serb Radio and Television, heating plants, and bridges.  Human Rights Watch criticized the use of cluster bombs in populated areas, insufficient precautions in warning civilians of attacks, and insufficient precautions in identifying the presence of civilians when attacking convoys and mobile targets.   Human Rights Watch called for changes in targeting and bombing doctrine to ensure compliance with international humanitarian law.  
Cluster Bombs
	The use of cluster bombs by NATO in the Kosovo conflict generated extensive attention to the negative humanitarian impact of these weapons.  U.S. and U.K. aircraft dropped about 1,600 cluster bombs on Yugoslavia, containing about 300,000 individual bomblets.   According to a Human Rights Watch investigation, at least ninety and as many as 150 civilians died in incidents involving NATO use of cluster bombs15 to 25 percent of all civilian deaths in the conflict.  The large number of civilian casualties reflected both the difficulty of accurately targeting cluster bombs, and the decision to use them in populated, urban areas. 
	Cluster bombs not only posed a special danger to civilians during conflict, but like landmines, continued to take civilian victims even after the war ended.  Cluster bomblets that did not explode on impact as designed became de facto antipersonnel mines that would then explode from the contact of a person.  Using a very conservative estimated failure rate of 5 percent, the air war resulted in some 15,000 unexploded bomblets littering the country.  Those bomblets had caused several hundred civilian casualties since the end of the bombing campaign in June 1999; more children had been killed or injured by cluster bomblets than landmines.   
	In December 1999, in a memorandum to delegates to the Convention on Conventional Weapons, Human Rights Watch called for a moratorium on the use of cluster bombs by all nations until humanitarian concerns can be adequately addressed.  Subsequently the International Committee of the Red Cross and other organizations also called for a use moratorium.  In September 2000 the ICRC called for a new remnants of war protocol to the CCW that would require users to be responsible for post-conflict clean-up and require self-destruct mechanisms on munitions such as cluster bombs.



United States Policy

Antipersonnel Landmines
	There was no change in the Clinton administration policy announced in May 1998 that the U.S. would join the Mine Ban Treaty in 2006 if the Pentagon was successful in identifying and fielding alternatives by that time.  After several years of inaction, Pentagon spending and activities related to the search for alternatives expanded, but it also became increasingly clear that the 2006 date was unlikely to be met.  While the U.S. deserved credit for continuing to increase the amount of money it devoted to mine clearance programs around the world, it had not taken adequate steps to move closer to a comprehensive ban on the weapon.
	There were several disturbing developments in 2000.  For the second year in a row, the Pentagon asked for $48 million for a new mine system called RADAM that would contain not only antitank mines, but also antipersonnel mines banned under the Mine Ban Treaty.  Congress cut funding to $8 million in 1999 and appropriated $28 million in 2000.  Moreover it came to light that the alternative that was farthest along in the developmental stages, the so-called man-in-the-loop system, still contained a feature that when activated would return the munition to traditional antipersonnel mine status, and therefore be prohibited by the ban treaty.  Human Rights Watch also discovered U.S. Air Force plans to stockpile antipersonnel mines in Qatar, a party to the Mine Ban Treaty.  

Conventional Weapons and Military Transfers or Training
	U.S. efforts in 2000 to control the flow of conventional weapons focused on illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons.  In February 2000, the Department of State released a fact sheet outlining U.S. priorities in this area, which included increasing domestic and international transparency of arms transfers, helping other countries destroy surplus weapons stocks, and enforcing U.N. arms embargoes.  These priorities reflected input from U.S.-based NGOs, often acting in concert as members of the Small Arms Working Group and the Arms Transfers Working Group.
	In November 1999 the International Arms Sales Code of Conduct Act of 1999 was signed into law as an amendment to the Consolidated Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2000.  The amendment, the result of a compromise between Representatives Cynthia McKinney (Democrat, Georgia) and Sam Gejdenson (Democrat, Connecticut), required the Clinton administration to support efforts to negotiate an international code of conduct for arms transfers.  The following month, the U.S. endorsed the 1998 E.U. Code of Conduct on arms exports.  At this writing, the U.S. government had not incorporated into national regulations E.U. Code criteria that went beyond those already followed by the U.S., so it was unclear how the U.S. intended to adhere to the criteria.  Also in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, Congress required the Secretary of State to submit by May 2000 reports on small arms proliferation and the arms export licensing process.  At this writing, both reports to Congress were pending.
	At a NATO meeting in May 2000, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright announced arms export reforms to facilitate U.S. arms exports to close allies.  Under the Defense Trade Security Initiative, the U.S. introduced seventeen changes to its domestic arms regulations, most aimed at expediting the export licensing process.  NGOs expressed concern that the exemptions would undermine efforts to monitor U.S. weapons exports and ensure that they are not illegally diverted to unauthorized end users.
	The Leahy Amendment, which prohibited the U.S. from giving security assistance to abusive forces, continued to have a beneficial impact on U.S. policy. In August, U.S. Special Forces arrived in Nigeria to help train and equip battalions of Nigerians to serve as peacekeepers in Sierra Leone.  In order to comply with the Leahy law, the U.S. pledged to screen all potential trainees and exclude those suspected of having committed human rights abuses.  It did not, however, take the further step of promoting prosecution of human rights abusers as a condition for such assistance.
	In March 2000 the Departments of Defense and State released a three-part report outlining foreign military training programs in fiscal years 1999 and 2000, of which two parts were classified.  The declassified portion of the report was a disappointing setback for efforts to increase transparency in foreign military assistance.  It no longer identified the foreign military units trained, for example, and thus made more difficult the monitoring of U.S. compliance with the Leahy law.
	In July 2000, the U.S. General Accounting Office released a report summarizing U.S. efforts to stem the proliferation of small arms.  It stated that between 1996 and 1998, the U.S. authorized transfers or delivered $3.7 billion in small arms, primarily to close allies (Turkey was one top recipient), and acknowledged that some of these weapons had ended up on the black market.  The GAO also noted U.S. contributions to international efforts to control the trade in small arms and its role in helping other states destroy excess weapons.  In a second report, released in August, the GAO examined the U.S.s end-use monitoring efforts.  The GAO concluded that the Department of Defense was failing in three areas: requiring field personnel to conduct and report on end-user checks; requiring field personnel to conduct such checks in response to specific circumstances or for certain weapons systems; and complying with the reporting requirements of the Arms Export Control Act of 1996. The report attributed these failures to inadequate training and guidance provided to field personnel on end-use monitoring requirements.
	In September 2000 the Defense Department released its portion of the annual Section 655 report, detailing arms sales for fiscal year 1999.  As of October 2000, the State Department had not yet released its complementary portion.


Chemical and Biological Weapons
	The United States was in technical non-compliance with the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention until May 2000, when, three years late, it began submitting its initial declarations under the treaty with respect to possession or production of chemical weapons.  Although U.S. declarations included almost 600 chemical manufacturing facilities, it was unclear if all facilities that should be declared were included.  Inspections of U.S. industry facilities also began in May.  According to the U.S. General Accounting Office, the United States would most likely not meet the 2007 deadline for the complete destruction of its chemical weapons stockpiles.  
	There was concern in 2000 that the U.S. was not providing needed leadership in the negotiations for a compliance protocol to the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention (BWC).  The ad hoc group charged with negotiating the protocol hoped to complete its work before the fifth review conference of the BWC, scheduled for late 2001, but absence of U.S. support for this effort undermined its prospects for success.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Angola Unravels: The Rise and Fall of the Lusaka Peace Process, 9/99 
Landmine Monitor Report 2000: Toward a Mine-Free World and the Executive Summary: Landmine Monitor Report 2000, 9/00
NATO: Civilian Deaths in the NATO Air Campaign, 2/00
South Africa: A Question of Principle: Arms Trade and Human Rights, 10/00
United States: Clintons Landmine Legacy, 7/00
CHILD SOLDIERS CAMPAIGN

Seventeen_year_old Abubakar (not his real name) was one of thousands of children abducted by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) during the recent conflict in Sierra Leone. Abubakar took part in fighting and was often forced to commit abuses. In one instance, he and others were ordered by their commander to burn down an entire town after a counterattack on the RUF by government helicopters. It was not my wish to go fight, it was because they captured me and forced me, he told Human Rights Watch. There was no use in arguing with them, because in the RUF if you argue with any commander they will kill you.
	Like Abubakar, an estimated 300,000 girls and boys under the age of eighteen were fighting in armed conflicts in approximately thirty countries. These young combatants served in government forces, pro-government militias, and armed opposition groups. Their ranks included children as young as eight recruited into Colombias paramilitaries, teenaged boys forcibly taken from their villages in Myanmar to serve in the national army, and young girls kidnapped by the Lords Resistance Army in Northern Uganda for use as soldiers and sex slaves. 
	In a  breakthrough in efforts to end the use of child soldiers, six years of negotiations led to agreement on January 21 on a new optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The protocol established eighteen as the minimum age for direct participation in hostilities, for compulsory recruitment, and for any recruitment or use in hostilities by nongovernmental armed groups. 
	Agreement on the protocol was a tremendous achievement for the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, which had aggressively campaigned for a global ban on the use of children as soldiers. The coalition was founded by Human Rights Watch and five other international organizations in 1998 and subsequently grew to encompass national partners and campaigns in more than thirty countries. 
	The protocol marked a significant advance over previous international standards, which permitted children as young as fifteen to be legally recruited and sent to war. The new protocol established a clear standard that any use of children in war was unacceptable, and provided a critical new basis for exerting public and political pressure against governments and armed groups that use children in armed conflict. 
	The biggest weakness of the protocol was its failure to establish eighteen as the minimum age for voluntary recruitment into government armed forces. The protocol required states to raise the minimum age for voluntary recruitment from the previous minimum of fifteen, and to implement certain safeguards when recruiting under-eighteens including parental permission and proof of age. States were also required to deposit a binding declaration at the time of ratification stipulating the states minimum age for voluntary recruitment.  
	The coalition, along with U.N. agencies and the International Committee of the Red Cross, had consistently campaigned for a prohibition of any recruitment or participation in hostilities by children under the age of eighteen, arguing that the only way to ensure that children do not participate in war is to not recruit them in the first place. But many governments based their positions during the negotiations on their existing military recruitment practices, and insisted on the right to continue recruiting under-age volunteers. The resulting provision created an unfortunate double-standard, allowing governments to recruit under-eighteens, but prohibiting nongovernmental armed forces from doing so. 
	The negotiations on the protocol were marked by a significant shift in the United States position.  After six years of vigorous opposition to eighteen as the minimum age for participation in armed conflict, the U.S. reversed itself and agreed for the first time to end the deployment of U.S. troops who were under eighteen into combat and to support the protocol. This was the first time that the United States had ever agreed to change its practices in order to support a human rights standard. 
	The protocol was formally adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on May 25, and opened for signature in early June. By the close of the U.N. Millennium Summit, held in New York from September 6-8, sixty-eight countries had signed the new protocol, and three (Canada, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka) had ratified it. 
	The coalition announced that it would campaign for universal ratification of the protocol and urge states to deposit binding declarations upon ratification setting a minimum age of at least eighteen for voluntary recruitment. It set an initial target of one hundred signatures by the first anniversary of the protocols adoption on May 25, 2001, and fifty ratifications by the time of the September 2001 U.N. General Assembly Special Session on Children. 
	During the Millennium Summit, the coalition drew attention to the use of child soldiers and the new protocol by unveiling a special childrens war memorial during a ceremony attended by more that twenty governments. The memorial was inscribed with the name, age, and country of scores of child soldiers killed, wounded, missing, or detained in armed conflicts around the world. Those attending the ceremony included the president of Mali, the prime ministers of New Zealand and Sweden, the first ladies of Ecuador and Norway, and representatives from fifteen other governments.
	The coalition also held the fourth in a series of regional conferences on the use of children as soldiers, following previous conferences in 1999 for Africa, Latin America, and Europe. The Asia-Pacific conference was held from May 15 to 18 in Kathmandu, Nepal. Representatives of twenty-four governments (including Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Laos, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand) and more than one hundred delegates from NGOs across the region attended the conference, together with representatives of UNICEF and other agencies. 
	The coalition released a new report at the conference on the use of children as soldiers in the region, estimating that at least 75,000 children under the age of eighteen were participating in conflicts in Asia and the Pacific, placing the region second only to Africa in the use of children as soldiers. The report named Burma as one of the largest users of child soldiers in the world, and Afghanistan, Cambodia, and Sri Lanka as some of the other worst affected countries. 
	The conference concluded with a strong declaration in support of the new Optional Protocol, calling on states to ratify it without reservations and specify at least eighteen years as the minimum age for voluntary recruitment. Delegates called on government armed forces and armed groups to immediately demobilize or release into safety child soldiers. They also urged tight controls on the availability of small arms, including the sanctioning of those supplying forces using children in this way.
	Human Rights Watch, which had chaired the coalition since its inception, continued to play a leadership role in the global campaign to end the use of child soldiers. Human Rights Watch participated in briefings for the press, representatives of the Organization of American States, and members of the U.N. Security Council. It spoke at numerous events, including the Asia-Pacific regional conference in Kathmandu, and the International Conference on War-Affected Children, held in Winnipeg, Canada in September 2000. Human Rights Watchs Brussels office took the lead in the coalitions advocacy with the European Union, European Parliament, and the OSCE, and lobbied OSCE member states in favor of a strong ministerial decision on children and armed conflict. 
 
	Human Rights Watch also maintained a strong role with the U.S. Campaign to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers. It helped influence the United States change of position regarding the Optional Protocol and the age of deployment for U.S. troops, and worked with the Clinton administration and Congress to support U.S. ratification of the protocol. Congressional resolutions were adopted by the Senate in June, and the House of Representatives in July, urging the United States signature and swift consideration for ratification. President Clinton signed the protocol on July 5 at the U.N., and submitted it to the Senate later that month; at the time of this writing, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had taken no action. 

INTRODUCTION
		
The scope of todays global human rights problems far exceeds the capacity of global institutions to address them.  The problem is most acute in the global economy, where a disturbing institutional void frequently leaves human rights standards unenforced.  But the problem also arises as the world struggles to stop mass atrocities, protect the victims of these crimes, rebuild their countries, and bring their persecutors to justice.  In each case, a more interconnected and seemingly smaller world rightfully feels a greater responsibility to respond.  Yet the capacity to meet these demands has not kept up with the challenges.  A reinforced global architecture is needed.

This introduction to Human Rights Watchs annual World Report describes this weakness in the institutional capacity to address the global human rights challenges of our time.  It highlights the enforcement gap for issues of human rights in the global economy.  It discusses the inadequate resources given to the United Nations to assume its assigned tasks of keeping the peace and assisting war-torn nations with national reconstruction.  And it describes the recent strides taken toward a new institutional justice system for the worlds worst human rights criminals but laments the U.S. governments persistent refusal to countenance U.S. nationals being held to the same standards as the rest of the world.
This report?Human Rights Watchs eleventh annual review of human rights practices around the globe?covers developments in seventy countries.  It is released in advance of Human Rights Day, December 10, 2000, and describes events from November 1999 through October 2000.  Most chapters examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the United Nations, and various regional organizations; and the freedom of local human rights defenders.  Other chapters address important thematic concerns.  

Highlights of the year include, on the positive side, the popular rebellion against the Milosevic regime in Yugoslavia, the conclusion of a treaty barring the use of children as soldiers, and the U.N. Commission on Human Rightss first formal criticism of a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council (Russia, for its abuses in Chechnya).  On the negative side, the U.N. Human Rights Commission refused yet again to condemn China for its relentless suppression of political opposition, the U.S. government failed to abide by conditions included in a major military aid package to Colombia that would have required the Colombian army to sever its ties with paramilitaries, and there was a growing crisis in the worlds response to refugees and asylum-seekers and persistently inadequate protection for the internally displaced.  
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2000 by the Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human rights activists in the countries in question.  Human Rights Watch reports, published throughout the year (see http://www.hrw.org), contain more elaborate accounts of the brief summaries collected in this volume.  The chapters here also reflect the work of the Human Rights Watch advocacy staff, which monitors the policies of governments and institutions with influence to curb abusive human rights conduct. 
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the problem.  There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.  Other factors affecting the focus of our work in 2000 and hence the content of this volume include the severity of abuses, access to the country and the availability of information about it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to outside influence, the importance of addressing certain thematic concerns, and the need to maintain a balance in the work of Human Rights Watch across various political divides. 

The Global Economy 

After street protests over the past year in Seattle, Prague, Washington, and elsewhere, proponents of the global economy seem on the defensive.  Globalization?the increased international flow of trade, capital, information, and people?has delivered undeniable wealth and opportunity and created millions of jobs.  But there is widespread unease at some of the associated and parallel ills.  Income inequality is growing, as are the number of people in abject poverty.  The much-criticized race to the bottom seems to stymie certain attempts at social and economic betterment.  Resource extraction?the business of oil, minerals, and metals? often proceeds without regard to the rights of local residents.  Governments depend on migrant workers to take on less desirable jobs but frequently deny them legal protection.  Trafficking in people has flourished.  
Despite these problems, the current system to regulate global commerce leaves little or no room for human rights and other social values.  Relevant international human rights standards exist but are not uniformly ratified, effectively enforced, or adequately integrated into the global economy.
The debate about solving these problems has been unhelpfully polarized.  Advocates of unfettered trade and capital flow tend to see commerce itself as a panacea.  Pointing to the immense wealth generated by the global economy, they frequently resist any governance regime that might constrain globalization by attention to other social values.   More and freer commerce, in their view, is the best route to social as well as economic betterment.  
But as Human Rights Watch has repeatedly found, a world integrated on commercial lines does not necessarily lead to human rights improvements.  In China, increased international trade has not lessened the governments determination to snuff out any political opposition.  In Sudan, oil revenue made possible by international investment has allowed the government in only two years nearly to double the defense budget for its highly abusive war.  In Central Asia, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, international investment in oil and gas exploration and production has only reaffirmed the new governments resolve to cling to power at all costs while their people plunge into poverty.  In Sierra Leone and Angola, international trade in diamonds has fueled deadly civil wars.  The number of migrant workers and trafficking victims has grown with international commerce, yet abuses against them remain largely ignored.  Experience shows that global economic integration is no substitute for a firm parallel commitment to defending human rights.
Opponents of globalization highlight the fate of the millions of people who are excluded from the benefits of the global economy or are forced to accept it on unsatisfactory terms.  They argue that globalization mainly benefits the wealthy and that it aids the poor too slowly or actually contributes to their plight.  Some opponents would simply shut down the process of globalization, convinced that its benefits are not worth the price.  They include those who have used violence against institutions they see as supporting globalization.  Others focus more constructively on reshaping the global economy to better serve social values.  Many reforms have been discussed but none has gained a consensus.
Some of the firmest defenders of unfettered global commerce come from the developing countries in whose name the opponents of globalization claim to speak.  Both governments and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in these countries fear that linking trade or investment to respect for social values, however well intentioned, will end up serving protectionist interests in the industrialized world and shutting off developing countries from the benefits of global commerce.  They are particularly wary of the efforts of some activists to prescribe a living wage on a national basis for fear of being deprived of their principal competitive advantage?cheap labor.  They also object to efforts by the global North to enforce selected social and economic values in the global South when it serves Northern interests, while neglecting more costly obligations to help achieve other important social and economic goals such as alleviating poverty or improving health care or education.

A Human Rights Framework

In this divisive debate, human rights offer a promising framework to address many of the problems of globalization, including the tendency of some governments and corporations to compete by profiting from repression.  Some of the most alarming by-products of globalization are clear violations of rights enshrined in international treaties.  By the same token, upholding these rights provides the basis for solving many of the ills associated with globalization in a way that need not shut down global trade or benefit the worlds richer countries at the expense of the poor.
Within the workplace, for example, human rights speak directly to the problems of exclusion.  Factory workers often face poor wages, abysmal working conditions, sexual abuse, no social safety net, and no legal protection.  Respect for freedom of association would allow workers to join together?in trade unions should they choose?to improve wages and working conditions.  The prohibition against discrimination on such grounds as gender, race, or ethnicity ensures that historically marginalized people enjoy the fruits of their labor on the same terms as others.  The prohibition of forced or abusive child labor and the ban on arbitrary violence require employers to negotiate with adult free-agents. 
On a societal level, respect for civil and political rights, including the right to elect ones government, allows the disadvantaged to have a voice in the direction of their nations social and economic development.  These rights permit citizens to press their government to take on such issues as increasing the minimum wage, protecting union activists from retaliation, enforcing prohibitions on discrimination, regulating extraction industries, or ensuring that investments are made with social values in mind.  They also promote the transparency and accountability in national governments and international institutions that are prerequisites to making them responsive to popular concerns.  
In addition, respect for these basic freedoms helps to encourage governments of the industrialized and developing world to take seriously their obligations to uphold economic, social, and cultural rights.  It allows people to urge governments to ratify the leading treaty safeguarding these rights and to adopt reasonable plans to realize these rights progressively, including in the regulation of trade and investment.  It also permits popular input into the choice among alternative routes to fulfill economic and social rights, such as the amount of investment to put into education or health care, the level of restrictions to place on industries that cause environmental damage or social disruption, or the type of social welfare programs needed to temper the shock of trade liberalization and structural adjustment policies.
This emphasis on rights may not guarantee particular wage levels, working conditions, or regulatory policies.  Nor does it eliminate inequalities in bargaining power or eradicate all forms of social exclusion.  But by allowing an unfettered civil society to make its views heard, a rights approach permits workers and citizens to have a say in these important matters.  
A rights approach also discourages the tendency of some governments and multinational corporations to gain a competitive advantage by suppressing workers demands for better treatment or societys pursuit of such goals as a clean environment.  Corporations might still seek lower production costs by moving to lower-wage or less socially demanding countries.  Governments might still seek a competitive advantage by restricting taxes, wages, regulations, or social benefits.  But competition through repression? the most nefarious aspect of the race to the bottom?would be significantly constrained.
A rights approach would give developing countries a legal basis to broaden discussions of trade and investment policy to include the need for reciprocal benefits and concessions from the industrialized world to facilitate the realization of economic and social rights. Such demands would have more resonance because they would be grounded in legally binding international human rights treaties rather than more malleable and selective economic theories.  A rights approach would thus serve as a useful supplement to development models that are premised on market liberalization but pay insufficient attention to attendant social and economic problems.
At the same time, a rights approach should prove acceptable to proponents of free trade.  It does not seek to shut down global trade and investment, only to invoke broadly accepted rights to define the limits within which commerce should proceed.  It does not raise the drawbridge against global competition, but insists that the market be grounded in respect for international human rights law.
Finally, a rights approach would help develop international solutions to problems arising from the global movement of people, such as the lack of protection for migrant workers and trafficking victims.  Many industrialized countries erect barriers to legal immigration from developing countries but tacitly accept undocumented migrants, or migrants with strict legal limits on their presence, to perform undesirable work.  Many developing countries also export workers, some with documentation and some without, to earn foreign exchange through remittances.  Lacking legal protection, these workers have little recourse in the face of such problems as sexual abuse, dangerous working conditions, and violations of the right to organize.  In addition, many governments wrongly equate the smuggling used to infiltrate undocumented migrant workers with human trafficking?transport based on deception or coercion????thereby denying trafficking victims the protection they need.

The Need for Stronger Institutions

The advantages of a rights approach remain theoretical without broad governmental ratification of the relevant human rights treaties and a reliable means of enforcement.  Stronger institutions are needed to insist that governments and corporations respect human rights in their global dealings.  The United Nations and the International Labour Organization have played an important role in establishing human rights standards, including the U.N.s international covenants and the ILOs core labor standards.  But these institutions lack adequate enforcement powers.  Except in extraordinary circumstances, the most they can do is encourage treaty ratification and condemn abusive conduct.  The U.N. has been more effective because its special rapporteurs and working groups have more latitude to use public shaming to encourage compliance.  The tripartite nature of the ILO ????combining representatives of government, business, and labor????often leaves the organization paralyzed when it tries to uphold rights in contentious situations.  
Meanwhile, the World Trade Organization, which does have enforcement powers, focuses on promoting global trade, sometimes at the expense of international human rights norms.  The proposal to add a social clause to its mandate has been controversial in part because the WTO has no expertise, culture, or tradition of  protecting rights.  Moreover, many Southern governments and NGOs fear that sanctions under a social clause would be applied against only developing countries, not against comparable abuses in the industrialized world.  
At a regional level, the Council of Europe has established clear rights standards in the European Convention on Human Rights, enforced by the European Court of Human Rights, and the European Social Charter.  At the same time, the European Union has established an institutionalized social dialogue procedure among employers and unions, set forth in its Maastricht Social Protocol and Agreement, and an international court, the European Court of Justice, with a proven track record of protecting employment rights.  However, the commitment to integration that made this model possible is peculiar to Europe.  It is not clear whether the model can be applied elsewhere.
At a national level, labor rights have been promoted through trade conditionality, such as the linkage between respect for core labor rights and access to preferential trade benefits (Generalized System of Preferences) that exists in U.S. and E.U. legislation.  But this conditionality is limited geographically and applied irregularly.  It should be broadened, made justiciable, and applied more consistently.

Voluntary Codes of Conduct

The institutions noted above can at least call attention to governmental misbehavior, but multinational corporations have largely been left to police themselves, with occasional prodding from human rights and labor organizations.  In recent years, progress has been made in increasing corporate attention to human rights, but more is needed.  
Only several years ago, many corporations treated human rights as outside their legitimate concerns.  They claimed their role was only to maximize profits for shareholders, that human rights concerns were best left to governments.  
Today, after a series of exposs of corporate complicity in human rights abuse, the response is often quite different.  Corporate leaders increasingly recognize that they must pay attention to human rights or risk consumer pressure, a tarnished corporate image, and problems with employee recruitment and morale.  The 1997 Asian economic crisis provided other economic reasons to be sensitive to human rights.  As a result, many corporations have adopted voluntary codes of conduct, pledging to abide by specified principles on human rights and other social concerns.  These corporations include not only consumer-oriented companies  in apparel, footwear, toys, and appliances but also major oil companies and other extraction industries.
These codes have been effective in changing some corporations conduct, but they have shortcomings.  They are typically written without consultation with the workers most affected, many of whom are not even aware of their companys code.  They are usually written in vague language which looks good in corporate brochures but avoids some of the stickier human rights issues, such as how to do business in a country that bars labor unions, restricts the rights of women, guards company facilities with abusive soldiers, or uses joint-venture revenue to fund military abuses.  With notable exceptions, the codes generally give independent organizations no formal role in monitoring compliance.  They commonly address only workplace issues and the conduct of subcontractors, not broader societal concerns.  
And, of course, the codes are voluntary.  They contain no enforcement mechanism, nothing to fill the institutional gap in rights protection.  Indeed, that these codes are unenforceable is one of their principal allures for corporations and governments that lack a firm rights commitment.  It is thus left to human rights groups, labor organizations, and others in civil society to expand the number of corporations adopting these codes, encourage compliance, and promote improvement. These efforts can be effective, but they are ad hoc, under-funded, and not enough.  
The United Nations took a potentially useful step in July by launching a Global Compact of business, labor, and civil society to promote social responsibility in the global economy.  Its reporting requirements, though minimal, may make member corporations more accountable for their conduct.  Its breadth ????engaging companies based not only in Europe and North America but also in Africa, Asia, and South America????demonstrates that the demand for corporate responsibility is not limited to companies from industrialized countries.  This scope also helps to refute the argument sometimes heard from U.S. companies that they are put at a competitive disadvantage by being asked to bear the brunt of concern with corporate responsibility themselves.  Still, the Global Compact is also only a voluntary endeavor.  It attempts to back voluntarism with a degree of social pressure, but has shown no sign of moving toward mandatory compliance.  Its failure to require probing public reports, independent monitoring, and an enforceable legal regime has left it short of its potential. 
There is no single prescription for filling this enforcement gap, whether for governments or multinational corporations.  Among the ideas advanced so far have been giving the ILO real enforcement powers; linking the ILO with the WTO, so that the ILOs more rights-oriented culture might join with the WTOs enforcement powers; or creating an intermediate institution that might be free of both the WTOs exclusive trade orientation and the ILOs paralyzing tripartite system.  Movement in any of these directions would be useful, but they are not the only options or necessarily the most productive.  Below we outline three other possible approaches, all drawn from recent governmental or institutional practices.  None of these is a panacea either.  Indeed, none standing alone can address all of the problems associated with globalization.  But they illustrate the kinds of steps that must be taken if rights in the global economy are to move from exhortation to enforcement.

The OECD Anti-Corruption Model

One approach could be modeled on the response of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the problem of corporate bribery of government officials.  Such corruption once also had a race to the bottom dynamic.  Governments were reluctant to prohibit it for fear of putting their corporations at a competitive disadvantage.  In 1997, the OECD decided that a collective approach was required.  It adopted anti-corruption standards and mandated that all OECD governments????the principal industrialized governments????criminalize violations.  A special OECD working group was assigned responsibility for monitoring and reporting on governmental compliance.  By setting a common, enforceable standard, the OECD helped undercut fears that bribery of foreign officials was necessary for corporations to keep up with the competition.  
A similar global approach could help enforce human rights in the global economy. National governments could be asked to adopt a prescribed enforcement regime to ensure that all corporations operating in or from their territory avoid complicity in serious rights violations.  Such a regime would allow corporations and governments from the North and South to respect these rights in the commercial realm without fear of placing themselves at a competitive disadvantage, thus undercutting the race to the bottom.  (The OECD in June adopted voluntary Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, but these lack the compulsory nature of its anti-corruption regime.)

The U.S.-Jordan Trade Pact
Another promising option can be found in the U.S.-Jordan Free Trade Agreement, concluded in October.  Rather than uncritically endorsing national standards or relegating labor rights to a side accord, as does the North American Free Trade Agreement, the U.S.-Jordan accord incorporates core international labor rights standards in its body and insists that domestic laws uphold them.  The parties explicitly recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domestic labor laws and vow not to do so.  The agreement establishes consultative and adjudicative processes to address violations and allows unilateral sanctions in the event of breaches.  But sanctions can be applied only if a violation of the accord severely distorts the balance of trade benefits or substantially undermines the fundamental objectives of the agreement ????both quite high bars.  The agreement also precludes judicial remedies for breaches, leaving it exclusively to governments to challenge violations.

International Financial Institutions

The international financial institutions should also help integrate human rights into the global economy by promoting the creation of national institutions to enforce rights and insisting on progressive improvement in respect for rights as part of loan packages.  Their frequent failure to play this role has made the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund the focus of much of the protest against globalization.  
These protests are understandable because, until recently, these institutions pursued a conception of economic development that was largely insensitive to human rights.  For years, Nobel Prize economist Amartya Sen and others have demonstrated that abuse of human rights impedes economic development????that unaccountable governments are more likely to indulge corruption or misguided economic projects and less likely to distribute the benefits of development to those most in need.  Yet the World Bank and the IMF insisted that human rights were a purely political matter outside their economic mandates.  Because of the influence of these institutions, governments and private investors often followed suit.  The funds they plowed into authoritarian governments were frequently wasted or misspent, while debts piled up that now thwart successor governments efforts to lift their people from poverty.
Many of these problems remain today.  But the World Bank in particular has begun to change this sorry legacy.  Under the leadership of James Wolfensohn, the banks efforts to combat corruption, reduce poverty, and promote good governance and the rule of law have led it, in some countries, to show greater sensitivity to human rights.  Yet much of this attention is ad hoc.  Additional progress is needed to institutionalize human rights as an essential foundation of the banks development work if the bank is to help enforce human rights in the global economy.
The banks approach to Zambia, Indonesia, and other countries in Asia illustrate some of the positive steps it took in 2000 to address human rights issues: 
	In advance of the World Bank-convened donors conference for Indonesia in October, Wolfensohn sent a  personal letter to Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid urging action to halt the violence in West Timor.  Without directly threatening to suspend funding, he warned that donors would raise this issue at the conference.  
	The donors conference convened in Zambia in July was the first in Africa to be wholly transparent.  All deliberations were open to independent human rights activists and other representatives of civil society, and the human rights performance of the government was freely discussed as an integral part of development plans.
	In Asia, civil society input on bank projects and at donors conferences was actively sought in Cambodia, Indonesia, East Timor, and elsewhere.  However, during the banks consultative process in Kyrgyzstan, the government excluded NGOs seen as linked to the political opposition, suggesting the need for rules based on international human rights standards to ensure participation by all elements of civil society.
In fighting corruption, the World Bank has also begun to pay more attention to human rights-related concerns.  It has promoted greater transparency in bank projects and encouraged civil society to scrutinize these transactions.  But it could still do more to support whistle-blowers, journalists, and nongovernmental monitors who are arrested or abused for exposing corruption.  It should also do more to promote the basic legal and judicial reform needed to achieve access to justice for all.  This would help to root out and prosecute corrupt police and public officials????steps that would improve official accountability for all sorts of human rights abuse.
The IMF, for its part, under the new leadership of Horst Khler, has also begun slowly to change in ways that will help integrate human rights in the global economy.  It was at its most innovative in Angola, where it secured the governments agreement to allow World Bank monitoring of oil revenues to ensure that they went toward development needs and were not mismanaged.  It began negotiations for a similar audit of diamond revenues.  Such transparency, coupled with stringent auditing, could become a model for extraction industries operating in countries ruled by abusive governments, such as Sudan, Turkmenistan, or Burma.  Until now, the vast government revenues generated meant that these companies almost inevitably risked complicity in serious abuse by funding the machinery of repression.  This new model of transparency should become a minimum requirement for companies entering into substantial revenue-producing joint ventures with repressive governments.
Yet the international financial institutions were hardly uniform in their attention to human rights.  At the height of Russias atrocities in Chechnya, the World Bank advanced Moscow U.S. $450 million in structural adjustment loan payments without any linkage to Russian conduct in the breakaway republic.  The IMF continues to freeze new loans to Russia, but it denies Russian claims that Chechnya is the reason and insists that the only cause is the slow pace of economic reform.  The World Bank gave U.S. $1.6 billion loans to China in fiscal year 2000 despite rampant corruption and restrictions on basic freedoms that made any genuine consultation with people affected by projects close to impossible.  The bank vowed to expand the role of civil society in Chinas development but its intervention on human rights cases was selective.
The international financial institutions new openness to incorporating human rights into their mandates at least sometimes has produced an ironic new problem of appearing impermissibly political.  The problem arises not because of these institutions attention to human rights????a natural focus of their development work????but because of their inconsistency.  A steadier commitment to human rights is needed. 
A useful model might be the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.  Founded in 1991 to assist the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, it operates under a charter that reflects recognition of the link between governance and development.  The charter permits assistance only to governments that are committed to and applying the principles of multiparty democracy, pluralism, and market economics.  In 2000, the EBRD cut off public sector lending to Turkmenistan in part because there has been no progress towards a pluralist or democratic political system.  However, the banks enforcement of its charter has also been uneven.  Moreover, its options should include not only suspending assistance but also aiding in the development of institutions to protect human rights.
  
From Voluntarism to Enforcement

There is no single way to ensure respect for human rights and other social values in the global economy.  Any viable approach must move beyond simply articulating standards and hoping for good-faith compliance.  The stakes are too high to rely on voluntarism alone.  Enforcement is needed.  The contours of an enforcement regime????its national or international focus, its institutional home???? remain to be defined.  But until there is a consistent commitment to enforce rather than simply pronounce international standards, the global economy is likely to fall short of its potential to serve all people rather than just the fortunate few.  An urgent global dialogue is needed to fill this enforcement gap.

The United Nations
One would be hard-pressed to devise a surer recipe for failure: assign an institution responsibility for managing the worlds most intractable problems, then deprive it of funds, give it a skeletal staff, overload the organization with peripheral tasks, and insist on its using large numbers of temporary personnel frequently offered less for their skills than for geographic balance or their governments desire to collect hard currency.  Yet this is how the international community treats the United Nations.  For some, this setup-for-failure is by design.  For others, it reflects a lack of commitment????an eagerness to pass off problems without providing the means to address them.  In Kofi Annan, the U.N. has a secretary-general of unusual vision, courage, skill, and dedication.  But the worlds refusal to give him the tools necessary to the tasks at hand has created an institutional crisis.  It is time to stop treating the U.N. as the dumping ground for global problems without giving it the capacity to address them.  
To highlight this institutional crisis is not to disparage the many parts of the U.N. that do work.  The U.N. human rights staff, based in Geneva and led by Mary Robinson as high commissioner for human rights, has grown significantly in recent years in professionalism and impact.  Despite woefully inadequate resources, it has made steady progress in overcoming the ocean that was deliberately put between it and the New York-based bodies that make the U.N.s most important political decisions.  The U.N. working groups and special rapporteurs, again established through Geneva, produce many first-rate accounts of serious human rights problems, even though the governments on the politicized U.N. Human Rights Commission routinely create new and often peripheral mandates to be carried out within existing resources.  Officials in New York at the U.N.s Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping also attempt to address problems of immense complexity with ridiculously small staffs.
Today, after several years of steady reform, the U.N.s main problem is less the skill or dedication of its officials than the dire lack of capacity that the nations of the world are willing to permit it.  Many of these institutional shortfalls are well described in a report on U.N. peace operations issued in August by a commission led by former Algerian Foreign Minister Lakhdar Brahimi.  It describes a world body asked to take on immense challenges with paltry resources and half-hearted political backing.  Earlier U.N. reports, issued in November and December 1999 on the inexcusable failure to respond to genocide in Srebrenica and Rwanda, highlight the tragic consequences of this neglect.  Rare among most governments, this candid self-scrutiny is admirable.  The time has come to act on these insights.  If the U.N. is to remain a viable resource for addressing the worlds most complex problems, the nations of the world must make an immediate and genuine commitment to remove the straitjacket of institutional weakness that they have imposed.

Sierra Leone
The tragedy of Sierra Leone highlights the consequences????for the U.N. and for people in need????of the international community trying to buy peace on the cheap.  For years, the country was plagued by a vicious civil war in which the rebel Revolutionary United Front and its allies terrorized the population with murder, rape, and the signature atrocity of chopping off human limbs.  The government clung to power with the help of a Nigerian-led West African military force known as ECOMOG.  But Nigeria threatened to withdraw its troops, in part because the international community refused to help cover its expenses.  Eager to diffuse public pressure to respond to the crisis, the U.S. government, backed by Britain, the U.N., the Organization of African Unity, and a group of West African states, brokered a power-sharing arrangement with the RUF in the guise of a peace accord.  With its economy devastated and the international community unwilling to commit the required troops, Sierra Leone was forced to accept a peace agreement that was tantamount to political surrender.
This July 1999 accord gave the RUF and all other forces amnesty for their atrocities, awarded the RUF leader, Foday Sankoh, a status equivalent to vice president, and appointed him chairman of the commission that oversees exploitation of the nations vast diamond fields and mineral wealth.  When the amnesty was greeted by protests, the U.N. secretary-general insisted at the last minute that a provision be inserted denying international, as opposed to national, recognition of it.  But the international community took no action on this disclaimer by moving to prosecute these criminals.  The lesson was clear: the RUF would pay no price????indeed, would be rewarded????for its ruthlessness.
It took the RUF little time to apply this lesson.  Its depredations continued unabated, and no one did anything to stop them.  Then, in early May 2000, as U.N. peacekeepers drawn exclusively from developing countries replaced ECOMOG forces, the RUF killed several peacekeepers and took five hundred hostage.  The badly equipped, poorly led U.N. force put up little or no resistance.  
Even as the year progressed, the U.N. was left under-equipped.  Elite British troops flown in on an emergency basis gave the peacekeepers the added muscle they needed to push the rebels back from the capital Freetown.  Gradually, the hostages were freed.  But even Britain would not subject its troops to U.N. command, and no other Western government volunteered its troops to lend a hand.  The absence of governments with high-tech militaries willing to put their soldiers at risk in a dangerous conflict in Africa left the U.N. force significantly handicapped as it tried to contain the ruthless rebels.  A stronger mandate????to provide meaningful protection for civilians throughout Sierra Leone????remained out of the question.  Other aspects of the U.N. presence, including its in-country leadership, reflected a similar lack of international commitment.

East Timor and Kosovo
The international community fared only slightly better in East Timor and Kosovo????the two other most challenging situations it handed the United Nations in 1999 and 2000.  Forced in each case to assemble personnel on an ad hoc basis, with no ready reservoir of experienced professionals, the U.N. operated under severe handicap.
In September 1999, immediately following an overwhelming vote in East Timor for independence, Indonesian-backed militia left the territory a charred ruin.  An Australian-led military forced initially secured the territory, but by late 1999 the new country was handed over to a U.N.-led operation.  The U.N. was given painfully inadequate tools for such large tasks as addressing past abuses, preventing new ones, and building basic governmental institutions from scratch.  The international civilian police were recruited at an agonizingly slow pace and showed up poorly trained for short, three-month tours of duty.  Their inadequacy, combined with divisions within U.N. operations, slowed investigations into the September 1999 violence and contributed to vigilante attacks and summary justice, as Timorese despaired of the U.N. police guaranteeing law and order.
In Kosovo, the U.N. again was asked to take over a territory that was virtually bereft of governmental institutions.  Reconstruction was hampered by the Yugoslav governments history of repressing the ethnic Albanian majority, the institutional and legal void it left after its sudden withdrawal in June 1999 following the war with NATO, and the lack of clarity about the territorys future relationship with Yugoslavia.  Under the circumstances, progress was made creating a new criminal justice system and civilian police force.  But the justice system, inadequately supervised, fell far short of international human rights standards and showed a disturbing pattern of bias against ethnic Serbs.  The international civilian police force, under equipped and poorly trained, was sometimes unwilling to arrest former Kosovo Liberation Army members and other ethnic Albanians who were responsible for violence against ethnic Serbs and other minorities, as well as against ethnic Albanian political rivals.  A lack of investigative capacity and poor cooperation by the local population were also obstacles.  These shortcomings meant that NATO troops sometimes had to assume sensitive law enforcement tasks for which they were unprepared.  The violence against minorities persisted, meaning that virtually no ethnic Serbs participated in the October 2000 municipal elections.

Embargoes
U.N. attempts to curb conflicts through embargoes suffered from a similar lack of will and resources to ensure implementation.  A U.N. panel found widespread breaches of a Security Council-imposed embargo on trade in arms or diamonds with Angolas murderous rebel group UNITA.  The report, spearheaded by Canadas then U.N. Ambassador Robert Fowler, was remarkable for naming the companies and countries, including heads of state, involved in sanctions busting.  But through October, the Security Council had taken no further action to enforce its lofty pronouncement of an embargo.  No serious effort was made to sanction the embargo breakers or to monitor the flow of goods at borders and airports.  An embargo on arms trading with Sierra Leone and Liberia fared no better.

North-South Collusion

That the U.N. is so handicapped in its capacity to address global problems is the product of an unfortunate congruence of interests between governments of the North and South, often against the interests of their people.  Many governments of the industrialized world, particularly the United States, appreciate the U.N. as a place to hand difficult problem countries but distrust the global body too much to allow it the capacity to resolve these problems.  The frequent result is the deployment of personnel who are starved of the resources needed to accomplish urgent tasks.  Many governments of the developing world also do not like these political deployments.  Rather than stand in solidarity with the people of the South whose calls for help might be answered, these governments see a U.N. emergency capacity as a diversion of resources from the U.N. development projects they most cherish and a threat to their own political latitude.

Solutions
It may be difficult to muster the political will to address these problems, but it is not difficult to identify solutions.  Some of the changes are doctrinal, many described in the Brahimi report.  For example, the U.N. must abandon its reflexive neutrality when circumstances call for protecting civilians from slaughter.  Even when the U.N. enters dangerous situations consensually, it must do so with a sufficiently robust mandate and military capacity to protect U.N. personnel and the civilians they have come to serve.  The Security Council must stop treating human rights as an unwelcome irrelevancy best left in its Geneva exile.  Instead, drawing on the U.N.s significant human rights expertise, the council must begin to recognize that human rights abuses are the cause of many conflicts and that ending these abuses is a critical element of lasting peace.  In particular, accountability for the most heinous human rights crimes must be seen less as an obstacle to peace than as an essential building block????a goal worth embracing for pragmatic as well as principled reasons.
Other changes are structural.  It makes no sense for the U.N. to squander months at the outset of each new emergency desperately searching the world for qualified personnel and begging national governments to spare them.  The U.N. needs a standby capacity  not the caricature of troops drilling on U.N. grounds in New York, but a reserve of personnel that governments would make available on short notice for emergency U.N. service.  This reserve should include not only specially trained troops but also police, judicial, legal, human rights, development, and administrative personnel  and the leadership to deploy them effectively.  
The U.N. Secretariat in New York must also be bolstered.  At current staffing levels, it is designed to be solely reactive.  Even when it does respond, it is grossly understaffed to manage complex emergencies.  The political and peacekeeping departments do not begin to have the requisite capacity.  Preventive work, for example, is impossible in an institution whose limited staff is overburdened with far less significant work.  The answer requires not only a substantial increase in the staff of the political and peacekeeping departments but also a cultural change.  The nations of the U.N. must accept the need to identify, name, and address problem areas before they explode.  They must stop diverting the U.N. from more pressing problems with demands for unread reports delivered to forgotten committees.  They must transcend the zero-sum logic that every dollar spent on political or peacekeeping affairs is a dollar less for development and recognize that ending abusive conflict is a prerequisite to development for the countries, and often the regions, involved.
The U.N. is fortunate to have a secretary-general who understands and embraces these truths.  But he cannot lead alone.  If the U.N. has any prospect of meeting its potential, the nations of the world must accept and support the organizations transformation.


International Justice

The greatest strides toward an enhanced global architecture have been taken in the area of international justice.  Less than a decade ago, impunity for tyrants was the rule.  The worlds most heinous human rights criminals committed atrocities knowing that they could use intimidation and violence to fend off accountability.  This impunity was an affront to the victims and an encouragement of further atrocities.  
Today, the world is a far smaller place for tyrants because there are fewer places to escape justice.  New international tribunals are being launched.  These tribunals, in turn, have catalyzed national prosecutorial efforts, demonstrating that international justice serves to reinforce rather than replace national justice.  Moreover, the actions of several Southern governments have made clear that justice for the worst human rights offenders is hardly an exclusively Northern concern.  The most pronounced sour note in this steady progress has been the U.S. governments persistent opposition to having its citizens held to the same legal standards as the rest of the world.

International Tribunals

The movement to create international institutions of justice took several steps forward in 2000.  Most significant was the progress toward the establishment of the International Criminal Court????the first global tribunal for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.  A treaty to establish the court was adopted in Rome in July 1998.  Despite the many legal complexities involved, twenty-two governments had already ratified the treaty by the end of October 2000 (of the sixty needed to launch the court) and another ninety-three governments had signed it.  This broad embrace suggests that the court will be up and running soon????conceivably as early as 2002.  
Because the ICC will not have retroactive jurisdiction, the world continues to rely on country-specific international tribunals for the most heinous crimes of the past and present.  Political changes in Croatia and Yugoslavia show how international tribunals have changed the long-term prospects of even seemingly secure human rights offenders.  The death of Franjo Tudjman in December 1999 opened the way to the election of Croatias new president, Stipe Mesic, who has been far more cooperative with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, handing over evidence and suspects and opening the countrys borders to investigators.  The September 2000 electoral loss of Slobodan Milosevic to Yugoslavias new president, Vojislav Kostunica, has also opened up new possibilities for cooperation.  Kostunica at first insisted that he would not surrender Milosevic to the Hague, where the tribunal has indicted him for crimes against humanity committed in Kosovo.  But Kostunicas later comments were more equivocal, suggesting that cooperation with the tribunal and even the eventual surrender of Milosevic remain possibilities.  At stake is also the fate of former Bosnian Serb military leader Ratko Mladic, who has taken refuge in Serbia after his indictment by the tribunal for genocide and other crimes in Bosnia.
Meanwhile, as of late October, the U.N. Security Council was moving toward the creation of a hybrid national-international tribunal for Sierra Leone.  The tribunal will effectively overturn the July 1999 amnesty and make possible the prosecution of those behind the horrendous crimes that have characterized the countrys civil war.  The hybrid nature of the court will be precedent-setting????an international prosecutor and judges in a dominant role to ensure the courts independence, but a significant role for Sierra Leonean judges and prosecutors to help them begin reconstructing their devastated legal system.  However, certain issues remain to be worked out, including the power of the court to compel cooperation, the time period on which the court will focus, the courts treatment of juvenile offenders, and the extent of witness protection.    
Unfortunately, a proposed hybrid tribunal for Cambodia has fared less well.  Unlike Sierra Leone, the Cambodian government has insisted that Cambodians have a dominant role.  The U.N. at first resisted because of the Cambodian governments long history of manipulating its legal system.  But the U.N. was later forced to acquiesce when the U.S. government brokered a deal largely on Cambodian terms.  Still, as of late October, the Cambodian government was dragging its feet in seeking the necessary parliamentary approval, raising doubts about the courts prospects.

National Justice Efforts

Some have questioned whether it is appropriate for international prosecutions to replace national justice systems.  But that concern reflects a misunderstanding.  The purpose of creating an option of international justice is to establish a backstop for national efforts.  By making clear that violence or intimidation aimed at national judges and prosecutors no longer guarantees impunity, the option of international justice bolsters national justice systems.  The International Criminal Court was built explicitly on these terms, and events in 2000 showed that the emergence of international tribunals has had precisely this catalyzing effect.
Britains October 1998 arrest of former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet would almost certainly not have taken place before the ICC treaty changed the environment for international justice.  In March 2000, the British government released Pinochet on health grounds after almost seventeen months in detention.  He returned to a Chile that had been transformed by his arrest.  In August, in a step that would have been unthinkable before his detention in Britain, the Chilean Supreme Court stripped him of his parliamentary immunity, allowing prosecution to proceed for his role in a notorious episode of execution and disappearance immediately following his 1973 coup.  
Similarly, after the September 1999 rampage of Indonesian-backed militia in East Timor, the U.N. launched a commission of inquiry.  In January 2000, the commission recommended the establishment of an international tribunal.  Kofi Annan declined to endorse this recommendation so long as the Indonesian government upheld its vow to bring the abusers to justice on its own????a step it had no previous history of taking.  In August, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson reminded Jakarta that she would call for an international tribunal if it did not proceed with prosecutions.  In September, the government published a list of nineteen suspects involved in the East Timor rampage, though by late October the prospect of actual prosecutions remained distant.
Interestingly, in one case a nationally based prosecutorial effort may precede action by an international tribunal, suggesting a complementary relationship.  The international war crimes tribunal for Rwanda has jurisdiction not only over atrocities associated with the 1994 genocide but also over crimes committed at the time by the Rwandan Patriotic Front????the dominant force in the current Rwandan government.  The RPFs military victory in June 1994 ended the genocide, but the Tutsi-led force committed serious abuses in the process.  The Rwanda tribunal has issued no indictments for the RPFs crimes????a failure that is often attributed to its need to maintain good relations with the Rwandan government so it can retain access to the country to conduct investigations and secure witnesses for the genocide trials.  In August 2000, a Belgian prosecutor began investigating a complaint of war crimes and crimes against humanity filed against the RPF by a group of Rwandans.  This initiative may hasten similar action by the Rwanda tribunal.  

Southern Initiatives
Some critics of efforts to hold human rights abusers accountable for their crimes have suggested that justice is a parochial concern of Northern governments which is imposed on the people of the South.  But the events of 2000 demonstrated that Southern governments are also eager to pursue the most heinous human rights criminals????that the quest for justice does not break down on hemispheric lines.
	In February, in an echo of the Pinochet case, a Senegalese court, acting at the request of Chadian victims, indicted former Chadian dictator Hissne Habr for torture and ordered his arrest.  Habr had taken refuge in Senegal following the fall of his dictatorship in 1990.  In July 2000, in a blow to judicial independence, an appellate court dismissed the indictment after the new Senegalese government of President Abdoulaye Wade removed the judge investigating the case and promoted the head of the judicial chamber that issued the reversal ruling.   The dismissal is on appeal to the countrys Supreme Court.
	In October, an Argentine judge asked Chile to extradite Pinochet and others for the 1974 assassination of General Carlos Prats and his wife, Sofia Cuthbert.  Prats, the former commander-in-chief of the Chilean armed forces, had opposed Pinochets 1973 coup and taken refuge in Buenos Aires with his family.  The judge also sought the extradition of other Chileans in the case, including the former chief of Chiles secret police, Manuel Contreras Seplveda, who is in prison in Chile for having carried out a 1974 car-bombing in Washington that took the life of another coup opponent, former Chilean Foreign Minister Orlando Letelier, and his assistant, Ronni Moffitt.
	Also in October, Vladimiro Montesinos, the shadowy intelligence figure behind the authoritarian government of Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori, unsuccessfully sought political asylum (effective amnesty) in Panama.  Panama had evidently tired of being the worlds dumping ground for deposed dictators and their accomplices.  Montesinos, who had been responsible for forming and supervising a death squad in the early 1990s among other abuses, beat a hasty retreat to Peru.
	In August, acting upon a Spanish request, Mexico arrested Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, an accused torturer for the 1976-83 Argentine military junta.  Cavallo had been living in Mexico.
These and other cases demonstrate an increasingly global effort????involving governments of the North and South????to bring abusive officials to justice.  The trend is still at a rudimentary stage, but it is clearly working against the impunity that so many ruthless officials enjoyed.  This smaller world may make tomorrows dictators think twice before embarking on the path of slaughter taken by their predecessors.

Disappointments

However, the news in 2000 was not all rosy on the justice front.  The most glaring failure was the international communitys refusal to put serious pressure on Russia to bring to justice the commanders who had been responsible for massacres, torture, and indiscriminate slaughter in Chechnya.  With Russia wielding a veto on the U.N. Security Council, a council-created international tribunal was not an option.  The U.N. Commission on Human Rights did criticize Russias actions and urge prosecution????the first such resolution against a permanent member of the Security Council.  The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe also suspended the Russian delegations voting rights.  But there was little follow-up on these initiatives, and no insistence that Russia apply the rule of law to its troops in Chechnya as a condition of receiving the large international assistance that continued to be sent its way.
Also disappointing was the lack of international attention to justice in Central Africa????particularly Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo.  This failure is especially unfortunate in the Congo because the government of President Laurent Kabila effectively blocked an earlier U.N. commission of inquiry established to examine atrocities committed on Congolese soil during Kabilas rise to power in 1996-97.  The war fought in Congo since 1998 has also been plagued by widespread atrocities.  So far, the international community has taken no steps to end the impunity that helps drive these abuses.  
Despite a clear mandate, NATO made no effort through October to arrest Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb political leader who has been indicted for genocide and other crimes in Bosnia.  Throughout all or most of 2000, he was reported still to be in Bosnia and hence in territory where NATO had permission to operate.  
A Selective U.S. Vision of Justice

Perhaps the greatest disappointment was the persistently selective view of international justice adopted by the U.S. government.  Washington has been an active supporter of country-specific tribunals insofar as they apply to others, but it has stood in the way of efforts to establish a more universal system of justice that might apply to U.S. citizens as well.
This attitude was evident in the cries of protest heard in Washington when the prosecutor for the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal, Carla del Ponte, dared even to consider opening an investigation of NATOs conduct during the 1999 air war with Yugoslavia.  The tribunal has jurisdiction over war crimes committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, whether by residents of the territory or outside forces.  The prosecutors scrutiny of the NATO air campaign was entirely appropriate, given that, according to a Human Rights Watch study released in February, up to a half of the roughly 500 civilian deaths during the bombing campaign were attributable to possible NATO violations of international humanitarian law.  Although the prosecutor ultimately decided against launching an investigation, Washington thought it an outrage that she would even contemplate holding NATO to the same standards as other forces.  Indeed, NATO failed to turn over specific information requested by investigators.
In March, the U.S. government again fell short of its international justice obligations. Toms Ricardo Anderson Kohatsu, a one-time major in Perus Army Intelligence Service, was credibly accused of participating in the 1997 brutal torture of a woman who was beaten, burned, raped and electrically shocked in such a manner that she was rendered paraplegic.  The U.S. State Department itself had described the case in its annual human rights reports for 1997 and 1999.  Anderson Kohatsu came to Washington in March 2000 to testify on Perus behalf at a hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, part of the Organization of American States.   At the request of the U.S. Justice Department, which had been alerted to his presence, he was detained while changing planes in Houston.  Anderson Kohatsu was not on Peruvian government business and was not carrying a diplomatic passport.  Nonetheless, without allowing the courts to consider the matter, Acting Secretary of State Thomas Pickering ordered his release on the dubious theory that he was entitled to diplomatic immunity because he had participated in official business of the OAS.  Pickerings actions reflected an administration far more concerned with avoiding political problems with Peru than with carrying out international legal obligations to arrest and prosecute the worst human rights offenders.
Perhaps most troubling is the U.S. governments continued refusal to accept the International Criminal Court.  With the help of the United States, the court already has extensive safeguards against unjustified prosecutions.  Moreover, under the courts principle of complementarity, any government can spare its nationals ICC prosecution by conducting its own good-faith investigation and, if appropriate, prosecution.  Yet the U.S. government is determined to shut off even the theoretical possibility that its citizens would have to appear before the court.  Washington maintains this stance even though an exception to the courts universal reach would undermine the courts legitimacy and effectiveness.
Because the U.S. government has no intention of ratifying the courts treaty anytime soon, it has focused on the supposed outrage that the court would have jurisdiction over the citizens of a state that has not ratified the treaty.  But it is common practice for a government to prosecute a foreign national for crimes committed on its territory without first seeking permission of the foreigners government.  The jurisdiction of the ICC amounts to no more than a delegation of this widely accepted power for the most serious human rights crimes.  Indeed, Washington itself routinely exercises far more expansive jurisdiction in unilaterally pursuing alleged terrorists or drug traffickers even when their crimes were not committed on U.S. soil.
Still, the U.S. government has advanced one scheme after another to shield U.S. citizens from the courts reach.  The latest idea, floated in October, would exempt the citizens of any government that has not ratified the court, so long as the government could show that it acts responsibly and is generally willing to prosecute its own serious human rights offenders.  But these requirements are not in the ICC treaty.  Adding them would fundamentally revise the treaty and upend a whole series of carefully crafted compromises made in Rome to secure the courts broad support.  Moreover, the principle of complementarity as framed in the treaty permits a government to avoid ICC prosecution of a citizen only by pursuing the specific suspect in question.  Washington wants to weaken this rule by requiring only a general willingness to prosecute criminals of this nature????something a country could presumably establish once and for all and thereafter preclude the risk of ICC prosecution for any of its citizens.  That is hardly a goal worth endorsing.
The best antidote to this U.S. exceptionalism is for the many governments supporting the court to reject all such schemes out of hand and proceed as rapidly as possible toward the sixty ratifications of the treaty needed to establish the court.  The sooner the court is up and running, the sooner Washington will recognize the futility of its quest to carve out an exemption for its citizens.  Ultimately, Washington will realize that its best defense against unfair (as opposed to legitimate) prosecutions of Americans is to help create a culture within the ICC that is deeply respectful of individual rights and the rule of law.  The U.S. contribution to that culture will be far more effective if the United States joins the court????or at least becomes a friendly supporter of it????than if it persists in attacking the court from the outside.

Conclusion

An increasingly interconnected world is generating human rights problems of a global dimension.  From regulating the global economy to rebuilding war-torn societies to bringing the most heinous criminals to justice, global solutions are needed to these global problems.  A nation would never willingly address its most complex national problems with handicapped national institutions.  So the world needs to enhance its institutional capacity on a global level to address the most serious human rights problems that transcend national borders.  Some progress is being made in each of these areas, but far more needs to be done.  The challenge today is to build a global institutional capacity commensurate with the complexity and importance of these global problems.
Over fifty years ago, as World War II ended and a new era began, the international community created a new set of institutions to address the challenges of the future.  What emerged were such landmark organizations as the United Nations and the Bretton-Woods institutions.  Similar vision is needed today.  To manage the global economy, stronger institutions are needed to ensure respect for human rights.  To assist war-torn nations, the United Nations must be bolstered substantially.  To build an international system of justice, the International Criminal Court must be launched and supported.  These are major steps requiring foresight and commitment.  Complacency can no longer be tolerated.  It is time to act.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS


The international community took important actions in 2000 aimed at protecting those who are risking their lives to fight for human rights. During its annual session,  the United Nations Commission on Human Rights voted to establish the post of a special representative of the secretary-general on the situation of human rights defenders. After a worldwide search, in August, the secretary-general appointed Hina Jilani, a Pakistani human rights lawyer (and a human rights monitor honored by Human Rights Watch in 1991 at our annual monitors celebration) for the post. The special representative will be able to press for the implementation of the 1998 Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and intervene in cases of threats to and harassment of human rights defenders worldwide.
Five humanitarian workers were murdered in 2000 while aiding refugees. In West Timor,  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) staff Samson Aregahegn, Carlos Caceres, and Pero Simun were killed on September 6. In Guinea, UNHCR head of office Mensah Kpognon was killed on September 17. In Burundi, Brother Antoine Bargiggia of the Jesuit Refugee Service (JRS) was killed on October 3. Their tragic deaths prompted a global protest and highlighted the dangers for humanitarian workers world wide.  The murders also posed a serious threat to the protection of refugees as UNHCR responded by withdrawing  all staff from West Timor and the border areas of Guinea, leaving refugees there almost completely unprotected. The Jesuit Refugee Service continued to serve refugees in Burundi.
Indonesia experienced the loss of  human rights defenders Sukardi and Jafar Siddiq Hamzah  in the year 2000. Sukardi, a volunteer for the local environmental and human rights group based in Aceh, the Bamboo Thicket Institute (Yayasan Rumpun Bambu Indonesia), disappeared on January 31. Sukardis body was found naked and bullet-riddled on February 1.  Jafar Siddiq Hamzah, the founder and director of the New York-based rights group, the International Forum for Aceh, vanished on August 5, while on a visit to Medan, Indonesia. Jafar, one of Acehs most accomplished human rights advocates, was found dead with his body showing signs of torture in an unmarked grave on September 3.
Some fifty miles outside Nairobi, Fr.  John Kaiser, a well-known human rights activist in Kenya, was murdered during the night of August 24, 2000.  Father Kaiser, a Catholic parish priest in the Rift Valley area and a U.S. citizen, worked in Kenya for thirty-six years and was  an outspoken human rights activist.  In 1999, the Law Society of Kenya had honored Father Kaiser with its annual human rights award.
In Colombia, four human rights defenders were killed and three disappeared in the year 2000. On July 11, Elizabeth Caas,  a member of the Association of Family Members of the Detained and Disappeared (Asociacin de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos-Colombia ASFADDES), was shot and killed in Barrancabermeja. Angel Quintero and Claudia Patricia Monsalve, also ASFADDES members, were disappeared in Medelln, Antioquia, on October 6. Indigenous activist Jairo Bedoya Hoyos, a member of the Antioquia Indigenous Organization (Organizacin Indgena de Antioquia, OIA) who worked on human rights issues, was disappeared on March 2. Demetrio Playonero, a displaced person and human rights leader was murdered apparently by paramilitaries on March 3. In May, Jess Ramiro Zapata, the only remaining member of the Segovia Human Rights Committee, was killed near Segovia. Government prosecutor Margarita Mara Pulgarn Trujillo, part of a team investigating cases linking paramilitaries to the army and regional drug traffickers, was murdered in Medelln on April 3. 
In Haiti, Jean Dominique, the director of Radio Haiti-Inter and one of Haitis most prominent radio journalists, was shot to death the morning of April 3. Forced into exile in 1980 for his opposition to the Jean-Claude Duvalier regime, Dominique was a strong proponent of the free press and Haitis struggle for democracy.
INTRODUCTION
		
The scope of todays global human rights problems far exceeds the capacity of global institutions to address them.  The problem is most acute in the global economy, where a disturbing institutional void frequently leaves human rights standards unenforced.  But the problem also arises as the world struggles to stop mass atrocities, protect the victims of these crimes, rebuild their countries, and bring their persecutors to justice.  In each case, a more interconnected and seemingly smaller world rightfully feels a greater responsibility to respond.  Yet the capacity to meet these demands has not kept up with the challenges.  A reinforced global architecture is needed.

This introduction to Human Rights Watchs annual World Report describes this weakness in the institutional capacity to address the global human rights challenges of our time.  It highlights the enforcement gap for issues of human rights in the global economy.  It discusses the inadequate resources given to the United Nations to assume its assigned tasks of keeping the peace and assisting war-torn nations with national reconstruction.  And it describes the recent strides taken toward a new institutional justice system for the worlds worst human rights criminals but laments the U.S. governments persistent refusal to countenance U.S. nationals being held to the same standards as the rest of the world.
This report?Human Rights Watchs eleventh annual review of human rights practices around the globe?covers developments in seventy countries.  It is released in advance of Human Rights Day, December 10, 2000, and describes events from November 1999 through October 2000.  Most chapters examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the United Nations, and various regional organizations; and the freedom of local human rights defenders.  Other chapters address important thematic concerns.  

Highlights of the year include, on the positive side, the popular rebellion against the Milosevic regime in Yugoslavia, the conclusion of a treaty barring the use of children as soldiers, and the U.N. Commission on Human Rightss first formal criticism of a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council (Russia, for its abuses in Chechnya).  On the negative side, the U.N. Human Rights Commission refused yet again to condemn China for its relentless suppression of political opposition, the U.S. government failed to abide by conditions included in a major military aid package to Colombia that would have required the Colombian army to sever its ties with paramilitaries, and there was a growing crisis in the worlds response to refugees and asylum-seekers and persistently inadequate protection for the internally displaced.  
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2000 by the Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human rights activists in the countries in question.  Human Rights Watch reports, published throughout the year (see http://www.hrw.org), contain more elaborate accounts of the brief summaries collected in this volume.  The chapters here also reflect the work of the Human Rights Watch advocacy staff, which monitors the policies of governments and institutions with influence to curb abusive human rights conduct. 
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the problem.  There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.  Other factors affecting the focus of our work in 2000 and hence the content of this volume include the severity of abuses, access to the country and the availability of information about it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to outside influence, the importance of addressing certain thematic concerns, and the need to maintain a balance in the work of Human Rights Watch across various political divides. 

The Global Economy 

After street protests over the past year in Seattle, Prague, Washington, and elsewhere, proponents of the global economy seem on the defensive.  Globalization?the increased international flow of trade, capital, information, and people?has delivered undeniable wealth and opportunity and created millions of jobs.  But there is widespread unease at some of the associated and parallel ills.  Income inequality is growing, as are the number of people in abject poverty.  The much-criticized race to the bottom seems to stymie certain attempts at social and economic betterment.  Resource extraction?the business of oil, minerals, and metals? often proceeds without regard to the rights of local residents.  Governments depend on migrant workers to take on less desirable jobs but frequently deny them legal protection.  Trafficking in people has flourished.  
Despite these problems, the current system to regulate global commerce leaves little or no room for human rights and other social values.  Relevant international human rights standards exist but are not uniformly ratified, effectively enforced, or adequately integrated into the global economy.
The debate about solving these problems has been unhelpfully polarized.  Advocates of unfettered trade and capital flow tend to see commerce itself as a panacea.  Pointing to the immense wealth generated by the global economy, they frequently resist any governance regime that might constrain globalization by attention to other social values.   More and freer commerce, in their view, is the best route to social as well as economic betterment.  
But as Human Rights Watch has repeatedly found, a world integrated on commercial lines does not necessarily lead to human rights improvements.  In China, increased international trade has not lessened the governments determination to snuff out any political opposition.  In Sudan, oil revenue made possible by international investment has allowed the government in only two years nearly to double the defense budget for its highly abusive war.  In Central Asia, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, international investment in oil and gas exploration and production has only reaffirmed the new governments resolve to cling to power at all costs while their people plunge into poverty.  In Sierra Leone and Angola, international trade in diamonds has fueled deadly civil wars.  The number of migrant workers and trafficking victims has grown with international commerce, yet abuses against them remain largely ignored.  Experience shows that global economic integration is no substitute for a firm parallel commitment to defending human rights.
Opponents of globalization highlight the fate of the millions of people who are excluded from the benefits of the global economy or are forced to accept it on unsatisfactory terms.  They argue that globalization mainly benefits the wealthy and that it aids the poor too slowly or actually contributes to their plight.  Some opponents would simply shut down the process of globalization, convinced that its benefits are not worth the price.  They include those who have used violence against institutions they see as supporting globalization.  Others focus more constructively on reshaping the global economy to better serve social values.  Many reforms have been discussed but none has gained a consensus.
Some of the firmest defenders of unfettered global commerce come from the developing countries in whose name the opponents of globalization claim to speak.  Both governments and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in these countries fear that linking trade or investment to respect for social values, however well intentioned, will end up serving protectionist interests in the industrialized world and shutting off developing countries from the benefits of global commerce.  They are particularly wary of the efforts of some activists to prescribe a living wage on a national basis for fear of being deprived of their principal competitive advantage?cheap labor.  They also object to efforts by the global North to enforce selected social and economic values in the global South when it serves Northern interests, while neglecting more costly obligations to help achieve other important social and economic goals such as alleviating poverty or improving health care or education.

A Human Rights Framework

In this divisive debate, human rights offer a promising framework to address many of the problems of globalization, including the tendency of some governments and corporations to compete by profiting from repression.  Some of the most alarming by-products of globalization are clear violations of rights enshrined in international treaties.  By the same token, upholding these rights provides the basis for solving many of the ills associated with globalization in a way that need not shut down global trade or benefit the worlds richer countries at the expense of the poor.
Within the workplace, for example, human rights speak directly to the problems of exclusion.  Factory workers often face poor wages, abysmal working conditions, sexual abuse, no social safety net, and no legal protection.  Respect for freedom of association would allow workers to join together?in trade unions should they choose?to improve wages and working conditions.  The prohibition against discrimination on such grounds as gender, race, or ethnicity ensures that historically marginalized people enjoy the fruits of their labor on the same terms as others.  The prohibition of forced or abusive child labor and the ban on arbitrary violence require employers to negotiate with adult free-agents. 
On a societal level, respect for civil and political rights, including the right to elect ones government, allows the disadvantaged to have a voice in the direction of their nations social and economic development.  These rights permit citizens to press their government to take on such issues as increasing the minimum wage, protecting union activists from retaliation, enforcing prohibitions on discrimination, regulating extraction industries, or ensuring that investments are made with social values in mind.  They also promote the transparency and accountability in national governments and international institutions that are prerequisites to making them responsive to popular concerns.  
In addition, respect for these basic freedoms helps to encourage governments of the industrialized and developing world to take seriously their obligations to uphold economic, social, and cultural rights.  It allows people to urge governments to ratify the leading treaty safeguarding these rights and to adopt reasonable plans to realize these rights progressively, including in the regulation of trade and investment.  It also permits popular input into the choice among alternative routes to fulfill economic and social rights, such as the amount of investment to put into education or health care, the level of restrictions to place on industries that cause environmental damage or social disruption, or the type of social welfare programs needed to temper the shock of trade liberalization and structural adjustment policies.
This emphasis on rights may not guarantee particular wage levels, working conditions, or regulatory policies.  Nor does it eliminate inequalities in bargaining power or eradicate all forms of social exclusion.  But by allowing an unfettered civil society to make its views heard, a rights approach permits workers and citizens to have a say in these important matters.  
A rights approach also discourages the tendency of some governments and multinational corporations to gain a competitive advantage by suppressing workers demands for better treatment or societys pursuit of such goals as a clean environment.  Corporations might still seek lower production costs by moving to lower-wage or less socially demanding countries.  Governments might still seek a competitive advantage by restricting taxes, wages, regulations, or social benefits.  But competition through repression? the most nefarious aspect of the race to the bottom?would be significantly constrained.
A rights approach would give developing countries a legal basis to broaden discussions of trade and investment policy to include the need for reciprocal benefits and concessions from the industrialized world to facilitate the realization of economic and social rights. Such demands would have more resonance because they would be grounded in legally binding international human rights treaties rather than more malleable and selective economic theories.  A rights approach would thus serve as a useful supplement to development models that are premised on market liberalization but pay insufficient attention to attendant social and economic problems.
At the same time, a rights approach should prove acceptable to proponents of free trade.  It does not seek to shut down global trade and investment, only to invoke broadly accepted rights to define the limits within which commerce should proceed.  It does not raise the drawbridge against global competition, but insists that the market be grounded in respect for international human rights law.
Finally, a rights approach would help develop international solutions to problems arising from the global movement of people, such as the lack of protection for migrant workers and trafficking victims.  Many industrialized countries erect barriers to legal immigration from developing countries but tacitly accept undocumented migrants, or migrants with strict legal limits on their presence, to perform undesirable work.  Many developing countries also export workers, some with documentation and some without, to earn foreign exchange through remittances.  Lacking legal protection, these workers have little recourse in the face of such problems as sexual abuse, dangerous working conditions, and violations of the right to organize.  In addition, many governments wrongly equate the smuggling used to infiltrate undocumented migrant workers with human trafficking?transport based on deception or coercion????thereby denying trafficking victims the protection they need.

The Need for Stronger Institutions

The advantages of a rights approach remain theoretical without broad governmental ratification of the relevant human rights treaties and a reliable means of enforcement.  Stronger institutions are needed to insist that governments and corporations respect human rights in their global dealings.  The United Nations and the International Labour Organization have played an important role in establishing human rights standards, including the U.N.s international covenants and the ILOs core labor standards.  But these institutions lack adequate enforcement powers.  Except in extraordinary circumstances, the most they can do is encourage treaty ratification and condemn abusive conduct.  The U.N. has been more effective because its special rapporteurs and working groups have more latitude to use public shaming to encourage compliance.  The tripartite nature of the ILO ????combining representatives of government, business, and labor????often leaves the organization paralyzed when it tries to uphold rights in contentious situations.  
Meanwhile, the World Trade Organization, which does have enforcement powers, focuses on promoting global trade, sometimes at the expense of international human rights norms.  The proposal to add a social clause to its mandate has been controversial in part because the WTO has no expertise, culture, or tradition of  protecting rights.  Moreover, many Southern governments and NGOs fear that sanctions under a social clause would be applied against only developing countries, not against comparable abuses in the industrialized world.  
At a regional level, the Council of Europe has established clear rights standards in the European Convention on Human Rights, enforced by the European Court of Human Rights, and the European Social Charter.  At the same time, the European Union has established an institutionalized social dialogue procedure among employers and unions, set forth in its Maastricht Social Protocol and Agreement, and an international court, the European Court of Justice, with a proven track record of protecting employment rights.  However, the commitment to integration that made this model possible is peculiar to Europe.  It is not clear whether the model can be applied elsewhere.
At a national level, labor rights have been promoted through trade conditionality, such as the linkage between respect for core labor rights and access to preferential trade benefits (Generalized System of Preferences) that exists in U.S. and E.U. legislation.  But this conditionality is limited geographically and applied irregularly.  It should be broadened, made justiciable, and applied more consistently.

Voluntary Codes of Conduct

The institutions noted above can at least call attention to governmental misbehavior, but multinational corporations have largely been left to police themselves, with occasional prodding from human rights and labor organizations.  In recent years, progress has been made in increasing corporate attention to human rights, but more is needed.  
Only several years ago, many corporations treated human rights as outside their legitimate concerns.  They claimed their role was only to maximize profits for shareholders, that human rights concerns were best left to governments.  
Today, after a series of exposs of corporate complicity in human rights abuse, the response is often quite different.  Corporate leaders increasingly recognize that they must pay attention to human rights or risk consumer pressure, a tarnished corporate image, and problems with employee recruitment and morale.  The 1997 Asian economic crisis provided other economic reasons to be sensitive to human rights.  As a result, many corporations have adopted voluntary codes of conduct, pledging to abide by specified principles on human rights and other social concerns.  These corporations include not only consumer-oriented companies  in apparel, footwear, toys, and appliances but also major oil companies and other extraction industries.
These codes have been effective in changing some corporations conduct, but they have shortcomings.  They are typically written without consultation with the workers most affected, many of whom are not even aware of their companys code.  They are usually written in vague language which looks good in corporate brochures but avoids some of the stickier human rights issues, such as how to do business in a country that bars labor unions, restricts the rights of women, guards company facilities with abusive soldiers, or uses joint-venture revenue to fund military abuses.  With notable exceptions, the codes generally give independent organizations no formal role in monitoring compliance.  They commonly address only workplace issues and the conduct of subcontractors, not broader societal concerns.  
And, of course, the codes are voluntary.  They contain no enforcement mechanism, nothing to fill the institutional gap in rights protection.  Indeed, that these codes are unenforceable is one of their principal allures for corporations and governments that lack a firm rights commitment.  It is thus left to human rights groups, labor organizations, and others in civil society to expand the number of corporations adopting these codes, encourage compliance, and promote improvement. These efforts can be effective, but they are ad hoc, under-funded, and not enough.  
The United Nations took a potentially useful step in July by launching a Global Compact of business, labor, and civil society to promote social responsibility in the global economy.  Its reporting requirements, though minimal, may make member corporations more accountable for their conduct.  Its breadth ????engaging companies based not only in Europe and North America but also in Africa, Asia, and South America????demonstrates that the demand for corporate responsibility is not limited to companies from industrialized countries.  This scope also helps to refute the argument sometimes heard from U.S. companies that they are put at a competitive disadvantage by being asked to bear the brunt of concern with corporate responsibility themselves.  Still, the Global Compact is also only a voluntary endeavor.  It attempts to back voluntarism with a degree of social pressure, but has shown no sign of moving toward mandatory compliance.  Its failure to require probing public reports, independent monitoring, and an enforceable legal regime has left it short of its potential. 
There is no single prescription for filling this enforcement gap, whether for governments or multinational corporations.  Among the ideas advanced so far have been giving the ILO real enforcement powers; linking the ILO with the WTO, so that the ILOs more rights-oriented culture might join with the WTOs enforcement powers; or creating an intermediate institution that might be free of both the WTOs exclusive trade orientation and the ILOs paralyzing tripartite system.  Movement in any of these directions would be useful, but they are not the only options or necessarily the most productive.  Below we outline three other possible approaches, all drawn from recent governmental or institutional practices.  None of these is a panacea either.  Indeed, none standing alone can address all of the problems associated with globalization.  But they illustrate the kinds of steps that must be taken if rights in the global economy are to move from exhortation to enforcement.

The OECD Anti-Corruption Model

One approach could be modeled on the response of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the problem of corporate bribery of government officials.  Such corruption once also had a race to the bottom dynamic.  Governments were reluctant to prohibit it for fear of putting their corporations at a competitive disadvantage.  In 1997, the OECD decided that a collective approach was required.  It adopted anti-corruption standards and mandated that all OECD governments????the principal industrialized governments????criminalize violations.  A special OECD working group was assigned responsibility for monitoring and reporting on governmental compliance.  By setting a common, enforceable standard, the OECD helped undercut fears that bribery of foreign officials was necessary for corporations to keep up with the competition.  
A similar global approach could help enforce human rights in the global economy. National governments could be asked to adopt a prescribed enforcement regime to ensure that all corporations operating in or from their territory avoid complicity in serious rights violations.  Such a regime would allow corporations and governments from the North and South to respect these rights in the commercial realm without fear of placing themselves at a competitive disadvantage, thus undercutting the race to the bottom.  (The OECD in June adopted voluntary Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, but these lack the compulsory nature of its anti-corruption regime.)

The U.S.-Jordan Trade Pact
Another promising option can be found in the U.S.-Jordan Free Trade Agreement, concluded in October.  Rather than uncritically endorsing national standards or relegating labor rights to a side accord, as does the North American Free Trade Agreement, the U.S.-Jordan accord incorporates core international labor rights standards in its body and insists that domestic laws uphold them.  The parties explicitly recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domestic labor laws and vow not to do so.  The agreement establishes consultative and adjudicative processes to address violations and allows unilateral sanctions in the event of breaches.  But sanctions can be applied only if a violation of the accord severely distorts the balance of trade benefits or substantially undermines the fundamental objectives of the agreement ????both quite high bars.  The agreement also precludes judicial remedies for breaches, leaving it exclusively to governments to challenge violations.

International Financial Institutions

The international financial institutions should also help integrate human rights into the global economy by promoting the creation of national institutions to enforce rights and insisting on progressive improvement in respect for rights as part of loan packages.  Their frequent failure to play this role has made the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund the focus of much of the protest against globalization.  
These protests are understandable because, until recently, these institutions pursued a conception of economic development that was largely insensitive to human rights.  For years, Nobel Prize economist Amartya Sen and others have demonstrated that abuse of human rights impedes economic development????that unaccountable governments are more likely to indulge corruption or misguided economic projects and less likely to distribute the benefits of development to those most in need.  Yet the World Bank and the IMF insisted that human rights were a purely political matter outside their economic mandates.  Because of the influence of these institutions, governments and private investors often followed suit.  The funds they plowed into authoritarian governments were frequently wasted or misspent, while debts piled up that now thwart successor governments efforts to lift their people from poverty.
Many of these problems remain today.  But the World Bank in particular has begun to change this sorry legacy.  Under the leadership of James Wolfensohn, the banks efforts to combat corruption, reduce poverty, and promote good governance and the rule of law have led it, in some countries, to show greater sensitivity to human rights.  Yet much of this attention is ad hoc.  Additional progress is needed to institutionalize human rights as an essential foundation of the banks development work if the bank is to help enforce human rights in the global economy.
The banks approach to Zambia, Indonesia, and other countries in Asia illustrate some of the positive steps it took in 2000 to address human rights issues: 
	In advance of the World Bank-convened donors conference for Indonesia in October, Wolfensohn sent a  personal letter to Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid urging action to halt the violence in West Timor.  Without directly threatening to suspend funding, he warned that donors would raise this issue at the conference.  
	The donors conference convened in Zambia in July was the first in Africa to be wholly transparent.  All deliberations were open to independent human rights activists and other representatives of civil society, and the human rights performance of the government was freely discussed as an integral part of development plans.
	In Asia, civil society input on bank projects and at donors conferences was actively sought in Cambodia, Indonesia, East Timor, and elsewhere.  However, during the banks consultative process in Kyrgyzstan, the government excluded NGOs seen as linked to the political opposition, suggesting the need for rules based on international human rights standards to ensure participation by all elements of civil society.
In fighting corruption, the World Bank has also begun to pay more attention to human rights-related concerns.  It has promoted greater transparency in bank projects and encouraged civil society to scrutinize these transactions.  But it could still do more to support whistle-blowers, journalists, and nongovernmental monitors who are arrested or abused for exposing corruption.  It should also do more to promote the basic legal and judicial reform needed to achieve access to justice for all.  This would help to root out and prosecute corrupt police and public officials????steps that would improve official accountability for all sorts of human rights abuse.
The IMF, for its part, under the new leadership of Horst Khler, has also begun slowly to change in ways that will help integrate human rights in the global economy.  It was at its most innovative in Angola, where it secured the governments agreement to allow World Bank monitoring of oil revenues to ensure that they went toward development needs and were not mismanaged.  It began negotiations for a similar audit of diamond revenues.  Such transparency, coupled with stringent auditing, could become a model for extraction industries operating in countries ruled by abusive governments, such as Sudan, Turkmenistan, or Burma.  Until now, the vast government revenues generated meant that these companies almost inevitably risked complicity in serious abuse by funding the machinery of repression.  This new model of transparency should become a minimum requirement for companies entering into substantial revenue-producing joint ventures with repressive governments.
Yet the international financial institutions were hardly uniform in their attention to human rights.  At the height of Russias atrocities in Chechnya, the World Bank advanced Moscow U.S. $450 million in structural adjustment loan payments without any linkage to Russian conduct in the breakaway republic.  The IMF continues to freeze new loans to Russia, but it denies Russian claims that Chechnya is the reason and insists that the only cause is the slow pace of economic reform.  The World Bank gave U.S. $1.6 billion loans to China in fiscal year 2000 despite rampant corruption and restrictions on basic freedoms that made any genuine consultation with people affected by projects close to impossible.  The bank vowed to expand the role of civil society in Chinas development but its intervention on human rights cases was selective.
The international financial institutions new openness to incorporating human rights into their mandates at least sometimes has produced an ironic new problem of appearing impermissibly political.  The problem arises not because of these institutions attention to human rights????a natural focus of their development work????but because of their inconsistency.  A steadier commitment to human rights is needed. 
A useful model might be the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.  Founded in 1991 to assist the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, it operates under a charter that reflects recognition of the link between governance and development.  The charter permits assistance only to governments that are committed to and applying the principles of multiparty democracy, pluralism, and market economics.  In 2000, the EBRD cut off public sector lending to Turkmenistan in part because there has been no progress towards a pluralist or democratic political system.  However, the banks enforcement of its charter has also been uneven.  Moreover, its options should include not only suspending assistance but also aiding in the development of institutions to protect human rights.
  
From Voluntarism to Enforcement

There is no single way to ensure respect for human rights and other social values in the global economy.  Any viable approach must move beyond simply articulating standards and hoping for good-faith compliance.  The stakes are too high to rely on voluntarism alone.  Enforcement is needed.  The contours of an enforcement regime????its national or international focus, its institutional home???? remain to be defined.  But until there is a consistent commitment to enforce rather than simply pronounce international standards, the global economy is likely to fall short of its potential to serve all people rather than just the fortunate few.  An urgent global dialogue is needed to fill this enforcement gap.

The United Nations
One would be hard-pressed to devise a surer recipe for failure: assign an institution responsibility for managing the worlds most intractable problems, then deprive it of funds, give it a skeletal staff, overload the organization with peripheral tasks, and insist on its using large numbers of temporary personnel frequently offered less for their skills than for geographic balance or their governments desire to collect hard currency.  Yet this is how the international community treats the United Nations.  For some, this setup-for-failure is by design.  For others, it reflects a lack of commitment????an eagerness to pass off problems without providing the means to address them.  In Kofi Annan, the U.N. has a secretary-general of unusual vision, courage, skill, and dedication.  But the worlds refusal to give him the tools necessary to the tasks at hand has created an institutional crisis.  It is time to stop treating the U.N. as the dumping ground for global problems without giving it the capacity to address them.  
To highlight this institutional crisis is not to disparage the many parts of the U.N. that do work.  The U.N. human rights staff, based in Geneva and led by Mary Robinson as high commissioner for human rights, has grown significantly in recent years in professionalism and impact.  Despite woefully inadequate resources, it has made steady progress in overcoming the ocean that was deliberately put between it and the New York-based bodies that make the U.N.s most important political decisions.  The U.N. working groups and special rapporteurs, again established through Geneva, produce many first-rate accounts of serious human rights problems, even though the governments on the politicized U.N. Human Rights Commission routinely create new and often peripheral mandates to be carried out within existing resources.  Officials in New York at the U.N.s Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping also attempt to address problems of immense complexity with ridiculously small staffs.
Today, after several years of steady reform, the U.N.s main problem is less the skill or dedication of its officials than the dire lack of capacity that the nations of the world are willing to permit it.  Many of these institutional shortfalls are well described in a report on U.N. peace operations issued in August by a commission led by former Algerian Foreign Minister Lakhdar Brahimi.  It describes a world body asked to take on immense challenges with paltry resources and half-hearted political backing.  Earlier U.N. reports, issued in November and December 1999 on the inexcusable failure to respond to genocide in Srebrenica and Rwanda, highlight the tragic consequences of this neglect.  Rare among most governments, this candid self-scrutiny is admirable.  The time has come to act on these insights.  If the U.N. is to remain a viable resource for addressing the worlds most complex problems, the nations of the world must make an immediate and genuine commitment to remove the straitjacket of institutional weakness that they have imposed.

Sierra Leone
The tragedy of Sierra Leone highlights the consequences????for the U.N. and for people in need????of the international community trying to buy peace on the cheap.  For years, the country was plagued by a vicious civil war in which the rebel Revolutionary United Front and its allies terrorized the population with murder, rape, and the signature atrocity of chopping off human limbs.  The government clung to power with the help of a Nigerian-led West African military force known as ECOMOG.  But Nigeria threatened to withdraw its troops, in part because the international community refused to help cover its expenses.  Eager to diffuse public pressure to respond to the crisis, the U.S. government, backed by Britain, the U.N., the Organization of African Unity, and a group of West African states, brokered a power-sharing arrangement with the RUF in the guise of a peace accord.  With its economy devastated and the international community unwilling to commit the required troops, Sierra Leone was forced to accept a peace agreement that was tantamount to political surrender.
This July 1999 accord gave the RUF and all other forces amnesty for their atrocities, awarded the RUF leader, Foday Sankoh, a status equivalent to vice president, and appointed him chairman of the commission that oversees exploitation of the nations vast diamond fields and mineral wealth.  When the amnesty was greeted by protests, the U.N. secretary-general insisted at the last minute that a provision be inserted denying international, as opposed to national, recognition of it.  But the international community took no action on this disclaimer by moving to prosecute these criminals.  The lesson was clear: the RUF would pay no price????indeed, would be rewarded????for its ruthlessness.
It took the RUF little time to apply this lesson.  Its depredations continued unabated, and no one did anything to stop them.  Then, in early May 2000, as U.N. peacekeepers drawn exclusively from developing countries replaced ECOMOG forces, the RUF killed several peacekeepers and took five hundred hostage.  The badly equipped, poorly led U.N. force put up little or no resistance.  
Even as the year progressed, the U.N. was left under-equipped.  Elite British troops flown in on an emergency basis gave the peacekeepers the added muscle they needed to push the rebels back from the capital Freetown.  Gradually, the hostages were freed.  But even Britain would not subject its troops to U.N. command, and no other Western government volunteered its troops to lend a hand.  The absence of governments with high-tech militaries willing to put their soldiers at risk in a dangerous conflict in Africa left the U.N. force significantly handicapped as it tried to contain the ruthless rebels.  A stronger mandate????to provide meaningful protection for civilians throughout Sierra Leone????remained out of the question.  Other aspects of the U.N. presence, including its in-country leadership, reflected a similar lack of international commitment.

East Timor and Kosovo
The international community fared only slightly better in East Timor and Kosovo????the two other most challenging situations it handed the United Nations in 1999 and 2000.  Forced in each case to assemble personnel on an ad hoc basis, with no ready reservoir of experienced professionals, the U.N. operated under severe handicap.
In September 1999, immediately following an overwhelming vote in East Timor for independence, Indonesian-backed militia left the territory a charred ruin.  An Australian-led military forced initially secured the territory, but by late 1999 the new country was handed over to a U.N.-led operation.  The U.N. was given painfully inadequate tools for such large tasks as addressing past abuses, preventing new ones, and building basic governmental institutions from scratch.  The international civilian police were recruited at an agonizingly slow pace and showed up poorly trained for short, three-month tours of duty.  Their inadequacy, combined with divisions within U.N. operations, slowed investigations into the September 1999 violence and contributed to vigilante attacks and summary justice, as Timorese despaired of the U.N. police guaranteeing law and order.
In Kosovo, the U.N. again was asked to take over a territory that was virtually bereft of governmental institutions.  Reconstruction was hampered by the Yugoslav governments history of repressing the ethnic Albanian majority, the institutional and legal void it left after its sudden withdrawal in June 1999 following the war with NATO, and the lack of clarity about the territorys future relationship with Yugoslavia.  Under the circumstances, progress was made creating a new criminal justice system and civilian police force.  But the justice system, inadequately supervised, fell far short of international human rights standards and showed a disturbing pattern of bias against ethnic Serbs.  The international civilian police force, under equipped and poorly trained, was sometimes unwilling to arrest former Kosovo Liberation Army members and other ethnic Albanians who were responsible for violence against ethnic Serbs and other minorities, as well as against ethnic Albanian political rivals.  A lack of investigative capacity and poor cooperation by the local population were also obstacles.  These shortcomings meant that NATO troops sometimes had to assume sensitive law enforcement tasks for which they were unprepared.  The violence against minorities persisted, meaning that virtually no ethnic Serbs participated in the October 2000 municipal elections.

Embargoes
U.N. attempts to curb conflicts through embargoes suffered from a similar lack of will and resources to ensure implementation.  A U.N. panel found widespread breaches of a Security Council-imposed embargo on trade in arms or diamonds with Angolas murderous rebel group UNITA.  The report, spearheaded by Canadas then U.N. Ambassador Robert Fowler, was remarkable for naming the companies and countries, including heads of state, involved in sanctions busting.  But through October, the Security Council had taken no further action to enforce its lofty pronouncement of an embargo.  No serious effort was made to sanction the embargo breakers or to monitor the flow of goods at borders and airports.  An embargo on arms trading with Sierra Leone and Liberia fared no better.

North-South Collusion

That the U.N. is so handicapped in its capacity to address global problems is the product of an unfortunate congruence of interests between governments of the North and South, often against the interests of their people.  Many governments of the industrialized world, particularly the United States, appreciate the U.N. as a place to hand difficult problem countries but distrust the global body too much to allow it the capacity to resolve these problems.  The frequent result is the deployment of personnel who are starved of the resources needed to accomplish urgent tasks.  Many governments of the developing world also do not like these political deployments.  Rather than stand in solidarity with the people of the South whose calls for help might be answered, these governments see a U.N. emergency capacity as a diversion of resources from the U.N. development projects they most cherish and a threat to their own political latitude.

Solutions
It may be difficult to muster the political will to address these problems, but it is not difficult to identify solutions.  Some of the changes are doctrinal, many described in the Brahimi report.  For example, the U.N. must abandon its reflexive neutrality when circumstances call for protecting civilians from slaughter.  Even when the U.N. enters dangerous situations consensually, it must do so with a sufficiently robust mandate and military capacity to protect U.N. personnel and the civilians they have come to serve.  The Security Council must stop treating human rights as an unwelcome irrelevancy best left in its Geneva exile.  Instead, drawing on the U.N.s significant human rights expertise, the council must begin to recognize that human rights abuses are the cause of many conflicts and that ending these abuses is a critical element of lasting peace.  In particular, accountability for the most heinous human rights crimes must be seen less as an obstacle to peace than as an essential building block????a goal worth embracing for pragmatic as well as principled reasons.
Other changes are structural.  It makes no sense for the U.N. to squander months at the outset of each new emergency desperately searching the world for qualified personnel and begging national governments to spare them.  The U.N. needs a standby capacity  not the caricature of troops drilling on U.N. grounds in New York, but a reserve of personnel that governments would make available on short notice for emergency U.N. service.  This reserve should include not only specially trained troops but also police, judicial, legal, human rights, development, and administrative personnel  and the leadership to deploy them effectively.  
The U.N. Secretariat in New York must also be bolstered.  At current staffing levels, it is designed to be solely reactive.  Even when it does respond, it is grossly understaffed to manage complex emergencies.  The political and peacekeeping departments do not begin to have the requisite capacity.  Preventive work, for example, is impossible in an institution whose limited staff is overburdened with far less significant work.  The answer requires not only a substantial increase in the staff of the political and peacekeeping departments but also a cultural change.  The nations of the U.N. must accept the need to identify, name, and address problem areas before they explode.  They must stop diverting the U.N. from more pressing problems with demands for unread reports delivered to forgotten committees.  They must transcend the zero-sum logic that every dollar spent on political or peacekeeping affairs is a dollar less for development and recognize that ending abusive conflict is a prerequisite to development for the countries, and often the regions, involved.
The U.N. is fortunate to have a secretary-general who understands and embraces these truths.  But he cannot lead alone.  If the U.N. has any prospect of meeting its potential, the nations of the world must accept and support the organizations transformation.


International Justice

The greatest strides toward an enhanced global architecture have been taken in the area of international justice.  Less than a decade ago, impunity for tyrants was the rule.  The worlds most heinous human rights criminals committed atrocities knowing that they could use intimidation and violence to fend off accountability.  This impunity was an affront to the victims and an encouragement of further atrocities.  
Today, the world is a far smaller place for tyrants because there are fewer places to escape justice.  New international tribunals are being launched.  These tribunals, in turn, have catalyzed national prosecutorial efforts, demonstrating that international justice serves to reinforce rather than replace national justice.  Moreover, the actions of several Southern governments have made clear that justice for the worst human rights offenders is hardly an exclusively Northern concern.  The most pronounced sour note in this steady progress has been the U.S. governments persistent opposition to having its citizens held to the same legal standards as the rest of the world.

International Tribunals

The movement to create international institutions of justice took several steps forward in 2000.  Most significant was the progress toward the establishment of the International Criminal Court????the first global tribunal for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.  A treaty to establish the court was adopted in Rome in July 1998.  Despite the many legal complexities involved, twenty-two governments had already ratified the treaty by the end of October 2000 (of the sixty needed to launch the court) and another ninety-three governments had signed it.  This broad embrace suggests that the court will be up and running soon????conceivably as early as 2002.  
Because the ICC will not have retroactive jurisdiction, the world continues to rely on country-specific international tribunals for the most heinous crimes of the past and present.  Political changes in Croatia and Yugoslavia show how international tribunals have changed the long-term prospects of even seemingly secure human rights offenders.  The death of Franjo Tudjman in December 1999 opened the way to the election of Croatias new president, Stipe Mesic, who has been far more cooperative with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, handing over evidence and suspects and opening the countrys borders to investigators.  The September 2000 electoral loss of Slobodan Milosevic to Yugoslavias new president, Vojislav Kostunica, has also opened up new possibilities for cooperation.  Kostunica at first insisted that he would not surrender Milosevic to the Hague, where the tribunal has indicted him for crimes against humanity committed in Kosovo.  But Kostunicas later comments were more equivocal, suggesting that cooperation with the tribunal and even the eventual surrender of Milosevic remain possibilities.  At stake is also the fate of former Bosnian Serb military leader Ratko Mladic, who has taken refuge in Serbia after his indictment by the tribunal for genocide and other crimes in Bosnia.
Meanwhile, as of late October, the U.N. Security Council was moving toward the creation of a hybrid national-international tribunal for Sierra Leone.  The tribunal will effectively overturn the July 1999 amnesty and make possible the prosecution of those behind the horrendous crimes that have characterized the countrys civil war.  The hybrid nature of the court will be precedent-setting????an international prosecutor and judges in a dominant role to ensure the courts independence, but a significant role for Sierra Leonean judges and prosecutors to help them begin reconstructing their devastated legal system.  However, certain issues remain to be worked out, including the power of the court to compel cooperation, the time period on which the court will focus, the courts treatment of juvenile offenders, and the extent of witness protection.    
Unfortunately, a proposed hybrid tribunal for Cambodia has fared less well.  Unlike Sierra Leone, the Cambodian government has insisted that Cambodians have a dominant role.  The U.N. at first resisted because of the Cambodian governments long history of manipulating its legal system.  But the U.N. was later forced to acquiesce when the U.S. government brokered a deal largely on Cambodian terms.  Still, as of late October, the Cambodian government was dragging its feet in seeking the necessary parliamentary approval, raising doubts about the courts prospects.

National Justice Efforts

Some have questioned whether it is appropriate for international prosecutions to replace national justice systems.  But that concern reflects a misunderstanding.  The purpose of creating an option of international justice is to establish a backstop for national efforts.  By making clear that violence or intimidation aimed at national judges and prosecutors no longer guarantees impunity, the option of international justice bolsters national justice systems.  The International Criminal Court was built explicitly on these terms, and events in 2000 showed that the emergence of international tribunals has had precisely this catalyzing effect.
Britains October 1998 arrest of former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet would almost certainly not have taken place before the ICC treaty changed the environment for international justice.  In March 2000, the British government released Pinochet on health grounds after almost seventeen months in detention.  He returned to a Chile that had been transformed by his arrest.  In August, in a step that would have been unthinkable before his detention in Britain, the Chilean Supreme Court stripped him of his parliamentary immunity, allowing prosecution to proceed for his role in a notorious episode of execution and disappearance immediately following his 1973 coup.  
Similarly, after the September 1999 rampage of Indonesian-backed militia in East Timor, the U.N. launched a commission of inquiry.  In January 2000, the commission recommended the establishment of an international tribunal.  Kofi Annan declined to endorse this recommendation so long as the Indonesian government upheld its vow to bring the abusers to justice on its own????a step it had no previous history of taking.  In August, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson reminded Jakarta that she would call for an international tribunal if it did not proceed with prosecutions.  In September, the government published a list of nineteen suspects involved in the East Timor rampage, though by late October the prospect of actual prosecutions remained distant.
Interestingly, in one case a nationally based prosecutorial effort may precede action by an international tribunal, suggesting a complementary relationship.  The international war crimes tribunal for Rwanda has jurisdiction not only over atrocities associated with the 1994 genocide but also over crimes committed at the time by the Rwandan Patriotic Front????the dominant force in the current Rwandan government.  The RPFs military victory in June 1994 ended the genocide, but the Tutsi-led force committed serious abuses in the process.  The Rwanda tribunal has issued no indictments for the RPFs crimes????a failure that is often attributed to its need to maintain good relations with the Rwandan government so it can retain access to the country to conduct investigations and secure witnesses for the genocide trials.  In August 2000, a Belgian prosecutor began investigating a complaint of war crimes and crimes against humanity filed against the RPF by a group of Rwandans.  This initiative may hasten similar action by the Rwanda tribunal.  

Southern Initiatives
Some critics of efforts to hold human rights abusers accountable for their crimes have suggested that justice is a parochial concern of Northern governments which is imposed on the people of the South.  But the events of 2000 demonstrated that Southern governments are also eager to pursue the most heinous human rights criminals????that the quest for justice does not break down on hemispheric lines.
	In February, in an echo of the Pinochet case, a Senegalese court, acting at the request of Chadian victims, indicted former Chadian dictator Hissne Habr for torture and ordered his arrest.  Habr had taken refuge in Senegal following the fall of his dictatorship in 1990.  In July 2000, in a blow to judicial independence, an appellate court dismissed the indictment after the new Senegalese government of President Abdoulaye Wade removed the judge investigating the case and promoted the head of the judicial chamber that issued the reversal ruling.   The dismissal is on appeal to the countrys Supreme Court.
	In October, an Argentine judge asked Chile to extradite Pinochet and others for the 1974 assassination of General Carlos Prats and his wife, Sofia Cuthbert.  Prats, the former commander-in-chief of the Chilean armed forces, had opposed Pinochets 1973 coup and taken refuge in Buenos Aires with his family.  The judge also sought the extradition of other Chileans in the case, including the former chief of Chiles secret police, Manuel Contreras Seplveda, who is in prison in Chile for having carried out a 1974 car-bombing in Washington that took the life of another coup opponent, former Chilean Foreign Minister Orlando Letelier, and his assistant, Ronni Moffitt.
	Also in October, Vladimiro Montesinos, the shadowy intelligence figure behind the authoritarian government of Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori, unsuccessfully sought political asylum (effective amnesty) in Panama.  Panama had evidently tired of being the worlds dumping ground for deposed dictators and their accomplices.  Montesinos, who had been responsible for forming and supervising a death squad in the early 1990s among other abuses, beat a hasty retreat to Peru.
	In August, acting upon a Spanish request, Mexico arrested Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, an accused torturer for the 1976-83 Argentine military junta.  Cavallo had been living in Mexico.
These and other cases demonstrate an increasingly global effort????involving governments of the North and South????to bring abusive officials to justice.  The trend is still at a rudimentary stage, but it is clearly working against the impunity that so many ruthless officials enjoyed.  This smaller world may make tomorrows dictators think twice before embarking on the path of slaughter taken by their predecessors.

Disappointments

However, the news in 2000 was not all rosy on the justice front.  The most glaring failure was the international communitys refusal to put serious pressure on Russia to bring to justice the commanders who had been responsible for massacres, torture, and indiscriminate slaughter in Chechnya.  With Russia wielding a veto on the U.N. Security Council, a council-created international tribunal was not an option.  The U.N. Commission on Human Rights did criticize Russias actions and urge prosecution????the first such resolution against a permanent member of the Security Council.  The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe also suspended the Russian delegations voting rights.  But there was little follow-up on these initiatives, and no insistence that Russia apply the rule of law to its troops in Chechnya as a condition of receiving the large international assistance that continued to be sent its way.
Also disappointing was the lack of international attention to justice in Central Africa????particularly Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo.  This failure is especially unfortunate in the Congo because the government of President Laurent Kabila effectively blocked an earlier U.N. commission of inquiry established to examine atrocities committed on Congolese soil during Kabilas rise to power in 1996-97.  The war fought in Congo since 1998 has also been plagued by widespread atrocities.  So far, the international community has taken no steps to end the impunity that helps drive these abuses.  
Despite a clear mandate, NATO made no effort through October to arrest Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb political leader who has been indicted for genocide and other crimes in Bosnia.  Throughout all or most of 2000, he was reported still to be in Bosnia and hence in territory where NATO had permission to operate.  
A Selective U.S. Vision of Justice

Perhaps the greatest disappointment was the persistently selective view of international justice adopted by the U.S. government.  Washington has been an active supporter of country-specific tribunals insofar as they apply to others, but it has stood in the way of efforts to establish a more universal system of justice that might apply to U.S. citizens as well.
This attitude was evident in the cries of protest heard in Washington when the prosecutor for the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal, Carla del Ponte, dared even to consider opening an investigation of NATOs conduct during the 1999 air war with Yugoslavia.  The tribunal has jurisdiction over war crimes committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, whether by residents of the territory or outside forces.  The prosecutors scrutiny of the NATO air campaign was entirely appropriate, given that, according to a Human Rights Watch study released in February, up to a half of the roughly 500 civilian deaths during the bombing campaign were attributable to possible NATO violations of international humanitarian law.  Although the prosecutor ultimately decided against launching an investigation, Washington thought it an outrage that she would even contemplate holding NATO to the same standards as other forces.  Indeed, NATO failed to turn over specific information requested by investigators.
In March, the U.S. government again fell short of its international justice obligations. Toms Ricardo Anderson Kohatsu, a one-time major in Perus Army Intelligence Service, was credibly accused of participating in the 1997 brutal torture of a woman who was beaten, burned, raped and electrically shocked in such a manner that she was rendered paraplegic.  The U.S. State Department itself had described the case in its annual human rights reports for 1997 and 1999.  Anderson Kohatsu came to Washington in March 2000 to testify on Perus behalf at a hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, part of the Organization of American States.   At the request of the U.S. Justice Department, which had been alerted to his presence, he was detained while changing planes in Houston.  Anderson Kohatsu was not on Peruvian government business and was not carrying a diplomatic passport.  Nonetheless, without allowing the courts to consider the matter, Acting Secretary of State Thomas Pickering ordered his release on the dubious theory that he was entitled to diplomatic immunity because he had participated in official business of the OAS.  Pickerings actions reflected an administration far more concerned with avoiding political problems with Peru than with carrying out international legal obligations to arrest and prosecute the worst human rights offenders.
Perhaps most troubling is the U.S. governments continued refusal to accept the International Criminal Court.  With the help of the United States, the court already has extensive safeguards against unjustified prosecutions.  Moreover, under the courts principle of complementarity, any government can spare its nationals ICC prosecution by conducting its own good-faith investigation and, if appropriate, prosecution.  Yet the U.S. government is determined to shut off even the theoretical possibility that its citizens would have to appear before the court.  Washington maintains this stance even though an exception to the courts universal reach would undermine the courts legitimacy and effectiveness.
Because the U.S. government has no intention of ratifying the courts treaty anytime soon, it has focused on the supposed outrage that the court would have jurisdiction over the citizens of a state that has not ratified the treaty.  But it is common practice for a government to prosecute a foreign national for crimes committed on its territory without first seeking permission of the foreigners government.  The jurisdiction of the ICC amounts to no more than a delegation of this widely accepted power for the most serious human rights crimes.  Indeed, Washington itself routinely exercises far more expansive jurisdiction in unilaterally pursuing alleged terrorists or drug traffickers even when their crimes were not committed on U.S. soil.
Still, the U.S. government has advanced one scheme after another to shield U.S. citizens from the courts reach.  The latest idea, floated in October, would exempt the citizens of any government that has not ratified the court, so long as the government could show that it acts responsibly and is generally willing to prosecute its own serious human rights offenders.  But these requirements are not in the ICC treaty.  Adding them would fundamentally revise the treaty and upend a whole series of carefully crafted compromises made in Rome to secure the courts broad support.  Moreover, the principle of complementarity as framed in the treaty permits a government to avoid ICC prosecution of a citizen only by pursuing the specific suspect in question.  Washington wants to weaken this rule by requiring only a general willingness to prosecute criminals of this nature????something a country could presumably establish once and for all and thereafter preclude the risk of ICC prosecution for any of its citizens.  That is hardly a goal worth endorsing.
The best antidote to this U.S. exceptionalism is for the many governments supporting the court to reject all such schemes out of hand and proceed as rapidly as possible toward the sixty ratifications of the treaty needed to establish the court.  The sooner the court is up and running, the sooner Washington will recognize the futility of its quest to carve out an exemption for its citizens.  Ultimately, Washington will realize that its best defense against unfair (as opposed to legitimate) prosecutions of Americans is to help create a culture within the ICC that is deeply respectful of individual rights and the rule of law.  The U.S. contribution to that culture will be far more effective if the United States joins the court????or at least becomes a friendly supporter of it????than if it persists in attacking the court from the outside.

Conclusion

An increasingly interconnected world is generating human rights problems of a global dimension.  From regulating the global economy to rebuilding war-torn societies to bringing the most heinous criminals to justice, global solutions are needed to these global problems.  A nation would never willingly address its most complex national problems with handicapped national institutions.  So the world needs to enhance its institutional capacity on a global level to address the most serious human rights problems that transcend national borders.  Some progress is being made in each of these areas, but far more needs to be done.  The challenge today is to build a global institutional capacity commensurate with the complexity and importance of these global problems.
Over fifty years ago, as World War II ended and a new era began, the international community created a new set of institutions to address the challenges of the future.  What emerged were such landmark organizations as the United Nations and the Bretton-Woods institutions.  Similar vision is needed today.  To manage the global economy, stronger institutions are needed to ensure respect for human rights.  To assist war-torn nations, the United Nations must be bolstered substantially.  To build an international system of justice, the International Criminal Court must be launched and supported.  These are major steps requiring foresight and commitment.  Complacency can no longer be tolerated.  It is time to act.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS


The international community took important actions in 2000 aimed at protecting those who are risking their lives to fight for human rights. During its annual session,  the United Nations Commission on Human Rights voted to establish the post of a special representative of the secretary-general on the situation of human rights defenders. After a worldwide search, in August, the secretary-general appointed Hina Jilani, a Pakistani human rights lawyer (and a human rights monitor honored by Human Rights Watch in 1991 at our annual monitors celebration) for the post. The special representative will be able to press for the implementation of the 1998 Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and intervene in cases of threats to and harassment of human rights defenders worldwide.
Five humanitarian workers were murdered in 2000 while aiding refugees. In West Timor,  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) staff Samson Aregahegn, Carlos Caceres, and Pero Simun were killed on September 6. In Guinea, UNHCR head of office Mensah Kpognon was killed on September 17. In Burundi, Brother Antoine Bargiggia of the Jesuit Refugee Service (JRS) was killed on October 3. Their tragic deaths prompted a global protest and highlighted the dangers for humanitarian workers world wide.  The murders also posed a serious threat to the protection of refugees as UNHCR responded by withdrawing  all staff from West Timor and the border areas of Guinea, leaving refugees there almost completely unprotected. The Jesuit Refugee Service continued to serve refugees in Burundi.
Indonesia experienced the loss of  human rights defenders Sukardi and Jafar Siddiq Hamzah  in the year 2000. Sukardi, a volunteer for the local environmental and human rights group based in Aceh, the Bamboo Thicket Institute (Yayasan Rumpun Bambu Indonesia), disappeared on January 31. Sukardis body was found naked and bullet-riddled on February 1.  Jafar Siddiq Hamzah, the founder and director of the New York-based rights group, the International Forum for Aceh, vanished on August 5, while on a visit to Medan, Indonesia. Jafar, one of Acehs most accomplished human rights advocates, was found dead with his body showing signs of torture in an unmarked grave on September 3.
Some fifty miles outside Nairobi, Fr.  John Kaiser, a well-known human rights activist in Kenya, was murdered during the night of August 24, 2000.  Father Kaiser, a Catholic parish priest in the Rift Valley area and a U.S. citizen, worked in Kenya for thirty-six years and was  an outspoken human rights activist.  In 1999, the Law Society of Kenya had honored Father Kaiser with its annual human rights award.
In Colombia, four human rights defenders were killed and three disappeared in the year 2000. On July 11, Elizabeth Caas,  a member of the Association of Family Members of the Detained and Disappeared (Asociacin de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos-Colombia ASFADDES), was shot and killed in Barrancabermeja. Angel Quintero and Claudia Patricia Monsalve, also ASFADDES members, were disappeared in Medelln, Antioquia, on October 6. Indigenous activist Jairo Bedoya Hoyos, a member of the Antioquia Indigenous Organization (Organizacin Indgena de Antioquia, OIA) who worked on human rights issues, was disappeared on March 2. Demetrio Playonero, a displaced person and human rights leader was murdered apparently by paramilitaries on March 3. In May, Jess Ramiro Zapata, the only remaining member of the Segovia Human Rights Committee, was killed near Segovia. Government prosecutor Margarita Mara Pulgarn Trujillo, part of a team investigating cases linking paramilitaries to the army and regional drug traffickers, was murdered in Medelln on April 3. 
In Haiti, Jean Dominique, the director of Radio Haiti-Inter and one of Haitis most prominent radio journalists, was shot to death the morning of April 3. Forced into exile in 1980 for his opposition to the Jean-Claude Duvalier regime, Dominique was a strong proponent of the free press and Haitis struggle for democracy.
INTRODUCTION
		
The scope of todays global human rights problems far exceeds the capacity of global institutions to address them.  The problem is most acute in the global economy, where a disturbing institutional void frequently leaves human rights standards unenforced.  But the problem also arises as the world struggles to stop mass atrocities, protect the victims of these crimes, rebuild their countries, and bring their persecutors to justice.  In each case, a more interconnected and seemingly smaller world rightfully feels a greater responsibility to respond.  Yet the capacity to meet these demands has not kept up with the challenges.  A reinforced global architecture is needed.

This introduction to Human Rights Watchs annual World Report describes this weakness in the institutional capacity to address the global human rights challenges of our time.  It highlights the enforcement gap for issues of human rights in the global economy.  It discusses the inadequate resources given to the United Nations to assume its assigned tasks of keeping the peace and assisting war-torn nations with national reconstruction.  And it describes the recent strides taken toward a new institutional justice system for the worlds worst human rights criminals but laments the U.S. governments persistent refusal to countenance U.S. nationals being held to the same standards as the rest of the world.
This report?Human Rights Watchs eleventh annual review of human rights practices around the globe?covers developments in seventy countries.  It is released in advance of Human Rights Day, December 10, 2000, and describes events from November 1999 through October 2000.  Most chapters examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the United Nations, and various regional organizations; and the freedom of local human rights defenders.  Other chapters address important thematic concerns.  

Highlights of the year include, on the positive side, the popular rebellion against the Milosevic regime in Yugoslavia, the conclusion of a treaty barring the use of children as soldiers, and the U.N. Commission on Human Rightss first formal criticism of a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council (Russia, for its abuses in Chechnya).  On the negative side, the U.N. Human Rights Commission refused yet again to condemn China for its relentless suppression of political opposition, the U.S. government failed to abide by conditions included in a major military aid package to Colombia that would have required the Colombian army to sever its ties with paramilitaries, and there was a growing crisis in the worlds response to refugees and asylum-seekers and persistently inadequate protection for the internally displaced.  
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2000 by the Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human rights activists in the countries in question.  Human Rights Watch reports, published throughout the year (see http://www.hrw.org), contain more elaborate accounts of the brief summaries collected in this volume.  The chapters here also reflect the work of the Human Rights Watch advocacy staff, which monitors the policies of governments and institutions with influence to curb abusive human rights conduct. 
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the problem.  There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.  Other factors affecting the focus of our work in 2000 and hence the content of this volume include the severity of abuses, access to the country and the availability of information about it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to outside influence, the importance of addressing certain thematic concerns, and the need to maintain a balance in the work of Human Rights Watch across various political divides. 

The Global Economy 

After street protests over the past year in Seattle, Prague, Washington, and elsewhere, proponents of the global economy seem on the defensive.  Globalization?the increased international flow of trade, capital, information, and people?has delivered undeniable wealth and opportunity and created millions of jobs.  But there is widespread unease at some of the associated and parallel ills.  Income inequality is growing, as are the number of people in abject poverty.  The much-criticized race to the bottom seems to stymie certain attempts at social and economic betterment.  Resource extraction?the business of oil, minerals, and metals? often proceeds without regard to the rights of local residents.  Governments depend on migrant workers to take on less desirable jobs but frequently deny them legal protection.  Trafficking in people has flourished.  
Despite these problems, the current system to regulate global commerce leaves little or no room for human rights and other social values.  Relevant international human rights standards exist but are not uniformly ratified, effectively enforced, or adequately integrated into the global economy.
The debate about solving these problems has been unhelpfully polarized.  Advocates of unfettered trade and capital flow tend to see commerce itself as a panacea.  Pointing to the immense wealth generated by the global economy, they frequently resist any governance regime that might constrain globalization by attention to other social values.   More and freer commerce, in their view, is the best route to social as well as economic betterment.  
But as Human Rights Watch has repeatedly found, a world integrated on commercial lines does not necessarily lead to human rights improvements.  In China, increased international trade has not lessened the governments determination to snuff out any political opposition.  In Sudan, oil revenue made possible by international investment has allowed the government in only two years nearly to double the defense budget for its highly abusive war.  In Central Asia, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, international investment in oil and gas exploration and production has only reaffirmed the new governments resolve to cling to power at all costs while their people plunge into poverty.  In Sierra Leone and Angola, international trade in diamonds has fueled deadly civil wars.  The number of migrant workers and trafficking victims has grown with international commerce, yet abuses against them remain largely ignored.  Experience shows that global economic integration is no substitute for a firm parallel commitment to defending human rights.
Opponents of globalization highlight the fate of the millions of people who are excluded from the benefits of the global economy or are forced to accept it on unsatisfactory terms.  They argue that globalization mainly benefits the wealthy and that it aids the poor too slowly or actually contributes to their plight.  Some opponents would simply shut down the process of globalization, convinced that its benefits are not worth the price.  They include those who have used violence against institutions they see as supporting globalization.  Others focus more constructively on reshaping the global economy to better serve social values.  Many reforms have been discussed but none has gained a consensus.
Some of the firmest defenders of unfettered global commerce come from the developing countries in whose name the opponents of globalization claim to speak.  Both governments and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in these countries fear that linking trade or investment to respect for social values, however well intentioned, will end up serving protectionist interests in the industrialized world and shutting off developing countries from the benefits of global commerce.  They are particularly wary of the efforts of some activists to prescribe a living wage on a national basis for fear of being deprived of their principal competitive advantage?cheap labor.  They also object to efforts by the global North to enforce selected social and economic values in the global South when it serves Northern interests, while neglecting more costly obligations to help achieve other important social and economic goals such as alleviating poverty or improving health care or education.

A Human Rights Framework

In this divisive debate, human rights offer a promising framework to address many of the problems of globalization, including the tendency of some governments and corporations to compete by profiting from repression.  Some of the most alarming by-products of globalization are clear violations of rights enshrined in international treaties.  By the same token, upholding these rights provides the basis for solving many of the ills associated with globalization in a way that need not shut down global trade or benefit the worlds richer countries at the expense of the poor.
Within the workplace, for example, human rights speak directly to the problems of exclusion.  Factory workers often face poor wages, abysmal working conditions, sexual abuse, no social safety net, and no legal protection.  Respect for freedom of association would allow workers to join together?in trade unions should they choose?to improve wages and working conditions.  The prohibition against discrimination on such grounds as gender, race, or ethnicity ensures that historically marginalized people enjoy the fruits of their labor on the same terms as others.  The prohibition of forced or abusive child labor and the ban on arbitrary violence require employers to negotiate with adult free-agents. 
On a societal level, respect for civil and political rights, including the right to elect ones government, allows the disadvantaged to have a voice in the direction of their nations social and economic development.  These rights permit citizens to press their government to take on such issues as increasing the minimum wage, protecting union activists from retaliation, enforcing prohibitions on discrimination, regulating extraction industries, or ensuring that investments are made with social values in mind.  They also promote the transparency and accountability in national governments and international institutions that are prerequisites to making them responsive to popular concerns.  
In addition, respect for these basic freedoms helps to encourage governments of the industrialized and developing world to take seriously their obligations to uphold economic, social, and cultural rights.  It allows people to urge governments to ratify the leading treaty safeguarding these rights and to adopt reasonable plans to realize these rights progressively, including in the regulation of trade and investment.  It also permits popular input into the choice among alternative routes to fulfill economic and social rights, such as the amount of investment to put into education or health care, the level of restrictions to place on industries that cause environmental damage or social disruption, or the type of social welfare programs needed to temper the shock of trade liberalization and structural adjustment policies.
This emphasis on rights may not guarantee particular wage levels, working conditions, or regulatory policies.  Nor does it eliminate inequalities in bargaining power or eradicate all forms of social exclusion.  But by allowing an unfettered civil society to make its views heard, a rights approach permits workers and citizens to have a say in these important matters.  
A rights approach also discourages the tendency of some governments and multinational corporations to gain a competitive advantage by suppressing workers demands for better treatment or societys pursuit of such goals as a clean environment.  Corporations might still seek lower production costs by moving to lower-wage or less socially demanding countries.  Governments might still seek a competitive advantage by restricting taxes, wages, regulations, or social benefits.  But competition through repression? the most nefarious aspect of the race to the bottom?would be significantly constrained.
A rights approach would give developing countries a legal basis to broaden discussions of trade and investment policy to include the need for reciprocal benefits and concessions from the industrialized world to facilitate the realization of economic and social rights. Such demands would have more resonance because they would be grounded in legally binding international human rights treaties rather than more malleable and selective economic theories.  A rights approach would thus serve as a useful supplement to development models that are premised on market liberalization but pay insufficient attention to attendant social and economic problems.
At the same time, a rights approach should prove acceptable to proponents of free trade.  It does not seek to shut down global trade and investment, only to invoke broadly accepted rights to define the limits within which commerce should proceed.  It does not raise the drawbridge against global competition, but insists that the market be grounded in respect for international human rights law.
Finally, a rights approach would help develop international solutions to problems arising from the global movement of people, such as the lack of protection for migrant workers and trafficking victims.  Many industrialized countries erect barriers to legal immigration from developing countries but tacitly accept undocumented migrants, or migrants with strict legal limits on their presence, to perform undesirable work.  Many developing countries also export workers, some with documentation and some without, to earn foreign exchange through remittances.  Lacking legal protection, these workers have little recourse in the face of such problems as sexual abuse, dangerous working conditions, and violations of the right to organize.  In addition, many governments wrongly equate the smuggling used to infiltrate undocumented migrant workers with human trafficking?transport based on deception or coercion????thereby denying trafficking victims the protection they need.

The Need for Stronger Institutions

The advantages of a rights approach remain theoretical without broad governmental ratification of the relevant human rights treaties and a reliable means of enforcement.  Stronger institutions are needed to insist that governments and corporations respect human rights in their global dealings.  The United Nations and the International Labour Organization have played an important role in establishing human rights standards, including the U.N.s international covenants and the ILOs core labor standards.  But these institutions lack adequate enforcement powers.  Except in extraordinary circumstances, the most they can do is encourage treaty ratification and condemn abusive conduct.  The U.N. has been more effective because its special rapporteurs and working groups have more latitude to use public shaming to encourage compliance.  The tripartite nature of the ILO ????combining representatives of government, business, and labor????often leaves the organization paralyzed when it tries to uphold rights in contentious situations.  
Meanwhile, the World Trade Organization, which does have enforcement powers, focuses on promoting global trade, sometimes at the expense of international human rights norms.  The proposal to add a social clause to its mandate has been controversial in part because the WTO has no expertise, culture, or tradition of  protecting rights.  Moreover, many Southern governments and NGOs fear that sanctions under a social clause would be applied against only developing countries, not against comparable abuses in the industrialized world.  
At a regional level, the Council of Europe has established clear rights standards in the European Convention on Human Rights, enforced by the European Court of Human Rights, and the European Social Charter.  At the same time, the European Union has established an institutionalized social dialogue procedure among employers and unions, set forth in its Maastricht Social Protocol and Agreement, and an international court, the European Court of Justice, with a proven track record of protecting employment rights.  However, the commitment to integration that made this model possible is peculiar to Europe.  It is not clear whether the model can be applied elsewhere.
At a national level, labor rights have been promoted through trade conditionality, such as the linkage between respect for core labor rights and access to preferential trade benefits (Generalized System of Preferences) that exists in U.S. and E.U. legislation.  But this conditionality is limited geographically and applied irregularly.  It should be broadened, made justiciable, and applied more consistently.

Voluntary Codes of Conduct

The institutions noted above can at least call attention to governmental misbehavior, but multinational corporations have largely been left to police themselves, with occasional prodding from human rights and labor organizations.  In recent years, progress has been made in increasing corporate attention to human rights, but more is needed.  
Only several years ago, many corporations treated human rights as outside their legitimate concerns.  They claimed their role was only to maximize profits for shareholders, that human rights concerns were best left to governments.  
Today, after a series of exposs of corporate complicity in human rights abuse, the response is often quite different.  Corporate leaders increasingly recognize that they must pay attention to human rights or risk consumer pressure, a tarnished corporate image, and problems with employee recruitment and morale.  The 1997 Asian economic crisis provided other economic reasons to be sensitive to human rights.  As a result, many corporations have adopted voluntary codes of conduct, pledging to abide by specified principles on human rights and other social concerns.  These corporations include not only consumer-oriented companies  in apparel, footwear, toys, and appliances but also major oil companies and other extraction industries.
These codes have been effective in changing some corporations conduct, but they have shortcomings.  They are typically written without consultation with the workers most affected, many of whom are not even aware of their companys code.  They are usually written in vague language which looks good in corporate brochures but avoids some of the stickier human rights issues, such as how to do business in a country that bars labor unions, restricts the rights of women, guards company facilities with abusive soldiers, or uses joint-venture revenue to fund military abuses.  With notable exceptions, the codes generally give independent organizations no formal role in monitoring compliance.  They commonly address only workplace issues and the conduct of subcontractors, not broader societal concerns.  
And, of course, the codes are voluntary.  They contain no enforcement mechanism, nothing to fill the institutional gap in rights protection.  Indeed, that these codes are unenforceable is one of their principal allures for corporations and governments that lack a firm rights commitment.  It is thus left to human rights groups, labor organizations, and others in civil society to expand the number of corporations adopting these codes, encourage compliance, and promote improvement. These efforts can be effective, but they are ad hoc, under-funded, and not enough.  
The United Nations took a potentially useful step in July by launching a Global Compact of business, labor, and civil society to promote social responsibility in the global economy.  Its reporting requirements, though minimal, may make member corporations more accountable for their conduct.  Its breadth ????engaging companies based not only in Europe and North America but also in Africa, Asia, and South America????demonstrates that the demand for corporate responsibility is not limited to companies from industrialized countries.  This scope also helps to refute the argument sometimes heard from U.S. companies that they are put at a competitive disadvantage by being asked to bear the brunt of concern with corporate responsibility themselves.  Still, the Global Compact is also only a voluntary endeavor.  It attempts to back voluntarism with a degree of social pressure, but has shown no sign of moving toward mandatory compliance.  Its failure to require probing public reports, independent monitoring, and an enforceable legal regime has left it short of its potential. 
There is no single prescription for filling this enforcement gap, whether for governments or multinational corporations.  Among the ideas advanced so far have been giving the ILO real enforcement powers; linking the ILO with the WTO, so that the ILOs more rights-oriented culture might join with the WTOs enforcement powers; or creating an intermediate institution that might be free of both the WTOs exclusive trade orientation and the ILOs paralyzing tripartite system.  Movement in any of these directions would be useful, but they are not the only options or necessarily the most productive.  Below we outline three other possible approaches, all drawn from recent governmental or institutional practices.  None of these is a panacea either.  Indeed, none standing alone can address all of the problems associated with globalization.  But they illustrate the kinds of steps that must be taken if rights in the global economy are to move from exhortation to enforcement.

The OECD Anti-Corruption Model

One approach could be modeled on the response of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the problem of corporate bribery of government officials.  Such corruption once also had a race to the bottom dynamic.  Governments were reluctant to prohibit it for fear of putting their corporations at a competitive disadvantage.  In 1997, the OECD decided that a collective approach was required.  It adopted anti-corruption standards and mandated that all OECD governments????the principal industrialized governments????criminalize violations.  A special OECD working group was assigned responsibility for monitoring and reporting on governmental compliance.  By setting a common, enforceable standard, the OECD helped undercut fears that bribery of foreign officials was necessary for corporations to keep up with the competition.  
A similar global approach could help enforce human rights in the global economy. National governments could be asked to adopt a prescribed enforcement regime to ensure that all corporations operating in or from their territory avoid complicity in serious rights violations.  Such a regime would allow corporations and governments from the North and South to respect these rights in the commercial realm without fear of placing themselves at a competitive disadvantage, thus undercutting the race to the bottom.  (The OECD in June adopted voluntary Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, but these lack the compulsory nature of its anti-corruption regime.)

The U.S.-Jordan Trade Pact
Another promising option can be found in the U.S.-Jordan Free Trade Agreement, concluded in October.  Rather than uncritically endorsing national standards or relegating labor rights to a side accord, as does the North American Free Trade Agreement, the U.S.-Jordan accord incorporates core international labor rights standards in its body and insists that domestic laws uphold them.  The parties explicitly recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domestic labor laws and vow not to do so.  The agreement establishes consultative and adjudicative processes to address violations and allows unilateral sanctions in the event of breaches.  But sanctions can be applied only if a violation of the accord severely distorts the balance of trade benefits or substantially undermines the fundamental objectives of the agreement ????both quite high bars.  The agreement also precludes judicial remedies for breaches, leaving it exclusively to governments to challenge violations.

International Financial Institutions

The international financial institutions should also help integrate human rights into the global economy by promoting the creation of national institutions to enforce rights and insisting on progressive improvement in respect for rights as part of loan packages.  Their frequent failure to play this role has made the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund the focus of much of the protest against globalization.  
These protests are understandable because, until recently, these institutions pursued a conception of economic development that was largely insensitive to human rights.  For years, Nobel Prize economist Amartya Sen and others have demonstrated that abuse of human rights impedes economic development????that unaccountable governments are more likely to indulge corruption or misguided economic projects and less likely to distribute the benefits of development to those most in need.  Yet the World Bank and the IMF insisted that human rights were a purely political matter outside their economic mandates.  Because of the influence of these institutions, governments and private investors often followed suit.  The funds they plowed into authoritarian governments were frequently wasted or misspent, while debts piled up that now thwart successor governments efforts to lift their people from poverty.
Many of these problems remain today.  But the World Bank in particular has begun to change this sorry legacy.  Under the leadership of James Wolfensohn, the banks efforts to combat corruption, reduce poverty, and promote good governance and the rule of law have led it, in some countries, to show greater sensitivity to human rights.  Yet much of this attention is ad hoc.  Additional progress is needed to institutionalize human rights as an essential foundation of the banks development work if the bank is to help enforce human rights in the global economy.
The banks approach to Zambia, Indonesia, and other countries in Asia illustrate some of the positive steps it took in 2000 to address human rights issues: 
	In advance of the World Bank-convened donors conference for Indonesia in October, Wolfensohn sent a  personal letter to Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid urging action to halt the violence in West Timor.  Without directly threatening to suspend funding, he warned that donors would raise this issue at the conference.  
	The donors conference convened in Zambia in July was the first in Africa to be wholly transparent.  All deliberations were open to independent human rights activists and other representatives of civil society, and the human rights performance of the government was freely discussed as an integral part of development plans.
	In Asia, civil society input on bank projects and at donors conferences was actively sought in Cambodia, Indonesia, East Timor, and elsewhere.  However, during the banks consultative process in Kyrgyzstan, the government excluded NGOs seen as linked to the political opposition, suggesting the need for rules based on international human rights standards to ensure participation by all elements of civil society.
In fighting corruption, the World Bank has also begun to pay more attention to human rights-related concerns.  It has promoted greater transparency in bank projects and encouraged civil society to scrutinize these transactions.  But it could still do more to support whistle-blowers, journalists, and nongovernmental monitors who are arrested or abused for exposing corruption.  It should also do more to promote the basic legal and judicial reform needed to achieve access to justice for all.  This would help to root out and prosecute corrupt police and public officials????steps that would improve official accountability for all sorts of human rights abuse.
The IMF, for its part, under the new leadership of Horst Khler, has also begun slowly to change in ways that will help integrate human rights in the global economy.  It was at its most innovative in Angola, where it secured the governments agreement to allow World Bank monitoring of oil revenues to ensure that they went toward development needs and were not mismanaged.  It began negotiations for a similar audit of diamond revenues.  Such transparency, coupled with stringent auditing, could become a model for extraction industries operating in countries ruled by abusive governments, such as Sudan, Turkmenistan, or Burma.  Until now, the vast government revenues generated meant that these companies almost inevitably risked complicity in serious abuse by funding the machinery of repression.  This new model of transparency should become a minimum requirement for companies entering into substantial revenue-producing joint ventures with repressive governments.
Yet the international financial institutions were hardly uniform in their attention to human rights.  At the height of Russias atrocities in Chechnya, the World Bank advanced Moscow U.S. $450 million in structural adjustment loan payments without any linkage to Russian conduct in the breakaway republic.  The IMF continues to freeze new loans to Russia, but it denies Russian claims that Chechnya is the reason and insists that the only cause is the slow pace of economic reform.  The World Bank gave U.S. $1.6 billion loans to China in fiscal year 2000 despite rampant corruption and restrictions on basic freedoms that made any genuine consultation with people affected by projects close to impossible.  The bank vowed to expand the role of civil society in Chinas development but its intervention on human rights cases was selective.
The international financial institutions new openness to incorporating human rights into their mandates at least sometimes has produced an ironic new problem of appearing impermissibly political.  The problem arises not because of these institutions attention to human rights????a natural focus of their development work????but because of their inconsistency.  A steadier commitment to human rights is needed. 
A useful model might be the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.  Founded in 1991 to assist the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, it operates under a charter that reflects recognition of the link between governance and development.  The charter permits assistance only to governments that are committed to and applying the principles of multiparty democracy, pluralism, and market economics.  In 2000, the EBRD cut off public sector lending to Turkmenistan in part because there has been no progress towards a pluralist or democratic political system.  However, the banks enforcement of its charter has also been uneven.  Moreover, its options should include not only suspending assistance but also aiding in the development of institutions to protect human rights.
  
From Voluntarism to Enforcement

There is no single way to ensure respect for human rights and other social values in the global economy.  Any viable approach must move beyond simply articulating standards and hoping for good-faith compliance.  The stakes are too high to rely on voluntarism alone.  Enforcement is needed.  The contours of an enforcement regime????its national or international focus, its institutional home???? remain to be defined.  But until there is a consistent commitment to enforce rather than simply pronounce international standards, the global economy is likely to fall short of its potential to serve all people rather than just the fortunate few.  An urgent global dialogue is needed to fill this enforcement gap.

The United Nations
One would be hard-pressed to devise a surer recipe for failure: assign an institution responsibility for managing the worlds most intractable problems, then deprive it of funds, give it a skeletal staff, overload the organization with peripheral tasks, and insist on its using large numbers of temporary personnel frequently offered less for their skills than for geographic balance or their governments desire to collect hard currency.  Yet this is how the international community treats the United Nations.  For some, this setup-for-failure is by design.  For others, it reflects a lack of commitment????an eagerness to pass off problems without providing the means to address them.  In Kofi Annan, the U.N. has a secretary-general of unusual vision, courage, skill, and dedication.  But the worlds refusal to give him the tools necessary to the tasks at hand has created an institutional crisis.  It is time to stop treating the U.N. as the dumping ground for global problems without giving it the capacity to address them.  
To highlight this institutional crisis is not to disparage the many parts of the U.N. that do work.  The U.N. human rights staff, based in Geneva and led by Mary Robinson as high commissioner for human rights, has grown significantly in recent years in professionalism and impact.  Despite woefully inadequate resources, it has made steady progress in overcoming the ocean that was deliberately put between it and the New York-based bodies that make the U.N.s most important political decisions.  The U.N. working groups and special rapporteurs, again established through Geneva, produce many first-rate accounts of serious human rights problems, even though the governments on the politicized U.N. Human Rights Commission routinely create new and often peripheral mandates to be carried out within existing resources.  Officials in New York at the U.N.s Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping also attempt to address problems of immense complexity with ridiculously small staffs.
Today, after several years of steady reform, the U.N.s main problem is less the skill or dedication of its officials than the dire lack of capacity that the nations of the world are willing to permit it.  Many of these institutional shortfalls are well described in a report on U.N. peace operations issued in August by a commission led by former Algerian Foreign Minister Lakhdar Brahimi.  It describes a world body asked to take on immense challenges with paltry resources and half-hearted political backing.  Earlier U.N. reports, issued in November and December 1999 on the inexcusable failure to respond to genocide in Srebrenica and Rwanda, highlight the tragic consequences of this neglect.  Rare among most governments, this candid self-scrutiny is admirable.  The time has come to act on these insights.  If the U.N. is to remain a viable resource for addressing the worlds most complex problems, the nations of the world must make an immediate and genuine commitment to remove the straitjacket of institutional weakness that they have imposed.

Sierra Leone
The tragedy of Sierra Leone highlights the consequences????for the U.N. and for people in need????of the international community trying to buy peace on the cheap.  For years, the country was plagued by a vicious civil war in which the rebel Revolutionary United Front and its allies terrorized the population with murder, rape, and the signature atrocity of chopping off human limbs.  The government clung to power with the help of a Nigerian-led West African military force known as ECOMOG.  But Nigeria threatened to withdraw its troops, in part because the international community refused to help cover its expenses.  Eager to diffuse public pressure to respond to the crisis, the U.S. government, backed by Britain, the U.N., the Organization of African Unity, and a group of West African states, brokered a power-sharing arrangement with the RUF in the guise of a peace accord.  With its economy devastated and the international community unwilling to commit the required troops, Sierra Leone was forced to accept a peace agreement that was tantamount to political surrender.
This July 1999 accord gave the RUF and all other forces amnesty for their atrocities, awarded the RUF leader, Foday Sankoh, a status equivalent to vice president, and appointed him chairman of the commission that oversees exploitation of the nations vast diamond fields and mineral wealth.  When the amnesty was greeted by protests, the U.N. secretary-general insisted at the last minute that a provision be inserted denying international, as opposed to national, recognition of it.  But the international community took no action on this disclaimer by moving to prosecute these criminals.  The lesson was clear: the RUF would pay no price????indeed, would be rewarded????for its ruthlessness.
It took the RUF little time to apply this lesson.  Its depredations continued unabated, and no one did anything to stop them.  Then, in early May 2000, as U.N. peacekeepers drawn exclusively from developing countries replaced ECOMOG forces, the RUF killed several peacekeepers and took five hundred hostage.  The badly equipped, poorly led U.N. force put up little or no resistance.  
Even as the year progressed, the U.N. was left under-equipped.  Elite British troops flown in on an emergency basis gave the peacekeepers the added muscle they needed to push the rebels back from the capital Freetown.  Gradually, the hostages were freed.  But even Britain would not subject its troops to U.N. command, and no other Western government volunteered its troops to lend a hand.  The absence of governments with high-tech militaries willing to put their soldiers at risk in a dangerous conflict in Africa left the U.N. force significantly handicapped as it tried to contain the ruthless rebels.  A stronger mandate????to provide meaningful protection for civilians throughout Sierra Leone????remained out of the question.  Other aspects of the U.N. presence, including its in-country leadership, reflected a similar lack of international commitment.

East Timor and Kosovo
The international community fared only slightly better in East Timor and Kosovo????the two other most challenging situations it handed the United Nations in 1999 and 2000.  Forced in each case to assemble personnel on an ad hoc basis, with no ready reservoir of experienced professionals, the U.N. operated under severe handicap.
In September 1999, immediately following an overwhelming vote in East Timor for independence, Indonesian-backed militia left the territory a charred ruin.  An Australian-led military forced initially secured the territory, but by late 1999 the new country was handed over to a U.N.-led operation.  The U.N. was given painfully inadequate tools for such large tasks as addressing past abuses, preventing new ones, and building basic governmental institutions from scratch.  The international civilian police were recruited at an agonizingly slow pace and showed up poorly trained for short, three-month tours of duty.  Their inadequacy, combined with divisions within U.N. operations, slowed investigations into the September 1999 violence and contributed to vigilante attacks and summary justice, as Timorese despaired of the U.N. police guaranteeing law and order.
In Kosovo, the U.N. again was asked to take over a territory that was virtually bereft of governmental institutions.  Reconstruction was hampered by the Yugoslav governments history of repressing the ethnic Albanian majority, the institutional and legal void it left after its sudden withdrawal in June 1999 following the war with NATO, and the lack of clarity about the territorys future relationship with Yugoslavia.  Under the circumstances, progress was made creating a new criminal justice system and civilian police force.  But the justice system, inadequately supervised, fell far short of international human rights standards and showed a disturbing pattern of bias against ethnic Serbs.  The international civilian police force, under equipped and poorly trained, was sometimes unwilling to arrest former Kosovo Liberation Army members and other ethnic Albanians who were responsible for violence against ethnic Serbs and other minorities, as well as against ethnic Albanian political rivals.  A lack of investigative capacity and poor cooperation by the local population were also obstacles.  These shortcomings meant that NATO troops sometimes had to assume sensitive law enforcement tasks for which they were unprepared.  The violence against minorities persisted, meaning that virtually no ethnic Serbs participated in the October 2000 municipal elections.

Embargoes
U.N. attempts to curb conflicts through embargoes suffered from a similar lack of will and resources to ensure implementation.  A U.N. panel found widespread breaches of a Security Council-imposed embargo on trade in arms or diamonds with Angolas murderous rebel group UNITA.  The report, spearheaded by Canadas then U.N. Ambassador Robert Fowler, was remarkable for naming the companies and countries, including heads of state, involved in sanctions busting.  But through October, the Security Council had taken no further action to enforce its lofty pronouncement of an embargo.  No serious effort was made to sanction the embargo breakers or to monitor the flow of goods at borders and airports.  An embargo on arms trading with Sierra Leone and Liberia fared no better.

North-South Collusion

That the U.N. is so handicapped in its capacity to address global problems is the product of an unfortunate congruence of interests between governments of the North and South, often against the interests of their people.  Many governments of the industrialized world, particularly the United States, appreciate the U.N. as a place to hand difficult problem countries but distrust the global body too much to allow it the capacity to resolve these problems.  The frequent result is the deployment of personnel who are starved of the resources needed to accomplish urgent tasks.  Many governments of the developing world also do not like these political deployments.  Rather than stand in solidarity with the people of the South whose calls for help might be answered, these governments see a U.N. emergency capacity as a diversion of resources from the U.N. development projects they most cherish and a threat to their own political latitude.

Solutions
It may be difficult to muster the political will to address these problems, but it is not difficult to identify solutions.  Some of the changes are doctrinal, many described in the Brahimi report.  For example, the U.N. must abandon its reflexive neutrality when circumstances call for protecting civilians from slaughter.  Even when the U.N. enters dangerous situations consensually, it must do so with a sufficiently robust mandate and military capacity to protect U.N. personnel and the civilians they have come to serve.  The Security Council must stop treating human rights as an unwelcome irrelevancy best left in its Geneva exile.  Instead, drawing on the U.N.s significant human rights expertise, the council must begin to recognize that human rights abuses are the cause of many conflicts and that ending these abuses is a critical element of lasting peace.  In particular, accountability for the most heinous human rights crimes must be seen less as an obstacle to peace than as an essential building block????a goal worth embracing for pragmatic as well as principled reasons.
Other changes are structural.  It makes no sense for the U.N. to squander months at the outset of each new emergency desperately searching the world for qualified personnel and begging national governments to spare them.  The U.N. needs a standby capacity  not the caricature of troops drilling on U.N. grounds in New York, but a reserve of personnel that governments would make available on short notice for emergency U.N. service.  This reserve should include not only specially trained troops but also police, judicial, legal, human rights, development, and administrative personnel  and the leadership to deploy them effectively.  
The U.N. Secretariat in New York must also be bolstered.  At current staffing levels, it is designed to be solely reactive.  Even when it does respond, it is grossly understaffed to manage complex emergencies.  The political and peacekeeping departments do not begin to have the requisite capacity.  Preventive work, for example, is impossible in an institution whose limited staff is overburdened with far less significant work.  The answer requires not only a substantial increase in the staff of the political and peacekeeping departments but also a cultural change.  The nations of the U.N. must accept the need to identify, name, and address problem areas before they explode.  They must stop diverting the U.N. from more pressing problems with demands for unread reports delivered to forgotten committees.  They must transcend the zero-sum logic that every dollar spent on political or peacekeeping affairs is a dollar less for development and recognize that ending abusive conflict is a prerequisite to development for the countries, and often the regions, involved.
The U.N. is fortunate to have a secretary-general who understands and embraces these truths.  But he cannot lead alone.  If the U.N. has any prospect of meeting its potential, the nations of the world must accept and support the organizations transformation.


International Justice

The greatest strides toward an enhanced global architecture have been taken in the area of international justice.  Less than a decade ago, impunity for tyrants was the rule.  The worlds most heinous human rights criminals committed atrocities knowing that they could use intimidation and violence to fend off accountability.  This impunity was an affront to the victims and an encouragement of further atrocities.  
Today, the world is a far smaller place for tyrants because there are fewer places to escape justice.  New international tribunals are being launched.  These tribunals, in turn, have catalyzed national prosecutorial efforts, demonstrating that international justice serves to reinforce rather than replace national justice.  Moreover, the actions of several Southern governments have made clear that justice for the worst human rights offenders is hardly an exclusively Northern concern.  The most pronounced sour note in this steady progress has been the U.S. governments persistent opposition to having its citizens held to the same legal standards as the rest of the world.

International Tribunals

The movement to create international institutions of justice took several steps forward in 2000.  Most significant was the progress toward the establishment of the International Criminal Court????the first global tribunal for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.  A treaty to establish the court was adopted in Rome in July 1998.  Despite the many legal complexities involved, twenty-two governments had already ratified the treaty by the end of October 2000 (of the sixty needed to launch the court) and another ninety-three governments had signed it.  This broad embrace suggests that the court will be up and running soon????conceivably as early as 2002.  
Because the ICC will not have retroactive jurisdiction, the world continues to rely on country-specific international tribunals for the most heinous crimes of the past and present.  Political changes in Croatia and Yugoslavia show how international tribunals have changed the long-term prospects of even seemingly secure human rights offenders.  The death of Franjo Tudjman in December 1999 opened the way to the election of Croatias new president, Stipe Mesic, who has been far more cooperative with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, handing over evidence and suspects and opening the countrys borders to investigators.  The September 2000 electoral loss of Slobodan Milosevic to Yugoslavias new president, Vojislav Kostunica, has also opened up new possibilities for cooperation.  Kostunica at first insisted that he would not surrender Milosevic to the Hague, where the tribunal has indicted him for crimes against humanity committed in Kosovo.  But Kostunicas later comments were more equivocal, suggesting that cooperation with the tribunal and even the eventual surrender of Milosevic remain possibilities.  At stake is also the fate of former Bosnian Serb military leader Ratko Mladic, who has taken refuge in Serbia after his indictment by the tribunal for genocide and other crimes in Bosnia.
Meanwhile, as of late October, the U.N. Security Council was moving toward the creation of a hybrid national-international tribunal for Sierra Leone.  The tribunal will effectively overturn the July 1999 amnesty and make possible the prosecution of those behind the horrendous crimes that have characterized the countrys civil war.  The hybrid nature of the court will be precedent-setting????an international prosecutor and judges in a dominant role to ensure the courts independence, but a significant role for Sierra Leonean judges and prosecutors to help them begin reconstructing their devastated legal system.  However, certain issues remain to be worked out, including the power of the court to compel cooperation, the time period on which the court will focus, the courts treatment of juvenile offenders, and the extent of witness protection.    
Unfortunately, a proposed hybrid tribunal for Cambodia has fared less well.  Unlike Sierra Leone, the Cambodian government has insisted that Cambodians have a dominant role.  The U.N. at first resisted because of the Cambodian governments long history of manipulating its legal system.  But the U.N. was later forced to acquiesce when the U.S. government brokered a deal largely on Cambodian terms.  Still, as of late October, the Cambodian government was dragging its feet in seeking the necessary parliamentary approval, raising doubts about the courts prospects.

National Justice Efforts

Some have questioned whether it is appropriate for international prosecutions to replace national justice systems.  But that concern reflects a misunderstanding.  The purpose of creating an option of international justice is to establish a backstop for national efforts.  By making clear that violence or intimidation aimed at national judges and prosecutors no longer guarantees impunity, the option of international justice bolsters national justice systems.  The International Criminal Court was built explicitly on these terms, and events in 2000 showed that the emergence of international tribunals has had precisely this catalyzing effect.
Britains October 1998 arrest of former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet would almost certainly not have taken place before the ICC treaty changed the environment for international justice.  In March 2000, the British government released Pinochet on health grounds after almost seventeen months in detention.  He returned to a Chile that had been transformed by his arrest.  In August, in a step that would have been unthinkable before his detention in Britain, the Chilean Supreme Court stripped him of his parliamentary immunity, allowing prosecution to proceed for his role in a notorious episode of execution and disappearance immediately following his 1973 coup.  
Similarly, after the September 1999 rampage of Indonesian-backed militia in East Timor, the U.N. launched a commission of inquiry.  In January 2000, the commission recommended the establishment of an international tribunal.  Kofi Annan declined to endorse this recommendation so long as the Indonesian government upheld its vow to bring the abusers to justice on its own????a step it had no previous history of taking.  In August, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson reminded Jakarta that she would call for an international tribunal if it did not proceed with prosecutions.  In September, the government published a list of nineteen suspects involved in the East Timor rampage, though by late October the prospect of actual prosecutions remained distant.
Interestingly, in one case a nationally based prosecutorial effort may precede action by an international tribunal, suggesting a complementary relationship.  The international war crimes tribunal for Rwanda has jurisdiction not only over atrocities associated with the 1994 genocide but also over crimes committed at the time by the Rwandan Patriotic Front????the dominant force in the current Rwandan government.  The RPFs military victory in June 1994 ended the genocide, but the Tutsi-led force committed serious abuses in the process.  The Rwanda tribunal has issued no indictments for the RPFs crimes????a failure that is often attributed to its need to maintain good relations with the Rwandan government so it can retain access to the country to conduct investigations and secure witnesses for the genocide trials.  In August 2000, a Belgian prosecutor began investigating a complaint of war crimes and crimes against humanity filed against the RPF by a group of Rwandans.  This initiative may hasten similar action by the Rwanda tribunal.  

Southern Initiatives
Some critics of efforts to hold human rights abusers accountable for their crimes have suggested that justice is a parochial concern of Northern governments which is imposed on the people of the South.  But the events of 2000 demonstrated that Southern governments are also eager to pursue the most heinous human rights criminals????that the quest for justice does not break down on hemispheric lines.
	In February, in an echo of the Pinochet case, a Senegalese court, acting at the request of Chadian victims, indicted former Chadian dictator Hissne Habr for torture and ordered his arrest.  Habr had taken refuge in Senegal following the fall of his dictatorship in 1990.  In July 2000, in a blow to judicial independence, an appellate court dismissed the indictment after the new Senegalese government of President Abdoulaye Wade removed the judge investigating the case and promoted the head of the judicial chamber that issued the reversal ruling.   The dismissal is on appeal to the countrys Supreme Court.
	In October, an Argentine judge asked Chile to extradite Pinochet and others for the 1974 assassination of General Carlos Prats and his wife, Sofia Cuthbert.  Prats, the former commander-in-chief of the Chilean armed forces, had opposed Pinochets 1973 coup and taken refuge in Buenos Aires with his family.  The judge also sought the extradition of other Chileans in the case, including the former chief of Chiles secret police, Manuel Contreras Seplveda, who is in prison in Chile for having carried out a 1974 car-bombing in Washington that took the life of another coup opponent, former Chilean Foreign Minister Orlando Letelier, and his assistant, Ronni Moffitt.
	Also in October, Vladimiro Montesinos, the shadowy intelligence figure behind the authoritarian government of Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori, unsuccessfully sought political asylum (effective amnesty) in Panama.  Panama had evidently tired of being the worlds dumping ground for deposed dictators and their accomplices.  Montesinos, who had been responsible for forming and supervising a death squad in the early 1990s among other abuses, beat a hasty retreat to Peru.
	In August, acting upon a Spanish request, Mexico arrested Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, an accused torturer for the 1976-83 Argentine military junta.  Cavallo had been living in Mexico.
These and other cases demonstrate an increasingly global effort????involving governments of the North and South????to bring abusive officials to justice.  The trend is still at a rudimentary stage, but it is clearly working against the impunity that so many ruthless officials enjoyed.  This smaller world may make tomorrows dictators think twice before embarking on the path of slaughter taken by their predecessors.

Disappointments

However, the news in 2000 was not all rosy on the justice front.  The most glaring failure was the international communitys refusal to put serious pressure on Russia to bring to justice the commanders who had been responsible for massacres, torture, and indiscriminate slaughter in Chechnya.  With Russia wielding a veto on the U.N. Security Council, a council-created international tribunal was not an option.  The U.N. Commission on Human Rights did criticize Russias actions and urge prosecution????the first such resolution against a permanent member of the Security Council.  The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe also suspended the Russian delegations voting rights.  But there was little follow-up on these initiatives, and no insistence that Russia apply the rule of law to its troops in Chechnya as a condition of receiving the large international assistance that continued to be sent its way.
Also disappointing was the lack of international attention to justice in Central Africa????particularly Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo.  This failure is especially unfortunate in the Congo because the government of President Laurent Kabila effectively blocked an earlier U.N. commission of inquiry established to examine atrocities committed on Congolese soil during Kabilas rise to power in 1996-97.  The war fought in Congo since 1998 has also been plagued by widespread atrocities.  So far, the international community has taken no steps to end the impunity that helps drive these abuses.  
Despite a clear mandate, NATO made no effort through October to arrest Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb political leader who has been indicted for genocide and other crimes in Bosnia.  Throughout all or most of 2000, he was reported still to be in Bosnia and hence in territory where NATO had permission to operate.  
A Selective U.S. Vision of Justice

Perhaps the greatest disappointment was the persistently selective view of international justice adopted by the U.S. government.  Washington has been an active supporter of country-specific tribunals insofar as they apply to others, but it has stood in the way of efforts to establish a more universal system of justice that might apply to U.S. citizens as well.
This attitude was evident in the cries of protest heard in Washington when the prosecutor for the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal, Carla del Ponte, dared even to consider opening an investigation of NATOs conduct during the 1999 air war with Yugoslavia.  The tribunal has jurisdiction over war crimes committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, whether by residents of the territory or outside forces.  The prosecutors scrutiny of the NATO air campaign was entirely appropriate, given that, according to a Human Rights Watch study released in February, up to a half of the roughly 500 civilian deaths during the bombing campaign were attributable to possible NATO violations of international humanitarian law.  Although the prosecutor ultimately decided against launching an investigation, Washington thought it an outrage that she would even contemplate holding NATO to the same standards as other forces.  Indeed, NATO failed to turn over specific information requested by investigators.
In March, the U.S. government again fell short of its international justice obligations. Toms Ricardo Anderson Kohatsu, a one-time major in Perus Army Intelligence Service, was credibly accused of participating in the 1997 brutal torture of a woman who was beaten, burned, raped and electrically shocked in such a manner that she was rendered paraplegic.  The U.S. State Department itself had described the case in its annual human rights reports for 1997 and 1999.  Anderson Kohatsu came to Washington in March 2000 to testify on Perus behalf at a hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, part of the Organization of American States.   At the request of the U.S. Justice Department, which had been alerted to his presence, he was detained while changing planes in Houston.  Anderson Kohatsu was not on Peruvian government business and was not carrying a diplomatic passport.  Nonetheless, without allowing the courts to consider the matter, Acting Secretary of State Thomas Pickering ordered his release on the dubious theory that he was entitled to diplomatic immunity because he had participated in official business of the OAS.  Pickerings actions reflected an administration far more concerned with avoiding political problems with Peru than with carrying out international legal obligations to arrest and prosecute the worst human rights offenders.
Perhaps most troubling is the U.S. governments continued refusal to accept the International Criminal Court.  With the help of the United States, the court already has extensive safeguards against unjustified prosecutions.  Moreover, under the courts principle of complementarity, any government can spare its nationals ICC prosecution by conducting its own good-faith investigation and, if appropriate, prosecution.  Yet the U.S. government is determined to shut off even the theoretical possibility that its citizens would have to appear before the court.  Washington maintains this stance even though an exception to the courts universal reach would undermine the courts legitimacy and effectiveness.
Because the U.S. government has no intention of ratifying the courts treaty anytime soon, it has focused on the supposed outrage that the court would have jurisdiction over the citizens of a state that has not ratified the treaty.  But it is common practice for a government to prosecute a foreign national for crimes committed on its territory without first seeking permission of the foreigners government.  The jurisdiction of the ICC amounts to no more than a delegation of this widely accepted power for the most serious human rights crimes.  Indeed, Washington itself routinely exercises far more expansive jurisdiction in unilaterally pursuing alleged terrorists or drug traffickers even when their crimes were not committed on U.S. soil.
Still, the U.S. government has advanced one scheme after another to shield U.S. citizens from the courts reach.  The latest idea, floated in October, would exempt the citizens of any government that has not ratified the court, so long as the government could show that it acts responsibly and is generally willing to prosecute its own serious human rights offenders.  But these requirements are not in the ICC treaty.  Adding them would fundamentally revise the treaty and upend a whole series of carefully crafted compromises made in Rome to secure the courts broad support.  Moreover, the principle of complementarity as framed in the treaty permits a government to avoid ICC prosecution of a citizen only by pursuing the specific suspect in question.  Washington wants to weaken this rule by requiring only a general willingness to prosecute criminals of this nature????something a country could presumably establish once and for all and thereafter preclude the risk of ICC prosecution for any of its citizens.  That is hardly a goal worth endorsing.
The best antidote to this U.S. exceptionalism is for the many governments supporting the court to reject all such schemes out of hand and proceed as rapidly as possible toward the sixty ratifications of the treaty needed to establish the court.  The sooner the court is up and running, the sooner Washington will recognize the futility of its quest to carve out an exemption for its citizens.  Ultimately, Washington will realize that its best defense against unfair (as opposed to legitimate) prosecutions of Americans is to help create a culture within the ICC that is deeply respectful of individual rights and the rule of law.  The U.S. contribution to that culture will be far more effective if the United States joins the court????or at least becomes a friendly supporter of it????than if it persists in attacking the court from the outside.

Conclusion

An increasingly interconnected world is generating human rights problems of a global dimension.  From regulating the global economy to rebuilding war-torn societies to bringing the most heinous criminals to justice, global solutions are needed to these global problems.  A nation would never willingly address its most complex national problems with handicapped national institutions.  So the world needs to enhance its institutional capacity on a global level to address the most serious human rights problems that transcend national borders.  Some progress is being made in each of these areas, but far more needs to be done.  The challenge today is to build a global institutional capacity commensurate with the complexity and importance of these global problems.
Over fifty years ago, as World War II ended and a new era began, the international community created a new set of institutions to address the challenges of the future.  What emerged were such landmark organizations as the United Nations and the Bretton-Woods institutions.  Similar vision is needed today.  To manage the global economy, stronger institutions are needed to ensure respect for human rights.  To assist war-torn nations, the United Nations must be bolstered substantially.  To build an international system of justice, the International Criminal Court must be launched and supported.  These are major steps requiring foresight and commitment.  Complacency can no longer be tolerated.  It is time to act.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS


The international community took important actions in 2000 aimed at protecting those who are risking their lives to fight for human rights. During its annual session,  the United Nations Commission on Human Rights voted to establish the post of a special representative of the secretary-general on the situation of human rights defenders. After a worldwide search, in August, the secretary-general appointed Hina Jilani, a Pakistani human rights lawyer (and a human rights monitor honored by Human Rights Watch in 1991 at our annual monitors celebration) for the post. The special representative will be able to press for the implementation of the 1998 Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and intervene in cases of threats to and harassment of human rights defenders worldwide.
Five humanitarian workers were murdered in 2000 while aiding refugees. In West Timor,  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) staff Samson Aregahegn, Carlos Caceres, and Pero Simun were killed on September 6. In Guinea, UNHCR head of office Mensah Kpognon was killed on September 17. In Burundi, Brother Antoine Bargiggia of the Jesuit Refugee Service (JRS) was killed on October 3. Their tragic deaths prompted a global protest and highlighted the dangers for humanitarian workers world wide.  The murders also posed a serious threat to the protection of refugees as UNHCR responded by withdrawing  all staff from West Timor and the border areas of Guinea, leaving refugees there almost completely unprotected. The Jesuit Refugee Service continued to serve refugees in Burundi.
Indonesia experienced the loss of  human rights defenders Sukardi and Jafar Siddiq Hamzah  in the year 2000. Sukardi, a volunteer for the local environmental and human rights group based in Aceh, the Bamboo Thicket Institute (Yayasan Rumpun Bambu Indonesia), disappeared on January 31. Sukardis body was found naked and bullet-riddled on February 1.  Jafar Siddiq Hamzah, the founder and director of the New York-based rights group, the International Forum for Aceh, vanished on August 5, while on a visit to Medan, Indonesia. Jafar, one of Acehs most accomplished human rights advocates, was found dead with his body showing signs of torture in an unmarked grave on September 3.
Some fifty miles outside Nairobi, Fr.  John Kaiser, a well-known human rights activist in Kenya, was murdered during the night of August 24, 2000.  Father Kaiser, a Catholic parish priest in the Rift Valley area and a U.S. citizen, worked in Kenya for thirty-six years and was  an outspoken human rights activist.  In 1999, the Law Society of Kenya had honored Father Kaiser with its annual human rights award.
In Colombia, four human rights defenders were killed and three disappeared in the year 2000. On July 11, Elizabeth Caas,  a member of the Association of Family Members of the Detained and Disappeared (Asociacin de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos-Colombia ASFADDES), was shot and killed in Barrancabermeja. Angel Quintero and Claudia Patricia Monsalve, also ASFADDES members, were disappeared in Medelln, Antioquia, on October 6. Indigenous activist Jairo Bedoya Hoyos, a member of the Antioquia Indigenous Organization (Organizacin Indgena de Antioquia, OIA) who worked on human rights issues, was disappeared on March 2. Demetrio Playonero, a displaced person and human rights leader was murdered apparently by paramilitaries on March 3. In May, Jess Ramiro Zapata, the only remaining member of the Segovia Human Rights Committee, was killed near Segovia. Government prosecutor Margarita Mara Pulgarn Trujillo, part of a team investigating cases linking paramilitaries to the army and regional drug traffickers, was murdered in Medelln on April 3. 
In Haiti, Jean Dominique, the director of Radio Haiti-Inter and one of Haitis most prominent radio journalists, was shot to death the morning of April 3. Forced into exile in 1980 for his opposition to the Jean-Claude Duvalier regime, Dominique was a strong proponent of the free press and Haitis struggle for democracy.
LESBIAN AND GAY RIGHTS
Protection from abuse remained elusive for lesbians, gay men, and bisexual and transgender people in 2000, despite the reaffirmation in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that All people are born free and equal in dignity and rights.  In virtually every country in the world, people suffered from de jure and de facto discrimination based on their actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity.  Sexual minorities were persecuted in a significant number of countries and in many ways, including the application of the death penalty or long prison sentences for private sexual acts between consenting adults.  In some countries, sexual minorities were targeted for extrajudicial execution.  In many countries, police actively participated in the persecution.  Pervasive bias within the criminal justice system in many countries effectively precluded members of sexual minorities from seeking redress.
	These attacks on human rights and fundamental freedoms also occurred in international fora where states were supposedly working to promote human rights.  For example, in New York in June at the five year review meeting for the Fourth World Conference on Women, many delegates refused to recognize womens sexual rights and some states continued to defend violations of womens human rights in the name of religious and cultural practices.  Activists stressed the connection between the need for states to recognize womens right to control their sexuality and enjoy physical autonomy if states were serious about wanting to reduce violence against women. Many delegates refused to acknowledge that discrimination against lesbian and single women created a climate in which attacks on such women were deemed justified.  
	Other intergovernmental bodies played a significant role in upholding the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals.  In July, for example, the Council of Europes Parliamentary Assembly approved Armenia and Azerbaijans applications for membership with the understanding that each country would repeal legislation that discriminated against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons.  In a further debate the assembly voted to support recommendations that national governments recognize persecution on the grounds of sexual orientation for the purposes of asylum and grant bi_national same_sex couples the same residence rights as bi_national heterosexual couples. In September, the Parliamentary Assembly called upon its member states to include sexual orientation among the prohibited bases of discrimination, revoke sodomy laws and similar legislation criminalizing sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex, and apply the same age of consent for all sexual relations.  
	Despite the councils laudable efforts, the International Gay and Lesbian Association (IGLA) reported to the Parliamentary Assemblys Legal Affairs and Human Rights Committee in March that discrimination against lesbian, gay and bisexual persons remains endemic and extremely serious in Europe and that [h]omophobic violence is common, even in countries like Sweden which are world leaders in their support for lesbian and gay rights.


Persecution
	Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals were vilified by officials of several states.  Their claims to equal enjoyment of rights and equal protection before the law were routinely denied in many states.  State-sponsored hostility and entrenched bias toward lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people not only placed them at risk of violence and persecution by agents of the state, but virtually guaranteed that they would face serious obstacles if they turned to the state for protection or redress when attacked by private actors.
	World Pride 2000, an international event calling attention to human rights violations of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people, held in July in Rome, came under heavy criticism from the Vatican.  In the wake of the Vaticans criticism, Italys prime minister Guiliano Amato ordered the countrys minister for equal rights to cancel her ministrys official sponsorship of World Pride.  The pope went on to condemn the event as an offense to the Christian values of the city. 
	Leaders in Namibia, Uganda, and Zimbabwe continued to denounce lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals during the year.  Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe continued his longstanding anti-gay campaign.  At a New Years Day celebration, he characterized same-sex marriage as an abomination, a rottenness of culture, real decadence of culture.  In Namibia, President Sam Nujoma was regularly quoted as calling lesbians and gays unnatural and against the will of God.  State television reported in October 2000 that Home Affairs Minister Jerry Ekandjo urged new police officers to eliminate lesbians and gays from the face of Namibia.
	Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni appeared to back away from his September 1999 directive to Criminal Investigations Division officers to look for homosexuals, lock them up and charge them.  At a news conference in November 1999, he criticized lesbians and gays for provoking and upsetting society but suggested that they could live in Uganda as long they did it quietly.
	In the month after President Museveni ordered the arrest of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender Ugandans, the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC) received reports that several students had been expelled from schools for their involvement in same-sex relationships.  The offices of Sister Namibia, a magazine known for its strong support of gay and lesbian rights, was set on fire on July 10 in what appeared to be a deliberate attack; the Namibian National Society for Human Rights noted, While the motive for the attack is not yet known, the attack occurred barely a week after Namibian President Sam Nujoma launched a verbal attack on the homosexual community.
	According to the Lebanese human rights organization Multi-Initiative on Rights: Search, Assist and Defend (MIRSAD), Beirut Morals Police (Police des Murs) officers entered the offices of Destination, an Lebanese internet service provider, in April to obtain information about the owners of a website for Lebanese gays and lesbians that was accessible to internet users in Lebanon but maintained in the United States.  Later that month, officers questioned the general manager and another senior staff member at the Hobaich police station.  When MIRSAD posted an urgent action message on several websites, the military prosecutor charged MIRSAD and Destination officials with tarnishing the reputation of the Morals Police by distributing a printed flier, in violation of article 157 of the Military Penal Code; their trial was scheduled for September 25.  If convicted, they would face three months to three years of imprisonment.
	Gay men, lesbians, and transgender people have been subjected to a campaign of terror,  violence, and murder in El Salvador over the last several years.  Governmental indifference to these offenses was compounded by state agents active participation in violence.   A person who identified himself as a member of the special Presidential Battalion used his weapon to threaten a transgender person who was participating in Lesbian and Gay Pride Day celebrations in the Constitution Plaza in San Salvador.  Asociacin Entre Amigos Executive Director William Hernndez repeatedly received death threats.  The Salvadorean police acknowledged that Hernndez and Entre Amigos qualified for protection due to the repeated attacks and threats to which they had been subjected. Nevertheless, the chief of the National Civil Police initially refused to appoint any officers to provide protection because officers who do not share the sexual tastes of those they should protect would feel uncomfortable doing their work.  Hernndez was placed under special police protection following an international campaign.
	In August, a longstanding prohibition against the use of a public park in Aguascalientes, Mexico, by dogs and homosexuals became the focus of public attention after a sign announcing the ban was repaired and reposted at the park entrance.  Asked for his thoughts on the gay community in interviews broadcast on the Mexican network Televisa and in the national newspaper La Jornada, Aguascalientes Director of Regulations Jorge Alvarez Medina stated that he was against this type of people and declared that he will not allow access to homosexuals while he remained in charge of municipal regulations.  In a welcome development, however, National Action Party (Partido de Accin Nacional, PAN) National President Lus Felipe Bravo Mena denied that Alvarez Medinas remarks reflected the policy of the PAN, the governing party in Aguascalientes.  Declaring that we reject and repudiate Alvarez Medinas remarks, Bravo Mena stated, If any doubt remains, I can say that I feel that this is absolutely reprehensible.  We do not believe in any type of discrimination and reject it.
	At least four transgender persons in Valencia, in the Venezuelan state of Carabobo, were reportedly detained without judicial order by Carabobo police, according to Amnesty International.  In July, police improperly detained two transgender persons for eight days; in August, officers forced two other members of Valencias transgender community to undress in the street, beat them, and then held them for several days in August without permitting them legal, medical, or family visits.
	In September, the Brazilian GLBT Pride Parade Association of So Paulo (Associao da Parada do Orgulho GLBT de So Paulo) received a letter bomb, one day after several gay and lesbian rights organizations and other human rights NGOs received letters threatening to exterminate gays, Jews, blacks, and persons from Brazils northeast.  There were an estimated 169 bias-motivated killings of sexual minorities in Brazil in 1999, according to a May report issued by the Grupo Gay de Bahia; the states of Pernambuco and So Paulo recorded the highest number of killings.

The Criminalization of Private Sexual Conduct
	Over eighty countries continued to criminalize sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex, according to the IGLHRC.  Elsewhere, national or local legislation discriminated against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons by imposing different standards for the legal age of consent.  In addition, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons were often targeted for arrest under provisions relating to scandalous conduct, public decency, loitering, and similar charges.
	In Saudi Arabia, where sodomy was punishable by the death penalty, six men were executed for that crime in July.  In April, nine men were sentenced to up to 2,600 lashes each for transvestism and deviant sexual behavior; because the sentence could not be carried out in a single session without killing the men, it was to be carried out at fifteen-day-intervals over a period of two years.
	Sri Lankas Press Council fined a gay rights activist in June for filing a complaint against a newspaper that had published a letter urging that lesbians be turned over to convicted rapists.  The council declared that being a lesbian was an act of sadism and that the activist, rather than the newspaper, was guilty of promoting improper values.
	At this writing, the Romanian Senate was considering the abolition of article 200, which criminalized all sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex if  committed in public or if producing public scandal.  The article was interpreted to include casual gestures of intimacy such as holding hands and kissing.   The measure passed the Chamber of Deputies, the Romanian Parliaments lower house, on June 28.  The measures under consideration did not address article 201, which continued to penalize  acts of sexual perversion if committed in public or if producing public scandal with one to five years of imprisonment.  A 1998 report jointly published by Human Rights Watch and the IGLHRC documented the human rights abuses suffered by lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons in Romania as a result of both provisions.
	In response to a 1993 decision of the European Court of Human Rights, Cyprus amended its criminal laws in June to equalize the male age of consent, setting it at eighteen.  Before the amendment, the age of consent for men engaging in heterosexual sex had been sixteen, while the age of consent for men engaging in homosexual sex had been eighteen.  The age of consent for all women continued to be sixteen.  Other European countries continued to maintain unequal ages of consent.  A notable example was Austria, where the age of consent was fourteen for heterosexual males and eighteen for men who had sexual relations with other men.
	In the United States, fifteen states retained laws prohibiting consensual sexual relations between adults of the same sex, classifying these acts as sodomy, sexual misconduct, unnatural intercourse, or crimes against nature.  A Texas court overturned the states sodomy law in June, while the highest court of the neighboring state of Louisiana upheld the states crimes against nature statute in July.  A challenge to Massachusetts sodomy law was pending at this writing.  Massachusetts was the only state in New England to retain legislation prohibiting sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex.
	In August, former Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim and his adopted brother Sukma Dermawan were both convicted of sodomy. Anwar was sentenced to nine years in prison; Sukma received six years and four lashes with a rattan cane.  The prosecution of Anwar was widely viewed inside and outside Malaysia as a case of political revenge against Anwar and his supporters, who had grown increasingly critical of Prime Minister Mahathir in the months prior to Anwars ouster and arrest. Anwars prosecution was also seen as undermining the integrity of the Malaysian judiciary, which had already been criticized widely for its lack of independence (see Malaysia chapter).
	In May, the Zimbabwe Supreme Court upheld former President Canaan Bananas 1998 conviction for sodomy and indecent assault.  Banana was quoted in 1999 as describing homosexuality as deviant, abominable, and wrong according to the scriptures and according to Zimbabwean culture.
	Even in countries where the laws criminalizing private consensual conduct between adults were not enforced, the existence of these laws provided the foundation for attacks on sexual minorities.  Men and women who identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual were attacked as immoral and putative criminals.  Thus, discrimination on the basis of this characterization was deemed justified.  

The Military
	In September 1999, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the United Kingdoms ban on lesbian and gay service members violated the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.  In July 2000, the court awarded four gay British service members compensation for their discharge.
	Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals were not barred from military service throughout much of the rest of Europe.  In remarks published in the French gay magazine Ttu in May, Gen. Alain Raevel declared of Frances policy with regard to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender service members, The army which we are building is an extension of society . . . .  We need to recruit boys and girls for 400 different types of work.  The fact that they may be homosexual does not concern us.  Similarly, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals served in Canada and Israel without official retaliation.
	With most of its allies either allowing homosexuals to serve openly or having no policy on the subject they considered unrelated to job performance, the United States found itself increasingly isolated in maintaining restrictions on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender servicemembers.  Turkey was the only other member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) that continued to ban gays and lesbians from its armed forces.  Six years after the U.S. military codified and implemented its dont ask, dont tell policy, its own investigations found that training on implementation of the law was lagging and that anti_gay comments and harassment were pervasive.  Although the dont ask, dont tell policy was ostensibly intended to allow a greater number of gay, lesbian, or bisexual service members to remain in the military, discharges increased significantly after the policys adoption.  From 1994 to 1999, a total of 5,412 service members were separated from the armed forces under the policy, with yearly discharge totals nearly doubling, from 617 in 1994 to 1,149 in 1998.  In 1999, the number of separations dropped slightly, to 1,034; nevertheless, the discharge rate was still 73 percent higher than it was prior to the implementation of dont ask, dont tell.  Women were discharged at a disproportionately high rate.  In addition, the policy enabled male harassers to threaten to out womenand end their careersif the women rejected their advances or threatened to report them.
	Even more disturbing than the increase in the number of service members separated from the military under this policy was the continued failure of the U.S. Department of Defense to hold anyone accountable for violations of the policy.  This lack of accountability spilled over to the murder case of Barry Winchell, a gay army private at Fort Campbell in 1999.  A U.S. Army review, issued in July, of the circumstances surrounding the beating death of Winchell on the base, concluded that no officers would be held responsible for the killing and that there was no climate of homophobia on the base.  This conclusion contradicted a Defense Department inspector general report issued in March which found that harassment based on perceived homosexuality was widespread in the military.  It also contradicted numerous reports that Winchell was relentlessly taunted with anti-gay slurs in the months before he was murdered. 

Marriage and Discrimination Based on Family Configuration	
	Barriers to the legal recognition of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender families continued to crumble slowly in a number of countries throughout the world.  In March, the European Parliament, the legislative body of the European Union, called on its member states to guarantee one-parent families, unmarried couples, and same-sex couples rights equal to those enjoyed by traditional couples and families.
	On September 13, the Dutch Parliament passed legislation permitting marriage between same-sex couples.  The legislation, which was limited to Dutch citizens and to those with residency permits, also provided for adoption rights and access to the courts in cases of divorce.  The law was expected to go into effect in early 2001, making the Netherlands the first country to allow same-sex couples to marry.
	Denmark, Greenland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden had provisions for registered partnerships, which did not provide all of the benefits of civil marriageoften according limited or no adoption rights, in particularand were generally limited only to citizens or to residents who had lived in the country for several years.  Frances civil pact of solidarity (pacte civile de solidarit, PACS) and Hungarys cohabitation law had similar limitations.  In June, Iceland expanded its registered partnership law to permit same-sex couples to adopt each others biological children.  The law was also extended to cover Danes, Swedes, and Norwegians living in Iceland; other foreigners were permitted to enter into registered partnerships after they had resided in Iceland for two years.
	A comprehensive same-sex partnership bill introduced in Germany on July 5 would grant same-sex couples spousal rights in taxation, inheritance, immigration, social security, child custody, health insurance, name changes, and other areas.  The plan was expected to pass the Bundestag, the lower house of the German parliament; support in the Bundesrat, necessary to enact some aspects of the proposal, was not assured.
	The U.S. state of Vermont enacted legislation in April providing for civil unions between same-sex couples.  The law was passed in response to a December 1999 decision of the Vermont Supreme Court holding that the states constitution required Vermont to extend to same-sex couples the common benefits and protections that flow from marriage under Vermont law.  Although civil unions carried virtually all of the state rights and responsibilities of marriage, they were not recognized by the federal government or any other U.S. state.
	Brazil granted same-sex partners the same rights as married couples with respect to pensions, social security benefits, and taxation in June.  This step was achieved by decree: legislation to provide for civil unions between persons of the same sex remained pending in the federal Chamber of Deputies.
	In November 1999, the Latvian Parliaments Human Rights and Public Affairs Commission rejected proposed legislation that would provide for registered partnerships for same-sex couples.  In August, Slovak Justice Minister Jan Carnogursky announced that same-sex partnerships would not be registered in Slovakia, reportedly stating that such partnerships would degrade heterosexual families.
	Israels Interior Ministry announced in July that it allowed same-sex partners to receive immigration benefits on equal terms with heterosexual common-law spouses.  Under the ministrys policy, the noncitizen partner is granted a renewable one-year tourist permit with employment authorization and may request temporary resident status after four years; eventually, the partner may seek permanent residence and then citizenship.
	With the addition of Israel, at least fourteen countries offered immigration benefits to same-sex couples.  Unlike most countries immigration policies with regard to married heterosexual couples, these policies typically required same-sex couples to demonstrate that they had had a committed relationship for one to two years or more before they were eligible for any immigration benefits.  Australia required same-sex couples to show a mutual commitment to a shared life for at least the twelve months preceding the date of application.  In New Zealand, same-sex couples had to have been living in a genuine and stable de facto relationship for two years.  The United Kingdom required applicants to show that they had had a relationship akin to marriage for two years or more. Belgium required a relationship of at least three and a half years duration. The other countries that offered same-sex immigration benefits were Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Namibia, the Netherlands, Norway, South Africa, and Sweden.

Harassment and Discrimination Against Students
	Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender students in the United States and elsewhere were frequently targeted for harassment by their peers.  Lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth were nearly three times as likely as their peers to have been involved in at least one physical fight in school, three times as likely to have been threatened or injured with a weapon at school, and nearly four times as likely to skip school because they felt unsafe, according to the 1999 Massachusetts Youth Risk Behavior Survey. Moreover, the survey found that those who identified as lesbian, gay, or bisexual were more than twice as likely to consider suicide and more than four times as likely to attempt suicide than their peers.
	Efforts to provide a safe, supportive environment for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender students in the United States were hampered by discriminatory legislation in several states.  In addition, many students also faced hostile school administrations.  In two particularly prolonged disputes, school districts in Utah and California attempted to deny students the right to form clubs known as gay-straight alliances, in violation of the federal Equal Access Act.  Both school districts began to permit the student groups to meet in September 2000, doing so only after the students who sought to form the groups filed lawsuits against the districts. (See Childrens Rights).
Africa Overview	
			
Reassuring Omens, Bold Visions  
On May 13, 2000, the Economist, the venerable and influential magazine of the global English-speaking political classes, dubbed the continent Hopeless Africa. Yet beyond the ubiquitous images of mayhem, positive, though less newsworthy, changes were evolving at the societal level.  Thanks to discernible changes in public attitudes and less willingness to accept the inevitability of authoritarian rule, it was at the grassroots that the most promising battles were being waged for a more humane Africa.  Human rights groups, churches, academics, and other civil society activists demonstrated an uncommon resolve, courage and willingness to put their lives on the line to resist repression and lead the push among nongovernmental actors for transparency, participation, and accountability.  
The indignant demand for more democracy came against a backdrop of deterioration and decay in the quality and performance of public institutions, in their ability to produce the results that people demanded and would respect.  Demands for change resonated with the public at large, including sectors of society that were only tenuously tied to the system, with little access to employment, food, health care, education, or other benefits that government was supposed to bring.  But their aspirations bumped up against governments that had been unable to provide political and social progress.  As the pressure built up during the year, governments in a number of countries began to pay more attention as concepts of transparency and accountability took hold.
The phenomenal transition in Zimbabwe was the most dramatic illustration of a yearning for democracy and human rights, and of the dogged determination of civil society actors to engineer and orchestrate reform.  Not so long ago the prospect of Zimbabwes ruling party losing a referendum vote and coming close to losing control of parliament would have bordered on the surreal.  But that was precisely what happened.  First, the Zimbabwean electorate voted down a government-sponsored constitution at a referendum in April, and two months later the ruling partythat had been thought unassailablecame close to losing its parliamentary majority.  The June elections came in the wake of a period of unprecedented violence in which supporters of the ruling party reportedly killed nineteen people, including white farmers and opposition politicians, beat up hundreds more, raped dozens of women, and occupied more than one thousand commercial farms.  At the vanguard of pressure for change was a coalition of nongovernmental forces that confronted the powers that be, questioning not only their efficacy but also their legitimacy.  This was an insurrection of courageous academics, high school teachers, priests, students, lawyers, judges, citizens, all seeking to move their country closer to the ideals of democracy and respect for human rights and the rule of law.  They rose to that task very effectively and pulled off a people-power revolution that achieved astonishing gains in a short span of time.
The organizational effectiveness of the Zimbabwe groups was considerably helped by two factors: a popular backlash, especially among the urban electorate, against persistently high levels of unemployment, poverty, corruption; and an infusion of talent and organizing capabilities that rapidly professionalized the ranks of the civil society coalition and later the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC).  Sophisticated and adroit, the opposition became highly effective media operators, ensuring a forceful projection of their message both at home and abroad.  It did not lead to a change in government, but it marked a big step along the way.
As developments in Zimbabwe heralded bolder, increasingly courageous grassroots movements, the Ivory Coast too saw changes towards greater empowerment of nongovernmental forces, and renewed engagement of the Ivorian people. In massive demonstrations sparked by a controversial presidential election, thousands of Ivorians spilled onto the streets of Abidjan to force the Ivorian president General Guei from power. Moreover, in the general uprising, voters in the northern power base of opposition leader Alassane Ouattara largely boycotted the elections. Despite harsh repression under General Guei since his coup, and even in the face of intense gunfire, protesters demonstrated across Abidjan, storming state radio and television stations in what appeared to be a spontaneous popular revolution. This people power revolution was set off by mass dissatisfaction with Gueis attempts to rig and steal the elections, and also with an earlier court ruling that excluded two major political opposition figures from the presidential election.
Equally undaunted were civil society and human rights groups in the rebel-held eastern provinces of North and South Kivu in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  Although the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD) authorities sought to limit the many and vigorous actors, civil society groups struggled to maintain their rights to free expression and association, serving as a channel for criticizing the RCD and its Rwandan allies.  In addition to dozens of human rights associations, there were uncounted development and humanitarian nongovernmental groups, activist churches, and independent journalists.  Although the rebel authorities and their Rwandan allies resorted to such tactics as physical assault, arbitrary arrest, and detention, activists courageously persevered to maintain the only line of defense against glaring human rights abuses by self-styled liberators.
In DRCs southern neighbor Zambia, a less dramatic but nonetheless crucial development took place during the countrys World Bank Consultative Group (CG) meeting.  For the first time in Africa, a transparent CG meeting where all deliberations were open to independent human rights and civil society activists was convened in Lusaka in July.  Building upon the experience of a previous CG meeting in Malawi when a select number of NGOs were invited to a session on human rights and governance, the Bank and a number of bilateral donors used it as a precedent to persuade the Zambian authorities of the benefits of opening up the discussions.  After strenuous objections to the participation of human rights and civil society activists, Zambias Minister of Finance Katele Kalumba relented and agreed to have the entire meeting opened to civil society groups, both local and international, including traditionally tightly closed sessions.  The human rights performance of the government was openly discussed during the meeting in the presence of NGOs.  This was a significant opening given the strategic importance of a World Bank Consultative meeting to an aid-dependent government like Zambia.  Seemingly, the success of the Lusaka meeting was due to good teamwork between Zambias bilateral donors, and a new, more open team at the World Bankreflecting a softening of the World Banks compartmentalization of poverty reduction versus human rights, and some risk-taking by the Zambian government.
War-torn Angola also showed signs of pressure for change.  With an eye to forthcoming elections, seventeen minor opposition parties met in May to fashion an alliance to foster opposition to the war, and advocate free and fair elections.  Concurrently, Angolas churchesknown to command the largest base of support in the countryformed a joint body to champion peace and national reconciliation.  In Sudan too, in the face of overwhelming security obstacles, the New Sudan Council of Churches People-to-People reconciliation process held a meeting in May in conflict-ridden southern Sudan, of people on the east bank of the Nile, despite overwhelming ethnic and military impediments.  The May meeting sought to build upon the positive results of the west bank March 1999 meeting.
There were other interesting trends in Senegal, Eritrea, and Somalia.  In Senegal, the electorate rejected President Abdou Diouf in his quest for a fourth consecutive term.  Following a highly competitive March election, Diouf peacefully conceded defeat to veteran opposition leader Abdoulaye Wade who took almost 60 percent of the votes cast.  Diouf, head of the party that had governed Senegal since independence from France in 1960, became only the third elected African head of government to leave office following an election.  Prior to the elections, Senegal set another precedent in February 2000, when a Senegalese court indicted Chads exiled former dictator, Hissein Habr, on torture charges and placed him under house arrest.  It was the first time that an African had been charged with atrocities in his own country by the court of another African country and represented a major step toward promoting the rule of law and breaking the cycle of impunity in Africa.  But Senegal somewhat tarnished its reputation when its judiciary dropped charges against Habr under what seemed to be questionable circumstances.  An appeal by Chads torture victims was still pending at this writing.
 In Eritrea, although decision_making remained tightly controlled within the governing Peoples Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ), the sole party operating in the country since the country became formally independent in 1993, there were signs of possible openings.  The constitution guaranteed freedom of expression and the press, but the government severely restricted those rights.  The government owned all the broadcasting media, and the only printing press in the country.  But following military setbacks in the war with Ethiopia during the first half of 2000, and the catastrophic displacement of almost a third of the Eritrean population as a result of that war, the pressure mounted for a genuine implementation of the constitution.  An intense debate was reportedly taking place in Eritrean elite circles, behind closed doors, on how and why the country went to war in the first place.  Questions were reportedly also being raised on the conduct of Eritrean diplomacy during several unsuccessful rounds of negotiations to end the war.  Probably in a concession to the mounting tide for change, the Eritrean National Assembly concluded its thirteenth session on October 2 by announcing that multiparty elections would be held in December 2001.  The assembly formed a committee to draft regulations to govern political parties.  Also in the aftermath of the war, about a dozen private newspapers and magazines started publication.   The Eritrean government also softened the severe restrictions it had imposed in 1998 on foreign NGOs that had denied them any operational role, and limited their contribution to the health and education sectors, through government channels and approved programs.  Facing a complex disaster resulting from war and drought, the government invited back several international NGOs that had left the country to protest the policy.  The government even ended its decade-long feud with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) by inviting it to establish a delegation in Asmara soon after the war broke out.  In midyear, the Eritrean government ratified the Geneva Conventions.
Even the sickest man of Africa, Somalia, showed prospects of renewal.  After descending into a maelstrom of warring regions and factions since the 1991 ouster of the late ex-President Barre, Somalia had been without a national government.  But following the Intergovernmental Authority (IGAD)-backed national reconciliation conference in August to discuss a peace plan put forward by Djiboutis President Ismael Omar Guelleh, a new transitional government was put in place.  Shedding past fears, tens of thousands of Somalis staged demonstrations in the capital, Mogadishu, and other cities in support of President Guellahs peace proposals.  President Salad Hassan subsequently reclaimed Somalias U.N. seat and addressed the U.N. Millennium Conference in New York.
The most important question for Zimbabwe, Angola, Zambia, or Somaliaand by association, for Africawas whether the changes would prove more than cyclical upturns.  To the degree that developments mirrored a change in the publics state of mind, and a perception that they could influence the composition of a government and its policies, it appeared that the human rights advances would endure. These developments were driven by a combination of greater pressures on government and the gathering force of globalization, with Internet communications playing a growing role.  As communications became close to instantaneous across international boundaries, African electorates, with nongovernmental forces at the vanguard as in Zimbabwe, became increasingly well informed and able to demand higher standards of governance.  These developments would hardly change the face of Africa overnight.  But they showed what could be done by ordinary people despite massive repression.  The information revolution could in time accelerate political transformation and alter the political and human rights landscape in Africa and beyond.
Such challenges to the power base of President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, a longtime and controversial strongman, the warlords in Somalia, or the rebel forces in the DRC, could help sway many who would otherwise have felt that the task was too daunting.  But the durability of the courage and determination of civil society to bring change would remain in doubt in the absence of substantial financial and diplomatic support from abroad.  Under the best of circumstances, civil society and other advocates of change would have a hard time challenging wrongs that had gone on for decades, presided over by entrenched regimes often with substantial foreign support.  The lesson for the international donor community was that institutions and policy decisions that led to human rights abuses were not intractable and inevitable.  Investments in civil society initiatives would help ensure that the momentum generated by the events of 2000 was sustained and would embolden those seeking to influence and change institutions and policiesthough progress would quite likely be painfully slow.  The international community should be generous.

Staying the Course in a Tempest-Tossed Climate 
Other good news from Africa was that two sub-Saharan giantsNigeria and South Africacontinued to make the transition to democracy, albeit on somewhat bumpy courses.  Botswana, Ghana, Mali, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, and Namibia also maintained steady growth.  In particular, Mozambiques record was remarkable.  Despite being pummeled by cyclone-driven floods, the worst in living memory, and severe tensions spawned by the 1999 December presidential and parliamentary elections, Mozambique was once again on its feet with the fastest growing economy in the world.  
Still, the premier case for Africa remained decidedly focused on South Africa.  The country continued to benefit from a holdover of political virtue derived from its political and constitutional transformation from apartheid to a constitutional democracydespite the stormy political climate engendered by the crisis in Zimbabwe that threatened to engulf the entire sub-region.  South Africas rebound continued to be driven by responsible governmental actions in most areas of public policy.  The constitutional framework was strengthened by passage of major legislation mandated under the 1996 constitution: the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, the Promotion of Access to Information Act, the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, and Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act.  The National Assembly also passed legislation giving protection to whistle blowers disclosing information in the public interest.  In a landmark September judgment on economic and social rights, the Constitutional Court found that the government had an obligation under the constitution to provide short-term housing for several hundred people evicted from their homes and in desperate need.  
But though its achievements remained impressive, South Africa was not out of the woods.  The growth, employment, and redistribution (GEAR) program implemented in previous years still failed to bring economic growth to some sectors of society, which had barely benefited or had even fallen further behind since 1994, leading to disagreement between the African National Congress (ANC) and its allies in the labor movement.  In particular, joblessness remained intractably above 30 percent.  There were other major problems: crime rates remained shockingly high; taxi violence between competing operators of minibus taxis remained a crime control riddle; violence against women, including sexual violence, remained alarmingly uncontrolled, with very high numbers of reported rapes; reports of police corruption and brutality were common during the year; and, despite over-congested prisons, the criminal justice system seemed unable to cope.  Despite policies and laws designed to bring transformation to all sectors, implementation sometimes seemed a distant dream.  The governments credibility and effective leadership also risked being undermined by conflict between health professionals and President Mbeki, who had controversially expressed doubt as to the link between HIV and AIDS, and the governments decision not to supply anti-retroviral drugs to HIV positive pregnant women to prevent transmission of the virus to their babies.  Nonetheless, the ANC-led government continued to hold extraordinary political capital and the transformation program seemed broadly on course.
In Nigeria, Africas most populous state and the economic heartland of the subregion, the military remained in the barracks.  Viewed from the perspective of President Bill Clintons two-day August visit, it seemed that Nigeria had much to celebrate.  But after what some saw as a year of waffling by President Olusegun Obasanjo, a number of political worries tempered any optimism.  Yes, things had changed, but the question was whether enough had changed.  Little had been done to address serious and deep-rooted problems such as the unrest in the Niger Delta, secessionist demands from the southwest, high unemployment, the collapse of social services, and school closures.  With worsening economic conditions and government failures to deliver any benefit from democracy, popular fatigue provided fuel for communal violence at flashpoints throughout the country.  The declaration by several northern states that Islamic Sharia law would be extended to criminal law sparked deadly clashes between Muslims and Christians.  The uncertainty caused by all these problems seriously damaged the countrys prospects for desperately needed economic rejuvenation and for sustaining and deepening its democracy.  Many ascribed much of the blame to Obasanjothough the challenges he faced were more institutional than personal.  He was accused of being reluctant and incapable of dealing firmly with important issues, including the bickering between the president and the legislature that seemed to have distracted attention from the need to make real progress.
Nonetheless, the good news was that none of those factors seemed likely to blunt the fundamental forces that had driven the switch from military rule to civilian government.  The passage to democracy would be rough but would stay the course.  A crucial element was that the major international actors kept their faith in Nigerias democracy experiment.  Would the armed forces risk making a bad situation worse by staging a coup? Given Nigerias status as a bellwether for the region as a whole, the international response would be far from sanguine.  The military would risk sharp international censure.  The chances were that the military would probably not wish to turn the clock back.  In the long term, nothing could do more to secure Nigerias democracy than a decisive break with its past: constitutional reform to provide an agreed framework for the representation of Nigerias disparate communities, the overhauling of a ramshackle legal and governmental structure, and human rights reforms to underpin the rule of law, accountability, and transparency.

Emblems of Bad Old Habits
While democracy was strengthened in select African countries, parts of the continent remained mired in authoritarianism, brutalized politics, and violent conflicts.  At least thirteen nations in the region were engaged either in open conflict or heated disputes, some with internal groups and some with neighboring states, spawning large-scale forced migration and abuses of civilians either directly targeted or caught in crossfire.  Ethnically inspired violence spread in Senegals Casamance, the Great Lakes, the Horn of Africa, Guinea, Ivory Coast, and other regions, proving that self-serving political elites continued to play the ethnic or nationalist card in an effort to consolidate their power at the expense of civilian casualties. Even in countries such as Nigeria, where the government has worked to counter the negative use of ethnicity and religion by forces outside of the government, ethnic strife remained a concern. Several countries that had benefited from the wave of democratization with the promise of more participation, transparence, and accountability in the early 1990s saw tightening control and shrinking political space.
One electoral process after another stumbled into difficulty.  Electoral manipulation, government spending to support its own candidates, and the pervasive pro-government bias of most local media left electoral landscapes badly tilted in favor of incumbentsdespite the now ubiquitous presence of election observers and their ritualized post-election reports.  Angola, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Uganda, and Zambia saw stagnation or regression.
In Ivory Coast, sub_Saharan Africas third_largest economy, soldiers launched a coup that brought to power a strongman, General Robert Guei, on December 24, 1999, and clobbered Ivory Coasts standing as a stable financial and political power.  The new military regime was expected to come under pressure to make good on its pledge to move quickly toward democracy and demonstrate more openness than the previously entrenched regime of ex-President Henri Konan Bedie.  But such expectations were quickly dashed as General Guei deliberately sought to disqualify his key rivals for the presidency in the October 22 elections.  As widely expected, President of the Supreme Court Tia Kone announced on October 6 the disqualification of twelve presidential hopefulsincluding Alassane Dramane Ouattara, leader of the Rassemblement des Republicains (RDR), the main opposition partyand the approval of only fiveincluding Guei himselfahead of the vote.
 In another key country, the Kenyan state seemed to have run out of both money and ideas.  The constitutional reform process which could have brought greater democratization remained unsettled.  And yet the government of President Daniel arap Moi continued to block progress on promised reform.  The political crisis was paralleled by a marked deterioration in the economic situation, caused by state fumbling and corruption.  The standard of living for the average Kenyan continued to drop, and the year was typified by unprecedented electricity rationing and water shortages in the capital Nairobi and other cities.  At the end of July, President Moi signed on to exceptionally exacting conditions in return for renewed International Monetary Fund and World Bank lending.  Moi nominally committed himself to doing something desperately difficult: to change an immeasurably corrupt and authoritarian country.
 Elsewhere in the sub-region, the ruling Ethiopian Peoples Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) won a victory in Mays tightly controlled elections, two days after Ethiopia launched its largest military offensive against Eritrea.  Allegations of fraud and violence marred these elections, particularly in rural areas.  In Uganda, just four days after Zimbabwean voters defied massive intimidation to rebuke the de facto single party rule of President Mugabe, President Yoweri Musevenis de facto one-party system was extended in a referendum marked by poor voter turnout.  The choice in the referendum was whether to return to a multiparty system or to continue Musevenis favored so-called no-party system. Having called for a boycott of the referendum poll, the traditional opposition parties declared a moral victory, saying that the turnout of roughly 40 percent was too low for a mandate on a key constitutional and human rights issue.  In the long term, the outcome could be that the no-party system might undermine the efforts to develop what was needed to sustain several of the positive changes that Musevenis Movement system had introduced.  Of greatest concern was that behind the illusion of inclusion under the no-party system was a concentration of power in the ruling elite, high-level corruption, and mismanagement of resources.
In Rwanda, General Paul Kagame was selected by the National Assembly as president following the sudden resignations of the speaker of the national assembly, the prime minister, and the president within the first three months of the year.  Two of the those of who had resigned their posts left the country, saying they feared for their lives.  As Kagames party, the Rwandan Patriotic Front, consolidated its power, it announced communal-level elections for late 2000, in which political parties could play no role.  Zambias poor performance on the democratization front undermined President Chilubas credibility as a broker for peace and democracy in the DRC.  Political parties, NGOs and other civic interest groups were regularly denied permission to assemble by the governments political and security apparatus or had their meetings violently broken up by police on public security grounds.
  After a year-long lull in fighting, Ethiopia and Eritrea went to war again. On May 12, Ethiopia launched a massive attack against Eritrea and successfully recaptured disputed territories that Eritrea had occupied.  The two-year conflict was estimated to have killed and wounded tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians and uprooted nearly a million people.  Displaced Eritreans fleeing the fighting credibly reported the involvement of the Ethiopian army in large-scale destruction and looting of civilian property, the harassment of civilians, particularly men of military age, and a high incidence of rape.  On the home front, the Ethiopian government continued to face internal armed insurgencies in the Oromia and Somali regional states and other remote regions, and to hold without charge or trial thousands of people it suspected of sympathizing with the insurgents.  By early 2000, Ethiopian authorities, citing broad threats to national security, had arbitrarily and harshly returned some seventy thousand Ethiopians of Eritrean parentage to Eritrea.  For its part, the Eritrean government forced an estimated forty thousand Ethiopians back to Ethiopia in the months that followed the outbreak of hostilities.  Eritrean authorities also interned thousands of Ethiopian residents under harsh conditions in the wake of Ethiopias offensive in May, citing unspecified threats to national security.
 Destructive wars persisted in Angola, DRC, Burundi, Sudan, Sierra Leone, and on the border between Liberia and Guinea.  Noncombatants continued to bear the brunt of the interminable fighting.  In the DRC it was 1999 redux: tangled webs of allies facing off in a devastating war with no end in sight.  The conflict pitted the government of President Kabila, and allied troops from Zimbabwe, Angola and, Namibia, against the rebel Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), as a proxy for forces fielded by the governments of Rwanda, Uganda, and Burundi.  The RCD had split into two competing groups in May 1999, with the mainstream faction supported by Rwanda, and the other backed by Uganda. In the northern province Equateur, the Movement for the Liberation of Congo (MLC) obtained military support from Uganda.  Apparently fighting on the side of President Kabilas government were rural militia, known locally as the Mai-Mai; and predominantly Hutu fighters commonly known as Interahamwe.  Human rights and humanitarian conditions continued to deteriorate throughout the country as both government and rebel forces and their backers were reported involved in patterns of civilian killings and widespread rape of women, while government forces carried out indiscriminate shelling in Equateur. There was no improvement between 1999 and 2000.  And yet there was no tangible progress in efforts to stop the ruinous war and its associated senseless killings: peace talks aimed at reviving the moribund peace deal signed in Lusaka in 1999 crumbled without an agreement on peace enforcement mechanisms amid mutual accusations of cease-fire violations.
The war in the Congo was increasingly closely linked to the seven-year civil war in Burundi as Kabila reportedly supplied more and more weapons for the Burundian rebel movement, Forces for the Defense of Democracy (FDD), in return for its help in defending Lubumbashi.  A Burundian peace agreement, promoted by former South African President Nelson Mandela and U.S. President Clinton, had no effect on the combat, which grew considerably in the months after its August signing. Although parties to the war increasingly fought a classic war, they also continued to target civilians, with more than a thousand killed by October. An estimated one hundred and fifty thousand persons have been killed since the start of the war. The FDD and a rival rebel movement talked of new peace negotiation in early November but set conditions which made an agreement appear unlikely. 
In Angola, a series of major victories by the government that pushed the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) out of its strongholds in the central highlands of Angola in late 1999 raised expectations that the war might be nearing a decisive phase.  At this writing, fierce fighting was raging, particularly in the areas close to the Zambian border, resulting in significant refugee inflows into Zambia.  Human rights violations, a hallmark of the Angolan war, remained widespread and systematic.  Disoriented and smarting from setbacks suffered at the hands of government forces, UNITA resorted to guerrilla attacks and indiscriminate killings.  
 As the countrys ravaging seventeen-year war raged on, Sudan remained a blatant human rights abuser, while rebel groups committed their share of violations.  The Khartoum government intensified its bombing of civilian targets in the war in the south and its efforts to hamper relief food operations to needy civilians.  For its part, the Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), the principal rebel movement in the country, continued to foster glaring abuses including looting of food and other provisions from the population, sometimes with civilian casualties; recruitment of underage boys; and rape.  In the meantime, the governments war machine was poised to benefit substantially from new oil revenue.  According to a government announcement, 20 percent of its 2000 revenue would be spent on defense, including an arms factory near Khartoum.  It was estimated that following the first export of oil in August 1998, defense spending in dollars had increased 96 percent in two years.
 In Sierra Leone, despite the Lom Peace Accord signed on July 7, 1999 that committed the rebels to lay down their arms in exchange for representation in a new government, the war and its associated abuses continued, though at a lower intensity and with a reduction in the rebels signature abuses, the amputation of limbs, for the first few months of the year.  The May collapse of the peace process after the capture of some five hundred United Nations peacekeepers, reversed this trend and ushered in an increase of all classes of human rights abuses by the rebel Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and other militias, including limb amputation, and a disturbing intensification of abuses by pro_government forces, against whom previous allegations had been few.  Women were particularly targeted for sexual violence. In thousands of cases, rape and other forms of sexual violence were followed by the abduction of women and girls who were forced into bondage to male combatants in slavery-like conditions. If that was not enough, the war became increasingly regionalized, sucking Guinea and Liberia into a tangled web of cross-border attacks with devastating consequences for noncombatants and refugees living in border areas.

The Private Press: Beaten Back 
But Not Cowed
The rapid growth of independent media endured, although the degree of media freedom differed widely.  For the most part, levels of freedom corresponded with levels of democratic development.  The Internet also dramatically enhanced the access and distribution capabilities of the independent press, fostering freer flows of information in general. Eroding governments ability to control the press and manipulate facts, the Internet also relieved the financial stresses that many African news agencies faced. South Africa, Nigeria, Botswana, Mauritius, Mali, Senegal and some others generally continued to register high levels of media freedom.  But in several countries, severe levels of intolerance persisted.  Many a government seemed all too alert to the danger that a free flow of information in society could undermine their grip on power.  During the year, there was a rampant use of intimidation, assaults and detention, banning and radio closures, prolonged prosecutions and libel suits, or economic coercion to silence independent media.
Despite an improved climate for freedom of expression in Angola, a campaign of harassment against journalists continued.  The privately owned media was targeted, apparently because it had increased its investigative and critical posture.  Since November 1999 at least six journalists had been convicted of libel or defamation by government officials.  On December 10, the directors of Folha 8, and the privately owned weekly newspapers, Agora and Actual, were ordered by police to retract stories that concerned a report by the U.K.-based NGO Global Witness, saying the government had corruptly used oil revenues.  For its part, the official media published detailed refutations of the Global Witness report.  On July 27, the Angolan government signaled its intention to tighten further controls on the media when it published a draconian new draft media bill that guaranteed presidential immunity to criticism and would send journalists to prison for criticizing or questioning government officials.  The bill would allow the government the right to decide on who could practice journalism, seize and ban publications, and to detain journalists for thirty days before charges were filed.
The independent media also continued to come under legal pressure in Zambia, where the trial of six journalists from the Post who were detained in March 1999 for publishing a story that criticized Zambias military capability and preparedness in the face of a possible military attack from Angola dragged on.  All the reporters, including editor_in_chief Fred Mmembe, were charged with espionage. All twelve pleaded not guilty to the charge, and on August 18, after repeated trial adjournment, the state dropped its charges against all except Mmembe.  An unexplained fire on September 3 at the Post offices damaged some U.S.$500,000 worth of equipment.  
In South Africa, eyebrows were raised when more than thirty editors and writers were subpoenaed to appear before the South African Human Rights Commission to answer charges of racism.  They were ordered to produce documents related to their editorial decisions, and the commission had the power to search their offices.  The journalists could face fines or up to six months in jail if they failed to comply.  The journalists stood their ground but offered to give evidence voluntarily if the subpoenas were withdrawn.  Following a public outcry, the commission relented and withdrew the subpoenas.  The hearings followed the release of an interim report commissioned by the Human Rights Commission and much criticized on methodological grounds, which found that the South African media was riddled with racism and racial stereotyping.  The final report, which included material from the hearings, received a much more favorable reception, and included constructive recommendations to address these problems.
In Liberia, the year witnessed numerous incidents of detention and ill-treatment of journalists, a community under heavy attack since President Taylor took power in 1997.  In March, Suah Dede, head of the Liberian Press Union, was briefly detained without charge after giving a radio interview condemning the closure of two radio stations.  In April, Isaac Redd, radio broadcaster on the state radio station, was detained and held without charge for several days by the police.  He was later accused of speaking against the president and charged with criminal malfeasance. In August, four members of a foreign news film team, in Liberia to film a documentary, were arrested, charged with espionage, and detained for a week.  The team had been given official permission to film in Liberia, but were accused of filming in restricted areas and seeking to damage the countrys image by falsely linking President Charles Taylor to diamond smuggling.  They were released following international pressure.
For its part, the Ethiopian government continued to abuse freedom of speech and of the press.  At least twenty-seven journalists lived in exile at this writing, having fled their homeland due to repeated arrests, ill-treatment in detention, and the threat of extraordinarily high bail amounts.  Eight reporters remained behind bars.  In mid-August, sudden increases in printing costs, by more than a third, put additional pressures on some thirty-six private publications as well as the government press in Ethiopia.  The private newspapers went on strike in September, and warned that the high production costs could eventually force them out of business.  They urged the government to reduce taxation on imported paper and other print inputs.  
In April, several journalists were assaulted in Zimbabwe.  On April 22, a bomb shook the premises of privately owned Zimbabwean Daily News.  On 6 April, Nyasha Nyakunu and Tsvangirai Mukwazhi, respectively editor and a photographer with the Daily News, were held for two hours by youths from the ZANU_PF armed with iron bars.  A week earlier a photographer and a journalist with Agence France_Presse, and a cameraman from the British news agency Reuters had been threatened by about fifty men armed with machetes and iron bars.  
In the DRC, scores of journalists were imprisoned apparently without legal justification.  President Kabilas government had detained over 110 journalists and harassed many others since it took power in 1997. Private newspapers and radio and television stations were often shut down or banned from coverage of news deemed sensitive by the government. A special military court in mid-September sentenced two journalists to two years in prison for defying such directives. There were also numerous accounts of torture and other inhumane treatment.  In Bukavu, the capital of rebel-held south Kivu province, photographer Jean Pierre Tanganyika, also known as Dudjo, was arrested after a grenade explosion on August 26 for having taken pictures of the injured victims at the scene.  He was detained without formal charge at the local army barracks, briefly released on September 16, and rearrested again on the same day.  His whereabouts remained unknown.
Aware that a large proportion of the population relied on radio for news, governments sought to silence independent radio broadcasting.  The government-owned radio station provided the only news broadcasts heard by most Liberians.  Two independent radio stations came under attack in March 2000: Star Radio and Radio Veritas, the radio station of the Catholic Church.  Star Radio was forcibly closed, and remained so at this writing.  At the beginning of October, the Zimbabwe police shut down Capital Radio, an independent radio station, and seized its equipment.  The station began broadcasting after the Supreme Court ruled that Zimbabwes broadcast monopoly was inconsistent with the countrys constitutional provisions regarding the fundamental right to freedom of expression.  President Mugabes government then promulgated a presidential order outlawing private broadcasting without state approval.  According to the police, Capital Radio had breached that order.  At this writing, the stations legal action disputing the legality of the governments actions was still pending.  In Kenya, however, several independent television and FM radio stations began broadcasting in 2000, obtaining licences after applications made several years earlier, some as far back as 1992.  The growth of the independent broadcast sector resulted in a notable expansion in the airing of differing opinions, particularly on radio.  These licences were, however, restricted principally to urban areas.

More Human Fallout
The massive numbers of displaced persons in Africa remained a major human rights catastrophe.  As of January 2000, there were 6.3 million Africans of concern to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), from an estimated 22.3 million worldwide.  Of the top twenty countries from which people fled from around the world, eight were in Africa.  Eleven African states hosted refugee populations of 100,000 or more.  The figures were equally striking in terms of internally displaced populations (IDPs): eight African countries were among the twenty countries with the largest internally displaced populations.  Indeed, in several African countries, as in Sierra Leone, armed groups purposefully uprooted civilians, creating massive populations of refugees and IDPs in order to forward political or military objectives with little or no regard for human suffering. 
Sudan alone had approximately four million IDPsthe largest IDP population in the world.  Angolas growing IDP population stood at some 2.5 million.  The war between Eritrea and Ethiopia resulted in massive internal displacement, particularly in Eritrea where 1.5 million people were uprooted, including 90,000 who sought refuge in neighboring Sudan. Hostilities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo resulted in the displacement of 1.6 million people, one million of whom had little or no access to humanitarian assistance with dire consequences. The U.N. reported that infant mortality among the displaced was the highest in the region, and that maternal mortality was the highest in the world.  Some of the longest and most forgotten refugee crises were on the African continent, with recurring refugee movements caused by conflicts spilling over into neighboring countries.  Refugee crises in Africa invariably affected a whole subregionand sometimes beyond. 
The Horn of Africa countries continued to be producers and receivers of refugees simultaneously.  And in West Africa, the interlocking conflicts in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea affected populations in all three nations.  Balancing national security concerns with the obligation to provide safe asylum and protection to refugees was one of the most challenging issues for host governments in Africa. Internal conflicts alarmingly spilled across borders into neighboring countries, resulting in greater militarization of refugee settlements by armed elements, weapons flows, cross_border attacks, forced recruitment of refugee children, and rape and other physical attacks on refugee women and children in camps.  The security risk increasingly associated with hosting refugees from intractable regional conflicts resulted in a growing unwillingness by host governments to provide asylum and protection.  Xenophobia and anti_refugee sentiment continued to grow, even in countries with a generous history of hosting those fleeing conflict.  The failure by African governments and the international community to separate out combatants from refugees in the camps exacerbated the problem and made refugee camps more likely targets for attack.
For example, in September, tensions rose between Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone, each accusing the other of supporting rebel activity.  Guinea, one of the largest refugee hosts in Africa, intermittently closed its border with Sierra Leone, fearful of incursions by Sierra Leonean rebels.  In September, an inflammatory public statement by the president of Guinea provoked widespread rapes and other attacks by Guinean police, soldiers, and civil militias against Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees. 

Defending Human Rights
The human rights movement continued to register significant strides across the continent, although there were variations in the environments in which they operated.  Many countries continued to liken human rights advocacy by local NGOs to disloyal political opposition or collaboration with those fighting the government of the day.
In several countries, including DRC, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Liberia, and Ethiopia, individual activists faced intimidation, arrest, assault, and sometimes death for their advocacy of human rights.  The risk that rights defenders faced was underscored on August 24 when Fr. John Kaiser, a well-known human rights activist in Kenya, was brutally murdered at night by unidentified persons some fifty miles outside Nairobi.  A Catholic parish priest in the Rift Valley area and a U.S. citizen, Father Kaiser had worked in Kenya for thirty-six years and had been an outspoken human rights activist.  In 1999, the Law Society of Kenya had honored Father Kaiser with its annual human rights award. 
The DRC continued to be one of the most dangerous places for human rights activists.  The government in late May detained for weeks Flicien Malanda Nsumbu and Georges Kazimbika, respectively the secretary and financial officer of the national umbrella group for developmental organizations, and accused them of contacting the rebels. In early June, the government prevented representatives of civil society and the political opposition from leaving the capital to attend preparatory talks for the inter-Congolese dialogue in Cotonou, Benin.  On January 16, security forces of the RCD arrested at her home Immacule Birhaheka, president of the womens group Promotion and Support of Womens Initiatives (PAIF), and her colleague Jeannine Mukanirwa, PAIFs vice president.  The two, and other women held like them at the infamous Bureau 2 detention center in Goma, were whipped with a piece of tire.  On October 9, RCD soldiers broke up a meeting held by the umbrella group for human rights organizations in Bukavu.  Congolese and Rwandan soldiers beat them  with sticks and fists in front of a big crowd.  The rights groups were planning to discuss follow-up activities to the previous weeks visit to eastern DRC of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson.  
President Charles Taylor of Liberia and other high-ranking government officials also continued to attack human rights groups for publicizing abuses and blamed the human rights community for the withholding of international aid.  In December, 1999, James D. Torh, the executive director of a child-rights organization, Fore-Runners of Childrens Universal Development, was detained and charged with sedition for a speech he made.  Torh was denied bail for five days and upon release, he fled the country.  In Namibia, a Zambian_born human rights activist and a founder member and executive of the Namibian Society for Human Rights who had lived in Namibia for sixteen years was on February 21 expelled by immigration officials because of his alleged support for Caprivi secessionists.
But in Nigeria, numerous and sophisticated human rights groups were able to operate freely throughout the year.  The human rights movement, long recognized as the one of the most vibrant networks on the continent, strengthened its advocacyto the extent that its legislative and reform program was vastly more ambitious than that of the government.  In South Africa too, activists continued to operate in an environment of freedom.  Occasional government hostility to NGO criticism was neutralized by strong collaboration in government-NGO partnerships elsewhere.
There was also some encouraging news from countries whose dedicated human rights networks operated in less than favorable circumstances.  In Rwanda, the League for Promoting and Defending Human Rights (La Ligue Rwandaise pour la Promotion et la Dfense des Droits de lHomme, LIPRODHOR) monitored judicial proceedings related to the genocide and made plans to observe a new alternative justice process set to begin operating early in 2001.  The Association for the Defense of Human Rights and Public Liberties (Association pour la Dfense des Droits Humains et des Librts Publiques, ADL) executed a useful study of villagization, a government policy of forced resettlement of the rural population.  The League for the Defense of Human Rights of the Great Lakes (La Ligue des Associations de Dfense des Droits de lhomme des Grands Lacs, LDGL) initiated a campaign among its member organizations to end impunity in the region and to extend the mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, as did the Burundian Ligue Iteka.  The Burundian Association for the Defense of Prisoners did the first nation-wide census of persons jailed in national prisons and secured the release of prisoners who had already served their terms and yet remained in jail.  
In an environment which was not known for tolerance of independent monitoring, the Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCO) continued to report on the human rights situation in the country.  Several civic organizations, including EHRCO, the Ethiopian Economic Association, the Inter-Africa Group, and the Addis Ababa Chamber of Commerce convened panel discussions that allowed ruling party and opposition candidates to air their programs before urban voters, mainly in the capital.  The Ethiopian Women Lawyers Association conducted training for women candidates.  Progress was registered toward the establishment in Ethiopia of national institutions and an international presence for the protection and promotion of human rights. The outgoing parliament in July unanimously approved bills establishing the Ethiopian human rights commission and the office of the ombudsman.  However, the government continued to deny recognition to the Human Rights League, which was founded in 1997 by members of the Oromo community. The government arrested eight board members of the league shortly after they applied for registration of the association, and confiscated its office records and equipment in 1998. Garuma Bekele, executive secretary of the league, and also editor of Urji, and Addisu Beyene, secretary of the Oromo Relief Association and prominent rights advocate, together with some fifty other prominent Oromo civic leaders, remained in jail since their arrest in October 1997. Their trial for conspiracy continued in camera.  Mary Robinson, the U.N. high commissioner for human rights, said during a visit in October that her agency planned to open a regional office in Addis Ababa to work with the countries of the Horn of Africa and the OAU.

Organization of African Unity
As countries in Africa continued to erupt in violence, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) once again failed to rise to the challenge of effectively dealing with issues of stability and democracy throughout the continent.  Through measures taken at several summits, the OAU attempted to become a more proactive, unified body; however, its efforts were undermined by decisions which called into question its commitment to democracy and stability.  Working mostly in tardy reaction to crisis situations, the OAU found its actions largely futile in solving the civil strife in many countries.  The one exception, the OAUs success story for the year, was the cessation of hostilities agreement which helped halt the two-year war between Ethiopia and Eritrea, with a June 18 agreement to end hostilities and work out a final settlement.  The cease_fire, which was a product of OAU intervention, consisted of detailed plans to disengage the two armies and to allow a U.N. peacekeeping force to patrol parts of the established buffer zone.  As part of its efforts to oversee the agreements implementation, the OAU sent military observers in September to monitor the cessation of hostilities.
In countries like the DRC, Comoros, Sierra Leone, and the Ivory Coast, the OAUs presence was either not very visible or for the most part ignored.  In April, leaders of European and African states met under the auspices of the European Union (E.U.) and the OAU in Cairo. In the first summit of its kind, participants discussed human rights, good governance, trade, illegal arms, debt relief, and other issues.  A Civil Society Forum scheduled to take place prior to the summit was blocked at the last minute. Convened by the North_South Center, the gathering was moved to Libson, which diminished its potential impact on the summit.  The OAUs apparent silencing of civil society groups weakened its credibility as an organization committed to the promotion of democracy.  African nations had hoped to make economic issues a priority at the conference, particularly the issue of debt relief.  The E.U. decided to remove trade barriers to Africa, but refused to establish new measures to address Africas burgeoning debt.  The summit resulted in the 110-point Cairo Declaration, which included an affirmation of the promotion of human rights, but no new initiatives for their protection.
 The thirty_sixth annual OAU summit held in Lom, Togo, in July symbolized the organizations desire to move toward greater unity despite deep divisions.  During a summit in Syrte, Libya, the previous year, the OAU issued a declaration committing itself to the establishment of an African union.  The aims of the union included the promotion of stability, political and economic integration, and solidarity between countries.  Twenty_seven of the thirty_three member states that attended the Lom summit signed a draft of the African Union Treaty, and it was expected that two_thirds of OAU member states would have ratified the treaty by the next years summit.  This step toward greater unity was however overshadowed by several countries boycott of the summit.  Angolas president, Jos Eduardo dos Santos, asked that the summits venue be moved to Addis Ababa after Togolese President Gnassingbe Eyadema was implicated in diamond and arms trafficking with UNITA by a U.N. report.  As host of the summit, Eyadema stood to inherit the chair of the OAU for the upcoming year.  Ignoring both Angolas request and a recommendation by Robert Fowler, head of the Security Council sanctions committee, to avoid holding conferences in sanctions_busting states, the OAU decided to keep the summit in Togo.  Namibia and the DRC expressed solidarity with Angola and also boycotted the summit.  During the summit, OAU members extended support for the efforts of the Angolan government to restore peace, while condemning UNITA for its violent actions in Angola.
The summit sought to address current crises as well as those from the past.  Initiatives were proposed to investigate the illegal trade of conflict diamonds and the resumption of fighting in Sierra Leone.  A mini_summit was held among West African leaders, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, and the executive secretary of ECOWAS to discuss the continuing hostilities in Sierra Leone.  The absence of Angola, the DRC, and Namibia prevented a mini_summit from being held to discuss the conflict in the DRC.  The OAU members also voted to enact a maritime blockade on Anjouan to discourage its secession efforts from the Comoros.  Perhaps grabbing the most international attention was a report released by the OAUs International Panel of Eminent Personalities demanding the payment of significant reparations by countries that failed to prevent the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.  Belgium, France, and the United States were specifically mentioned as guilty of inaction, along with the U.N.  Security Council.  The report also called for attention to alleged war crimes by the Rwandan Patriotic Front during the genocide.
 In many countries in Africa, the OAUs efforts to restore peace and stability had little or no result.  In 1999, OAU Secretary General Salim Ahmed Salim had morally guaranteed the Lom peace agreement for Sierra Leone, which included a blanket amnesty for all abuses committed prior to its conclusion.  Since then, the agreement had been torn to shreds as fighting had resumed and human rights abuses were rampant.  In June, the OAU named a special envoy to Sierra Leone in hopes of enhancing its efforts to end the conflict.  A delegation in Freetown pressed for a cease_fire but President Kabbah stated he would not comply until the rebels had returned the areas seized since the signing of the Lom Accord.  Since many of these areas include diamond mines, the fighting continued with no signs of stopping.  In August, OAU chair Gnassingbe Eyadema called for a change in the U.N. monitoring forces mandate from one of peace enforcement to peacekeeping.  The African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights sent a delegation led by the commissions chair, EVO Dankwa of Ghana, to Freetown in February 2000, after strong lobbying from NGOs attending the commissions October 1999 session in Kigali.  The delegation, continuing a tradition of ineffective missions by the OAU organ, met with no victims and almost no local human rights groups, did not go outside of Freetown, and produced no written report of its findings or recommendations.
 After leaving the construction and implementation of the Lusaka Accord for the DRC in the hands of Zambian President Chiluba, who was representing the Southern African Development Community (SADC), the OAU appointed Sir Ketumile Masire to be the facilitator of an internal dialogue on the future of the DRC.  Throughout the year, the accord was repeatedly violated and an internal dialogue never materialized.  President Laurent Kabila rejected Masire on the grounds he was biased toward rebel groups.  Despite the OAUs repeated calls for a cease_fire, all parties continued to engage in fighting.  After a regional leaders summit sponsored by SADC was held in August, Kabila suspended the implementation of the peace accord and called for direct negotiations with Rwanda, Uganda, and Burundi, to be overseen by the U.N. and OAU.  At this writing, no movement had been made in that direction.
 The situation in the Comoros provided an excellent example of the OAUs efforts being largely ignored.  The OAU had sought to defuse the Anjouan island secession crisis in the Indian Ocean republic for three years.  In April 1999, Colonel Azali Assoumani staged a bloodless coup and established a military government.  Assoumani refused to hold elections until the secession attempt was ended.  The OAU repeatedly criticized the coup and Assoumanis unwillingness to hold democratic elections.  Early in the year, the OAU increased pressure on Anjouan separatists by enacting a travel embargo and freezing the financial assets of the leaders.  Assoumani asserted that the OAU had failed to resolve the crisis and Comorans could find a solution themselves.  In August, the military government and Anjouan separatists held talks, which resulted in an agreement ending the secession attempt.  The OAU criticized the agreement because its formation did not include the input of a majority of the Comoran people, and failed to adhere to the framework established by the 1999 OAU brokered reunification accord.  Despite OAU condemnation of the agreement for threatening the unity of the Comoros, the military regime and Anjouan separatists called for the OAU to lift its trade and travel embargo.
The OAU condemned General Robert Gueis coup in Cte dIvoire and called for elected president Henri Konan Bedie to be reinstated.  Guei refused to step down, but declared that elections would be held in October.  Staying true to its decision that military juntas would not be allowed to participate in the OAU, Guei was banned from this years summit.  At its summit in July, the OAU created the Group of Ten to ensure that the upcoming governmental transition in the Cte dIvoire was peaceful.  The group consisted of Togo, South Africa, Algeria, Burkina Faso, Djibouti, Gabon, Ghana, Mali, Nigeria, and Senegal.  At the end of September, the Group of Ten called upon Guei and the leaders of political parties to form a National Transitional Council to guide the country toward peaceful elections.  The OAU also requested that presidential elections be postponed until legislative elections had taken place.  There were mixed reactions to the groups proposal among the political leaders in Cte dIvoire.  As of this writing, the OAUs requests remained ignored.

The International Response

Trapped in The Basement Of Global Priorities?
There was little new movement in international policy on African issues.  As the international community seemed reconciled to the notion that Africa was locked in a permanent pattern of annihilation and turbulence, big powers seemed unprepared to elevate the plight of millions of Africans trapped by conflict and human rights abuse to a global priority.  The year opened on a high note and witnessed a flurry of activity: hectic agendas and rounds of announcements; high-powered delegations traversing the continent; commissions galore examining and reexamining urgent issues; declarations and resolutions continued to be churned out; reports and documents adorned with the habitual exhortations and reaffirmations of lofty visions continued to be released.  But real action that could curb cataclysmic trends if rhetoric was matched by commitment inched forward at a snails pace.  When it came to the pivotal issue of funding, major players resorted to fudging, making no commitments, only options to consider.  As a result, it became predictable that once again pledges would be unfulfilled.

The United Nations Strategic Ghetto
The year 2000 was inauspicious for the United Nations in Africa, although it aimed much of its official rhetoric toward the continent and its current activities there.  This increase in rhetoric was not matched with a comparable increase of financial support or other resources.  The woes of the U.N. in Africa, especially its peacekeeping missions, seemed to represent system_wide failures of the U.N.  Furthermore, the major powers were reluctant to intervene in Africa under U.N. supervision and the forces of the countries that took part in peacekeeping missions were often ill-trained and ill-equipped.  While the U.N. and the Security Council no longer treated Africa with the indifference that it did during the early 1990s, it clearly failed to address African issues with the material resources they so desperately needed.
The U.N. engaged in a rare bout of self-criticism at the close of 1999.  The Report on the Genocide in Rwanda severely condemned the lackadaisical manner in which the Security Council treated Rwanda, due to its and Africas marginalized status within the international community.  The report, released on December 16, 1999, declared that, the Security Council, led unremittingly by the United States, simply did not care enough about Rwanda to intervene appropriately. The report went on to denounce the Security Councils tragic decision to reduce UNAMIR in the face of killings, rather than to try to muster political will to try and stop them.  Ultimately, [The Security Councils] refusal to sanction a serious mission made the genocide more likely. In response to the report, Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for more effective U.N.  engagement in Africa and better coordination between the Security Council and regional organizations.
As if in response to these views, the United States representative to the U.N., Richard Holbrooke, used the U.S. stint as president of the Security Council to lead the U.N. to focus its attention on Africa during January 2000.  Undertakings were made that the U.N. would lead from the front in addressing Africas problems and make Africa safe for human rights and dignity.  The Security Council held meetings on the effects of HIV and AIDS in Africa, the growing problems of refugees and internally displaced persons in the continent, and the conflicts in Angola, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright called Africas First World War. 
The issue of AIDS in Africa received additional attention during the month, as the United States declared it a national security threat, the first time a health issue had been linked to national security in the United States and within the Security Council.  Annan declared that the impact of AIDS on Africa was no less destructive than that of warfare itself, and many speakers called for the conspiracy of silence about AIDS to end.  Dr.  Peter Piot, director of UNAIDS, noted that roughly U.S. $1_$3 billion was needed to sustain and expand these campaigns.  What happened after the ringing speeches? Only a tiny fraction of that total sum had been raised at this writing.  Moreover, the international community continued to be less and less responsive to Africas refugee and IDP emergencies.  Food deliveries were curtailed during the year and relief programs for Africa remained drastically underfunded.  For example, UNHCR programs throughout West Africa faced a U.S.$27 million funding shortfall in an overall budget of U.S.$77 million.  Similarly, in Tanzania, which hosted the largest number of refugees in Africa, refugee food rations were cut in September due to insufficient funding.  The international communitys lack of response to African crises continued to contrast sharply with its generous and relatively speedy response to alleviate the suffering of displaced persons in 1999 during the humanitarian crises in Kosovo and East Timor.
The Millennium Summit, held in New York September 6-8, 2000, gave world leaders another opportunity to convey their concern and interests in Africa affairs.  Following closely after the release of the Brahimi report, which scrutinized U.N.  peace and security operations, the Security Council in resolution 1318 decided unanimously to overhaul U.N.  peacekeeping operations to create a more effective and better_financed force by adopting clearly defined, credible, achievable and appropriate mandates. The Brahimi report, released on August 17, 2000, criticized the concept of impartiality, which had guided U.N. peacekeeping efforts in the past that had led to the failure to distinguish between the victim and the aggressor.  In addition, the report demanded that peacekeeping missions should specify orders to use force to better serve as a credible deterrent, a veiled reference to the U.N. peacekeeping mission debacle in Sierra Leone.  The report also noted that spoilers of peace accords tended to be those with access to funds to supply weapons, a reference to the illicit trade in diamonds that supported continued fighting in Angola, the DRC, and Sierra Leone. Resolution 1318 pledged to enhance the effectiveness of the U.N. in addressing all stages of the conflict, reaffirmed its determination to give special attention to the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa given the specific characteristics of African conflicts, and emphasized the importance of continued cooperation and effective coordination between the U.N., the OAU, and African sub-regional organizations in addressing conflicts in Africa.  
As part of this trend, Secretary-General Annans Millennium Report urged developed nations to make special provisions for the needs of Africa, to fully support Africans in their struggle to overcome the continents problems, and to curb the illegal traffic in small arms by supporting regional disarmament measures.  Despite the renewed focus on Africa, many African leaders felt that not enough was being done within the Security Council to address African issues, quickly or effectively.  South Africas President Thabo Mbeki stated, Our collective rhetoric conveys promise.  Our offense is that our actions convey the message that we do not care. Indeed very little had been accomplished by the peace and security operations in Africa between January and September.  Overall, the U.N. remained as ill-prepared for the next big crisis as it was for the last.  
Following two years of fighting between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the United Nations established UNMEE, the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, when a new outbreak of hostilities erupted.  A severe drought in the Horn of Africa had affected roughly ten million people in the region, which the fighting exacerbated, causing a severe humanitarian crisis, and the Security Council called on the OAU to immediately initiate peace talks between the countries.  On June 18, 2000, the foreign ministers of both countries signed an Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities under the auspices of the OAU, with representatives from the United Kingdom and the United States present.  The following month the Security Council passed Resolution 1312, which called for one hundred military observers to be sent to the region to verify the cessation of hostilities between the two countries in order to prepare for a larger peacekeeping mission.  On September 15, Security Council Resolution 1320 authorized the deployment of up to 4,200 troops until March 1, 2001 to monitor the cease_fire agreement.  Although the security conditions improved, as Annan noted in a report on September 18, the humanitarian issues caused by the drought were still a cause for serious concern.  
Combat and tension continued to plague the DRC, despite the Lusaka peace agreement signed by the government of the DRC, five neighboring countries, and one of the two main rebel groups in July of 1999.  The disengagement plan hammered out by the United Nations and a joint military commission drawn from the governments and the factions involved provided that the belligerents should start simultaneously withdrawing their forces forty kilometers (twenty-five miles) from the frontline within weeks.  But there was little evidence to validate the optimistic messages by the U.N. that the ceasefire was holding.  Although Security Council Resolution 1279 extended the mandate of MONUC in November 1999, authorizing five hundred U.N. military observers to the region, fighting continued between government troops and rebel groups in the eastern region of the country.  Some members of the Security Council, specifically the United States and Great Britain, did not want U.N. troops in the region while fighting continued, further delaying the deployment of U.N. troops to the country.  Security Council Resolution 1291 expanded MONUC to 5,537 soldiers in February 2000, to monitor the implementation of the cease_fire agreement and to supervise the disengagement and redeployment of troops.  The whole concept of MONUC seemed to have been founded more on hope than experience.  Many analysts doubted its viability, given the impossibility of protecting civilians in the huge country with such a small force.  At this writing, U.N. optimism had waned considerably, though MONUCs mandate was extended by a further two months in October 2000.  There seemed to be a real chance that MONUC would simply wither and die.
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary  Robinson visited eastern Congo for three days in early October to meet with the leadership of the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), local human rights activists, and representatives of U.N.  agencies working in the country.  Upon her return, she pledged to make the humanitarian situation within the DRC a higher priority for the U.N. 
The peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone illustrated many of the structural flaws that hindered the effectiveness of the United Nations.  Since the inception of UNAMSIL in October of 1999, officials in charge of the mission appeared unable to address the most basic security issues or cooperate among themselves.  Besides the U.N.s inability to protect its own staff,  UNAMSILs most egregious failure was its inability to protect civilians in the face of increasing human rights violations, a clear failure to fulfill its mandate. In May, the killing of at least ten and the capture of roughly five hundred U.N. peacekeepers forced the U.N. to reassess its role in Sierra Leone and the future of U.N.  peacekeeping missions in Africa.  Even the successful rescue of the U.N. hostages in July and the SLA capture of the notorious leader of the RUF, Foday Sankoh, in May did little to repair the public image of UNAMSIL.  Contributing countries were reluctant to continue supporting a costly and seemingly doomed peacekeeping mission.  At the end of September, the Indian government announced its intention to withdraw its troops from UNAMSIL; its 3,059 troops made up one quarter of the 12,477 troops and were the best equipped.  The Indian commander, Major General Vijay Jetley, had engaged in a public row with leaders from Nigeria, the largest troop contributor to UNAMSIL, accusing them of undermining the operation and doing business with the RUF in diamond mining operations. He also upbraided the Jordanian troops for collaborating with dissident former government soldiers known as the West Side Boys, by giving them supplies.  Jetley was criticized for his treatment of soldiers from other nations under his command and his lack of communication with other military and political leaders during the hostage crisis in May.  Following Indias decision, Jordan reportedly decided that it did not want its troops to remain in Sierra Leone unless a NATO country was persuaded to play a significant role in the U.N. force.  Additionally, the U.N. was unwilling to stiffen its mandate from peacekeeping to peacemaking, although it continued to increase the troop size of the mission.  On August 4, UNAMSILs mandate was expanded and its authorized troop presence was increased in successive resolutions; from the original six thousand in October 1999 to thirteen thousand in May. In September, the secretary general recommended that the troop strength be further increased to 20,500.
The United Nations Security Council agreed on August 14 to set up a war crimes tribunal for Sierra Leone to try crimes against humanity, war crimes, and other serious violations of international humanitarian law, as well as crimes under relevant Sierra Leone law committed within its territory.  But the measure stopped short of actually establishing the court or deciding its composition and functions.  The sticking point seemed to be how the authority of the court should be shared between Sierra Leones judicial system and neutral international experts.  The Security Council asked the secretary-general to address these and other questions and produce a detailed blueprint for the court within thirty days.  The blueprinta draft statute for the special courtwas published in October.    The provisions regarding the courts jurisdiction, competence, fair trial guarantees, rules of procedure, and evidence all seemed to be satisfactory to assure that the court would receive a broad mandate to prosecute those responsible for the atrocities, that it would be backed by a strong international presence. The report that accompanied the draft statute emphasized the need for adequate funds.
Nevertheless, concerns remained as to whether the court would be free from political manipulation, and would try not only Sankoh and his comrades but also leaders of other fighting factions, including those supporting the government, who had committed heinous crimes against humanity.  A structure that failed to establish a broad-based justice would in the long run gravely undermine a strong and impartial rule of law that would be essential to sustainable recovery.  In addition, the Statute would limit the temporal jurisdiction of the court to crimes committed since November 1996, yet unspeakable crimes were committed from the inception of the war in 1991.
One of the main causes of fighting in the DRC and Sierra Leone was the illegal diamonds_for_arms trades that rebel groups, as well as external allies, used to sustain continued fighting.  Diamonds played a pivotal role in funding the fighting between the government and the RUF rebels in Sierra Leone.  In recognition of this link, the Security Council passed Resolution 1306, which banned imports of rough diamonds from Sierra Leone for the next eighteen months, except those diamonds that were certified by the government.  It also called for a five-person panel to examine sanctions violations and the  link between trade in diamonds and small arms in Africa, with observations and recommendations to be presented by October 31, 2000.
In Resolution 1237, the Security Council decided to establish an independent inquiry into the breaking of sanctions against Angolas UNITA, which prohibited the sale or delivery of arms, military equipment, and petroleum products, and most importantly, the purchase of diamonds mined in areas controlled by UNITA.  On March 10, the Report of the Panel of Experts on Violations of Security Council Sanctions Against UNITA was released; it was a ground breaking report in that it openly named sanction_breakers and established its own sources for information and investigation.  The report cited two African presidents, Gnassingbe Eyadema of Togo and Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso, who openly broke the sanctions to aid UNITA, while it said President Omar Bongo of Gabon supplied UNITA with large amounts of fuel.  
The report explicitly linked UNITA with the diamond_for_arms trade, stating that, Diamonds had a uniquely important role within UNITAs political and military economy. UNITAs ongoing ability to sell rough diamonds for cash and to exchange rough diamonds for weapons provide the means for it to sustain its political and military activities. The Security Council approved the report and called for tougher measurers to restrict UNITA access to diamonds, fuel and arms. By July, the Security Council declared that UNITAs conventional war capacity had been destroyed and no longer posed an immediate threat to the Angolan government, citing UNITAs increasing difficulty in selling diamonds on the international market as a dominant factor in addition to rebel territorial losses on the battlefield.  The writing of the report signaled the Security Councils growing interest in the illegal trading activities of UNITA and its supporters and became a deterrent to those that would break the U.N. sanctions against UNITA.  
The report made thirty-nine recommendations, including that the Security Council should apply sanctions to those governments, officials, and enterprises that break sanctions against UNITA, and that the diamond certificate of origin system should be reformed.  Despite its strong stance against sanction_busters and innovative and reasonable recommendations, the Experts Panel suffered from the lack of a centralized office to coordinate its work, not involving Interpol in its efforts, and by the failure of member states to share intelligence with the panel.
Badgered by the controversy regarding conflict diamonds, De Beers Consolidated Mines, the dominant force in the international diamond industry, in July announced a radical shift from its seventy-year marketing strategy of manipulating prices by stockpiling to a new one of selling diamonds as branded luxuries.  Essentially, the new strategy seemed to be a defensive response to protect De Beers product from being tainted by conflict.  Also in July, the International Diamond Manufacturers Association and the World Federation of Diamond Bourses, meeting at the World Diamond Congress in Antwerp, adopted a global certification scheme for rough diamonds in order to identify conflict diamonds.  The congress also agreed that all rough diamonds would have to be shipped in sealed packages certified by the authorities in the exporting nations and verified by a new international diamond council, and that countries knowingly involved in illegal diamond trading should lose their export accreditation.  Both De Beers and the congress pledged that they would cooperate with the United Nations to help curb illegal trade in diamonds.  These were important announcements, but the fundamental issue remained verification.  In the absence of an independent monitoring regime-nagging questions would persist.

European Union, Norway, and the Donor Community
As in previous years, the European Union (E.U.) and the international donor community in general remained almost exclusively concerned with corruption and economic reform issues at the expense of civil and political rights concernsand in seeming indifference too to economic, social, and cultural rights.  It was still evident that policies were driven by the full belly thesis that civil and political rights were luxuries that could be put aside until the economy reached a certain degree of success.  As a result of the compartmentalization approach, little progress was made in tackling the core issuesauthoritarianism, arbitrariness and brutalization of politicsat the heart of Africas political and human rights crises.  International donor policy also continued to be undermined by the recurrent problem of inconsistency and double standards in the application of aid and human rights policies.  For example, during 2000, donors demonstrated far less enthusiasm and determination in championing human rights issues in Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Guinea, Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda, Swaziland, Uganda, or Zambia than in their approach regarding the issue of good governance and human rights in Zimbabwe, the Democratic Republic of Congo, or Liberia. This tended to reinforce the perception that human rights was a tool used by donors against their enemies and ignored in respect of their friends.
 The largest aid and trade agreement between developed and developing countries, the fourth Lom Convention, expired in February 2000.  A new, more ambitious twenty-year partnership agreement was signed in June in Cotonou, Benin, between the E.U. and seventy-seven countries from Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific (the ACP bloc).  The Cotonou Convention, replacing Lom, included a clause stipulating that individual countries that were seriously corrupt would face sanctions, including the withholding of aid.  A new procedure was also foreseen for consultation and the adoption of measures where human rights, democratic principles, and the rule of law were violated, placing the primary responsibility with the state concerned to take measures to rectify the situation.  A separate Trade, Development, and Cooperation Agreement between the E.U. and South Africa (which, as a middle-income country, did not qualify for full Lom/Cotonou terms) was also agreed upon in February 2000, cutting tariffs and liberalizing trade, after years of negotiations.
The Portuguese presidency of the E.U. during the first six month of the year promised particular attention to deepening cooperation with the African continent.  But apart from the African_European Summit in Cairo on April 3_4, 2000, little was delivered.  The summit itself was fairly neutral on human rights concerns save for a formal declaration that the parties recognize the need to provide for greater inclusion of civil society in all areas of our partnership.  In this context, we emphasize the need for greater participation of the citizen in decision_making concerning the management and the allocation of resources, whilst respecting the diverse and complementary roles of the State, decentralized local authorities and the other society actors concerned. 
Otherwise the priority issue for the African participants was debt relief, and they seemed to have given short shrift to human rights and related governance issues.
France took the E.U. presidency during the second half of 2000, promising a follow_up to the Cairo Conference and proposing that priority be given to developing dialogue with the sub_regional organizations. But the French E.U. presidency remained relatively muted on virtually all the major flashpoints in Africa, with the exception of Ivory Coast.  Frances reaction to the coup in that country was read as evidence that France would no longer unconditionally support loyal but corrupt incumbents in its former colonies.  France did not intervene to save Ivory Coasts president, Henri Konan Bedie, whose party reportedly cheated in the 1995 presidential elections and had arbitrarily changed the constitution to thwart his main rival.  Analysts observed that if France did not intervene in the Ivory Coast, their most important economic partner in Africa, it was unlikely that they would do so to support the likes of Omar Bongo of Gabon or President Gnassingbe Eyadema of Togo.  France also lashed out at General Gueis government of the Ivory Coast, following the barring of Ouattara from the presidential polls. 
Britains involvement in Africa was most dramatically marked by its armed intervention in Sierra Leone, following the collapse of the Lom peace process in May 2000.  British paratroopers were deployed after hundreds of U.N. peacekeepers were taken hostage by the RUF.  The troops evacuated British nationals and established a sense of stability in the country.  Britain provided U.N. forces with intelligence and logistical support, along with training and equipment.  In September, eleven British troops were taken hostage and a rescue team was deployed to free them.  Hundreds of British forces remained stationed in Sierra Leone throughout the year, but under a bilateral agreement with the Sierra Leonean government, not under U.N. command.  Their primary responsibility was to train a reconstituted Sierra Leonean army.
 Following its high level of engagement in Sierra Leone, Britain took a leading role in the international communitys response to the use of conflict diamonds in fueling wars in Africa.  In June, the British government introduced a draft U.N.  Security Council resolution banning the trade of diamonds from Sierra Leone which were not certified by the government.  In June Peter Hain, minister of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, hosted a meeting of officials from diamond importing and marketing countries.
 Next to the war in Sierra Leone, Britain was most outspoken with regard to the violence associated with Zimbabwes presidential election and land redistribution there.  Throughout the year, Britain criticized President Robert Mugabes government for failing to uphold rule of law in the country.  In May, Britain placed a national arms embargo on Zimbabwe because of the possibility that imported weapons would be used in the conflict in the DRC.  Zimbabwe demanded that Britain fund its land reform in accordance with the 1979 Lancaster House independence agreement.  However, the British government stated it would only finance a land redistribution policy that adhered to the transparent principles agreed upon during an international land conference in 1998.
The Netherlands, Sweden, and Norway maintained their tradition of engagement with Africa.  All three countries froze or suspended government-to-government aid to Zimbabwe on the basis of good governance concerns, and to Ethiopia and Eritrea, as a result of the ongoing hostilities between the duo.  Assistance to NGOs continued, often focusing on human rights and democratization programs.  Denmark, however, continued its development assistance to Zimbabwe and Eritrea on the grounds that there was a greater chance of promoting democracy and human rights through development partnership and dialogue.  All four countries also maintained their high profile on human rights and governance issues in dialoguing with African governments.   However, Uganda, Zambia, and Ethiopia seemed to get gentler treatment than Zimbabwe or Eritrea.  Moreover, economic interests could trump human rights concerns.  Once Norwegian oil firms obtained lucrative footholds in Angolas ultradeep offshore fields, Norwegian comment on Luandas human rights abuses became muted.  The Netherlands government agreed to send some seven hundred peacekeepers to the Horn of Africa to take part in the United Nations mission to monitor the cease-fire agreement that ended the war between Ethiopia and Eritrea. 
Making bold pledges about debt relief turned out to be easier than acting upon them.  Despite the high sounding declarations at the 1999 June Cologne Group of Seven (G-7) summit to enhance coordinated efforts to support deeper, broader and fast debt relief, by mid-2000 only nine African countries had experienced any reduction in their debt paymentsway off the G-7 target of writing off U.S.$100 billion of debt by the end of 2000.  To help breathe new life into international debt relief efforts, Britain in July announced a special plan to provide extra money to help countries that stopped fighting and instead used their resources to combat poverty.  Ahead of the G-7 summit, the E.U. and the ACP group agreed a deal to allow the release of U.S.$1.04 billion for global debt relief for the worlds poorest countries.  In its communiqu at the Okinawa summit, the G-7 conceded that the dilemmas of debt, health, and education were inextricably linked, and the heart of the economic difficulties facing the poorest countries.  The Okinawa communiqu also for the first time addressed the need to combat diseases.  It set three global targets to be achieved by 2010: to reduce the number of HIV infected young people by 25 percent; to reduce tuberculosis deaths, and prevalence of the disease, by 50 percent; and to reduce malaria by 50 percent. 

China
In October 2000, nearly eighty ministers of foreign and economic affairs from forty-four African countries assembled in Beijing for the first China-Africa cooperation forum.  China, making a fresh bid to emerge as a leader of the developing world, and building on a six-nation African tour undertaken by President Jiang Zemin in 1996, promised debt relief and business deals to those attending.   In a passage clearly aimed at human rights interventions of the sort undertaken by NATO in Kosovo, the communiqu declared that no country or group of countries has the right to impose its will on others, to interfere, under whatever pretext, in other countries internal affairs, or to impose unilateral coercive economic measures on others.  While affirming the universality of human rights, the communiqu went on to state that Each country has the right to choose, in its course of development, its own social system, development model and way of life in light of its national conditions. Countries, that vary from one another in social systems, stages of development, historical and cultural background and values, have the right to choose their own approaches and models in promoting and protecting 	human rights in their own countries. Moreover, the politicisation of human rights and the imposition of human rights conditionalities on economic assistance should be vigorously 	opposed to as they constitute a violation of human rights.

U.S. Policy Towards Africa 
The United States dedicated its month as president of the Security Council, January 2000, to African crises.  During this Month of Africa, various issues were discussed, from the refugee situation to the crises in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo.  This emphasis on Africa was reinforced by President Clintons trip to Nigeria and Tanzania at the end of Augustan unprecendented second visit to the continent.  But these interventions only obscured a lack of commitment to promoting human rights and accountability when dealing with crises in Africa. The Clinton administration did make strides in bringing African issues into more mainstream U.S. policy, as exhibited by the record number of U.S. government agencies engaged in Africa, although African issues rarely galvanized high-level attention. In crisis after crisis, the administration continually failed to integrate human rights into its policies on economic development and regional security.  Although a rhetoric of human rights concerns remained on the U.S. agenda, trade and economic concerns as well as international terrorism continued to take precedence over human rights.   While administration officials rarely mentioned their prior emphasis on Africas new leaders or their support for the Lom Accord ending the Sierra Leone peace process despite its blanket amnesty, the effects of these short-sighted policies were seen in the diminished credibility of U.S. Africa policy.
During his 1999 trip to Africa, Clinton avoided Nigeria as a sign of disapproval of its military dictatorship.  Yet as he praised Nigerias transition to a democracy in August 2000, Clintons rhetoric focused more heavily on economic growth than human rights.  Rewarding Nigeria for its democratic accomplishments, the U.S. promised to quadruple aid to the country.  The U.S. also promised funding to build partnerships between the U.S. government, Nigerian government, oil companies, and the residents of the oil-producing areas in the hopes of resolving the ongoing conflict affecting oil production.  Central to his visit, however, was Clintons appeal to the Nigerian government to increase oil production in order to drive down world oil prices, then at an all-time high.  After leaving Nigeria, Clinton visited Tanzania to witness the signing of the Burundi Peace Agreement.  Prior to his visit, Clinton had sent a special envoy to Burundi to support the mediation effort.  However, the U.S. did not push for prompt, effective justice to punish serious crimes  committed during the war as part of the peace process. 
After the United Kingdom, the U.S. made the greatest efforts to engage with the crises in Sierra Leone.  The U.S. condemned the taking of U.N. hostages by the RUF rebels and asked that they be released, but did not commit to any actions against the RUF.  The U.S. also discussed with the U.N. the prospect of expanding the rapid reaction force to Sierra Leone, but remained reluctant to put its troops at risk, and would not commit personnel for peacekeeping operations.  Instead, the U.S. undertook the task of training and equipping additional battalions of Nigerian peacekeepers.  In the Security Council, the U.S. was a leading force behind efforts to establish a special tribunal for Sierra Leone.  It also pledged support for a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, as well as creating a reintegration program to train and educate rebel soldiers.
The U.S. also took the initiative with efforts to eradicate the use of illicit diamonds to fuel civil wars in Africa, declaring support for tighter measures to control the diamond sectors in all affected countries and in the international diamond trade, but warned that those efforts should not damage the markets of stable, democratic, diamond-producing states.  The U.S. provided technical and financial support in the establishment of the Sierra Leone Commission on the Management of Strategic Resources, which was supposedly responsible for the management of the countrys diamond sector.  In July, representatives from the United States, United Kingdom, Belgium and the Diamond High Council met with officials in Sierra Leone to establish a diamond certification scheme in hopes of limiting the amount of RUF_controlled diamonds that made their way into the market.  At this writing, Congress was hearing testimony on a bill that would block the import of conflict diamonds into the United States.  With regard to illicit diamonds in Angola, the U.S. supported a U.N. resolution strengthening the implementation of sanctions against UNITA in an effort to further limit the export of diamonds and import of military supplies.  There was disapproval expressed during the year over the unsafe environment for the press in Angola. However, such efforts were greatly outweighed by much more forthright lobbying of U.S. economic interests, and official criticism of other Angolan government rights abuses was muted by its embassy in Luanda. In addition, the Clinton administration encouraged the government to find a peaceful solution to the countrys civil war.  Reacting to the continuing humanitarian disaster, the U.S. committed U.S.$38 million to support humanitarian relief efforts and an additional U.S.$2 million for UNHCR assistance programs in northern Angola.  
The U.S. expressed repeated concern over the Sudanese governments bombings of civilian targets, especially in areas where relief efforts were being conducted.  The United States engagement increased with the appointment of a special U.S. envoy who traveled to Khartoum to discuss reducing human rights abuses, improving humanitarian response, and renewing regional peace efforts.  The United States continued to assert that the IGAD peace initiative offered the best hope of ending the war.
In March, the U.S. sent a special envoy on a two_week mission to support the mediation efforts of the OAU in the Ethiopia_Eritrea conflict.  However, brokering the peace agreement largely fell on the shoulders of the OAU, despite its recent history of close relations with both Ethiopia and Eritrea.  The U.S. supported a U.N.  resolution to establish a mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea consisting of one hundred military observers until January 31, 2001.  The U.S. condemned the coup in Ivory Coast and the exclusion there of many of the candidates in the presidential elections slated for October.  All bilateral assistance and arms transfers were suspended until democracy was restored.
The U.S. position regarding HIV/AIDS in Africa advanced appreciably this year.  The U.S. signed a U.S. $10 million agreement with the Southern African Community to fund a variety of programs, one of them an assessment of the impact of HIV/AIDS on sexual development.  The Clinton Administration promised to request U.S.$332 million over the next two years to combat HIV/AIDS in Africa and globally.  The U.S. also announced an HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention program in Angola that would cost U.S. $3 million over three years.  The U.S. introduced a resolution in the U.N.  that would allow for voluntary testing and AIDS education for U.N.  peacekeepers.  However, in July, the U.S. announced that U.S. $1 billion in annual loans to finance the purchase of anti_AIDS drugs would be available to countries in sub_Saharan Africa.  Many African nations responded coolly to the proposal, expressing concern that the loans would just add to their debt burden.
The U.S. promoted a plan to the G_7, which was designed to provide up to U.S.$90 billion in additional debt relief to developing countries.  The primary beneficiaries would be African countries.  In addition, the U.S. pledged U.S.$500 million in debt relief and an additional U.S.$120 million toward the promotion of democracy.  But for all the soaring speeches and high-blown sentiment, performance fell far short of the expectations generated.  The House of Representatives approved funding for debt relief to meet the Clinton administrations request of U.S.$225 million, but the measure flopped as the U.S. Senate bill earmarked a paltry U.S.$75 million for debt.
Despite high expectations that the year 2000 would bring greater international attention and resources to Africa, the major international powers remained at the sidelines during the worst episodes of human rights abuses and violations. Starting in January, the United Nations and the United States pledged greater levels of interest and support in African affairs, and vowed to do more to help their African counterparts. Africa had never garnered this much attention from the international community and its prospects for growth and development seemed brighter. However, as little was done during the year to fulfill these bold pledges, it very quickly became evident that business would remain as usual for Africa in the international arena. Furthermore, E.U. and U.S. policies lacked the desired balance between economic rights on the one hand and political and civil rights on the other, while the United Nations was unable to ameliorate any of the devastating conflicts that continued to plague the continent. The slow pace of debt relief promised by the United States and the E.U. did little to alleviate the health and education issues that burdened many African countries, nor did it appear that the pace of debt relief would increase in the near future. Moreover, the international community failed not only on its pledges for African development and debt relief, but accomplished very little in stemming the spread of AIDS despite the havoc that the pandemic was wreaking across Africa. Ultimately, numerous statements to the contrary notwithstanding, it remained clear that Africa was a low priority for the United States, the E.U. and to some extent, the United Nations. Africa remained trapped in the basement of global priorities.

The Work of Human Rights Watch
Human Rights Watch continued to focus on identifying the root causes of deplorable human rights violations in Africa.  Human Rights Watch also dedicated significant resources toward improving relationships with local human rights groups and exploring ways of working together.
Human Rights Watch stepped up a three-track approach to expanding cooperation with local African nongovernmental organizations, striving to develop relationships with them based on interdependence, long-term commitment, and solidarity. A key strategic goal was to increase local NGOs influence throughout the human rights movement in Africa by facilitating their access to Human Rights Watchs wide range of expertise.
First, in the context of massive human rights violations in the Great Lakes area, Human Rights Watch implemented a Great Lakes NGO field initiative to strengthen the research, networking, and advocacy capacity of NGOs.  Second, Human Rights Watch promoted an African Fellows program that trained experienced human rights activists. The program developed the skills of those activists by exposing them to international partners, advanced research methodologies, and the international advocacy arena. Last, Human Rights Watch remained committed to protesting abuses against human rights activists in Africa.
Human Rights Watch continued to cover all of sub-Saharan Africa and expanded monitoring of French-speaking countries, but focused intensively on a nucleus of countries: Angola, Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Nigeria, Mozambique, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Uganda, and Zambia. Additionally, the Africa division undertook cross-country, thematic research on arms flows, resources and corporate responsibility, national human rights commissions, the rights of children and women, refugees and the internally displaced, and prisons. Human Rights Watch maintained field offices in Kigali and Freetownin Rwanda and Sierra Leone respectivelyand created a new field office in Bujumbura, Burundi.
The Africa division fielded investigative missions to Angola, DRC, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Uganda, and Zambia, and also collaborated with the Arms, Childrens Rights and Womens Rights divisions in their work on Angola, DRC, Kenya, Liberia, Rwanda, and Tanzania.
Concerned that noncombatants, refugees, and internally displaced persons were under severe attack, the Africa division published numerous reports and briefing documents on Angola, Burundi, DRC, Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone to raise international awareness.  
Moreover, given the sporadic nature of high_level international attention devoted to Africa, it was especially important to ensure that Human Rights Watch policy recommendations focus on political rights issues as well as security and economics. Human Rights Watch remained active in advocating for aid conditionality at the World Bank Consultative Group (CG) meetings for Zambia. In July, Human Rights Watch launched a report at the CG meeting in Lusaka to encourage donors to continue to make balance of payments support conditional upon improvements in human rights practices. Human Rights Watchs information formed the basis of policy recommendations to guide donors aid programs to these countries, and made clear recommendations to the governments in question. 
The Africa division devoted significant resources toward advocacy during the year, especially targeting the United States and British governments, the U.N., and the E.U.. The Africa divisions advocacy efforts focused on Angola, Nigeria and the crises in the Great Lakes, particularly Burundi and DRC, where it played a major role in providing information and analysis about a range of human rights abuses.
Human Rights Watch was called to testify before U.S. congressional committees on four occasions, dealing with the situation in Sudan and the ongoing crisis in the Great Lakes. Human Rights Watch held numerous briefings for congressional staff about its research and implications of U.S. policy.  These analyses were also presented to administration officials on numerous occasions in official roundtables and in a series of meetings held with officials of the Department of State, the National Security Council, and the Pentagon. 
In regular meetings, briefings, and submissions at the U.N., Human Rights Watch advocated for human rights. The organization continuously expressed concerns to the Security Council and the secretary-general about events in Sierra Leone. Human Rights Watch underlined the need for the U.N. to establish a criminal process to bring gross abusers of human rights to justice, to strengthen the U.N. mandate and capacity to protect civilians in Sierra Leone, and to address violations of the U.N. arms embargo by Sierra Leonean rebels. Human Rights Watch remained active in pressing the E.U., the OAU and the Commonwealth to focus on human rights issues, especially those with a bearing on Angola, DRC, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, and Sudan. 
Human Rights Watch focus on the need for accountability for human rights abuses stressed the need for justice at the national and international level in order to stop the cycles of violence in Africa. The Africa division worked with intergovernmental organizations, governments, and local human rights activists to compel abusers to adhere to internationally recognized human rights standards.
Americas Overview

Human Rights Developments
	Contrasts marked the year in the Americas. The already dire situation in Colombia deteriorated further, and the deep political and institutional crisis in Peru continued to make broad respect for human rights but a distant goal. On the other hand, in Mexico, where presidential elections in July heralded the first change of party in the presidential mansion in more than seventy years, hopes grew that the new president would undertake much-needed human rights reforms. A coup in Ecuador and a failed coup attempt in Paraguay reminded the region of the fragility of democracy. Meanwhile, Chile moved forward in its attempt to prosecute former dictator Augusto Pinochet, and an Argentine judge requested his extradition to face criminal charges for the 1974 Buenos Aires car-bombing of former Chilean army commander-in-chief general Carlos Prats and his wife. Distress signals from Haiti included electoral fraud and unchecked street violence, while in Argentina, nine people, including two members of the former military junta, remained under house arrest, under investigation for their role in the kidnapping of babies during the former military regime.
	Through the years ups and downs, though, one thing remained constant: the everyday violation of human rightsincluding police abuse, torture, and lack of access to effective justice systemsrequired far greater attention from policy makers than they were willing to recognize or give.
	Colombia constituted the regions most urgent human rights crisis. As fighting intensified in the thirty-year conflict, human rights abuses proliferated. The victims were largely civilians caught between the parties to the conflict, all of whichthe military and the paramilitaries with whom they maintained close ties, and the opposition guerrillascommitted atrocities with impunity. Despite claims to the contrary by the Colombian government, there was irrefutable evidence that the countrys armed forces continued to be implicated in human rights violations as well as in support for the paramilitary groups responsible for the majority of serious abuses.  Troops attacked indiscriminately and killed civilians, among them six elementary school children on a field trip near Pueblo Rico, Antioquia, on August 15. According to witnesses, soldiers fired on the group for forty minutes.
	The character of the conflict changed with the entry of the United States as a major investor, providing an infusion of U.S. $1.3 billion of mostly military aid for the government. The package included seven rigorous human rights conditions, including the need for the Colombian armed forces to demonstrate a break with the paramilitaries. The U.S. secretary of state certified that Colombia had met only one of the conditions, related to ensuring civilian, not military, jurisdiction over crimes against humanity committed by soldiers; President Bill Clinton waived the other conditions on national security grounds, effectively sending the message that U.S. policy subordinated human rights to other interests.
	A burgeoning crisis in Peru did nothing to alleviate the shadow that  Colombia cast over the region. In April, after manipulating the constitution to allow him to run, President Alberto Fujimori won a third presidential victory in an electoral process roundly denounced as fraudulent by Peruvian and international observers. Then, in September, scandals involving his governments bribery of opposition politicians and his security chiefs alleged undercover sale of arms to Colombias leftist Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, FARC) led to an abrupt change of plans. Fujimori disolved the feared National Intelligence  Service (Servicio de Inteligencia Nacional, SIN), and announced that he would call new elections but not stand again for the presidency. Nonetheless, ten years of Fujimoris abusive leadership left the countrys judicial and political systems in  shambles, virtually assuring that efforts to rebuild democracy would be hobbled. At this writing, Fujimori remained in the presidency, and his former security chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, had returned to the country after unsuccessfully seeking asylum in Panama.
	Mexico, too, experienced the promise of political change, but with a decidedly more upbeat forecast than in Peru. After more than seventy years in power, the Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional, PRI) lost presidential elections in July. The victor, Vicente Fox of the National Action Party (Partido Accin Nacional, PAN), demonstrated an openness to human rights unprecedented among Mexicos leaders. Scheduled to take office on December 1, Fox quickly met with human rights groups in Mexico, Canada, the United States, and Germany. He announced a thorough and much-needed overhaul of the countrys justice system and called for the establishment of a transparency commission, to seek answers to long-standing questions about some human rights abuses and corruption under successive PRI governments.
	With a few setbacks, efforts to obtain justice for past human rights violations in the region prospered. Cause for optimism in the fight against impunity surfaced in Chile, where Pinochet was stripped of his parliamentary immunity after returning home in March, following seventeen months of house arrest in the United Kingdom. Released for health reasons, Pinochet had been held for possible extradition to Spain to face human rights charges there. The former dictator faced more than sixty criminal complaints within Chile, lodged since January 1998 by relatives of victims of extrajudicial executions, disappearances, and torture, and by political parties, trade unions, and professional groups. In August, the countrys Supreme Court concurred with a lower court that there was enough evidence against Pinochet to warrant removing his immunity. Advances also took place in other cases against former military officers and members of the intelligence services under Pinochets former military government. In July, two former army majors and a cadet received life sentences for the 1982 murder of Juan Alegra Mandioca, the scapegoat for the murder of a union leader.
	The same Spanish judge who had ordered Pinochets arrest in London, Baltasr Garzn, also sought the detention of former Argentine military officer Ricardo Miguel Cavallo in August. Living in Mexico, Cavallo was accused of genocide, terrorism, and torture stemming from his alleged role as a torturer at Argentinas infamous Navy Mechanics School under military rule. At this writing, Cavallo fought extradition while waiting in a Mexican prison.
	Argentine authorities also contributed to the fight against impunity in cases related to the kidnapping of children during the military dictatorship in the 1970s and 1980s. Nine people, including former presidents brigade general Reynaldo Bignone and general Jorge Videla, and former junta member admiral Emilio Massera, were under house arrest in relation to the alleged kidnapping of over 200 children.
	The fight against impunity received a setback in Italy, though, in a case involving another accused Argentine human rights violator. Former army Maj. Jorge Olivera was detained in Rome in August, following an extradition request from a French judge, Roger Le Loire. Olivera stood accused of torture, kidnapping, and disappearance in the case of French citizen Marieann (or Marie Anne) Erize in 1976, but was released after an Italian court ruled that Erize was dead, not disappeared, and that the statute of limitations had run out for the other crimes. The court made its finding on the basis of what later turned out to be a falsified death certificate.
	The United States contributed to another serious setback to the otherwise positive worldwide trend toward the application of universal jurisdiction for crimes against humanity. In March, based on legislation obliging the United States to prosecute torturers, justice department officials detained Peruvian army intelligence agent Maj. Toms Ricardo Anderson Kohatsu, sparking hope that he might be prosecuted for serious human rights abuses that he allegedly committed in Peru. Anderson was implicated in numerous violations, including the torture of a former intelligence agent who was left paraplegic as a result.  But in a regrettable decision, the Department of State obtained Andersons release, claiming that he enjoyed immunity because he was brought to the U.S. to participate in a hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. 
	Within the United States, two former military leaders in El Salvador faced wrongful death charges in a federal court in Florida. Former defense minister Gen. Jos Guillermo Garca and Gen. Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova, who headed that countrys notoriously brutal National Guard, stood accused of the wrongful death of four U.S. churchwomen who were raped and murdered in El Salvador in 1980. In 1984, lower-ranking members of the National Guard were convicted in the case in El Salvador. The civil case was brought in the United States by relatives of the victims.    
	The cause of truth, if not justice, also received a boost in Guatemala, after the January inauguration of President Alfonso Portillo. Just months after taking office, he declared a national day in honor of the estimated 200,000 victims of Guatemalas thirty-five-year civil conflict, ratified the Inter-American Convention on Forced Disappearances, and admitted state responsibility for past violations in many well-known cases, including the 1990 murder of anthropologist Myrna Mack and the December 1982 Dos Erres massacre of at least 162 people.
	If cause for optimism was to be found in efforts to hold human rights violators to account, events in Ecuador and Paraguay underscored the fragility of democracy in the region. On January 22, the Ecuadoran military, allied with a coalition of indigenous groups, toppled elected President Jamil Mahuad, replacing him briefly with a three-man junta. Just days later, the military stepped aside for Vice-President Gustavo Noboa. In Paraguay in May, army officers failed in an attempt to oust President Luis Gonzlez Macchi.
	A host of other human rights violations also took place during the year. In countries including Argentina, Brazil, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, and Venezuela, abuses by security forces and impunity remained serious problems.  A common denominator was the failure of these countries justice systems to provide effective remedies for victims of human rights violations. The case of Teodoro Cabrera Garca and Rodolfo Montiel Flores in Mexico highlighted the problem. Environmental activists from Pizotla, Guerrero, they were accused by authorities of drug- and weapons-related offenses. Despite evidence that soldiers planted the evidence used against them, and that the defendants were forced to sign incriminating statements, they were found guilty, demonstrating the abysmal failure of Mexicos justice system. In Guatemala, where United Nations officials documented more than two dozen extrajudicial executions, the weak justice system led to a climate of insecurity and lynchings of alleged criminals by vigilantes.
	The case of Sandro do Nascimento demonstrated the problem in Brazil. Nascimentos attempt at armed robbery in Rio de Janeiro ultimately led to kidnapping and murder. Deserving of a trial for his serious offenses, police strangled him to death instead, shortly after his arrest.  In  So Paulo state,  police killings of civilians surged from 525 in 1998 to 664 in 1999, the highest total since 1992, when police killed 111 inmates in a massacre at Carandiru prison.  This violent trend intensified over the first six months of 2000, as police in the nations most populous state killed 489 civilians, an increase of 77.2 percent over the comparable 1999 figure.  A study released in July by the police ombudsman shed light on these shockingly high figures.  Analyzing the autopsy reports of 222 persons killed by police gunfire in 1999one-third of the victims of fatal police actionsit reported that 51 percent had been shot in the back and 23 percent had been shot five or more times.  The findings suggested that many had been summarily executed, and not killed as a result of legitimate use of lethal force in shootouts, as authorities routinely reported. 
	In Haiti, electoral fraud and unchecked politically motivated street violence raised serious concerns about the governments willingness and ability to apply the law. Much of the violence was carried out by supporters of Fanmi Lavalas, the party of former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, in the context of parliamentary elections held in May.
	Human rights violations in Venezuela also continued. Following flooding and mud slides in December 1999, the armed forces murdered suspected looters in Vargas state. Army paratroopers, police, and members of the National Guard were blamed for the execution-style killing of what the state ombudsman said were more than sixty people. The number of extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects elsewhere in the country also increased over the prior year; the nongovernmental Venezuelan Program for Education and Action on Human Rights (Programa Venezolano de Educacin-Accin en Derechos Humanos, PROVEA) said it knew of seventy-six reports of violations of the right to life by police during the first six months of the year alone.
	Press freedom also remained precarious in the region, most severely in Cuba, where authorities maintained almost total control over the flow of news within the island. In Haiti, Radio Hati-Inter journalist Jean Dominique was ambushed and killed on April 3, along with station bodyguard Jean-Claude Loiussant. Dominique was an outspoken proponent of the rule of law. In Chile, too, journalists suffered restrictions. Jos Ale Aravena, court reporter for the daily La Tercera, was convicted in February of insulting former chief justice Servando Jordn in an article summarizing the judges controversial career. The journalists 541-day suspended sentence reminded the country of the authoritarian mentality of some Chilean judges and the weak free speech protections offered under the law. A new law to regulate the press was pending in Congress at this writing. If passed, as expected, the law would provide greater and much-needed protection in several important areas, including by removing jurisdiction from military courts over cases of journalists accused of sedition or espionage under military laws, and by repealing the crime of contempt of authority from the State Security Law.
	Inhumane conditions of detention remained a common feature throughout the region, with particularly abusive situations found in Venezuela, Brazil, Haiti, Panama, and El Salvador.  The continued growth of inmate populations exacerbated overcrowding, at the root of a host of other problems.  Yet, all over the region, prisons and jails were not crammed with convicted prisoners, but instead with pretrial detainees, turning the presumption of innocence on its head. 


Defending Human Rights
	The burgeoning of the human rights movement, even in countries with environments hostile to activism, remained a regional highlight.  In addition to groups focusing on the traditional array of civil and political rights, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) emerged over the last decade in the defense of womens rights, childrens rights, the rights of indigenous populations, refugee rights, and in some countries gay and lesbian rights.  With increasingly sophisticated methods of documentation and advocacy, these groups played an indispensable role in monitoring and reporting on human rights developments in the region.
	Yet, even in countries where human rights defenders could work with no apparent personal risk, they frequently faced an unsympathetic public, suspicious of their defense of criminal suspects and other despised groups.  Worse, in a number of countries they were the subject of threats, harassment and physical violence.
	Colombia remained the most dangerous country in which to monitor human rights, with four defenders killed and three  dissappeared during the first ten months of 2000.  Elizabeth Caas, a member of the Association of Family Members of the Detained and Disappeared (Asociacin de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos-Colombia, ASFADDES), was shot and killed in July.  Caas lived in Barrancabermeja, where paramilitaries systematically intimidated human rights defenders, sending dozens of death threats over the course of the year. Also slain were Demetrio Playonero, an internally displaced person (IDP) and human rights leader; Jess Ramiro Zapata, the only remaining member of the Segovia Human Rights Committee; and Margarita Mara Pulgarn Trujillo, a government prosecutor who was developing cases that linked paramilitaries to the army and drug traffickers.
	Civilian groups, including human rights organizations, also faced attack from the FARC, which in October 2000 characterized them as paid killers [for the Colombian military]. In a statement on why they failed to honor an invitation to an October 2000 peace meeting in San Jos, Costa Rica, sponsored by a broad coalition of human rights, peace, and community groups, the FARC dismissed the effort as organized by the enemies of Colombia and its people. In this way, the guerrillas contributed to a general atmosphere of fear and intolerance that endangered human rights defenders.  
	The Colombian governments efforts to protect threatened defenders were slow and inadequate.  Moreover, recklessly endangering defenders lives, members of the Colombian military continued to make public statements accusing government investigators and human rights groups of guerrilla sympathies.
	Failed assassination attempts were reported in Brazil.  In September, a jeep carrying members of a commission that monitored rural violence and land reform issues was fired upon in the northeastern state of Paraba, but its occupants survived.  That same month, So Paulo representatives of Amnesty International and of a gay pride organization received bombs in the mail, but the police safely deactivated the devices.
	In an alarming development, particularly when viewed in historical perspective, Guatemala witnessed a notable increase in threats, harassment, and targeted violence against human rights organizations and activists. In one disturbing incident in August, a representative of the Center for Legal Action in Human Rights (Centro para la accin legal en Derechos Humanos, CALDH) was detained, beaten and robbed by individuals posing as journalists but thought to have links with active and retired military officers.
	Death threats, frequent in Colombia, were also reported in Guatemala, Chile, Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, and Peru.  In Cuba, human rights monitors, whose legitimacy the government stubbornly refused to recognize, faced harassment and criminal prosecution for their activities.
	In Venezuela, the Supreme Court determined in separate decisions in June and August that human rights organizations that received funding from abroad were not members of civil society, thereby depriving them of the right to participate in the nomination of candidates for the Supreme Court, to be ombudsman, and for other important government posts.
	Authorities continued to apply pressure to human rights monitors in Mexico, too, where they were sometimes blamed for some of the crime problems suffered in the country. Losing presidential candidate Francisco Labastida of the PRI, for example, noted during the campaign, Let it be known that the law was made to protect the human rights of citizens, not criminals. This anti-human rights rhetoric contributed to a hostile environment for human rights defenders. According to the nongovernmental All Rights for All Network of Human Rights Organization (Red de Derechos Humanos Todos los Derechos para Todo, known as the Red), its offices in Mexico City were under surveillance by agents of the federal National Security System (Sistema Nacional de Seguridad, SISEN) in June.

The Role of the International Community

Organization of American States
	The OASs electoral observation capacities were severely tested this year in both Peru and Haiti, where election monitoring missions nevertheless successfully avoided the shortcomings of past such teams.  In Peru, a mission led by former Guatemalan minister of foreign affairs Eduardo Stein conducted a forthright, transparent, and proactive observation of the electoral process.  In Haiti, Barbadian Ambassador Orlando Marville led a team of observers that were the first to discover the fraudulent calculation method that tainted the results of senatorial elections.  Both bodies ended up deciding to quit their host countries prior to the completion of the elections, after it had become clear that electoral abuses would not be remedied.
	But the OAS showed less initiative in dealing with the results of its monitoring efforts.  With regard to Peru, in particular, the OAS Permanent Council rejected a proposal by the United States and Costa Rica for an ad hoc meeting of foreign ministers under Resolution 1080the provision appropriate to responding to interruptions of democracyto discuss sanctions against Peru.  By a substantial majority, member states showed themselves to be unwilling to take strong measures to respond to unfair elections.  This consensus revealed the limits of the OASs effectiveness in managing interruptions of the democratic process that fall short of a coup detat. The limits of Resolution 1080 were also on display in the case of the coup in Ecuador. Despite the ouster of the president, the OAS failed to take action. 
	Nor did the OAS take concrete actions with regard to Haiti.  At this writing, OAS Deputy Secretary General Luigi Enaudi was engaged in negotiations with the Haitian authorities to try to alleviate the worst aspects of the summers elections, but no reforms had yet been announced.
	The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights sent multiple death penalty cases against Trinidad and Tobago to the Inter-American Court. In 1998, the country announced that it would withdraw from the American Convention on Human Rights so as to eliminate the inter-American human rights system as an avenue of appeal for death row inmates. The withdrawal became effective in 1999, but the cases referred by the commission to the court involved incidents that had occurred when Trinidad and Tobago was still bound by the convention.
	In a contrary and positive direction in the Caribbean, Barbados recognized this year the jurisdiction of the court.   

United Nations
	The United Nations maintained a permanent human rights presence in Colombia and Guatemala, and to a lesser extent in Haiti.  In other countries, visiting special rapporteurs and other mechanisms lent their expertise to efforts to address human rights problems.  The August-September mission of the U.N. special rapporteur on torture to Brazil, for example, drew public attention to prison abuses and strengthened the credibility of local monitoring groups.  Earlier in the year, at the April meeting of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, a resolution censuring the Cuban government for its intolerance of peaceful dissent, among other problems, was instrumental in maintaining pressure for reform.
	The Bogot office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights continued its invaluable work in 2000, visiting regions shaken by war and pressing the Colombian authorities to implement needed reforms.  The offices annual report was an accurate and compelling portrayal of the dire state of human rights in Colombia.  In a wise decision, the Colombian government agreed to maintain the office until April 2002.  Yet, disturbingly, U.N. staff noted a marked drop in cooperation from Colombian officials.
	The United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (Misin de Verificacin de las Naciones Unidas en Guatemala, MINUGUA), established after the 1996 peace accords, published reports on the peace process that included detailed analyses of human rights issues.  Under the 1996 peace accords, the mandate of MINUGUA was due to expire at years end.  Although President Portillo had requested that MINUGUA extend its stay, at this writing the U.N. General Assembly had not yet decided on the extension.
	In Haiti, the six-year-old U.N. human rights monitoring mission departed the country in early 2000, together with the U.N. peacekeeping mission.  A smaller human rights mission was subsequently installed: the United Nations International Civilian Support Mission in Haiti (Mission internationale civile dappui en Hati, MICAH).
	High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson visited Mexico in November 1999, signing an agreement with the government to undertake a human rights technical cooperation program. At this writing, the U.N. and Mexican government had not agreed on the exact nature of the program. Following the high commissioners visit, the special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions released a report on Mexico. Although it noted that the government had taken some positive steps, the report concluded: Unfortunately, these positive undertakings have not been sufficient to correct the situation.
	
United States
	The year 2000 marked the emergence of the United States as a major player in the armed conflict in Colombia, with the approval of the U.S. $1.3 billion aid plan. Debated heatedly yet passed overwhelmingly by the U.S. Congress, the Colombia aid package was the largest ever approved for a Latin American country. Although the aid was conditioned on Colombias compliance with strict human rights conditions, President Clinton waived six of the seven conditions for reasons of U.S. national security on August 22.  
	Clintons use of the waiver, made just prior to his visit to Colombia, allowed aid to go forward even as U.S. officials acknowledged that the forces they were funding maintained ties to paramilitary groups, had failed to suspend or prosecute implicated officers, engaged in human rights abuses, and refused to enforce civilian jurisdiction over human rights crimes.  With brutal candor, a spokesperson for the office of White House adviser and drug czar retired Gen. Barry McCaffrey explained the presidents decision: You dont hold up the major objective to achieve the minor.
	In December 1999, the first U.S.-trained Colombian army battalion completed its training and was deployed. A second battalion began to train the following August. U.S. law mandated that fewer than 500 U.S. troops be in-country at any one time barring an emergency. But reflecting a global trend to out-source war, some analysts projected that as many as 1,000 U.S.-related personnel could be in Colombia on any given day, many of them working for private companies under contract to the U.S. military.
	The southern Colombian department of Putumayo, home to 50 percent of Colombias illegal coca crop, was to be the first target of the U.S. eradication strategy. Officials acknowledged that forced population displacement was a likely outcome of the eradication effort, and proposed to set up government-controlled temporary camps to distribute assistance. Groups working with the internally displaced protested, saying that the planned activities risked fomenting the conflict, targeting innocent civilians, and substantially increasing internal displacement in Colombia.
	The Clinton Administration, backed by Congress, initially took a strong line against the manipulation of the electoral process in Peru that led to Fujimoris third term.  President Clinton directly suggested that the U.S. relationship with Peru would be damaged if democracy was not respected. Yet, when other OAS members states failed to rally to the U.S. call for an ad hoc meeting of ministers under Resolution 1080, the U.S. did not appear to push hard for the measure.
	Behind-the-scenes negotiations of U.S. officials during the September video scandal were said to be critical in convincing Fujimori to agree to leave office and to dismantle his hated intelligence apparatus.  Yet instead of promoting full accountability in Perus return to democratic rule, the United States threw its weight behind a scheme by which intelligence chief Vladimiro Montesinos escaped to Panama to seek political asylum. In October, Montesinos returned to Peru after unsuccessfully seeking asylum in Panama.
	On the positive side, important progress was made in the declassification of U.S. documents relating to human rights violations in Chile under military rule.  By mid-year, in accordance with a 1999 declassification directive, thousands of documents from the State and Defense Departments and other U.S. agencies, including the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), were released. Some files were held back on the order of the CIAs director, George Tenet, supposedly to conceal sensitive information about intelligence-gathering methods. At this writing, the CIA and other government agencies were preparing for another massive release of documents.
	A breakthrough in understanding the role of the CIA in Chile came in September, in response to a 1999 amendment to the fiscal 2000 Intelligence Authorization Act authored by member of the House of Representatives Maurice Hinchey. It required the CIA to submit a report to Congress on its relations with Pinochets military government, among other aspects of CIA involvement in Chile. In the report, the CIA revealed that it had maintained a liaison with Manuel Contreras, the infamous director of Chiles security agency from 1974 to 1977. The relationship lasted throughout the period in which human rights were grossly and systematically abused in Chile, and it ended a year after the car-bomb murder in Washington, D.C. of Allendes former foreign minister, Orlando Letelier, and his colleague Ronni Moffitt, for which Contreras had been indicted in the United States and convicted in Chile.
	Small but symbolic steps were also taken toward easing the decades-old U.S. economic embargo on Cuba, an outmoded policy instrument that Human Rights Watch and many other observers believed to be counterproductive to the human rights cause.  After months of debate in congressional committees, both houses of Congress passed legislation in October to allow limited food and medicine sales to Cuba.  The measure signaled the first meaningful retreat in nearly four decades in the U.S. policy of economic sanctions against Cuba, but was unlikely to yield more than a small volume of actual business.  Because of compromises with conservative lawmakers opposed to loosening the restrictions, no U.S. export credits or private financing would be allowed on food sales.  And on the negative side of the balance, the legislation codified restrictions on the travel of U.S. citizens to Cuba.

The Work of Human Rights Watch
	While responding to crises throughout the hemisphere, the Americas division of Human Rights Watch primarily focused attention on a core group of countries experiencing the most serious human rights problems. Human Rights Watch sought, in each country, to address the most pressing human rights issues: the Pinochet prosecution and freedom of expression in Chile; violations of international human rights and humanitarian law in Colombia; unfair election conditions, weakening of the rule of law, and impunity in Peru; deficiencies in the justice system in Mexico; political violence and electoral fraud in Haiti; accountability in Argentina; the protection of NGOs and human rights defenders in Guatemala; the use of excessive force by police and military in Bolivia; and overall human rights conditions and the U.S. embargo in Cuba.
	In addition to documenting abuses through published reports, Human Rights Watch responded rapidly to breaking events by directly addressing high-level government officials and representatives of relevant regional and international bodies, and generally pressing our human rights concerns in a firm, concise, and timely way.  Human Rights Watch also conveyed its views in meetings with senior government officials of Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Haiti, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, and Venezuela. In meetings and correspondence, we made specific recommendations for improving human rights conditions.
	As the regions gravest human rights crisis, Colombia was the divisions major focus during 2000.  In February, just as the U.S. Congress was debating a massive military assistance package for Colombia, Human Rights Watch released its report, The Ties That Bind: Colombia and Military-Paramilitary Links.  This documented the continuing close relationship between Colombian military and paramilitary forces, directly rebutting the Colombian governments claim that the military was not responsible for paramilitary abuses. And to ensure that the message was heard, the divisions executive director and Colombia researcher both testified before the U.S. Senate as to the reports findings, arguing that tough human rights conditionality be included in any proposed assistance to Colombia.
	The report made front-page headlines in Colombia, where top military leaders tried to discredit its findings by suggesting, grotesquely, that Human Rights Watch was in the pay of drug traffickers.  Not long after, Cuban government representatives facing censure at the U.N. Human Rights Commission mounted a similar attack, alleging that Human Rights Watch  received substantial funding from U.S. special services.  But such politically motivated invective rightly carried no weight or credibility, the more so because neither source could refute the carefully documented facts that were the basis for Human Rights Watchs conclusions.
	After President Clinton invoked the Colombia aid laws national security interest waiverafter the State Department found that Colombia had failed to meet six of the laws seven human rights-related conditionsHuman Rights Watch vigorously protested the Administrations subjugation of human rights imperatives to counter-narcotics interests.  Members of the European Union, skeptical of Plan Colombia, approved only a third of the funds requested, and dedicated all of their aid to nongovernmental organizations, as opposed to official entities.
	Fujimoris crisis of legitimacy dominated Human Rights Watchs work on Peru.  On the advocacy front, Human Rights Watch urged the OAS and others in the international community to adopt a firm posture on Perus democratic deficit.  In early May, Human Rights Watch wrote to OAS Secretary General Cesar Gaviria, comprehensively detailing deficiencies in Perus  electoral conditions.  In June, after the election, the divisions executive director attended the OAS General Assembly in Windsor, Canada, urging member states to press Fujimori to restore the interrupted democratic process in Peru.  In September, as the political crisis unfolded in Peru, Human Rights Watch sought to ensure that the human rights abuses committed during Fujimoris decade in power were not left in impunity, including by directly challenging the efforts of Vladimiro Montesinos to secure immunity from potential prosecution by obtaining political asylum in Panama. In pursuit of this, Human Rights Watch wrote to the Panamanian president, setting out the reasons why any granting of asylum would be profoundly mistaken, and sent a delegation to Panama to discuss the question with relevant officials.
	The historic prosecution of Pinochet was Human Rights Watchs primary focus in Chile.  In late April, the divisions executive director published an opinion piece in the Chilean daily El Mercurio that critically analyzed Pinochets due process arguments against prosecution.  This was published shortly before the Santiago Appeals Court began hearings on stripping Pinochet of his parliamentary immunity from prosecution.  Human Rights Watchs Chile researcher attended the hearings, the only international observer permitted to do so, and closely monitored the legal developments that culminated in the lifting of Pinochets immunity.
 
	The Americas division made important strides toward the broad dissemination of its human rights information by entirely revamping Human Rights Watchs Spanish-language website.  With materials arranged chronologically by country and by issue, the site presented a detailed picture of human rights conditions in the region.  The goal was to be comprehensiveproviding documents that ranged from letters to reports to opinion pieces on each country and issueas well as timelyeffecting the simultaneous release in electronic and traditional formats of all of the divisions public materials.

Asia Overview
			
In East and Southeast Asia, governments relied on Asian initiatives during the year to address economic, political, and human rights issues. Gone was the rhetoric of Asian values with its pre-financial crisis premise that economic development and protection of individuals rights were incompatible. In its place was simply a determination, from democratic and authoritarian governments alike, to show that solutions to Asian problems were to be found within the region, despite the diversity of cultures and political interests involved. South Asia, as always, was a region apart, so divided by rivalries and security concerns that regional cooperation was all but impossible.
	On the economic side, one example of East Asian regionalism was the movement toward developing the equivalent of an Asian Monetary Fund involving China, Japan, South Korea and the ten countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). It had a political parallel with the all-Asian resistance in late 1999 to an international tribunal for East Timor, balanced by the prominent Asian participation in the U.N. Transitional Administration for East Timor (UNTAET) in which peacekeeping forces were headed first by a Filipino and then a Thai. In October 2000, South Korean President Kim Dae-Jung received the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to ease tensions with North Korea, a wholly homegrown initiative. At the governmental level, the Well do it our way stance was partly a case of resistance to solutions imposed from outside but also one of perceived common interest in building regional strength across a variety of fieldsincluding human rights.
	Asian regionalism was helped by the fact that the influence of the international donor community was near an all-time low, although aid levels were never higher: witness the helpless outrage of donor countries during the year over the treatment of women in Afghanistan; the attacks on minorities in India; the aftermath of the October 1999 coup in Pakistan; the continuing restrictions on Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma; Indonesias failure to stop militia violence in West Timor; the obstructions placed by Cambodia in the way of a tribunal to try the Khmer Rouge; the arrests of political and religious activists in China; or the coup and hostage crisis in Fiji in May. In all these countries, domestic political imperatives far outweighed any fear of international reaction, and as it turned out, there was not much to fear from donors worried that pressure would inflict more damage on themselves than on the offending country.
	Unlike the years immediately prior to the financial crisis when East and Southeast Asian governments steadfastly refrained from criticizing each other (South Asian governments felt no such hesitation), Asian regionalism in 2000 was more accommodating of different viewpoints. This may have reflected the impact of democratization in important countries in the region such as Thailand, whose foreign minister broke ranks with other ASEAN countries and openly criticized Burmas suppression of opposition political activities. It also reflected distrust between the big regional powers, China, India, and Japan, and suspicion within the less powerful countries about the long-term political and economic agendas of the big three. 
	The phenomenon of finding strength as a region without necessarily constituting a solid political bloc may also have reflected the many internal conflicts that strained bilateral relations. Kashmir remained a constant source of tension between India and Pakistan. Indonesias inability to control the conflict in Aceh worried Malaysia, just across the Straits of Malacca. The raid into eastern Malaysia by guerrillas of the Abu Sayaf wing in the southern Philippines led to the deportation of thousands of Filipinos from Malaysia and strained that relationship. The ongoing ethnic insurgencies in Burma affected relations with India, Bangladesh, and Thailand, all of which had to shelter thousands of refugees from those conflicts. 
	Both governments and regional and local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were committed, where possible, to regional approaches to resolving regional human rights problems such as exploitation of migrant labor, human trafficking, and child prostitution. There was less support among governments for the international system for protecting human rights. Not only did China work harder than ever to escape censure at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in Geneva, weakening that body as a result, but the Australian government in September bitterly rejected the actions of several U.N. bodies that had questioned its treatment of aboriginals and refugees. 
	Asian NGOs as a group, however, remained an important voice for the expansion of the international system, pushingas their governments, with few exceptions, did not for ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, an end to the use of child soldiers, and implementation of human rights commitments made at the Beijing Womens Conference in 1995.  

Human Rights Developments
	In general, a rising concern with justice for past abuses did not translate into effective measures to prevent new ones. Serious problems remained in terms of protecting civilians in areas of conflict; ensuring basic civil rights under authoritarian governments; and providing protection to refugees, migrants, and trafficking victims.
	The Pinochet precedent was very much on the minds of governments and NGOs in the region during the year, as accountability for past abuses was an issue as never before. In South Korea, efforts were underway to hold the U.S. accountable for the No Gun Ri massacre in July 1950, during the Korean war, in which some 400 civilians may have died. Throughout the countries occupied by Japan during World War II, women forced into sexual slavery as comfort women were still campaigning for individual compensation from the Japanese government. Relatives of families of those killed or unaccounted for in the Thai armys May 1992 firing on unarmed demonstrators demanded and got release of classified government documents about the incident and continued to demand the prosecution of those responsible. Relatives of Tiananmen Square victims filed a civil complaint in a U.S. court in September against Li Peng, then Chinese premier, now head of the National Peoples Congress in Beijing.  In Cambodia, international pressure forced the Hun Sen government to agree reluctantly to a tribunal over which it would not have complete control to try former Khmer Rouge leaders for crimes against humanity committed from 1975 to 1979. The final establishment of the tribunal, which would be based in Phnom Penh and have a majority of Cambodian over non-Cambodian judges, was still awaiting action by the Cambodian parliament by late October. A special panel of the Dili district court in East Timor was set up in June to try those responsible for crimes against humanity and serious crimes committed during the period January to October 1999.
	In part because of a rising interest in accountability, the International Criminal Court attracted more attention in the region. By the end of the year, New Zealand and Fiji had ratified the Rome Statute while South Korea, Thailand, Bangladesh, Australia, the Solomon Islands, and the Marshall Islands had all signed. A conference of Asian NGOs, held in Bangkok in June, decided to make ratification of the statute a key priority for regional advocacy.
	Even as moves to punish past abuses were gathering strength, serious human rights problems continued to plague the region. Some were linked to separatist or nationalist movements and governments abuse of security laws to detain, torture, disappear, or kill suspected opponents. Some were classic examples of the refusal of authoritarian governments to tolerate peaceful political opposition. Others were linked to communal violence, still others to the failure of governments in the region to protect refugees and migrants.
	In all countries where armed rebellion against the central government was underway, all parties to the conflict were responsible for abuse. In Sri Lanka, civilians in the northeast of the country were caught in the middle between the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and government forces. In Kashmir, Indian security forces used draconian counterinsurgency measures, including arbitrary arrest, torture, and staged encounter killings, against Muslim citizens who were suspected of supporting guerrilla activity, while armed Islamists were believed responsible for  mass killings of Hindu civilians. In Nepal, an ongoing Maoist insurgency continued to spread from four midwestern hill districts to encompass nearly the entire nation. In Aceh, in Indonesia, the Gerakan Aceh Merdeka (GAM, Free Aceh Movement) was reported to have killed suspected informers; government security forces were responsible for the torture and killing of suspected GAM supporters. Separatist conflicts were also underway in West Papua, Indonesia; northeast India; Xinjiang, in western China; and around all of Burmas borders. In Laos, armed insurgency from ethnic Hmong in the highlands and ethnic Lao rebels based in Thailand and Laos increased during the year, and in June, the government initiated a national security alert after a series of unclaimed bomb blasts were attributed to those Lao insurgents. Governments tended to deal harshly with any rebels arrested, sometimes judicially, sometimes extrajudicially, but their prosecutions of their own agents for human rights violations were rare. Several South Asian governments responded to internal armed conflicts by introducing or enhancing existing anti-terrorism legislation or emergency powers.
	Fundamental rights to freedom of association, expression, and assembly were tightly restricted in North Korea, Burma, Vietnam, and Afghanistan. China, despite some liberalization, still banned any group or publication that it considered a threat to the Communist Partys hold on power. 
	But even in more open societies, like Malaysia, Singapore, Pakistan, and Cambodia, politics could be a risky occupation, as the trials of Anwar Ibrahim and Nawaz Sharif made clear. The use of draconian internal security legislation remained an issue in many of the regions democratic or democratizing countries. In Bangladesh, for example, the government signed the Public Security Act into law in January, affording sweeping powers to the police and circumventing guarantees of due process.
	Where public advocacy was possible, human rights defenders were working toward legislative change. In South Korea, for example, President Kim Dae-Jung announced in August his willingness to repeal the harsh National Security Law, as recommended by the United Nations Human Rights Committee and demanded by a coalition of more than 200 local rights organizations; as of October, it was still on the books, but former prisoners who had been unfairly detained under it by previous administrations became legally eligible for rehabilitation and compensation. (In fact, a 1999 law made anyone who had suffered detention, job loss, or expulsion from universities as a result of involvement in pro-democracy activities eligible for restoration of honor and compensation.) In India, NGOs campaigned against the introduction of the Prevention of Terrorism Bill into parliament.
	In much of the region, communal, ethnic, or caste tensions were caused or exacerbated by government actions. In India, Hindu nationalist policies of the ruling party encouraged attacks on Dalits (untouchables),  Muslims, and Christians. In China, perception of organized meditation groups as a potential political threat led to widespread persecution of Falun Gong practitioners and members of other qi gong groups. Ethnic tensions rooted in longstanding social and economic grievances and a perception on the part of indigenous elites of dispossession by migrants, led to the coup in Fiji in May and the attempted coup in the Solomon Islands in June. In Fiji, many of the migrants were in fact third- and fourth-generation Fijians. In the Moluccas, in Indonesia, a bitter communal conflict with similar socioeconomic roots was fueled by the participation of security forces in the conflict, with the army largely siding with Muslims and the police with Christians. There was not a single ethnic or communal conflict in the region that was reducible to ancient hatreds, and impartial government policies, had they been in effect, could have gone a long way to reducing the potential for violence.
	Protecting refugees, migrants, and victims of trafficking was a huge issue across the region, made more complicated by the fact that it was, by definition, transnational. To combat trafficking of Thai women to Japan, for example, both the Thai and Japanese governments needed to reform legislation and crack down on corruption of police and immigration officials. To protect foreign migrant workers against abuse in Malaysia or South Korea, countries exporting labor needed to prosecute illegal labor recruiters while the receiving countries needed to step up investigations and prosecutions of abusive employers.
	The Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs hosted the January 20 Asia-Pacific Symposium on the Trafficking in Persons, but the conference did not generate any concrete preventive measures. The governments of the United States and the Philippines organized a conference of the Asian Regional Initiative on Trafficking of Women and Children (ARIAT) from March 29-31 in Manila.  That conference did produce an action plan for tackling human trafficking in the region. 
	Throughout the region, huge numbers of refugees and internally displaced people continued to need protection. On the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) only five Asian countries were parties to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or to its 1967 Protocol. Serious issues of refugee protection arose even in some of those five during the year. In Australia, for example, a riot in August at an immigration detention center in Woomera, South Australia, drew international attention to the governments harsh treatment of undocumented migrants. In China, reports of forcible return of North Korean refugees were almost impossible to verify because UNHCR was allowed no access to the area concerned. In some countries, protection in the host country was the problem. Many refugees from East Timor were virtual hostages of militia leaders in Indonesian West Timor, for example. In others, the country from which refugees fled obstructed their efforts to return. Despite international pressure to secure the right to return for approximately 100,000 Bhutanese refugees living in camps in Nepal since late 1990 and 1991, Bhutan continued to resist proposals for their repatriation. The UNHCR pledged to continue its voluntary yearly repatriation of thousands of Afghan refugees from Pakistan and Iran; the refugees returned to face ongoing civil war and severe violations of human rights.
	In many countries that offered little or no protection for refugees, desperate asylum-seekers tried to enter the workforce of the host country, blurring the line between refugees and migrants, and making deportation of undocumented migrants tantamount in many cases to refoulement. This was the case with three groups of Burmese refugees: ethnic Shan refugees in Thailand, ethnic Chin in India; and ethnic Rohingya in Malaysia.
	Protection of the internally displaced remained weak in some countries and non-existent in others. Many of the estimated one million internally displaced in Sri Lanka faced restrictions on fundamental freedoms and discrimination at the hands of Sri Lankan security forces; there were even allegations that army and police used displaced villagers as forced labor north of Batticaloa in eastern Sri Lanka. The Indonesian government for much of the year obstructed efforts of international agencies to assist the more than 300,000 Indonesians displaced by the communal conflict in the Moluccas. By October, some aid was getting through. In Afghanistan, aid agencies faced an ethical dilemma of whether to continue to provide assistance in light of the ruling Talibans policies on women when to halt all assistance could have a disastrous impact on the displaced population.  A Taliban offensive in northeastern Afghanistan resulted in a massive exodus from Takhar province into neighboring Badakshan. Up to 90,000 were believed to be homeless, and a humanitarian crisis loomed as winter approached.	

Defending Human Rights
	Human rights work continued to be a dangerous occupation in some parts of Asia. Human rights activists across the region condemned the murder of Acehnese human rights defender Jafar Siddiq Hamzah, whose body was found outside Medan, Indonesia, three weeks after he disappeared on August 5. He was believed to have been killed by military forces, although as of October, Indonesian police investigators reported no leads to the identity of his killers. In other countries, local defenders took risks in reporting government abuses. Several Cambodian human rights defenders came under attack in August for reporting on alleged extrajudicial executions in Kratie province; afterwards, the defense ministry threatened to sue the main Cambodian human rights coalition. Chinese activists who campaigned to organize a new association to uphold the rights outlined in the two international rights covenants that China had signed were detained, tried, and imprisoned.
	In some countries, human rights defenders moved into new and unaccustomed roles. In Malaysia, several leading activists stood for parliament in the November 1999 elections as an expression of opposition to the governments treatment of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim. In Indonesia, by contrast, some human rights organizations found themselves in the position of advising the democratically elected government of Abdurrahman Wahid on policy. ELSAM, a rights advocacy organization, drafted legislation for a proposed truth commission. 
	Increasingly, governments were finding it in their interests to establish national human rights institutions. Malaysia established a commission, known by the acronym Suhakam, in April, and began receiving complaints shortly thereafter, primarily of police abuse. Nepal established a national commission in May. The Thai parliament passed legislation setting up a human rights commission in 1999 but only began appointing members in October 2000. In September, South Koreas Ministry of Justice submitted a bill establishing a national human rights commission to Congress; NGOs had opposed it because they wanted the commission to be more than an advisory body and to be more independent of the government than the bill envisaged.  Cambodia has three semi-official human rights commissions, which are largely seen as partisan and ineffective: the Senate Human Rights Commission, the National Assembly Human Rights Commission, and the governments Human Rights Committee. In July, NGO leaders and government representatives established an informal working group to discuss establishing an independent national human rights commission.  The Cambodian working group is a member of a regional working group based in the Philippines that is working to set up an ASEAN Human Rights Commission. National human rights institutions were already operating in India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Australia, and New Zealand.

The Role of the International Community
	
United Nations
	The U.N. had a high profile on human rights during the year, most prominently with respect to Afghanistan, Burma, East Timor and Cambodia. In the latter two countries, prosecutions of past abuses were high on the agenda. In East Timor, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the special rapporteurs on torture; extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions; and violence against women conducted inquiries into grave abuses associated with the 1999 scorched earth campaign; UNTAET was responsible for further investigations and prosecutions. In Cambodia, negotiations over an international tribunal were conducted by the U.Ns Office of Legal Affairs.
	The OHCHR maintained field offices in Phnom Penh and Jakarta. While staff in the former included human rights monitoring in their brief, the Jakarta office was restricted to technical advisory services. High Commissioner Mary Robinson visited China, Indonesia, East Timor, and South Korea during the year; she was scheduled to return to China in November to work on a plan to give China technical assistance to bring its laws into conformity with international standards.
	At the fifty-sixth session of the Commission on Human Rights in March, U.N. Special Rapporteur on Afghanistan Kamal Hossain and Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women Radhika Coomraswamy submitted their reports based on research conducted in Afghanistan and Pakistan in 1999.   Hossain found widespread violations of international humanitarian and human rights law by Taliban forces and commanders against ethnic Hazaras and Tajiks in central and northern Afghanistan. Eyewitness testimony included accounts of forced displacement of civilians, deliberate burning of houses and crops, summary executions of non-combatants, arbitrary detention and forced labor.  In newly occupied areas of central and northern Afghanistan, the special rapporteur found that women and children were frequently separated from their families and transported by truck to other regions of the country or to Pakistan.  There were also many accounts of young girls in these areas being forcibly married to Taliban commanders.  Coomaraswamys report drew attention to a rise in violence against Afghan women, including domestic violence, honor killings, and trafficking of Afghan refugee women in Pakistan. 
	Burma reacted in a similar fashion to the report in October of the special rapporteur on Myanmar, Rajsoomer Allah, who for the fifth consecutive year was not permitted to visit the country on which he was tasked to report.
	Most of the regional reporting to the U.N. treaty bodies was fairly routine, but the highly critical conclusions by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to a report submitted by Australia helped provoke the Australian governments angry statement in September that it would not necessarily allow further visits by treaty bodies.

United States
	The Clinton Administration took a selective interest in Asia. Securing normal trading relations with China was a priority; so was preventing any escalation of the conflict in Kashmir. By the end of the year, developing a dialogue with North Korea, building on Kim Dae-Jungs sunshine policy, was also a high priority.  A state visit to India drew Indo-U.S. relations closer than ever before; a state visit to Vietnam in November was expected to put relations on an important new, trade-focused footing. Indonesia was very much a center of attention, but it was clear that neither the U.S., nor any other major international actor, knew exactly how to respond to a democratically chosen government that was so manifestly weak in terms of strategic vision and capacity to govern. The U.S. took an active role in supporting the UNTAET in East Timor and in pressing Indonesia to take action against militias in West Timor. 
	In general, trade and economic relations and strategic interests in the region took precedence over human rights, yet many Asian governments believed that the U.S. continued to give far too much attention to rights. Without any other international support, for example, the U.S. tried and failed to get a resolution critical of China adopted at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. The U.S. was the only donor at the World Bank-chaired Consultative Group on Indonesia meeting in October that suggested loans might be conditioned on Indonesias progress toward resolving the refugee situation in West Timor.
	The U.S. governments promotion of religious freedomlargely due to congressional pressuredrew a mixed response in Asia, appreciated by victims of persecution, seen by governments as meddling.  The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom held hearings on abuses in China, India and Pakistan, and religious freedom was expected to be a priority of Clintons trip to Vietnam in November. In general, the impact of U.S. appeals or interventions was marginal.
	The office of the U.S. Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes took a strong interest in justice issues relating to possible crimes against humanity in East Timor and Cambodia.

Japan
	Japanese diplomacy was at a post-Cold War peak this year, and human rights received attention as an important, if limited, component of Japanese policy in Asia.  Japan hosted the G-8 summit in Okinawa (July 21-23), and continued to emphasize building economic and political relations with its neighbors in Southeast and South Asia; the prime minister toured South Asia for the first time in a decade.   A pre-summit gathering of G-8 foreign ministers issued a statement endorsing fundamental principles of democracy, the rule of law, human rights and an open economy as indispensable in an era of globalization. But at the summit itself, the G-8 leaders side-stepped some of the most controversial issues.
	Promoting reform and stability in Indonesia was a top priority for Japan, which hosted the annual donor meeting for Indonesia in October. It also provided major assistance for East Timors reconstruction and urged a resolution of the crisis in West Timor.  Japan maintained good relations with Burma, trying to nudge the military towards democratization but also helped to deflect criticism of Burma internationally.  Japan continued its campaign to give full economic and political support to the Hun Sen government in Cambodia, while also urging its cooperation with the U.N. on a Khmer Rouge tribunal.  Relations with China, despite a visit to Tokyo by Jiang Zemin late in the year, remained rocky, largely because of mutual wariness on security issues; human rights concerns were marginal to Japans bilateral agenda with Beijing.

European Union
	The European Union was active in promoting peaceful resolution of the conflicts in Sri Lanka (backing Norways mediation offer) and Kashmir.  The first ever E.U.-India summit took place in June.  Following the October 12, 1999 coup in Pakistan, the E.U. quickly distanced itself from the military government, and only restored political dialogue with Islamabad in September 2000.
	Otherwise, the E.U. was concerned with expanding economic relations across the region, capped by the third Asia-Europe Meeting (ASME) summit in Seoul in October, which brought together heads of state from fifteen European countries and ten Asian governments to discuss expanded economic cooperation.
	The E.U. put a high priority on finalizing a trade agreement with China in the context of the WTO negotiations, while including human rights in its political dialogues and summit meetings.  But the E.U.-China human rights dialogue received increased scrutiny during the year as it failed to deliver tangible results, and by years end was under internal review.
	During the year, the E.U. used its influence as a leading donor to support human rights and democratization in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Indonesia and East Timor.  In the case of Burma, however, splits within the E.U. made it difficult to develop a stronger common position towards the ruling State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) following the SPDCs September crackdown. An E.U.-ASEAN meeting in Laos remained on the calendar for December.

World Bank
	Two of the World Banks top five loan recipients this year were in Asia (India, U.S. $1.8 billion and China, $1.67 billion). The social and economic consequences of the Asian financial crisis were key factors in sparking further reforms within the World Bank.  Those reforms included more engagement with civil society, strong attention to combating corruption, and an interest in examining the banks potential role in supporting basic judicial reforms.
	World Bank President James Wolfensohns extraordinary appeal to Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid urging an end the violence in West Timor had a major impact in Jakarta and helped frame an overall international agenda for dealing with the crisis.
	The banks emphasis on participation as an element of good governance led to consultations with civil society in advance of bank-convened donor meetings, with NGOs actually participating in some of the donor conferences, for example, on Indonesia and Cambodia. But in countries where NGOs were non-existent or tightly controlled, such as China and Vietnam, the bank effectively let the governments set the terms of any consultation with people likely to be affected by bank projects. 
	In East Timor, the bank was a key promoter of democratization efforts through a community empowerment project involving election of local councils to decide on development priorities.
	A new World Bank report on Burma, leaked late in 1999, explicitly linked deteriorating economic and social conditions in Burma to the lack of progress on political reform and human rights. This set a useful precedent and example for the ongoing debate in Asia on the linkages between rights concerns and governance and development issues.
Europe and Central Asia Overview

Human Rights Developments
 The civilian carnage in Chechnya and the further entrenchment of authoritarian governments in Central Asia dominated human rights concerns in 2000. The democratic defeat of Slobodan Milosevic, who had laid waste to democracy in Serbia and instigated the deadly Balkan wars,  held out hope of a new hope for peace and rule of law in the Balkans. But the international communitys selectivity in using leverage hindered efforts for positive change in human rights in the region, especially in the crises in Chechnya and Central Asia.  While the victory of Vojislav Kostunica over Milosevic was strongly supported by the lifting of international sanctions, governments were reluctant to take a strong position on the need to bring Milosevic, an indicted war criminal, before the International Criminal Tribunal on the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as the broader issue of cooperation with ICTY.
   	The international community lacked the political will to exercise leverage with Russia to press for a halt to the massive abuses perpetrated by Russian forces in Chechnya. This stood in stunning contrast to international engagement in other crises in the world, notably East Timor, but was regrettably consistent with the international communitys response to the 1994-1996 war in Chechnya. The pattern of impunity for abuse that so easily prevailed in that war persisted in the current war, as Russia clearly sensed it had nothing to lose by prosecuting the war without thought to civilian costs or to the consequences of wanton brutality.  
  	Russian forces violations of humanitarian law in the current war, which began in late 1999, caused some thousands of civilian casualties, the result of indiscriminate bombing. The capital of Chechnya, Grozny, was razed to the ground. At least 125 civilians were summarily executed in three massacres. Thousands of Chechens were detained arbitrarily on suspicion of rebel collaboration, and once in Russian custody guards and riot police tortured many of them systematically. 
  	The international community often lamented that it had no significant influence over Russia, but squandered real opportunities for leverage or sanctions in favor of political expediency.  During one of the wars bleakest moments the World Bank refused to withhold credit payments to the Russian general budget. The U.S. government and other member states refused even to entertain the notion of conditionality. A U.N. Commission on Human Rights resolution might have had a positive impact, but the member states who so commendably sponsored it stood idle as Russia ignored the resolutions requirements. Chief among them was that Russia establish a national commission of inquiry that would lead to prosecutions for abuse. In a more principled move, the Council of Europes Parliamentary Assembly voted to suspend Russias delegation. 
  	The blatant impunity for war crimes in Chechnya cried out for accountability, but there was none. This failure quickly became obvious, but governments were unwilling to take up a more robust commitment to international justice as they had in other parts of the world.  No member state of the Commission on Human Rights had the courage to insist, for example, on an international commission of inquiry, which would have necessarily invoked higher standards of rigor and impartiality than the wan Russian effort.  Council of Europe member states declined to lodge an interstate complaint at the European Court of Human Rights.  Unlike the Kosovo conflict, where the international community responded quickly to the needs of ethnic Albanian refugees, security concerns and a lack of international interest meant that many of the needs of displaced Chechens went unmet.  Food, safe water, medical care, gas, wood supplies, and electricity were provided haphazardly and often ran out.  Most children had their education disrupted, and during the early days of the war, disease and exposure claimed the lives of some displaced persons.
  	As corruption and grinding poverty worsened in Central Asia, fighting terrorism and religious extremism was an overwhelming concern both to national governments otherwise intent on maintaining their grip on power, and to the international community. This came at the expense of human rights and a long-term vision for the rule of law in the region.  Uzbekistans unrelenting crackdown against political and religious dissenters continued unabated, and authoritarianism deepened in Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and Tajikistan.
  	For the second time in two years, violence erupted in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. In August pitched battles erupted between armed insurgents and government troops in southeastern Uzbekistan and neighboring Kyrgyzstan. Thousands were displaced from their homes by the clashes. The group responsible, the so-called Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, demanded that the Uzbek government release what the group claimed were an estimated 100,000 wrongfully jailed Muslim prisoners and allow for the observance of Islamic law precepts, including permission for Muslim women to wear the veil. 
  	Some observers viewed the August violence as the self-fulfilling prophesy of the governments multi-year campaign against religious extremism, the product of fierce and violent repression of thousands of Uzbek citizens. This year the governments campaign to stop the spread of religious extremism expanded and caused pervasive fear. Hundreds more independent Muslims who chose to study Islam or worship outside government-controlled religious institutions joined thousands imprisoned in previous years. Many were sentenced to long prison terms, for alleged membership in illegal religious organizations, or distributing religious leaflets not approved by the state. They were often arrested on trumped-up charges of illegal possession of narcotics, weapons, or religious literature, held incommunicado and denied legal counsel, and convicted in grossly unfair trials at which judges routinely ignored credible evidence of torture. 
  	Symbolic of the Uzbek governments confidence that concern about terrorism trumped its human rights obligations was its decision in October not to appear to defend its initial report to the U.N. Human Rights Committee on the day it convened. The governments explanation was that officials needed to prepare for a conference on terrorism.
  	Governments in other parts of Central Asia continued the drift toward worsening authoritarianism by manipulating elections, harassing the media, and jailing political rivals on trumped-up charges. The government of Kyrgyzstan employed these with a vengeance this year, which sobered those who still considered that country to be Central Asias island of democracy. The Kyrgyz government jailed prominent opposition candidates before the October presidential elections, persistently harassed the opposition media, and drove some nongovernment organization activists into exile. The government of Kazakhstan, firmly entrenched after last years deeply flawed elections, continued to harass opposition media and political figures. The Tajik government flagrantly manipulated the February ballot to guarantee the election of a parliament dominated by the ruling party. In November 1999, Turkmenistan, one of the most repressive countries in the world, held utterly hollow parliamentary elections, followed by an indefinite extension of the presidents term in office. 
  	Once again, the international community chose not to use available policy tools to effect change or take a principled stand. This was particularly true of the United States government, which was concerned about losing its influence in Central Asia to Russia by putting too much emphasis on human rights. Yet the U.S. and its European allies were in unique positions to deliver the economic assistance that Central Asian countries badly want, whereas  Russian influence served to weaken these countries independence. The U.S. government declined to interpret the crackdown in Uzbekistan as one targeting people for their religious convictions, and for this reason did not  name Uzbekistan as a country of particular concern in the area of religious freedom under the 1998 International Religious Freedom Act. By contrast, Serbia was considered a country of particular concern. The U.S. Department of State certified Uzbekistan as eligible for U.S. security assistance, available under U.S. law only to countries committed to upholding international human rights standards.
  	The European Union (E.U.), for its  part, resisted using its lucrative trade agreements with Central Asian countries to press for human rights improvements. And the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the chief regional organization with a mandate  to strengthen human rights, emphasized economic and security cooperation instead, an approach that failed to yield any progress on human rights. OSCE missions in Central Asia did not engage in regular, frank, public reporting on the human rights situation in the region; this was a glaring failure, particularly when juxtaposed against the massive and laudable public documentation and reporting effort undertaken in Kosovo. 
 	 Authoritarianism deepened in other parts of the former Soviet Union as well. Under President Alexander Lukashenka, the Belarus government continued to jail opposition figures, drive the opposition media to bankruptcy, and intimidate human rights organizations with abandon. Its October parliamentary election process was deeply biased to favor pro-government parties, which prevailed on election day thanks to falsified election results. In Azerbaijan as well, prior to the November parliamentary elections, the government attempted to exclude major opposition parties and many individual candidates from participating.
  	In December 1999, Russian President Boris Yeltsin unexpectedly resigned. Vladmir Putin was elected president in March, riding a tide of domestic popularity with carefully-controlled information about the war in Chechnya and promises to get tough on crime and corruption. Putin was a career KGB agent who became head of the Federal Security Service, the KBGs successor. Despite numerous public assurances of support for democratic values, Putins conduct of the war in Chechnya and his impulse to stifle critical media coverage fuelled fears of growing authoritarianism in Russia.     
  	Political developments in Serbia and Croatia toward the rule of law were contrasted sharply, and positively, with those in the former Soviet Union. Perhaps the most dramatic event of the year was the deposing of Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic and the election of Vojislav Kostunica as president. Milosevic had attempted to remain in power by staging early presidential elections on September 24. The stakes were high, as Milosevic no doubt  wanted to avoid facing trial by the ICTY.  For the first time facing a united opposition, the government had engaged in an unparalleled effort to ensure victory by intimidating, at times violently, opposition members and movements, and brazenly rigging the electoral process.  Despite these obstacles, the opposition prevailed in the vote. When Milosevic tried to force a run-off, citizens took the streets, seizing the parliament and television station and ultimately forced Milosevic to acknowledge his defeat.  
  	Milosevics departure from power meant new hope for the rule of law and human rights protections in Serbia. At years end, top concerns were Serbias cooperation with the ICTY, including the transferal of Milosevic and other indicted war criminals hiding in Serbia to The Hague, the release of hundreds of Kosovo Albanian political prisoners, restoring the independence of the judiciary, and bringing to justice police and security forces responsible for serious abuses under Milosevic.
  	Following the death of Croatian president Franjo Tudjman, the opposition came to power in the presidency and parliament in early 2000. Important progress in human rights quickly followed. The new government began a policy of full cooperation with the ICTY by transferring an indictee to the Hague and allowing the ICTY access to investigate the sites of alleged 1991 war crimes against Serbs.  There were positive changes in governance and minority rights as well. The government made a dramatic commitment to the right of Serb refugees to return to Croatia and backed this up with a financial commitment, legislative reform that promised equal treatment for all returnees, and the creation of a new government structure to facilitate returns.
  	The international community had insisted on cooperation with The Hague as a condition for loans and other important benefits to Croatia. After the fall of Milosevic, however, the international community wavered in its commitment to press for cooperation with the ICTY.  While legitimately acknowledging the difficulties for the new authorities if Kostunica attempted to arrest and transfer Slobodan Milosevic to the ICTY, the international community also appeared to postpone indefinitely the whole issue of cooperation with ICTY from its agenda with Serbia, rather than insisting on deliverable interim measures such as the start of negotiations between the ICTY and the new authorities on access for ICTY investigators, discussions on the opening of an ICTY office in Belgrade, and the transfer of official documents necessary for the ICTYs investigations. The international communitys apparent willingness to compromise cooperation with ICTY as a condition of upgraded relations with Belgrade made it appear as though Serbia was receiving special treatment as compared to Croatia and Bosnia.
  	Between October 1999 and October 2000, eight indicted war criminals were arrested by NATO forces in Bosnia and transferred to The Hague.  Another indicted war criminal killed himself in the course of an October 2000 NATO arrest operation.  Croatia also transferred one indictee to the tribunal in 2000.  Nonetheless, at this writing, wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and Bosnian Serb General Ratko Mladic remained at large.  Although most North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) member government officials continued to insist that they would eventually see their day in court, some continued to resist their arrest.  No longer able to argue that Karadzic and Mladic were so prominent in Bosnia that their arrest would ignite popular protest and retaliation against the international community, opponents of the arrests shifted to arguing that these figures had become so sidelined in Bosnia that their detention was no longer necessary to the peace process. 
  	International agencies bore responsibility for guaranteeing human rights in several of the regions major postconflict zones they oversaw in Kosovo, Bosnia, and Tajikistan. In Kosovo and Tajikistan, these agencies displayed a disturbing tendency to rush the holding of elections in order to satisfy a pre-determined political schedule, even where the conditions for elections to be free, fair, and meaningful were absent, overlooking the harmful way in which serious, ongoing human rights problems undermine the prospects for long-term peace and democracy. 
  	In Kosovo, a de facto protectorate of the international community after the 1999 war between NATO and Serbia, steady violence imperiled the lives of  non-Albanians, who were for the most part confined to mono-ethnic enclaves and were unable to travel without KFOR peacekeepers as escorts. Kidappings, drive-by shootings, fire-bombing of homes, and grenade explosions were combined with threats and harassment by Albanians to force ethnic minorities to leave the province. NATO-led KFOR forces and United Nations Civil Police, which together had full responsibility for policing and security respectively, were either unable or unwilling to confront the armed elements of the former Kosovo Liberation Army and others implicated in the violence. U.N. police often lacked the resources and cooperation adequately to investigate and arrest those responsible.  While the United Nations peace implementation mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) oversaw the administration of justice, the courts were staffed primarily by local judges whose rulings raised serious questions about the impartiality of justice. 
  	The 1996 Bosnian example demonstrated that rushed elections in a postconflict situation could serve to legitimize further  some parties and leaders which had been responsible for gross abuses, but the international community chose to overlook this important lesson.  Kosovos first postwar elections, scheduled for October 28, were by all measures premature, driven more by the desire to meet a predetermined deadline set by the Rambouillet agreement  than the need to create the minimum conditions and set the framework for long-term democracy. All but a handful of Serbs and many other minorities boycotted registration, rendering them ineligible to vote.  Political violence resulted in the deaths of at least nine people affiliated with the Democratic League of Kosovo or parties linked to the former KLA, and there were politically motivated attacks on journalists.
  	Whereas in Kosovo the international community accepted premature elections in order to speed along the provinces political development,  in Tajikistan the United Nations (U.N.) presided over parliamentary elections in utterly inhospitable conditions as part of its strategy to hasten the end of its own peacekeeping operation. The result for human rights was disastrous. A 1997 U.N.-brokered peace agreement ending that countrys civil war envisioned the elections, held in February 2000, as the last step in the implementation of the agreement.  But opposition parties were excluded from the vote, there was widespread fraud, the media was clearly biased, and the overall rights situation was extremely poor. The vote served to legitimate the current president rather than to serve U.N. goals of democratization.
  	 In Bosnia, members of minority groups returned in significant numbers for the first time since the end of the war.  In the first six months of 2000, the United Nations High Commisioner for Refugees (UNHCR) registered nearly 20,000  minority returns in Bosnia, nearly three times the number recorded for the same period in 1999, thanks in part to focused international effort. With the success, however, has come  a drop in funds from donor nations, even though a sustained, longer-term level of funding  is necessary for the return of Bosnias remaining refugees. Croatias new commitment to returns was effective in encouraging the return of ethnic Serbs: more than 10,000 returned during 2000, the highest number since the mass exodus of more than 200,000 in 1995.
  	In Serbia and Montenegro, about 230,000 persons were displaced from the Kosovo conflict and the postconflict persecution of minorities, and 500,000 were refugees from Croatia and Bosnia. This burden continued to strain the resources of Serbia and Montenegro.
  	Minority rights violations accompanied returns in Croatia and Bosnia, and were a problem elsewhere in the region. Bosniak returnees to Republica Srpska were the victims of violent attacks in March and July. Serb returnees to Croatia continued to face discrimination at the hands of local authorities, despite a raft of new antidiscrimination measures adopted by the new government in Zagreb, and Serb and Croat communities remained deeply mistrustful of one another.
  	Roma continued to suffer shocking levels of harassment, violent attacks, and malicious discrimination in  Croatia, Hungary, Romania, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Serbia, Macedonia, and Slovakia, marring much of the regions record of progress on other human rights issues.  Law enforcement authorities in all of these countries typically did not investigate violent attacks on Roma.  Roma children often lacked access to education in Croatia, and in the Czech republic they were disproportionally channeled into classes for the mentally disabled. Municipalities in Serbia, Croatia, Hungary, and Greece forced Roma to abandon their homes, usually citing spurious zoning laws. Roma were evicted from their homes in Athens to clear land for facilities for the 2004 Olympics. In July, a municipal bulldozer, accompanied by the mayor and police, demolished numerous Roma huts in the Athens Aspropyrgos suburb.  Greek and Albanian Roma families in the settlement situated on a garbage dump were ordered to leave within three days. In Bulgaria, villagers refused to allow Roma in public places and threatened them with expulsion after an unresolved murder.  Roma homes in Macedonia were burned down in suspicious circumstances in the village of Stip. Roma homes in the village were the target of earlier arson attacks in 1992. And in a Serbian town, Roma were banned from a public pool. 
  	Torture of detainees reached crisis proportions in government arrest campaigns in Uzbekistan and Russia (Chechnya). These crises were not aberrations, however, since torture had been part and parcel of the criminal justice systems of both countries for years. Torture of detainees held in Russian custody in Chechnya followed the same methods and patterns as torture perpetrated against common suspects in Moscow or Irkutsk.  Similarly, torture to coerce testimony from people arrested in the crackdown against independent Islam in Uzbekistan was systematic. 
  	Torture remained common in Turkey and was used to coerce testimony and confessions in both common criminal cases and security-related cases. In a positive development that suggested heightened government acknowledgment of the problem, the Turkish parliaments Human Rights Commission published nine detailed reports documenting the persistence of torture. The commission was able to find and photograph torture implements and a torture room described to it by victims. This was chilling testimony to the credibility of torture victims, whom governments often dismiss as unreliable or biased. 
  	Several factors accounted for the persistence of torture, among them impunity and poor due process protections, especially in countries of the former Soviet Union. Some countries began to make progress toward reforming due process to prevent torture, but backtracking also occurred. Azerbaijan, where torture was widespread, adopted legislation that for the first time required detainees to be brought before a judge within forty-eight hours. Last year Georgia repealed important due process reforms, and took no steps this year to restore them.
  	The governments of nearly all Central Asia states took steps to restrict or control the Internet. In a positive move, Croatia decriminalized most aspects of libel, but criminal libel statutes were enforced in Greece and Romania.  The governments of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan made liberal use of prohibitive libel suits to bankrupt critical media. In September a Turkish court acquitted Nadire Mater who had been charged with insulting the armed forces for writing Mehmets Book: Soldiers Who Have Fought in the Southeast Tell Their Stories. Unfortunately, this was not part of a broader pattern of improvements in freedom of expression. Turkish media and politicians furiously debated many issues and openly criticized the government, but those who contradicted the official line on the role of ethnicity, religion, or the military in politics continued to risk prosecution and imprisonment.
  	Governments made little progress this year protecting women from violence in armed conflict, domestic violence, trafficking, and discrimination.  Credible information surfaced about rape of the Chechen women by Russian forces, both in detention centers and during community sweep operations.  Even in postwar periods, womens human rights were not protected. Kosovar women confronted discrimination, domestic violence, rape, trafficking, and abductions following the war. Particularly in the former Soviet Union, those who trafficked women for work in the sex industry continued to operate with impunity, while governments offered thoroughly inadequate protection to women willing to come forward as witnesses to this crime. Police made no visible progress in promoting among their ranks a better response to domestic violence. In Uzbekistan, local governments compounded the problem by pressuring women to stay in abusive marriages in order to keep the divorce rate low.

 Defending Human Rights
  	The treatment of human rights defenders varied widely in the region. In some places they were able to initiate groundbreaking work, review national legislation, and seek remedies for abuse in domestic courts and at the European Court of Human Rights. In others, governments went to great lengths to curtail their activities and undermine their credibility. 
  	On October 16, Antonio Russo, a journalist who had documented humanitarian law violations in Chechnya, was killed near his home in Georgia.
  	Some human rights defenders in the region have had to operate in exceedingly hostile circumstances. The record was extremely poor in Uzbekistan, where the government had a history of jailing human rights activists and denying registration to human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). This year the government failed to release two activists and continued to harass those who brought their cases to human rights defenders. It frequently denied defenders access to public trials. 
  	In Serbia, activists, braving constant and baseless accusations of being NATO spies, defended ethnic Albanian  political prisoners right to due process. One Serbian defender, Bojan Aleksov, was tortured by police. 
  	In Kyrgyzstan the environment for defenders dramatically deteriorated, even as local defenders gained broader exposure to the international community. The government accused some activists of destabilizing the social order and threatened one of the countrys most active defenders with arrest, driving him into exile. Turkmenistan refused to allow human rights monitoring of any sort. 
  	Governments employed a range of tactics to impede the work of human rights organizations. The government in Serbia subjected several human rights organizations to groundless tax inspections. The Azerbaijani government banned prominent NGOs from monitoring elections. The Belarus government evicted a legal defense group from its office and was believed to be behind the unresolved series of break-ins and raids of other groups offices. In Kazakhstan an unexplained fire damaged the office of one of the countrys most prominent groups. In Georgia, the Ministry of Internal Affairs simply shut down an NGO program that would have provided round-the-clock pro bono legal services to detainees. 
  	Defenders faced difficulties in conflict and postconflict zones. The Russian government carefully controlled access to Chechnya, making human rights reporting directly from the conflict zone extremely difficult. Human Rights Watch was repeatedly denied access to Chechnya, and Memorial, a leading Russian group, faced many problems with its work there. A coalition of Russian NGOs urged Council of Europe member states to file an interstate complaint against Russia with the European Court of Human Rights. In Kosovo, the compounding effects of years of repression, armed conflict, and the resulting inter-ethnic animosity made local  human rights reporting extremely difficult.   
  	In Europe, defenders actively took up discrimination and violence against Roma, often among the most marginalized groups in the region.  Defenders in Romania and the Czech Republic lodged cases of discrimination against Roma with the European Court of Human Rights. In Greece, human rights defenders were able in one case to halt temporarily the eviction of Roma.  Hungarian Roma families from Zamoly fled to France, applied for asylum, and lodged a complaint against Hungary for failing to protect them from discrimination and violence with the European Court of Human Rights.

The Role of the International Community
                                
United Nations
  	Throughout the year, various U.N. actors voiced concern about violations of human rights and humanitarian law in Chechnya, but lacking political support from key member states U.N. representatives failed to follow through in any meaningful way on these statements.  
  	In early 2000, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson took the lead on Chechnya. The Russian government responded to her repeated condemnations by refusing her February request to visit Chechnya.  When she was finally permitted to visit the region in late March, she acknowledged evidence of summary executions, torture, and rape committed by Russian forces, but she refused to heed calls for an international commission of inquiry, opting instead to leave the accountability effort to the Russian authorities.  
  	The European Union-sponsored resolution adopted in April at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights followed Robinsons approach.  The resolution, the first ever adopted by the commission concerning the conduct of a permanent member of the Security Council, called upon the Russian government to establish a national commission of inquiry to investigate alleged abuses in Chechnya and to permit visits to the region by a number of U.N. human rights monitoring bodies.  
  	Other than periodic calls for implementation of this resolution, no U.N. member state or representative showed an active interest in ensuring Russian compliance with these demands, despite the high commissioners efforts.  As of this writing, the Russian government had taken no meaningful steps to investigate or prosecute cases relating to abuses in Chechnya, and it had utterly refused to establish a commission of inquiry or invite most U.N. human rights representatives who requested to visit the region. Although the conflict occasionally spilled over Russias border with Georgia and resulted in substantial cross-border refugee flows, the Security Council failed even to discuss the issue.
  	The U.N. continued to struggle with its peace implementation mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as international attention shifted to flashpoints in other parts of the world. UNMIK made some progress in convincing ethnic Albanian and Serb leaders to participate in transitional power-sharing structures, but peace efforts were marred by political and ethnic violence. Progress was also made in establishing a local police force, but international civilian police lacked personnel to police in the interim, despite repeated requests to U.N. member states. Efforts to build an independent judiciary were undermined by UNMIKs reluctance adequately to supervise the courts, although it belatedly began to appoint international judges and prosecutors to local courts to counter concerns about bias, intimidation, and bribery among local judges and court officials.  UNMIK established a special U.N. police unit for the protection of Serbs and began appointing international judges and prosecutors to local judicial systems to counter evident bias and to promote the rule of law.
  The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia continued its important
contribution to peace in the Balkans by trying alleged war criminals,  including the first-ever war crimes trial based solely on allegations of rape and sexual violence.  Its efforts were undermined, however, by the continued failure of the international community to apprehend the indicted masterminds of ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and Bosnian Serb general Ratko Mladic. Moreover, the failure of the international community to insist that deposed Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic stand trial before the tribunal reinforced the perception that the worst offenders enjoy the most lenient treatment.

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (0SCE)
  	After the Istanbul summit of its fifty-four heads of state in November 1999, with grand pronouncements about the organizations role in upholding human rights, the OSCEs contribution to human rights protection in the region depended on its willingness to withstand pressure and interference from member states. The result, for the most part, was singularly disappointing. The dogged efforts of the high commissioner on national minorities, the representative on freedom of the media, and the Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) to condemn abuses, provide training, and convene seminars, were completely overshadowed by the failure of the OSCE to uphold its mandate to deploy a mission to Chechnya and by the organizations role in organizing and monitoring deeply flawed elections throughout the region.
  	The members of the OSCE Assistance Group to Chechnya sat in a Moscow office, prevented by the Russian government from redeploying to Chechnya or neighboring provinces where their monitoring and reporting could have provided protection for thousands of civilian victims of the conflict.  The OSCE and its member states were unable to convince the Russian government to allow the group to operate in and around Chechnya, even though its right to do so had been clearly stipulated in its 1995 mandate and reaffirmed at the Istanbul summit by all member states, including Russia, and again by Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov during April meetings with OSCE Chair-In-Office Austrian Foreign Minister Benita Ferrero-Waldner.  
  	The OSCEs continued engagement in Central Asia, this year emphasizing economic and security cooperation, yielded no progress on human rights.  For the third straight year, the government of Turkmenistan would not sign a Memorandum of Understanding with ODIHR regarding democratization activities in the country, which seriously called into question the utility of continued OSCE engagement there.
 	 Perhaps because the OSCE did not have to contend with pressure from member states regarding its work on Kosovo, it engaged in active public human rights reporting there, which included thoughtful criticism of international institutions. This served as a positive model for what could be accomplished when political will is mustered.
  	In 2000, the OSCE monitored elections in Croatia, Tajikistan, Russia, Kyrgyzstan, Georgia, Albania, Macedonia, the Yugoslav Republic of Montenegro, Belarus, and Azerbaijan.  Although OSCE election reports were generally accurate in identifying flaws, the decisions to send full assessment missions to Kyrgyzstan and Azerbaijan, and even the limited assessment mission it sent to Belarus, risked according legitimacy to electoral processes that were deeply, structurally flawed. OSCE officials argued that their presence during these elections was necessary to document electoral abuses and develop recommendations for improved processes.  Unfortunately, 2000 saw little progress made in implementing OSCE recommendations developed in the course of monitoring past flawed votes in, for example, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.  The OSCE also organized the October municipal elections in Kosovo, pushing ahead under international pressure to demonstrate progress in peace implementation, although political and ethnic violence and attacks on journalists indicated at the time of writing that the elections would not likely meet OSCE standards. 
 	 Having failed to use the opportunity of the 1999 Istanbul summit to obtain any lasting human rights improvements in Turkey, the OSCE and its human dimension mechanisms remained underutilized in that country, where, had there been the political will, they might have made a significant contribution to the Turkish governments efforts to comply with E.U. accession criteria relating to democratization, rule of law, and minority rights.
  	The year saw continued OSCE efforts to address womens human rights issues, with the adoption of a Gender Action Plan in June and a special human dimension seminar to identify measures to combat trafficking.  The apparent downgrading of the position of the gender advisor in the Vienna secretariat did not, however, bode well for efforts to implement these plans.

Council of Europe
  	The Council of Europes profile expanded significantly in 2000, as the organization engaged in new and unprecedented field activities, technical assistance missions, and election monitoring activities with mixed results for human rights conditions.  
  	Among international organizations, the Council of Europe enjoyed the most extensive dialogue with the Russian government regarding its conduct in Chechnya.  The councils  commissioner for human rights, the council-based European Committee for the Prevention of  Torture, and several delegations from the its Parliamentary Assembly visited Moscow and the North Caucasus, condemned violations committed by both sides to the conflict, and urged steps to curb abuses and bring about an end to the conflict.  The secretary general invoked for the first time article 52 of the European Convention on Human Rights to request information from the Russian government regarding implementation of the convention in Chechnya and in April the Parliamentary Assembly suspended the voting rights of the Russian parliamentary delegation.  
  	In response, the Russian government accepted deployment in Chechnya of a three-person Council of Europe team of experts to assist the office of Russian President Putins Special Representative for Human Rights in Chechnya, Vladimir Kalamanov.  This team, the only international personnel with a human rights mandate permitted to operate in Chechnya, surely made a positive contribution to the work of Kalamanovs office.  At the same time, its deployment raised serious concerns that the Russian government was forum shopping, essentially looking for the weakest institution that it could engage in order to avoid a stronger international reaction.  
  	Indeed, the Council of Europe deployment was used by representatives of the U.S., the E.U., and other governments and institutions as an argument against creating an international commission of inquiry, even though Kalamanov and the Council of Europe staff working with him had no authority to investigate or prosecute alleged atrocities.   Council member states also used the deployment as an excuse to forego more robust action, such as a lawsuit against the Russian Federation before the European Court of Human Rights, or a Committee of Ministers action to monitor Russias conduct in Chechnya or to expel Russia from the council.  The deployment also weakened the case for an OSCE presence and gave the Russian authorities an argument against compliance with the U.N. Commission on Human Rights resolution.  Council of Europe officials argued that it was better for them to be in Chechnya than not.  This claim ignored the impact of their presence on the overall international response to the Chechnya crisis and the danger that the much-touted complementarity among international institutions in the field of human rights had, at least in Chechnya, become a race to the bottom.
  	Similar concerns arose over Council of Europe election assistance in Azerbaijan.  Although the OSCE was already engaged in a dialogue with the Azerbaijani authorities regarding conditions for their November elections, the Council of Europe accepted an April request from the Azerbaijani government that it advise them too.  Necessarily complicated by political considerations relating to Azerbaijans pending Council membership application, the teams assessment of pre-election conditions sometimes conflicted with that of the OSCE.
  	A more productive division of labor occurred in Kosovo, where the OSCE had the task of organizing the October municipal elections and the Council of Europe ran the independent international monitoring mission.
  	Concerns persisted that the Council of Europe was admitting states before they were ready to live up to its human rights standards.  In June, the Parliamentary Assembly voted to recommend admission for Armenia and Azerbaijan, and in a September report, the parliamentary rapporteur for Bosnia and Hercegovinas application seemed to set aside all but one of the eight conditions previously set for that countrys admission.  The prospect of premature admission of these countries heightened concern over the European Court of Human Rights ever-expanding caseload.  The court also faced an increased unwillingness among states to abide by its judgments; offending states included long-term members.
  	The year saw further progress in the emerging practice of member states electing to publish reports of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture, although a number of states continued to publish the reports selectively.  As of August 15, 2000, the following states continued to refuse to publish at least one committee report:  Albania, Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Moldova, Portugal, Romania, Russia, San Marino, Macedonia, Ukraine, and the United Kingdom. In the case of Turkey, no fewer than seven reports were outstanding.

North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
  	The North Atlantic Treaty Organization continued its leadership role in the peacekeeping operations in the Balkans.  In Kosovo, shortages of U.N. civilian police left the NATO-led KFOR with substantial policing responsibilities.  KFOR troops conducted between 500 and 750 patrols every day, guarded more than 550 sites, and manned more than 200 vehicle checkpoints.   KFORs policing responsibilities challenged NATO troops trained for military operations, who despite some efforts to seize illegal weapons remained reluctant to detain or sanction members of the Kosovo Protection Corps or of the officially disbanded Kosovo Liberation Army implicated in political violence and attacks on Serbs, Roma, and other ethnic minorities. Although NATO claimed that half of all KFOR personnel were engaged in the protection of Serbs and other minorities, their response to violence against minorities, particularly Roma, remained inadequate.  An October OSCE report on Kosovos justice system also criticized KFOR and UNMIK for arbitrary and prolonged detentions of suspects without charge.
  	Most prominent among NATO arrests of indicted war criminals in Bosnia was the April detention of Momcilo Krajisnik, the wartime president of the Bosnian Serb Assembly and a postwar member of the Bosnian presidency. Krajisniks arrest belied prior assertions by military and political leaders that arrests of high-ranking figures would result in protest and retaliatory attacks.

European Union
  	The European Union introduced the resolution on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.  Once the resolution went to a vote and passed, the E.U. was conspicuously absent from efforts to implement it.  To the contrary, the late spring and summer saw European heads of government and state highly eager to meet with the new Russian President Vladimir Putin; criticism over Chechnya barely figured in these dialogues.
	In the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the E.U. broke ranks with the U.S. to offer economic assistance to Serbias opposition-controlled towns, and when the opposition took power in early October, the E.U. quickly lifted most country-wide sanctions.  While the E.U. kept in place certain restrictions imposed on those indicted for war crimes  and their allies, it failed to make a clear link between enhanced relations with the new authorities and their  commitment to the international rule of law, including cooperation with the ICTY.
  	The year saw continued E.U. dialogue on human rights with the newly independent states in the context of Cooperation Council meetings held pursuant to the E.U.s Partnership and Cooperation Agreements (PCAs).  In a welcome development, official statements emerging from these meetings made explicit reference to the need for implementation of OSCE and Council of Europe human rights standards and recommendations.
  	Turkeys first year as an official candidate for membership in the E.U. produced little progress on its compliance with the human rights criteria for membership.  Indeed the first few months of the year saw backtracking on positive steps taken in the run-up to the E.U.s December decision to accord Turkey candidate status.  As this report went to press, observers were awaiting publication of the E.U.s Accession Partnership document, outlining the steps Turkey had to take to prepare itself for E.U. membership.  Rights groups feared that the Accession Partnership would lack depth and specificity regarding needed reforms particularly in such areas as minority rights, which were controversial in Turkey, or the restrictions on the headscarf, which were controversial in Europe. They urged strict application of the Copenhagen criteria for Turkeys E.U. admission, in a manner consistent with the approach for other applicant states.
 	 In October 1999, the European Commission proposed that updated agreements for candidate countries seeking to join the European Union, including Hungary and the Czech Republic, make the improvement of the situation of Roma a short and medium term priority.
 
United States
  	U.S. officials repeatedly expressed concern over alleged atrocities in Chechnya and claimed that other aspects of U.S.-Russian relations would not compromise their response to these abuses.  The U.S. governments lack of action on Chechnya belied this assertion.  
  	At the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, when negotiations over a consensus chairmans statement acceptable to the Russian government broke down, the U.S. became a late cosponsor of the resolution on Chechnya.
 	 President Clintons June, July, and September meetings with Russian President Vladimir Putin yielded no progress on accountability for abuses in Chechnya nor on compliance with the demands of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights and the OSCE Assistance Group.  
  	A travel ban imposed by the U.S. embassy in Moscow kept U.S. government officials from traveling to the North Caucasus to monitor and document the atrocities first-hand.  This represented a stark contrast to U.S. and E.U. practice in Kosovo, where beginning in mid-1998, military attaches in Belgrade conducted regular, coordinated missions to Kosovo to monitor the conduct of Serb security forces.  U.S. government personnel apparently made no concerted effort to monitor the status of Russian investigations of the abuses, although regular communication with responsible prosecutors would certainly have sent an important signal regarding U.S. expectations for the accountability process.
  	In the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the U.S., like the E.U., welcomed the oppositions rise to power by lifting most sanctions.  U.S. officials continued to promise that former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic would eventually be tried by the ICTY, but they refused to make any clear link between the extent of their support for new Yugoslav leader Vojislav Kostunica and his cooperation with the tribunal.
  	Close political and military ties between the U.S. and Turkey continued to dominate human rights concerns in that country.  When the Turkish military announced in mid-year that it had chosen a U.S. manufacturer to supply U.S. $4 billion in attack helicopters, the U.S. government appeared to waver in its promise to condition the sale on human rights improvements to which  President Clinton and then-President Mesut Yilmaz agreed in late 1997.  A decision on the export license for the helicopters was not expected before early 2001.

Russian Federation
  	While the conduct of Russian government forces in Chechnya was among top human rights concerns in the region, the Russian government also stood to have a significant impact on human rights elsewhere.  In September Russia became the 112th state to sign the Statute of the International Criminal Court, further isolating the U.S. and China as the sole remaining opponents to the court among Security Council permanent members.  The extent of Russian commitment to the principles of international humanitarian law were, however, seriously called into question by its continued failure to rein in its troops in Chechnya and to prosecute soldiers responsible for abuses. The Russian governments disregard for international rule of law was also illustrated in May when it played host in Moscow to Yugoslav Minister of Defense Dragolub Ojdanic, an indicted war criminal, in what it later claimed was the result of an administrative error (the government had an obligation under Security Council resolutions to arrest Ojdanic). 

International Financial Institutions
  	International financial institutions made some progress toward addressing human rights issues related to prospects for economic development in the region.  A welcome development came in the form of decisions by the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) to suspend financing in Turkmenistan due to the autocratic regimes corruption and utter resistance to reform.  Unfortunately, these decisions did not dissuade the Asian Development bank from allowing Turkmenistan to become a member in August.   
  	The World Banks continued disbursement of structural adjustment loan payments to the Russian government without reference to abuses committed in Chechnya was a disappointment, standing in stark contrast to the banks approach on abuses in West Timor.  While refusing to make the link to Chechnya, both the World Bank and the EBRD demonstrated a growing appreciation of the need for institutional reform and improved governance in Russia.
 	 Representatives of the international financial institutions repeatedly acknowledged the impact of corrupt and abusive law enforcement agencies on efforts to combat corruption and ensure the rule of law in the region, but they remained largely resistant to the idea of addressing needed criminal law reform through their own conditionality and technical assistance. 

The Work of Human Rights Watch
  	Based on the model of the organizations work last year on Kosovo, Human Rights Watch launched an emergency response to the massive abuses in Chechnya, which together with Central Asia and postwar Kosovo, remained top priorities throughout the year.
  	When the war in Chechnya entered its deadly stage in late autumn 1999, Human Rights Watch deployed a rotating team of researchers to Ingushetia, where the majority of people displaced by the conflict had fled. We used this six-month research presence to document humanitarian law violations by both Russian and Chechen rebel forces, to press the international media to cover what had been an underreported conflict,  and to use research results in timely advocacy with the Russian government and the international community. 
 	 Researchers interviewed more than 750 displaced people and immediately exposed abuses they experienced in a series of press releases. Three reports published in February, April, and June documented massacres of civilians by Russian forces in sweep operations: Civilian Killings in Staropromyslovski District of Grozny, No Happiness Remains: Civilian Killings, Pillage, and Rape in Alkhan-Yurt, Chechnya, and February 5: A Day of Slaughter in Novye Aldi. In October, a fourth report, Welcome to Hell: Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Extortion in Chechnya, documented torture in Russian detention centers in the region. Researchers in the region worked with the international community and Russian agencies to ensure better protection to displaced persons as Russian forces attempted to pressure them to return prematurely to their homes.
  	Throughout the year we urged international institutions and governments to send representatives to the region to bear witness to the abuse, and to press the Russian government to stop abuses and to launch a credible accountability process. We engaged the World Bank, in letters and meetings, to withhold installments of structural adjustment loans and to link disbursements to the Russian government with compliance with its international humanitarian law obligations.
  	Since the Russian authorities did not conduct credible inquiries or institute criminal proceedings in response to abuses in Chechnya, we urged the international community to do so. To this end we formed a coalition of Russian and international human rights organizations to urge Council of Europe member states to file an interstate complaint against Russia at the European Court of Human Rights. We conducted advocacy at three sessions of the Council of Europes Parliamentary Assembly to ensure that it would appropriately censure Russia, and urged the assembly to adopt resolutions calling for a rigorous domestic accountability process and calling on member states to file an interstate complaint. In a series of exchanges with the office of the secretary general and the departments for political affairs and human rights, we also cautioned the council about the potential pitfalls of sending its staff to work in the office of President Vladimir Putins special representative on human rights in Chechnya.
  	Human Rights Watch also sought to have an international commission of inquiry established by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. The organization urged the high commissioner for human rights to call for such a commission, and engaged member states to adopt a resolution to this effect at its fifty-sixth session. After the commission adopted a resolution calling for a national commission of inquiry and the deployment of thematic mechanisms, Human Rights Watch published a memorandum outlining Russias failure to comply with the resolution and urged member states, particularly the U.S. and E.U., to call Russia to account.  It was with this aim that we engaged U.S. president Bill Clinton in advance of his summit meeting with President Putin, and the E.U. in advance of its summit with the Russian government. In other advocacy, the organization testified twice before the U.S. Congress to emphasize that many of the abuses in Chechnya were effectively war crimes and twice before the Council of Europes Parliamentary Assembly. The goals with respect to Chechnya at the OSCE focused on the redeployment of the Assistance Group to Chechnya. Recommendations on Chechnya were reinforced in opinion articles in the U.S. and European media.
  	Through field offices in Tashkent and Dushanbe, the organization continued to document the worsening human rights crisis in Central Asia, particularly in Uzbekistan. Researchers undertook fact-finding missions in seven regions of the country to document and publicize the arbitrary arrests and torture of hundreds of people accused of religious extremism and to monitor dozens of trials. The Human Rights Watch Tashkent office regularly urged the international community to monitor trials, briefed the diplomatic community about human rights developments, and brought victims of abuse together with visiting high-level officials from the U.S. and E.U. A mission to three regions of the country documented how government agencies at all levels compounded the problem of domestic violence by pressuring women to remain in abusive marriages. 
  	The organizations Dushanbe office gathered information on civil and political rights violations relevant to the November 1999 presidential elections and the February 2000 parliamentary vote. In November 1999, a report was presented, Freedom of Expression Still Threatened, which documented the dramatic increase in harassment of and restrictions on the media, to the Tajik government in a series of high-level meetings. The organization launched an advocacy initiative in advance of both elections, publishing backgrounders detailing flagrant violations and addressing letters to the government urging redress. The Dushanbe office also regularly briefed members of the international community on human rights developments in the country.
  	The Europe and Central Asia Division strove to make the human rights crisis in Central Asia a priority issue among international actors, particularly the United Nations and the OSCE. This was also raised with U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson in February 2000 and in meetings with staff members for the U.N. special rapporteur on torture, the Working Group on Arbitrary Arrests and Disappearances, and the Committee against Torture, urging them to request visits to Uzbekistan. 
 	 Human Rights Watch focused special attention on Central Asia at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in March 2000, urging the appointment of a special rapporteur on Uzbekistan.  This forum was also used to release Leaving No Witnesses: Uzbekistans Campaign Against Rights Defenders, in order to strengthen the call for a commission resolution on defenders. When Uzbek officials used U.N. Human Rights Committee complaint forms as evidence against a defendant in a religious extremism case, this was reported to relevant U.N. agencies in detailed letters.
  	U.N.-targeted advocacy on Tajikistan aimed to ensure a strong human rights component to the U.N.s presence following the May 15 withdrawal of the U.N. Mission of Observers to Tajikistan (UNMOT).  A memorandum, based on ongoing research, was issued on April 21, concerning the governments poor human rights practices in the post-civil war period, and the implications that UNMOTs limited human rights mandate had for a long-term peace in Tajikistan. The organization formulated  recommendations for the follow-on mission, urging a strong human rights component to its work.  Letters outlining concerns were sent to members of the Security Council, and we conducted meetings with senior U.N. representatives from the Department of Political Affairs, the Office of the Secretary- General, and with representatives from the missions of major member states.
  	Human Rights Watch sought to keep human rights at the top of the agenda of  U.S.-Uzbekistan relations, and urged the U.S. government to use explicit conditionality under the International Religious Freedom Act and the Cooperative Threat Reduction program.  This was done in meetings with the secretary of state and other top officials and in many letters and memoranda. In congressional testimony we rebutted the Clinton Administrations argument that the crackdown in Uzbekistan qualified as political, not religious persecution.
  	With respect to Turkmenistan, Human Rights Watch strove to have international lending related to that countries linked strictly to human rights improvements. It urged the Department of State to declare Turkmenistan ineligible on human rights grounds for Export-Import Bank credits and urged the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to end all lending to the country. In January, Human Rights Watch also published a press release condemning the arrest of Nurberdi Nurmamedov, perhaps the last remaining dissident in the country who publicly criticized the decision to extend indefinitely President Saparmurad Niazovs term in office.
  	Torture and due process violations remained  a chief concern in the former Soviet Union. In November 1999, Human Right released Confessions at Any Cost: Police Torture in Russia, the result of a two-year, multiregion research project on torture, at a press conference in Moscow. The organization  held high-level advocacy meetings with Russian government officials and urged the international community to support the creation of a torture rehabilitation center. 
  	These same issues were of top concern in the Caucasus. Through the Human Rights Watch field office in Tbilisi, Georgia, research was conducted on torture and on the setback in legal reforms that could have helped prevent torture and other due process violations. In September, the organization released Backtracking on Reform: Amendments Undermine Access to Justice, at a press conference in Tbilisi. The report documented the repeal of reforms in Georgias criminal procedure code that would have granted criminal suspects and defendants the right to complain about due process violations directly to a court, prior to trial. Since the repeal of these reforms ran counter to Georgias commitments upon admission to the Council of Europe, this featured prominently in our meetings with the Council of Europes Monitoring Committee during its May visit to Tbilisi, and in advocacy with the Parliamentary Assembly. 
  	Human Rights Watch advocated for the expansion of the World Banks  work in the area of legal and judicial reforms specifically to address reform of certain aspects of criminal law and procedure. In meetings in November 1999 and in February and July 2000 we argued that Georgias setback in legal reform served to undermine public trust in the judiciary and hence bank programs that promote it.  The organization urged the bank to adopt criminal procedure reform throughout the region as a policy trigger for future structural adjustment lending in its country assistance strategy; to expand its capacity to conduct analysis of judicial systems and criminal procedure, to enable it to identify provisions in legislation that are not in compliance with international human rights law and standards; and to assist in the formulation of lending targets in these areas. 
  	In the run-up to Azerbaijans November 5 parliamentary elections, Human Rights Watch launched a month-long fact-finding mission to research civil and political rights abuses affecting the election. Researchers interviewed journalists for media outlets that were closed or fined arbitrarily, parliamentary candidates whose registration was arbitrarily denied, and opposition activists harassed by local governments. 
  	Human Rights Watch priorities in the wake of the war in Kosovo were twofold.  The
organization responded to the compelling need for an independent record of the humanitarian law violations during the war. It also examined postwar human rights issues especially minority rights, due process, and freedom of movement that would have a lasting impact on efforts to build a sustainable peace in the province. 
  	Throughout the year we assembled information on humanitarian law violations in the 1999 conflict with NATO. In March, the organization published a report documenting rape as a weapon of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. The report included ninety-six cases of rape of Albanian women by Serbian and Yugoslav forces immediately before and during the 1999 NATO bombing campaign. An April Human Rights Watch report found that NATO forces had violated international humanitarian law in its bombing campaign, which resulted in the deaths of more than 500 civilians. 
  	The organizations strategy on post-war Kosovo was to remind the international community of the lesson learned from Bosnia: that rushed elections in postwar situations, especially in the wake of massive violence and inter-ethnic hatred, undermined longer-term prospects for the rule of law. This message was presented in a March meeting with the OSCE chair-in-office, in follow-up correspondence, and in a June memorandum to diplomats and international organizations, and in an October backgrounder for the media and other observers of the elections. In June, we investigated access to protection and justice for minorities in Kosovo, focusing on the work of UNMIK police and KFOR. December 1999 and January 2000 meetings with the E.U. and the U.S. government raised fair-trial concerns regarding war crimes trials of Serbs before Albanian-dominated local courts in Kosovo.
 	 Before the ouster of Slobodan Milosevic, Human Rights Watch aimed to call international attention to victims of his governments intensified harassment and to ensure  maximum international assistance to civil society.  The significance of elections mandated for 2000 was anticipated, and throughout the year the organization detailed the repression of the governments critics. A May report focused on measures the government took against civil society institutions which it perceived as a threat, including opposition parties, the independent media, student organizations, independent trade unions, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and civic activists in Serbia. Just prior to the elections, the organization published a backgrounder detailing how the authorities set about rigging the elections.
  	When Milosevic left office, Human Rights Watch deployed a researcher to Belgrade to identify a new human rights agenda for Yugoslavia: release of Kosovo Albanian political prisoners, cooperation with the ICTY as part of the general restoration of the rule of law, restoring the independence of the judiciary, and justice for past abuses by security forces.  In a series of letters and press releases, Human Rights Watch called for the international community to adopt a policy on cooperation vis a vis Serbia consistent with that practiced throughout the Balkans.
  	In Croatia, the organization focused on minority rights and other basic civic freedoms in the transition from Tudjman period. A report published in December 1999, in anticipation of elections in early 2000, outlined violations of the rights to freedom of expression and assembly. After the election of President Stjepan Mesi  and formation of a new government under Prime Minister Ivica Racan, Human Rights Watch wrote to both leaders, recommending legislative and administrative measures to ensure equal treatment for all Croatian citizens, including minorities, to promote the return of Serb refugees and the reform the countrys state broadcaster. In Croatia, we focused on minority rights and other basic civic freedoms in the transition from Tudjman period. A report published in December 1999, in anticipation of elections in early 2000, outlined violations of the rights to freedom of expression and assembly.
  	Research and advocacy on Bosnia focused on two aspects of refugee return: keeping the donor community engaged, identifying minority returns as an essential element for a lasting peace and the rule of law,  and ensuring that progress on returns remained a condition for Council of Europe accession. In May Human Rights Watch published Unfinished Business: Return of Displaced Persons and Other Human Rights Issues in Bijeljina, which documented how authorities in that city obstructed the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement by providing neither protection nor equal rights to the Bosniak community there, and by actively deterring the return of Bosniaks who were driven from the city during the war. We continued with research in 2000 to investigate impediments to minority returns, including decrease in donor assistance, persistent failure by local authorities to enforce housing regulations, security concerns, and lack of long-term prospects for employment and education.
	In Turkey research and advocacy focused on the opportunity for reform that emerged when Turkey became a candidate for membership in the European Union in December 1999.  A September 2000 report outlined specific short-term steps the Turkish government should take to begin to demonstrate its willingness to meet the E.U.s membership criteria.  Recommended steps addressed torture, restrictions on freedom of expression and religious freedom, violations of minority rights, continued instability in the southeastern part of the country, and the death penalty.  Human Rights Watch pressed this agenda throughout the year with governmental interlocutors in both Brussels and Ankara.
  	In May, Human Rights Watch staff traveled to Ankara to meet with Ministry of Justice officials and released a report outlining our concern that their proposed prison reform measures would subject detainees to an impermissible isolation regime.  A November Human Rights Watch memorandum welcomed some improvements in the planned reforms and urged additional steps be taken to ensure that it would comport with international prison standards.  Research also continued on the headscarf ban and followed closely developments relating to the pending sale of U.S. $4 billion worth of U.S.-manufactured attack helicopters to Turkey.
  	In 2000 the organization took on migrant worker rights as its strategic focus in Western Europe.The multicountry project would document and expose the serious abuses committed against migrant workers in Western Europe, who were among the most vulnerable groups in that region, and the failure of states to protect their basic rights.  Of  particular concern were those migrant workers who worked in forced labor conditions, either in conditions of near-captivity for little or no wages or in debt bondage, where wages were immediately absorbed into repaying a debt owed to the employer. A fact-finding mission in October investigated these issues with respect to Greece.
  	Migrants and refugees were primary targets of the upsurge in xenophobia and racist violence in Western Europe in 2000.  Focusing specifically on the relationship between xenophobia and many European governments increasingly restrictive immigration policies and practices, we promoted migrants rights and refugee protection in fora related to the U.N. World Conference Against Racism. Together with the European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE), the organization released a memorandum at the Strasbourg regional preparatory conference critiquing the Draft General Conclusions of the European Conference Against Racism. The memorandum highlighted measures taken by Western European governments that undermined protections for asylum seekers and migrants, giving the media, public, and state agencies an apparent rational for discriminating against them. We recommended full compliance with the 1951 refugee convention and the promotion and protection of fundamental human and labor rights for all migrants as a way to stem the growing tide of anti-foreigner sentiment and violence in Europe.
  	Throughout the year, Human Rights Watch highlighted the need for greater coordination on human rights protection among international institutions active in the region.  The organization emphasized the need for institutional and policy linkages between political institutions engaged in monitoring and promoting human rights and an international donor community that was increasingly cognizant of the role of governance and rule of law in fostering effective development.  A welcome development in this regard was the emerging E.U. practice of citing Council of Europe and OSCE recommendations and commitments in statements regarding its Cooperation Council meetings with countries in the region.  
 
	In September, the organizations Europe and Central Asia Division participated in NGO meetings with World Bank and IMF officials organized in conjunction with those institutions annual meetings in Prague.  Human Rights Watch joined other nongovernmental organizations in pressing the World Bank in particular to operationalize its stated commitment to human rights.  In a joint statement with the Federation Internationale des Ligues des Droits de lHomme, the organization recommended that the bank incorporate reference to human rights law in its policies, consider appropriate human rights-related conditionality on its lending, expand the banks internal staff capacity to assess human rights conditions relevant to development, and coordinate closely with and support the work of international human rights bodies.

Middle East and North Africa Overview

 
Human Rights Developments
Positive developments in some countries in the region were overshadowed by a continuing pattern of human rights abuses, political violence, and a faltering Arab-Israeli peace process. At this writing clashes unprecedented in their lethality had erupted between Palestinian demonstrators and Israeli security forces in Gaza, the West Bank, East Jerusalem, and inside Israel itself.  Serious abuses including arbitrary arrest, torture, and unfair trials' were pervasive, as emergency rule or laws suspending constitutional protections were applied in many countries and the death penalty remained in force in all except Oman, Qatar, and Tunisia. Against this sobering backdrop, local activists and human rights organizations challenged these policies, though they often paid a high price for their courage. The rulers of Saudi Arabia and Bahrain made statements and authorized initiatives that suggested they might be ready to take human rights issues more seriously than in the past. The year also saw a potentially significant transition as Bashar al-Asad took power in Syria, joining the new generation of rulers in Morocco, Jordan, and Bahrain.
	The status and rights of women were a key issue in many countries. In Morocco the issue of remedying the discriminatory provisions of the personal status law and a national action plan to give women more rights gave rise to large demonstrations for and against in March. Jordanian women and men joined together in a campaign to eliminate laws condoning honor killings of women, and women in Kuwait campaigned vigorously for the right to vote and stand for public office. Saudi Arabia in September ratified the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). But in all these countries as in others in the region, women continued to suffer from severe forms of institutional and societal discrimination in nearly every aspect of their lives, particularly in the form of unequal personal status laws and the lack of legal redress in cases of domestic violence. Despite some positive initiatives, tens of millions of women throughout the region continued to be denied full equality, a fact that was reflected in high rates of illiteracy and maternal mortality and low rates of political participation and was justified in terms of religion, culture, and tradition.
	The issue of refugees, internally displaced and stateless persons was prominent throughout the year. Palestinian activists in the region and beyond initiated a right-of-return campaign that was well-grounded in international human rights law, but the problem of statelessness for Palestinian refugees in host countries in the region, Syrian-born Kurds, and Bidun in Kuwait and Bahrain was largely unaddressed or addressed in unsatisfactory ways. The region as a whole accounted for millions of refugeesofficially acknowledged and otherwiseand internally displaced persons who, along with similarly high numbers of migrant workers, endured violations of basic rights at the hands of indifferent or worse government officials and abusive private employers. Serious anti-Moroccan immigrant violence erupted in Spain in February.  The government of Iraq continued to force Kurds and other minorities out of the Kirkuk region into the autonomous three northern governorates. At least 200,000 Iraqis were illegal residents in Jordan, vulnerable to pressure from Iraqi and Jordanian intelligence services and to involuntary return to Iraq. Thousands of Iraqis desperately seeking refugee protection have turned up in Europe, Australia, and the U.S. Many Iranians and Iraqis fleeing to Turkey were denied protection there and forcibly returned to the countries they were fleeing.  Iran hosted an estimated half a million Iraqi refugees and 1.4 million Afghan refugees, making it, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the leading refugee host country in the world. Egypt continued to be host to an estimated two million or more Sudanese, although most did not have formal refugee status. 
	Morocco began to come to terms with the legacy of human rights abuses under King Hassan II, who died in July 1999. His powerful and feared interior minister, Driss al-Basri, was sacked in November 1999 by the kings son and successor, Mohamed VI. In October, Moroccan activists protested at the infamous Tazmamert prison, carrying candles and red roses to commemorate those who died under horrific conditions at the secret facility in the 1970s and 1980s. The demonstrators were not permitted access to the prison itself, which reportedly was ringed by dozens of paramilitary forces. They called for the trial of those responsible for disappearances, deaths in custody, and arbitrary detention, and the return to the families of the bodies of those who perished.
	This year saw another potentially important generational transition of power when the reign of Syrian President Hafez al-Asad came to an end with his death in June, but the carefully orchestrated succession of his son Bashar left no doubt that the apparatus of the ruling Bath party was still firmly in place. Nevertheless, supporters of political reform broke the ice with bold public statements that would have been unimaginable under the rule of the new presidents father. In Iran, expectations that the election of a new parliament with the majority composed of  reformers would lead to substantive progress in human rights were thwarted when hardline conservatives fought back by closing down some thirty independent newspapers and magazines, effectively destroying what had been a vital element of the reformists power base, and dealing a severe setback to freedom of expression. Prominent reformists also faced intimidation, detention, and prosecution throughout the year.
	The year also saw important reminders, positive and negative, of the potentially constructive role of an independent judiciary in creating an environment of legal protection of basic rights. In Israel the high court issued important rulings outlawing common interrogation techniques that amounted to torture and the practice of hostage taking. In Egypt, the Constitutional Court struck down the restrictive associations law of May 1999 and the Court of Cassation ruled that parliamentary elections had to be supervised by the judiciary rather than representatives of the executive branch. The absence of an independent judiciary was unfortunately more apparent throughout the region. In Tunisia, the judiciary continued at the service of the state to harass and convict human rights activists and other peaceful dissidents. Egypt and Bahrian continued to try political critics and protestors before state security courts. In Iran President Khatami and his allies spoke eloquently about the importance of rule of law, but his conservative adversaries used revolutionary courts and special clergy courts to deliver unfair verdicts, persecute citizens peacefully advocating political reforms, and close down the countrys freewheeling print media.
	Military operations claimed civilian lives in Algeria, Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen, Israel, the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and the Palestinian Authority territories. Several hundred persons were killed each month in Algeria as civilians were killed in indiscriminate attacks, and clashes continued between armed groups and security forces. U.S. and British air forces continued to enforce the no-fly zone over northern Iraq from Incirlik base in Turkey and southern Iraq from bases in Saudi Arabia, although according to press reports the number of overflights and use of missiles and bombs was considerably lower than in the previous year.
 	The Israeli occupation of the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and south Lebanon generated civilian casualties and damage, as well as regional tension, as U.S.-brokered peace negotiations faltered repeatedly. Israel bombed Lebanons electricity infrastructure twice during the year, targeting on February 8 the Jamhour plant supplying Beirut as well as facilities in Baalbek and Deir Nbouh near Tripoli, and the Bsalim station in Beirut and the Deir Ammar station in Tripoli on May 5. It appeared that the Israeli Air Force used U.S.-manufactured helicopters and U.S.-supplied AGM-114 Hellfire laser-guided missiles in the Bsalim attack, which completely destroyed three of the facilitys six large transformers. In a previous Israeli attack on Bsalim on May 16, 1996, U.S.-built F16 fighter planes dropped laser-guided bombs on the plant. 
	Israels unilateral military withdrawal from south Lebanon in May, followed by the rapid collapse of the Israeli-backed militiathe South Lebanon Army (SLA)marked the abrupt end of over two decades of occupation for the civilian population. Families who had fled violence, intimidation and impoverishment in the occupied zone began to return as well as those whom the SLA had summarily expelled from their homes. On May 23, local residents stormed the notorious Khiam prison, which since its opening in 1985 had been a joint enterprise of Israel and the SLA. They routed the SLA jailers without violent incident and freed about 130 detainees, some of whom had been held without charge for fifteen years. Within days, the facility was transformed into an informal museum, drawing thousands of Lebanese who toured the cramped cells and solitary confinement rooms, and read the names of torturers which were prominently posted on a large handwritten list near the entry gate. 
	At this writing, the death toll from Palestinian clashes with Israeli police, border police, and IDF that began on September 29 had risen to some 120, almost all of them Palestinians. More than 4,800 were injured. Human Rights Watchs investigations in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza Strip in early October revealed a pattern of excessive, and often indiscriminate, use of lethal force by Israeli security forces in situations where demonstrators were unarmed and posed no threat of death or serious injury to the security forces or to others. By mid-October the IDF had expanded its use of tanks and helicopter gunships armed with both missiles and medium-caliber machine guns in Palestinian  residential areas in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. On October 7, Hizballah guerrillas captured three Israeli soldiers on the south Lebanon-Israel border, announcing that they were being held hostage in exchange for nineteen Lebanese in Israeli jails and possibly other Arab prisoners. A fourth Israeli was in Hizballah custody as of this writing; the Lebanese group alleged that he was a spy but the Israeli government said he was a businessman and army reservist.  Successive Israeli governments have long maintained that two of the Lebanese prisoners, Shaykh Abd al-Karim Obeid and Mustafa al-Dirani, captured in Lebanon in Israeli commando operations in 1989 and 1994 respectively and held without charge ever since, were bargaining chips in exchange for Ron Arad, the Israeli navigator who went missing after his plane was shot down over Lebanon in 1986. 
	Comprehensive international economic sanctions remained in place on Iraq. High oil prices and a Security Council resolution in December 1999 that removed limits on the amount of oil Iraq could sell meant that the oil-for-food humanitarian relief program no longer faced cash constraints. As a short-term emergency assistance program limited to commodities, however, the oil-for-food program could not provide the extensive investment and development efforts needed to address the overall humanitarian situation, which remained grave. The Security Council resolution provided for the suspension of non-military sanctions in the event that Iraq cooperated satisfactorily with a new arms inspection regime, but Iraq insisted that it had fully complied with earlier resolutions and that sanctions should therefore be lifted without qualification or delay.
	In the region and around the world, advocacy and demonstrations increased on behalf of Palestinian refugees and their right of return under international law. On October 7, Israeli troops opened fire at a crowd of 500 demonstrators in Ramieh on the Lebanese side of the Israel-Lebanon border. The protesters, carrying Palestinian flags and demanding the right to return, reportedly threw stones at a nearby Israeli outpost. Two Palestinians, residents of Lebanons Shatila and Bourj al-Barajneh refugee camps, were killed and twenty-three wounded, two critically, according to press reports. Some 25,000 people participated in funeral processions for the victims the next day in Beirut. On October 24, security forces dispersed forcibly thousands of Jordanians who marched from Amman to the Allenby Bridge connecting Jordan and the West Bank to press for the right of return. The BBC reported that the demonstrators were beaten into retreat by Jordanian police with baton, water cannon and tear gas, as helicopters hovered overhead. Among the protestors were Jordanian parliamentarians and members of professional associations.
	The rights to freedom of expression and association were trampled across the region. There were no independent and critical local media in Saudi Arabia, Libya, Iraq, and Syria. In Tunisia and Egypt, the state-run broadcast and major print media were not open to  independent or critical perspectives. Journalists were harassed, arrested, or imprisoned in Egypt, Iran, Morocco, Tunisia, Yemen, and areas under the control of the Palestinian Authority (P.A.), and the independent weekly La Nation remained suspended in Algeria. P.A. authorities ordered the closure of five radio and television stations between May 5 and June 2, and arrested Samir Qumsiah, chair of the Council of Private Radio and Television Stations, after he called for a thirty-minute broadcasting halt to protest the closures.
	 In Morocco, despite positive developments in other areas, foreign and local journalists  faced harassment and threats during the year, and newspapers were banned or seized because of critical commentary about the current and former king, and interviews with Islamist and Polisario (Popular Front for the Liberation of saguia el Hamra and rio de Oro) leaders.  Three journalists from France 3 were placed under house arrest for three days in October, the Paris-based press freedom organization Reporters without Borders said, after they had filmed the October 7 protest march to Tazmamert prison, and authorities confiscated their material before they left Morocco.  The Moroccan governments relations with Qatar soured in July in part because of the content of programming by the  emirates regionally popular al-Jazeera satellite television station. Moroccan Prime Minister Abdel Rahman al-Youssoufi charged that the station led a campaign against Morocco, against its democratic evolution, its institutions and image. Qatars foreign minister, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr al-Thani, said that todays world does not fear the press and press freedom should not be a reason for tension in relations between states. 
	The trials of Capt. Mustafa Adib, including a prison hunger strike, attracted considerable attention in Morocco. Adib, 32 years old, had written in 1998 to then-Crown Prince Mohamed, in his capacity as head of the armed forces, to inform him of corruption and racketeering among the high command at the airbase where he served in the southeastern province of Errachidia. An initial inquiry led to the dismissal of those involved and cleared Adib of any wrongdoing, but he subsequently faced arbitrary transfers and retaliatory disciplinary measures. After failing to get relief inside the army, he filed a complaint in a civil court about his treatment, also to no avail. He was arrested on December 17, 1999, the day after he was quoted about the situation in the French daily Le Monde. A trial in February led to his conviction and a five-year prison term on charges of violating military discipline and insulting the royal armed forces, despite objections by his lawyers that they were not allowed to call witnesses and that one of the judges had been among his commanders at the air base at the time of his original complaint. After Adib went on hunger strike in May the Supreme Court finally acted on his appeal, overturning the February sentence and returning the case to the Rabat military court. In what Adibs defense lawyer called a parody of justice, the court on October 6 sentenced him to two-and-one-half years of imprisonment after again finding him guilty of the same charges.  In late September, Transparency International, the global anti_corruption organization, named Captain Adib as one of four winners of the groups Integrity Awards at its annual general meeting.
	Intellectuals, including prominent novelists, poets, and songwriters in Egypt, Kuwait, Lebanon and Yemen were prosecuted for the content of their work, sometimes based on complaints from self-appointed private guardians of the Muslim faith. In December 1999, Lebanese musician Marcel Khalifa was tried in a Beirut court for singing a song viewed as blasphemous of religious values because its text included a short verse from the Koran. The song was adapted from a poem written by Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish. In his testimony, Khalifa, who faced a maximum sentence of three years in prison, said Could you imagine that Lebanon would bring its artists to court? When a country brings its artists to court, it brings itself before the court. The court acquitted Khalifa of the charges on December 15, 1999. 
 	In Yemen, conservative clerics and political groups targeted Samir al-Yusufi, editor of the weekly al-Thaqafiya, for serializing Sanaa is an Open City, a novel by Mohammed Abdulwali. He was charged in a criminal court in July with insulting Islam, and the case was pending as of mid-October. Egyptian author Salahuddin Muhsin was arrested in March because prosecutors found two of his books, A Night Talk with Heaven and Trembling of Enlightenment, offensive to Islam. He was tried in a state security court and received a six-month suspended sentence in July. Earlier in April, violent clashes reupted between protesters and security forces in Cairo after an Islamist newspaper charged that A Banquet of Seaweed by Syrian author Haidar Haidar was blasphemous. A panel of literary experts appointed by the Ministry of Culture held that the novel was not blasphemous but authorities said that it would be withdrawn from circulation.
	A Kuwaiti appeals court in March banned a novel and a collection of poetry by prize-winning novelist and short-story writer Laila al-Othman and Kuwait University philosophy professor Dr. Aliya Shuayb and fined them both. While the court did not specify which references in the works constituted illegal expressions, during pre-trial questioning prosecutors focused on a description of an apple in feminine terms in Dr. Shuaybs collection of poetry and a description of the lustful coming together of sea waves in al-Othmans novel.
	Palestinians who publicly criticized P.A. policies were arbitrarily arrested and detentained. Security forces arrested eight prominent personalities who signed a November 27, 1999, petition criticizing P.A. tyranny and corruption. Six were released on JD50,000 (U.S. $70,000) bail on December 19, but Ahmad Dudin and `Abd al-Sattar Qassem were held until January 6, 2000. Qassem was re-arrested on February 18 and detained until July 28, despite a July 11 high court order for his release.
	The tightening of restrictions on freedom of opinion and expression extended to scholars and universities. The Tunisian government in January summarily dismissed and later expelled Jean-Francois Poirier, a French philosophy teacher at the Institute for Social Sciences, in retaliation for his association with Tunisian human rights activists, and in late July dismissed Moncef Marzouki from his post as professor of community  medicine at the University of Sousse after he spoke out publicly in Paris and Washington about the governments human rights record. In late June, Egyptian authorities arrested Saadeddin Ibrahim, professor of sociology at the American University in Cairo, in connection with his efforts to mobilize students and others to monitor the countrys parliamentary elections in October and November. The government held him without charge for forty-five days and subsequently filed charges against him before the Supreme State Security Court for allegedly receiving foreign funding without permission and disseminating information harmful to Egypts reputation. 
	Palestinian academic Jawad  al-Dalou of the Islamic University in Gaza was suspended in November 1999, along with two students, for writing in a student newspaper that many beggars in Gaza came from a particular district. Yemeni authorities closed a  womens studies center at Sanaa University in December 1999 in the wake of conservative objection to a conference the center had sponsored. The pervasive presence of Yemeni security personnel on campus led some faculty to request parliamentary legislation barring them from such a role, and Irans parliament was reportedly considering similar legislation. On August 5, Iranian  authorities arrested Hojatoleslam Hassan Youssefi Eshkevari, a leading independent religious scholar, after his return from Berlin where he had presented a paper on Dictatorship and its History. He was held in solitary confinement for two months and put on trial in October before a Special Court for the Clergy on charges of apostasy and being corrupt on earth, which carry the death penalty. As of this writing no verdict or sentence had been announced.
	Peaceful freedom of assembly, virtually non-existent in several counries including Iraq, Syria and Saudi Arabia was still a sought-after right throughout much of the region. Tunisian authorities closed down a publishing house after it had hosted a meeting on freedom of the press in that country.  Palestinian Police Chief Ghazi al-Jabali in February issued new regulations prohibiting processions, demonstrations, or public meetings without prior approval from the district police commander. Offenders faced up to two months of imprisonment or a maximum JD50 (U.S. $70) fine. The high court suspended their implementation on April 29, but as of September had not acted to revoke these or other regulations limiting freedom of assemby. 
	The Lebanese government in April suppressed peaceful, student-led protests against the Syrian role in Lebanon and prosecuted demonstrators in the military court. At an April 17 demonstration, dozens assembled at the Ministry of Justice in Beirut to protest the arrest of two students on April 13 for distributing leaflets calling for Syrias withdrawal of milittary forces. On April 18, demonstrators gathered near the National Museum and some put tape over their mouths to underscore the governments attempts to silence them. When this crowd refused to disperse on the order of a Lebanese army officer, security forces forcibly dispersed the demonstrators, and in an ensuing clash, several were reportedly injured. Eight demonstrators received sentences ranging from ten days to six weeks in prison. In the wake of these two incidents, some one thousand students peacefully rallied on three university campuses on April 19 to cries of The Israeli army out, the Syrian army out, and Lebanon first. Although the campuses were surrounded by security forces and army troops, there were no arrests and the rallies did not spill out onto the streets.
	Following serious clashes on October 6 between police and demonstrators protesting  Israeli policies in the occupied Palestinian territories, the Jordanian government announced a complete ban on public demonstrations and detained hundreds of people. Clashes developed after Friday prayers, with the worst incidents taking place in Palestinian refugee camps. Police responded to crowds calling for an end to Jordans peace treaty with Israel with baton charges, tear gas, and live ammunition. At least one demonstrator at the Baqaa refugee camp near Amman was killed and scores were injured. Demonstrators and their supporters claimed that the police had used excessive force in quelling the protests.
	Shaikh Hamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa, Bahrains ruler, announced on October 2 that he envisaged a new organizational and constitutional concept of our state, but it was not clear if he intended to institute such changes through mechanisms specified in the constitution of 1973, whose provisions for a partially elected parliament were suspended by decree in 1975. The government continued to hold without trial five opposition activists arrested in January 1996 in connection with their campaign to reinstate the 1973 constitution. One of the five, Abd al-Wahab Hussain, was released on March 17 following an order by the High Court of Appeal but was rearrested after spending about an hour at home. Others who had been released in 1999, including Shaikh Abd al-Amir al-Jamri and Shaikh Ali Ashoor, had been compelled as a condition of their release to refrain from speaking out or engaging in political activities. On April 3, Peter Hain, the British foreign minister responsible for the Middle East, responding to a query from a member of parliament, said that Abd al-Wahab Hussain was being held in a flat on Ministry of Interior property and that the decision to renew the detention order was again made on public security grounds. 
	In Bahrain, individuals as well as associations and organizations with views critical of government policy continued to face severe restrictions. According to the London-based Bahrain Freedom Movement (BFM), for example, in late December 1999 the authorities intervened to prevent a planned meeting at the prestigious Uruba Club on the subject of human rights. On August 8 security officials intervened to force the cancellation of a long-scheduled public speech that evening at the Al-Ahli Club by Hassan Radhi, a leading defense lawyer, on the subject of constitutional rights. The BFM also reported that on July 4 speakers at the Al-Ahli club publicly criticized the ruling familys refusal to revive the partially elected National Assembly. 
	Bahrains government maintained its policy of providing no information concerning the numbers or identities of persons arrested, tried, convicted, acquitted, or released under the State Security Law or brought before the State Security Court, where procedures do not meet basic fair trial standards and verdicts were not subject to appeal. The government announced the release of several hundred prisoners during the year, but the opposition BFM charged that there were numerous new arrests and state security court trials.
	Women in the Middle East and North Africa continued to suffer from severe forms of discrimination in nearly every aspect of their lives and womens rights continued to be one of the most contested areas for reform. Institutionalized discrimination in personal status laws and the lack of legal redress for violence against women characterized the majority of womens human rights abuses. The year 2000 was declared by the Arab Parliamentarian Union as the year of the Arab woman. Instead of governments adopting reform policies that would address discrimination and violence against women, womens rights became a chip in political negotiations between conservative and liberal forces in society, and inaction on the part of the governments unfortunately prevailed. Countries that have signed or ratified the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)Iraq, Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Libya, Algeria, Tunisia, Yemen, and Saudi Arabiamaintained national laws that contradicted the spirit and letter of CEDAW. 
	Workers rights were limited or nonexistent, particularly in Gulf states that employed large numbers of foreign workers. According to the annual report of the International Labour Organization released in May, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates were among the few countries anywhere that prohibited outright any type of labor organization, while Bahrain and Qatar allowed only committees or councils whose freedom of action is tightly constrained and which therefore do not have attributes of independent workers organizations. 
	Governments in the Gulf continued to use legislation to promote employment of  their own nationals and to discourage the use of foreign workers. In Kuwait, over one million foreign workers enjoyed little legal protection against abusive practices of employers, and women domestic workers were excluded from the labor law, increasing their vulnerability to physical and sexual abuse. In March, the Indian government stopped issuing immigration clearances for domestic workers in Kuwait due to reported abuses.
	In Saudi Arabia, 69 percent of the workforce of 7.2 million was composed of foreigners, many of them Asian. Nongovernmental organizations in Indonesia pressed the government of  President Abdurrahman Wahid for a three-month hiatus in sending women workers to Saudi Arabia. In August, twenty-two groups demonstrated at the Manpower Ministry in Jakarta, demanding that the government educate women about their rights prior to leaving the country, and reach an agreement with Saudi authorities that would ensure the workersprotection against abuse and the availability of legal remedies. On June 19, an Indonesian domestic worker, Warni Samiran Audi, was beheaded in al-Ahsa in eastern Saudi Arabia. The Saudi interior ministry said she had been convicted of killing the wife of her employer. Indonesias Manpower Ministry director general for labour, Din Syamsuddin, said the next day that the Indonesian embassy had not been officially informed of the execution, although the government had been seeking the womans release or a reduced sentence for three years.
	In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), foreigners comprised about 70 percent of the population of 2.76 million and 90 percent of the labor force. Workers did not have the right to organize trade unions, to strike, or to bargain collectively, and faced deportation if they carried out such activities. Domestic and agricultural workers were excluded from protection under the labor law, and reports continued of the physical abuse of women domestics and withholding of their wages. Migrant workers also faced corporal and capital punishment following unfair trials. An Indonesian domestic worker, Kartini binti Karim, was handed over to the police in 1999 when her employer discovered that she was pregnant and her husband was not in the country. The Fujairah Sharia court in February convicted her of adultery and sentenced her to death by stoning, while it acquitted in their absence the Indian national who was the womans accused partner. Commenting on the trial, Sulaiman Abdulmanan of the Indonesian Foreign Ministry said that Kartini did not understand Arabic, and it seems she was just trembling and saying yes to everything. Though she did not refute the adultery charges during the trial, she later testified that her pregnancy was the result of a rape. Kartini was never informed of her right to communicate with the Indonesian embassy or her right to a translator, and the embassy was not notified in advance of her trial. The harsh and inhumane sentence attracted international attention, and on April 25 the appeals court reduced the sentence to one year in prison and deportation. In September, the Sharia court in the emirate of Ras al-Khaimah found a Bangladeshi man and woman guilty of adultery and sentenced them to three months in jail and 150 lashes each. UAE Labor and Social Affairs Minister Humaid al-Tayer said the same month that employment visas would be issued only to those who possess at least secondary education. The new measure was expected to affect adversely mainly South Asians, who comprised the largest number of unskilled wokers in the emirates.
	In Bahrain this year labor activists made an effort to win the right to establish an independent trade union body. The International Center for Trade Union Rights, an independent London-based nongovernmental organization, reported in August that the executive committee of the General Committee of Bahraini Workers (GCBW), set up by the government in 1981 as an alternative to independent trade unions, requested government permission to reconstitute itself as an independent union in accordance with ILO and Arab Labor Organization principles.  Shaikh Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa, prime minister and uncle of the amir, reportedly summoned the executive committee to a meeting where he rejected the request and said that there would be grave consequences if they persisted with such demands. The minister of labor and social affairs subsequently instructed the committee to postpone GCBW general assembly elections scheduled for November 2000 to choose a new executive committee.
	Foreign workers were violently attacked in Libya, where hundreds of thousands of Africans reportedly migrated over the past several years in search of work.  On September 21-22, there were clashes between African immigrants and Libyans in az-Zawiyah, a town near Tripoli, in which approximately fifty Chadian and Sudanese migrants were killed, according to the daily al-Hayat (London). Dozens of others reportedly were injured, according to the Libyan media and Sudans foreign ministry. The Reuters news agency reported from Lagos on October 5 that some three thousand Nigerians returned home from Libya on Nigerian-government-organized flights and that state television featured the migrants describing killings and beatings as ordinary Libyans had set upon alleged illegal immigrants.
	Governments in the region continued gradually to embrace some of the language of human rights discourse and to establish what they said would be rights-monitoring bodies. There were welcome developments in the Algerian governments decision to permit four international human rights organizations to visit the country; the invitation that Saudi authorities extended to the U.N. special rapporteur on judicial independence; and the launching in Rabat of a human rights center co-funded by Moroccos ministry of human rights and the U.N. to provide training for judges, police officers, prison administrators, and teachers.
	Information about human rights developments in Bahrain remained difficult to access but there were several indications from high government officials that they were taking human rights issues more seriously. In October 1999 the amir announced the formation of a human rights committee comprising six members of the Shura Council, an appointed advisory body with no legislative or other authority. According to Bahrain Brief, a London-based pro-government newsletter, the committees duties were to scrutinize legislation, investigate reports of abuses, and raise awareness within society that the government considers the protection of human rights a priority. Bahrain Brief also reported that in February the committee was asked to examine the treatment of foreign workers. As of October, no further information was available regarding the committees activities or the results of any investigations it may have carried out. On August 2 the amir told Cable News Network (CNN) that he was ready to allow international human rights groups free access to the country. I am ready to carry them on my private aircraft and they can meet any group, he said.  A two-person delegation from the office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson visited Bahrain in late October to discuss technical assistance and human rights teaching. The delegation reportedly met with the ministers of education, justice, and the interior as well as the chairman of the Shura Councils human rights committee and the president of the University of Bahrain. 
	On a less positive note, however, the government deferred once again a visit by the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention that was initially planned for 1999 and most recently scheduled for October 2000; the visit was rescheduled for February 2001. On October 28, according to the Bahraini daily Al-Akhbar al-Khalij, the minister of labour and social affairs denied the August 8 written request of eighteen Bahraini citizens for permission to set up an independent human rights committee.
	There were conflicting signals from the government of Saudi Arabia in response to the launching of Amnesty Internationals  worldwide campaignEnd Secrecy, End Sufferingthat focused on the kingdoms human rights practices.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated in March that the government had a keen interest and commitment to the cause of human rights.  Interior minister Prince Nayef in April dismissed as merely nonsense the allegations of human rights abuses in the kingdom, and added: We welcome anyone to see for himself the facts in the kingdom as it has nothing to conceal. But Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal appeared to rule out access to the kingdom for Amnesty representatives. He told the leading Spanish daily El Pais in April: If Amnesty International was seeking the truth and if it informed itself honesty of the truth, we would consider a visit.  He continued: But so long as it continues to use erroneous information as its basis without taking into account our responses, the visit would have no sense. 
	In October, Jordan signed a memorandum of understanding with the International Labor Organization that was designed to address the problem of child labor in the kingdom through actions of state ministries and NGOs. The ministry of labor said that the memorandum represented the initial step for Jordans participation in the ILOs International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor. Jordan was the first West Asian country to ratify ILO Convention 182 Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor,  which calls for immediate measures to eliminate child slavery, debt bondage, child prostitution, trafficking, and other forms of hazardous and exploitative child labor. 
	There were also positive developments with respect to international justice. On September 8, Morocco and Kuwait signed the Rome Treaty for the establishment of an International Criminal Court, joining Jordan, which signed in October 1998. 

Defending Human Rights
	The regions vibrant and growing community of human rights activists persevered, despite widely differing local environments.  At this writing, three Syrians remained in prison, serving long sentences that the state security court imposed in 1992 following an unfair trial. In Bahrain, government-controlled Iraq, Libya, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates severe internal restrictions meant that it was impossible for human rights activists to speak and meet openly. Elsewhere, defenders variously faced surveillance, official harassment, arrest and detention, threats of criminal prosecution, and the inability to register human rights groups under the law. In an increasingly worrying trend, the issue of foreign funding was used in Egypt and Jordan,  and by the Palestinian Authority, to disparage the intentions of committed individuals and independent, locally based organizations. For example, in September the Jordanian Press Association suspended Nidal Mansour, chief editor of al_Hadath weekly, for receiving foreign funding for a local branch of a press freedom organization, the Center for Defending Freedom of Journalists.
	In Tunisia, government efforts to monopolize human rights discourse and smother independent activists were challenged repeatedly by human rights defenders on the ground, who faced job dismissals, judicial proceedings, intensive surveillance, and sometimes physical assault at the hands of police. The Kuwaiti cabinets 1993 order dissolving all unlicensed human rights and humanitarian organizations remained in force and local advocates were forced to meet informally or under the auspices of organizations that enjoyed legal status. In Yemen, local groups were allowed to function although some were threatened with closure.
	Activists were particularly at risk when they undertook efforts to expose corruption and gross human rights abuses. In Iran, the independent press that had been playing an increasing role in exposing human rights violations and promoting human rights principles was dealt a crippling blow with the enforced closure by hardline religious and political conservatives of thirty newspapers and the imprisonment and prosecution of leading journalists and writers. Palestinian Authority security forces in December 1999 detained eight signatories of a November 27, 1999, petition criticizing P.A. tyranny and corruption for periods between three weeks and seven months.
	In Algeria, security forces in May detained Mohamed Smain, head of the Relizane office of the Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADDH), after he attempted to document evidence at a grave site connected with the case of two former mayors implicated in mass killings in the area.  Egypts large and sophisticated human rights community was under attack throughout the year. The controversial 1999 Law on Civil Associations and Institutions overturned on procedural grounds by the Supreme Constitutional Court had been strongly criticized by local human rights activists since it allowed the government undue interference in the internal affairs of NGOs and criminalized any activity that authorities deemed political.  The Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) was informed in late July that its application for official registration under the previous law had been granted.  However, several days later the EOHR was notified that a final decision had been deferred upon the request of security officials.  Due to criticism by the government and in some of the media of NGO reliance on foreign funding, several rights groups were facing the possibility of cutting back on their activities since they were largely dependent on this form of financial support. 
	Womens rights defenders in the region continued to address legal discrimination and violence against women. In Morocco, Egypt, Jordan, and Kuwait, they were castigated by parliamentarians, conservative parties, and the media, who alleged that their actions were destroying the family, the unity of the nation, imposing immoral values on society, and that they were agents of the West. The Permanent Arab Court to Resist Violence Against Women, established in December 1999 in thirteen Arab countries, launched the Feminine Rights Campaign, which called for equality between men and women especially with respect to divorce. The one-year campaigns main objective was to achieve equality in the right of divorce and its consequences; unify laws and juridical procedures; ensure equal rights as to the custody of children, marital property and all other marital rights; and establish government funding to guarantee the payment of alimony. 
 	Human rights defenders also continued initiatives to promote joint work in the region. In October 2000 a follow_up conference to the April 1999 First International Conference of the Arab Human Rights Movement was organized by the Arab Working Group for Human Rights in coordination with five human rights organizations. The meeting, held in Rabat, Morocco, and attended by over 60 participants and observers from 43 local and international human rights organizations focused its discussions on some of the recommendations from the earlier conference. The conference called for improved coordination among Arab human rights groups and activists and more effective use of international human rights protection mechanisms. It recommended the setting up of a coordinating and representational office in Geneva, Switzerland to assist in this purpose.  It called for an end to restrictions on funding sources for human rights work and recommended establishing a fund for human rights defenders. Discussions also covered ways of improving the tools available for regional human rights protection and the role of the movement in facilitating democratic and constitutional reforms.
	Also in October the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies organized the Second International Conference of the Arab Human Rights Movement around the theme of human rights education and dissemination. Over one hundred Arab and international experts and activists from human rights groups and governmentsincluding artists, writers, media expertsexamined the political and cultural obstacles to the dissemination of human rights in the region and sought to identify ways and to develop strategies for overcoming them. The conference adopted the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights Education and Dissemination setting out principles and standards for human rights education in the region and establishing an agenda for the 21st century. It called on Arab governments to draw up national plans for human rights education and to urgently revise existing educational curricula to ensure their consistency with human rights values. 

The Work of Human Rights Watch
	Staff and other representatives of Human Rights Watchs Middle East and North Africa division travelled during the year to Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, and Yemen.  The missions were multifocused, involving research, coordination and cooperative work with local human rights activists and lawyers, and dialogue with government officials wherever possible.  Thematically, the major concerns of Human Rights Watch included violations of freedom of expression and association, womens rights, the absence of due process in legal proceedings in civilian and military courts, and minority rights and statelessness. In Algeria and Lebanon, the focus included accountability for past human rights abuses, including disappearances and extrajudicial executions at the hands of state agents and armed militia groups.  Human Rights Watch covered from the field the Israeli military withdrawal from occupied south Lebanon and closely monitored and publicized subsequent developments, including the kidnapping of Lebanese civilians by Hizballah operatives. In Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza Strip Human Rights Watch investigated excessive and indiscriminate use of force by Israeli security services in clashes with Palestinian civilians, failures to protect civilians by Palestinian security forces, and attacks on civilians by civilians.  
	Human Rights Watchs requests for access to Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Syria, some of them longstanding, were all pending with their respective governments at this writing.   
	Human Rights Watch representatives presented concerns to governments in the region, and met with senior government officials in Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Israel and Kuwait, as well as with officials in the Palestinian Authority.  In Egypt and Israel, Human Rights Watch brought its concerns about detention, torture, and prison conditions to the ministries of justice.  In Iran, a Human Rights Watch researcher met with the judge presiding over the trial of thirteen Iranian Jews in Shiraz to discuss due process and fair trial issues: It was the first time since 1979 that a revolutionary court judge had accepted to meet with a representative of an international human rights organization.   In Kuwait, Human Rights Watch met with Ministry of Interior officials to discuss that ministrys discriminatory treatment of the Bidun, Kuwaits stateless long-term residents, and met with parliamentarians to express concerns about proposed legislation which discriminated against women and Bidun, and restricted freedom of expression. Human Rights Watch observed the military court trials in Lebanon of former South Lebanon Army soldiers and officers as well as civilians who were charged with criminal offenses under Lebanese law for contact with Israel, and collected information from Lebanese families whose relatives were known or believed to be disappeared in Israel or Syria. 
	In January 2000 Human Rights Watch wrote to the U.N. Security Council urging that the sanctions in force against Iraq be radically restructured to remove restrictions on non_military trade and investment while tightening controls on Iraqs ability to import weapons_related goods. The letter was accompanied by a memorandum addressing the impact of the sanctions on the humanitarian situation in Iraq.  Human Rights Watch also called on the Security Council to set up an international tribunal to try top Iraqi leaders for war crimes and crimes against humanity. The letter acknowledged the high degree of responsibility of the Iraqi government for the unfolding humanitarian emergency, but insisted that the United States and other powers also face up to their share of the responsibility and take action to improve conditions.
	Together with five other international organizations and religious groups, Human Rights Watch in March and August again urged the Security Council to address the grave humanitarian consequences of the sanctions, and in September Human Rights Watch wrote to both the Security Council and the government of Iraq setting out urgent steps necessary to alleviate the humanitarian crisis.
	Human Rights Watch did not forget that other war crimes or crimes against humanity had been committed in the region and that to date no one has been held accountable in courts of law with local or international jurisdiction. It was eighteen years ago, in September 1982, that at least 700 to 800 Palestinians, and possibly as many as several thousand, were slaughtered in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Beirut by the Israeli-armed and -allied Lebanese Phalange (Kataeb) militia while nearby Israel Defense Forces (IDF) personnel looked on and did nothing to stop the sixty-two-hour indiscriminate carnage. In December 1999, we wrote to Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak to condemn the appointment of Maj. Gen. (Reserves) Amos Yaron as director-general of Israels Ministry of Defense and urge his immediate dismissal from public service.  While serving as an IDF division commander during Israels invasion of Lebanon in 1982, his  actions and omissions facilitated the massacre in the camps. By all accounts, the perpetrators of this indiscriminate slaughter were members of the Phalange (or Kataeb, in Arabic) militia, a Lebanese force that was armed by and closely allied to Israel since the outbreak of Lebanons civil war in 1975, but the killings were carried out in an area under IDF control.  An IDF forward command post, commanded by Amos Yaron, was situated on the roof of a multi-story building located some 200 meters southwest of the Shatila camp.
	Human Rights Watch noted in the letter that the Sabra and Shatila massacre was a grave violation of international humanitarian law and a crime against humanity, and urged that General Yaronas well as the other Israelis and Lebanese with direct or indirect responsibility for the killingsshould face criminal investigation and prosecution. Human Rights Watch also sent a letter to Lebanese president Emile Lahoud that raised the same point and inquired about legal or administrative measures that the government of Lebanon initiated or was contemplating with respect to investigation and prosecution of Lebanese citizens who are known or suspected to have had direct responsibility for the killings in Sabra and Shatilla. Human Rights Watch did not receive replies from either government.	
	In the lead up to the February parliamentary elections in Iran, Human Rights Watch issued a short briefing on current human rights conditions. Noting that the atmosphere surrounding the election campaign was notably freer than at the time of the last elections in March 1996,  Human Rights Watch pointed to a number of human rights issues as still impeding a free and fair election in the Islamic Republic, and said little had changed in the legal framework relating to the enjoyment of rights in Iran.
	In March, Human Rights Watch published the findings of international observers who attended the trial of Tunisias  outspoken human rights lawyer, Radhia Nasraoui, and twenty co_defendants, most of them students, on charges related to membership in or activities on behalf of an unauthorized left_wing political association, the Tunisian Communist Workers Party (Parti Communiste des Ouvriers Tunisiens, PCOT). The trial dramatized many aspects of Tunisias human rights situation. In addition to government measures to harass and impede the work of human rights defenders like Nasraoui, the case illustrated the use of repressive laws to imprison Tunisians who engage in peaceful political activity deemed critical of the countrys present government. It also demonstrated the commonplace nature of torture during interrogations in Tunisia and the judicial systems disregard of this abuse and its failure to provide defendants with basic guarantees of a fair trial.
	In advance of the Israeli withdrawal from occupied south Lebanon, Human Rights Watch disseminated a briefing paper that identified the human rights issues that were largely being neglected by the international media, and briefed Israeli and international journalists in Jerusalem.
	In its 38_page report, Promises Betrayed: Denial of Rights of Bidun, Women, and Freedom of  Expression, released in October, Human Rights Watch detailed Kuwaiti laws and practices that systematically discriminate against women and stateless Bidun, and that criminalize free expression by journalists, academics, and writers.  Human Rights Watch called on Kuwait to  amend its Penal Code and Printing and Publications Law to protect freedom of expression and to revoke laws that  discriminate against women and long_term non_citizens of Kuwait. 
 	Also in October Human Rights Watch published the results of a week_long fact_finding investigation into the unlawful use of force against civilians by security and police forces in Israel, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip. The organization condemned a pattern of repeated Israeli use of excessive lethal force during clashes between its security forces and Palestinian demonstrators in situations where demonstrators were unarmed and posed no threat of death or serious injury to the security forces or to others. In cases that Human Rights Watch investigated where gunfire by Palestinian security forces or armed protesters was a factor, use of lethal force by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) was indiscriminate and not directed at the source of the threat. Human Rights Watch also documented a pattern of IDF disregard for and targeting of Palestinian medical personnel and ambulances evacuating or treating injured civilians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip In the report, Human Rights Watch also criticized the failure of the Palestinian police to act consistently to prevent armed Palestinians from shooting at Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) from positions where civilians were present and thus endangered by the Israeli response. 
	In a six_page briefing published in October as the first round of Peoples Assembly elections  were getting underway in Egypt, Human Rights Watch noted several factors not conducive to a free and fair election. These included restrictions on freedom of association and assembly, including the ability to form political parties and to hold public rallies as part of an electoral campaign; arrests and prosecution before military and state security courts of political opponents, in particular members of the Muslim Brotherhood; restrictions on freedom of expression, including banning of books and newspapers and the use of criminal charges against journalists; and harassment of human rights activists and others preparing to monitor the elections. 
	Throughout the year Human Rights Watch sought to defend those who were persecuted for their human rights work and to protect and enlarge the political space in which independent institutions of civil society could express diverseand dissenting views. In the case of Tunisia, Human Rights Watch spoke out repeatedly in opposition to the governments systematic efforts to intimidate that countrys human rights activists and to silence its most outspoken writers.  In Egypt, Human Rights Watch intervened to criticize a restrictive NGO law and to condemn threatened prosecution of activists under military orders. Following the Palestinian Bar Associations decision to remove the names of Palestinian lawyers associated with human rights groups from its list of practicing lawyers, Human Rights Watch intervened to urge the Palestinian Authority to ensure that human rights lawyers did not face threats, intimidation or professional sanctions because of their human rights activities. In Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, and Yemen Human Rights Watch wrote to the governments to protest arrests or harassment of journalists, writers, artists and academic, and to urge that the fundamental right to freedom of expression be respected.
	The division also devoted time and resources to advocacy efforts within the United Nations. For example, in July Human Rights Watch attended the U.N. Human Rights Committees review of Kuwaits implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, where we briefed committee members on the results of our investigation into violations of womens rights, rights of Bidun residents, and freedom of expression.  In October, we called for the creation of an independent panel of experts to investigate human rights violations committed during clashes between Israelis and Palestinians that began on September 29, and urged the creation of a standing body of independent international criminal justice investigators to be available for deployment by the U.N. at short notice whenever the need arises for independent, impartial investigations of a criminal justice nature. 
	In our continuing efforts to maximize communication with activists and others throughout the region, we translated public statements and press releases into Arabic and made these widely available.  The Arabic section of Human Rights Watchs web-site continued to grow and provided access to key documents produced by the organization in its global coverage of human rights violations.  Traffic to this section tripled during the year, up from about 650 page-views per day during 1999 to about 2,000 pages per day in September 2000.  During September close to 250 users each day visited this section of the web-site.

The Role of the International Community

European Union
	Human rights abuses in the Middle East did not occasion much in the way of public diplomacy by the European Union or member states, despite visits to European capitals by Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Iranian President Mohamed Khatami, King Mohamed VI of Morocco, and Shaikh Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa of Bahrain, and visits to the region by Chris Patten, the European Unions commissioner for external affairs, Javier Solana, the E.U.s high representative, and the foreign ministers of France, the United Kingdom, and other European countries.  The E.U. at the U.N. General Assembly in October sponsored resolutions on the human rights situation in Iraq and Iran. The E.U. speech on October 26 on the human rights situation in the world mentioned Syria as a country where the expression of opposition or dissidence is systematically repressed and expressed concern about the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia, in particular by restrictions on fundamental freedoms. The speech welcomed Algerias invitation to several international human rights organizations but said that the E.U. remain[ed] concerned by the persistence of violence and by the fate of missing persons.   
	The year also saw little movement in the Barcelona process of establishing a Euro-Mediterranean free trade and cooperative security zone. The European-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the E.U. and Israel, signed in 1995,  went into force in June 2000 after completion of ratification by all E.U. member states. Israel thus joined Tunisia and Morocco as countries with operational association agreements. A draft agreement with Egypt was completed in July 1999, but as of this writing Egypt had not yet taken steps to sign it. There was no public discussion of how the human rights practices of these countries, especially Tunisia and Israel, could be reconciled with the stipulation in article 2 of each agreement that the agreement was premised on respect for human rights and democratic values. There were no indications that the year had seen progress regarding negotiations over association agreements with Algeria, Lebanon, and Syria. Signed agreements with Jordan and the Palestinian Authority remained to be ratified by some E.U. member states before coming into force. 
	External relations commissioner Patten, speaking in Cairo in early April on the E.U.s Mediterranean policy pointed to human rights along with drugs, terrorism, immigration, and conflict prevention as areas where we need some practical results. Our handling of these crucial topics needs to be sufficiently flexible to allow the partners who wish to advance ahead of others to do so without prejudicing the right of all Barcelona partners to participate in the discussions, he said.
	In his Cairo speech Patten observed that Europe now accounted for 47 percent of total Mediterranean imports, amounting to 30 billion euros (U.S. $25.1 billion). E.U. countries took 52  percent of all Mediterranean exports, he said, worth 63 billion euros. (U.S. $52.7 billion). Europe, he said, is by far the largest donor of non-military aid in the region,  amounting to 9 billion euros (U.S. $7.5 billion) in grants and loans.
	According to a U.S. Congressional Research Service study of transfers of conventional arms released in August and covering the 1996-1999 period, 85 percent of United Kingdom arms deliveries to developing countries were to the Middle East, while the comparable figures for France, Germany, and Italy were 43 percent, 40 percent, and 12.5 percent respectively. European countries accounted for just over 48 percent of all arms deliveries to the region in this period. According to the study, the bulk of the sales comprised tanks and self-propelled guns, other armor, supersonic aircraft, and naval vessels. 

United States
	The Middle Eastespecially Israeli-Palestinian negotiations and conflicts and Iraqoccupied much of the Clinton administrations diplomatic energies over the year. In a June speech to the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee devoted to Israeli-Palestinian negotiations and Iraq, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Thomas Pickering identified the components of U.S. policy in the region as achieving a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace, ensuring regional stability, stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, creating free market conditions, encouraging sustainable development, and expanding political reform and adherence to international norms for human rights. 
	In his presentation to Congress in March of the Near East segment of the Administrations foreign operations budget for fiscal year 2001, Assistant Secretary of State Edward S. Walker, Jr. said, Advancing vital U.S. political and economic interests in the Middle East is complicated by a legacy of ethnic conflicts, border disputes, economic dislocations, ecological disruptions, and human rights abusesall of which have contributed to terrorism and violence. Walker also stated that the Administration was pursuing a strong program for developing civil society in a region that often lacks the most rudimentary institutions for peaceful transition of leadership, freedom of expression, or respect for womens rights. 
	In its budget presentation the Administration requested military and economic assistance grants of U.S. $2.8 billion for Israel, nearly U.S. $2 billion for Egypt, and U.S. $228 million for Jordan. The request for democracy programs in the region, particularly in Algeria, Morocco, Yemen, and Oman, was $4 million. In requesting allocations for individual countries, Walkers presentation mentioned human rights or support for democratic institutions as issues of concern in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, and Yemen, though there was no such mention in the presentations for Bahrain or Jordan. Surprisingly, Tunisia was characterized without qualification as a stable democratic country, raising serious question about the ability of the U.S. government to recognize, let alone encourage or support, democracy in the region. The U.S. was a key convener of a conference of foreign affairs ministers in Warsaw in June entitled Towards a Community of Democracies, to which Tunisia, Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Qatar, and Yemen were invited. In a press briefing on June 19, Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor Harold Koh said that the list of countries invited was an inclusive one which included not just countries that were established democracies, but those that were striving for democracies and those that had made a commitment on the democratic path. He added that those countries that have experienced backsliding, we hope that the conference will itself be an occasion to engage them and press them aggressively on the extent to which we found their recent progress to be lacking.
	Koh visited Tunisia in Junethe first visit to any country in the region by him or his predecessor since 1993 (see Tunisia chapter below). In October 1999, Kohs deputy, Bennett Freeman, visited Israel and also met with Palestinian officials and human rights activists.
	The State Departments Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1999, released in February 2000, continued to provide comprehensive coverage of the human rights situation in each country in the region. Kohs introduction to the report, however, which set the tone for much of the media coverage, avoided citing abuses by Middle Eastern allies of the U.S., with the exception of Saudi Arabia regarding religious freedom, and Egypt, Oman, and Yemen with regard to the practice of female genital mutilation. Inexplicably, the introduction referred approvingly to Tunisias presidential election, where President Ben Ali won with an official 99.4 percent of the vote, as a modest step forward, and pointedly failed to include Tunisia in a discussion of Middle Eastern countries where dissidents and human rights defenders face arbitrary arrest, unfair trials, and intensive surveillance. 
	In September, the State Department released its second annual congressionally-mandated report on international religious freedom, which also included chapters on each country in the region. The report cited Iran, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia for intolerance towards religious minorities, and Egypt, Israel, and Jordan for discriminatory policies. The report also noted limited improvements in Egypt, Iran, Israel, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia. According to the report, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organizations David Welch met with Saudi Arabias foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, to discuss religious freedom and human rights issues. In the Saudi Arabia chapter, the reports authors wrote that the overwhelming majority of citizens support an Islamic state and oppose public non-Muslim worship, without any indication of how this conclusion was reached concerning a country where freedom of expression is severely restricted. 
	The Congressional Research Service report on arms transfers released in August noted that the high value of U.S. arms transfer agreements with developing nations is attributable to major purchase by key U.S. clients in the Near East, and to a lesser extent in Asia, together with a continuation of well- established defense support arrangements with such purchasers. For the most recent period covered, 1996 to 1999, Middle East countries accounted for more than 65 percent of total deliveries of U.S. arms to developing countries, and the U.S. accounted for nearly 50 percent of all arms purchase agreements by Middle East states. The principal Middle East purchasers of U.S. arms in this period were Egypt ($5.8 billion), Saudi Arabia ($5.5 billion), and Israel ($4.2 billion). The report listed tanks and self-propelled guns, armored vehicles, naval vessels, supersonic aircraft, helicopters, surface-to-air missiles and anti-ship missiles as the main categories of weapons systems purchased. 
	The U.S. signed a wide-ranging free trade agreement with Jordan on October 24 similar to agreements already concluded with Canada, Mexico, and Israel. U.S. and Jordanian officials expressed hope that the agreement would attract international investment to Jordan. The Clinton Administration promoted the agreement with Jordan as a model for future trade pacts on the grounds that its provisions mandated compliance of both parties with international labor and environmental standards. 

	PRISONS

The number of people incarcerated in the United States reached two million this year, a staggering figure both in absolute terms and in terms of the incarceration rate it represented.  But the U.S. was not alone in holding record numbers of inmates.  Prisoner numbers continued to rise in countries all over the world, resulting in severe overcrowding of prisons and other detention facilities.  Although overall figures were difficult to estimate due to some countries refusal to disclose information about their penal facilities, even such basic facts as the number of inmates held, the world inmate population was roughly eight to ten million people. 
	In many countries, the high levels of official secrecy that made prisoner numbers impossible to determine were equally effective in cutting off information about even the most egregious prison abuses. By barring human rights groups, journalists, and other outside observers access to their penal facilities, prison officials sought to shield substandard conditions from critical scrutiny.  In extreme cases, including China and Cuba, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was barred from providing basic humanitarian relief to prisoners.
	While conditions of detention varied greatly from country to country and facility to facility, standards in most countries were shockingly low.  Prisons and jails in even the richest and most developed countries were plagued by severe overcrowding, decaying physical infrastructure, a lack of medical care, guard abuse and corruption, and prisoner_on_prisoner violence. With the public primarily concerned about keeping prisoners locked up rather than about the conditions in which prisoners were confined, little progress was made toward remedying these abuses.

Abusive Treatment of Prisoners
	Unchecked outbursts of violence occurred in many prisons, violating prisoners right to life.  On April 27, in what was described as the bloodiest prison conflict in Colombian history, at least twenty-five inmates were killed in Bogots Modelo prison.  The incident, which pitted rival inmate groups against each other, was sparked by the discovery of a mutilated body stuffed in a sewer pipe.
	While the body count from this incident was exceptional, the violence itself was not.  As evidenced by a subsequent prison search that resulted in the discovery of two AK-47 assault rifles, eight grenades, dozens of firearms, and several thousand knives, Modelo prison was a mini-arsenal, and violence was frequent.  Indeed, some 1,200 Colombian inmates were killed over the past decade, a disproportionate number of them in Modelo prison.  In the four years that Ive been in the Modelo Ive seen more blood and more death than in all my life of crime, said an inmate there.  The combination of severe overcrowdingthe prison housed some 4,700 inmates in space for 1,900an extreme shortage of staff, and plentiful weapons made violence inevitable.
	The Mata Grande Penitentiary in Rondonopolis, Brazil, was the scene of a similar killing spree in March.  Thirteen prisoners were murdered when a group of inmates overpowered the handful of guards that manned their cellblock, gaining entry to a neighboring area that housed their enemies.  The killings were apparently part of an effort to gain control of the prison drug trade.  Although violence was common at the prison, the police were reported to have been slow to respond to the crisis, taking three hours to enter the facility and regain control over the inmates.
	Mass killings such as these merited an occasional mention in the press, but the vast majority of inmate deaths went unnoticed.  In some countries, including Brazil, Kenya, Venezuela, and Panama, prison homicides were so frequent as to seem routine.  Inmates were usually killed by other inmates rather than by guards, but inmate_on_inmate violence was usually the predictable result of official negligence. By neglecting to supervise and control the inmates within their facilities, by failing to respond to incidents of violence, by corruptly allowing the entry of weapons into the prisons, and by generally abetting the tyranny of the strongest prisoners over the weakest, prison authorities were directly responsible for the violence of their charges.
	Prisoner death rates were often far higher than corresponding rates among the populations outside  prisons. While violence was a factor in some penal facilities, diseaseoften the predictable result of  overcrowding, malnutrition, unhygienic conditions, and lack of medical careremained the most common cause of death in prison. Food shortages in some prisons, combined with extreme overcrowding, created ideal conditions for the spread of communicable diseases.
	Tuberculosis (TB) continued to ravage prison populations around the world. The spread of TB was especially worrisome in Russia, in light of the countrys enormous inmate populationover one million prisoners as of September 2000and the increasing prevalence of multi_drug resistant (MDR) strains of the disease.  Approximately one of out every ten inmates was infected with tuberculosis, with more than 20 percent of sick inmates being affected by MDR strains, constituting a serious threat to public health.  Nor was the tuberculosis epidemic confined to Russia; rather, it swept through prisons all over the former Soviet Union.  High rates of TB were also reported in the prisons of Brazil and India, two countries with substantial inmate populations.
	The HIV/AIDS epidemic ravaged prison populations, with penal facilities around the world reporting grossly disproportionate rates of HIV infection and of confirmed AIDS cases.  In a positive development, Botswanas government introduced a bill in July to allow inmates in the late stages of AIDS and other terminal illnesses to return home to their families.  But inmates around the world frequently died of AIDS while incarcerated, often deprived of even basic medical care.
	Physical abuse of prisoners by guards remained another chronic problem. Some countries continued to permit corporal punishment and the routine use of leg irons, fetters, shackles, and chains. The heavy bar fetters used in Pakistani prisons, for example, turned simple movements such as walking into painful ordeals.  In many prison systems, unwarranted beatings were so common as to be an integral part of prison life.
	Women prisoners were particularly vulnerable to custodial sexual abuse.  The problem was widespread in the United States, where male guards outnumbered women guards in many womens prisons.  In some countries, Haiti being a conspicuous example, female prisoners were even held together with male inmates, a situation that exposed them to rampant sexual abuse and violence.
	In contravention of international standards, juvenile inmates were often held together with adults. Many of Pakistans jails and police lockups mixed juvenile and adult prisoners, as did certain detention facilities in Nicaragua, Kenya, South Africa and Zambia. Children in such circumstances frequently fell victim to physical abuse, including rape, by adult inmates.
	Extortion by prison staff, and its less aggressive corollary, guard corruption, was common in prisons around the world. Given the substantial power that guards exercised over inmates, these problems were predictable, but the low salaries that guards were generally paid severely aggravated them.  In exchange for contraband or special treatment, inmates supplemented guards salaries with bribes.  Powerful inmates in some facilities in Colombia, India, and Mexico, among others, enjoyed cellular phones, rich diets, and comfortable lodgings, while their less fortunate brethren lived in squalor.  In Argentina, as part of an effort to combat rampant guard corruption, the government launched a purge of its prison service, dismissing numerous high-ranking officials in April.  The mass firing was sparked by revelations that guards had released inmates on robbing excursions and had even sent one inmate out to kill the judge investigating these schemes.
	Overcrowdingprevalent in almost every country for which information was availablewas at the root of many of the worst abuses.  The problem was often most severe in smaller pretrial detention facilities, where, in many countries, inmates were packed together with no space to stretch or move around. In some Brazilian police lockups, where a large proportion of the countrys approximately 190,000 detainees were held, overcrowding was so acute, and floor space was at such a premium, that inmates had to tie themselves to the cell bars to sleep. In Brazil, as in many other countries, inmates often suffered long stays in these dreadful conditions.
	Another common problem was governments continued reliance on old, antiquated, and physically decaying prison facilities. Nineteenth_century prisons needing constant upkeep remained in use in a number of countries, including the United States, Mexico, Russia, Italy, and the United Kingdom, although even many modern facilities were in severe disrepair due to lack of maintenance. Notably, some prisons lacked a functional system of plumbing, leaving prisoners to slop out their cells, that is, to defecate in buckets that they periodically emptied.
	A different set of concerns was raised by the spread of ultra_modern super_maximum security prisons. Originally prevalent in the United States, where politicians and state corrections authorities promoted them as part of a politically popular quest for more austere prison conditions, the supermax model was increasingly followed in other countries. Prisoners confined in such facilities spent an average of twenty_three hours a day in their cells, enduring extreme social isolation, enforced idleness, and extraordinarily limited recreational and educational opportunities.  While prison authorities defended the use of super_maximum security facilities by asserting that they held only the most dangerous, disruptive, or escape_prone inmates, few safeguards existed to prevent other prisoners from being arbitrarily or discriminatorily transferred to such facilities.
	The small group isolation regime instituted at Turkeys Kartal Special-Type Prison was one example of this trend.  Beginning in 1999, the Turkish authorities began holding prisoners charged under the countrys Anti-Terror Law in a new cell-based system, by which inmates remained locked in shared cells for lengthy periods of time, deprived of other human contact and lacking opportunities for exercise, work, education, or other activities.  In these conditions, one detainee wrote, Your senses of taste, smell, hearing, feeling, and sight fade.  You cannot laugh at anything and you cry at the smallest thing.  Penal experts, including the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture, have warned that such conditions may endanger prisoners physical and mental health.
	Fiscal constraints and competing budget priorities were to blame for prison deficiencies in some countries, but, as the supermax example suggests, harsh prison conditions were sometimes purposefully imposed.  In Peru, notably, a punitive motive was evident in the decision to hold top-security prisoners in high-altitude Challapalca and Yanamayo prisons, whose remote locations and miserable conditions led the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to declare that they were unfit to serve as places of detention.
	Conditions in many prisons were, in short, so deficient as to constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, violating article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  Their specific failings could also be enumerated under the more detailed provisions of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. A widely known set of prison standards, the Standard Minimum Rules describe the minimum conditions which are accepted as suitable by the United Nations. Although the Standard Minimum Rules were formally integrated into the prison laws and regulations of many countries, few if any prison systems observed all of their prescriptions in practice.
	With few means to draw public attention to violations of their rights, prisoners around the world frequently resorted to hunger strikes, self_mutilation, rioting, and other forms of protest. The most dramatic such incident took place in Kazakhstan in July, when forty-four prisoners at Arkalyk prison reportedly attempted mass suicide in protest of conditions.  The inmates used razors and broken glass to slash their necks, stomachs, and wrists.  Other outbreaks of prison unrest were reported in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Czech Republic, England, Greece, Israel, Italy, Mexico, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, and Venezuela.

Unsentenced Prisoners
	Even those unsympathetic to convicted criminals and entirely skeptical of the idea of rehabilitation had reason to be concerned about the inhuman treatment of prisoners. Although comprehensive figures were impossible to obtain, the available statistics showed that a large proportion of the worlds prisoners had not been convicted of any crime, but were instead being preventively detained at some stage of the trial process.  In countries as varied as Bangladesh, Burundi, Chad, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Rwanda, Uganda, and Venezuela, unsentenced prisoners made up the majority of the prison population. Indeed, some 90 percent of Honduran, Paraguayan, and Uruguayan inmates were unsentenced. Of the more than 125,000 prisoners jailed on charges of having participated in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, only some 3,000 have been brought to trial.  
	Worse, such detainees were in many instances held for years before being acquitted of the crime with which they were charged.  Prisoners also continued to be held after the expiration of their sentences in some countries.

 Defending Prisoners Human Rights
	Struggling against the governments natural tendency toward secrecy and silence on prison abuses, the efforts of numerous local human rights groups around the worldwho  sought to obtain access to prisons, monitored prison conditions, and publicized the abuses they foundwere critical. The Moscow Center for Prison Reform, for example, has done particularly  important work in drawing attention to the dreadful conditions of Russias prisons and jails, and the TB crisis afflicting the inmate population. 
	In some countries, government human rights ombudspersons, parliamentary commissions, and other official monitors also helped call attention to abuses. In the United Kingdom, notably, the chief inspector of prisons continued his vigorous investigation and forthright criticism of conditions in the countrys penal facilities.
	  In France, two special parliamentary commissions issued scathing official reports in July that called for major reforms in that countrys prison system.  The reports noted, among other serious failings, that unsentenced prisoners made up 40 percent of the French prison population, one of the highest such rates among industrialized countries.
	At the regional level as well, prison monitoring mechanisms were active. The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) continued its important work, inspecting penal institutions in eight countries in the first nine months of 2000: Turkey, Poland, Ukraine, Cyprus, France, Italy, Lithuania, and Russia, undertaking three visits to the latter country.  As of October 2000, forty_one countries were party to the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the treaty authorizing the CPTs monitoring. 
	In Africa, the special rapporteur on prisons and conditions of detention, an adjunct to the African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights, completed his fourth year, inspecting prisons in the Gambia.

U.N. Monitoring Efforts
	The vast scale and chronic nature of human rights violations in the worlds prisons have long been of concern to the United Nations, as demonstrated by the 1955 promulgation of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. Indeed, the international communitys failure to adopt these standards in practice, even while it has embraced them in theory, has inspired the United Nations most recent prisons effort.
	For nearly a decade, a U.N. working group has been hammering out a draft treaty that would establish a U.N. subcommittee authorized to make regular and ad hoc visits to places of detention in states party to the treaty, including prisons, jails, and police lockups.  As described in the draft treatyconceived as an optional protocol to the Convention against Torturethe primary goal of the subcommittee would be to prevent torture and other ill_treatment.  Based on the information obtained during its periodic and ad hoc visits, the subcommittee would make detailed recommendations to state authorities regarding necessary improvements to their detention facilities, and the authorities would be expected to implement these recommendations.
	The proposed monitoring mechanism held great promise, yet it also had serious potential flaws. Notable among them was the possibility that the subcommittee could be entirely barred from reporting publicly on abuses it discovers, pursuant to a strict rule of confidentiality that some countries have advocated. Although the draft treaty favored cooperation between governments and the subcommittee as a means of instituting remedial measures, it must, if it is to create an effective mechanism, leave open the possibility of public reporting, at least in situations where governments stubbornly refuse to cooperate with the subcommittee or to implement its recommendations.
	The working groups most recent two_week session, in October 1999, ended without any progress being made toward the completion of a draft treaty.  The failure of the 1999 session led the head of the working group to convene intersessional consultations to assist the drafting process.  Three days of informal consultations in October highlighted the wide gap between countries on such fundamental issues as which places should be subject to visits, whether prior consent must be obtained, whether reservations to the optional protocol should be allowed, and the impact of national legislation on the nature and scope of visits.
	Other U.N. bodies pressed countries to improve their prison conditions.  In August and September, U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture Sir Nigel Rodley spent three weeks visiting police stations, prisons and other detention facilities in Brazil.  At the end of his mission to the country, he expressed deep concern over Brazils treatment of prisoners, stating that they were routinely subject to subhuman conditions and severe physical abuse.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
No Minor Matter: Children in Marylands Jails, 11/99
Out of Sight: Super_Maximum Security Confinement in the United States, 2/00
Small Group Isolation in Turkish Prisons: An Avoidable Disaster, 5/00
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND RELATED 
INTOLERANCE 

	We are served refreshment only in separate cups at roadside tea stalls, turned away from public swimming pools, stopped on highways as presumptive criminals, trafficked as prostitutes, denied our mothers nationality, classed willy-nilly as mentally disabled in schools, and abducted into slavery. 

	We are denied housing or burned out of our homes, refused fresh water from village wells, barred from employment or forced to perform degrading labor, and driven out of out of our communities or even our countries by terror. 

	We face beatings, sexual assault, wrongful arrest, or murder on a daily basis. In lieu of the birthright of equality we are marked from birth with the brand of discriminatory treatment.

These words are the distillation of testimony received by Human Rights Watch that reflect the reality of racism  as a global ill. This is the experience of countless millions  who are victims of racial discrimination, xenophobia,  and related intolerance on a daily basis. They include minorities around the worldand  some majority populations too, even in the post-apartheid era. They have in common their humanity and the denial of full equality by reason of their birth. They are the victims of the politics of exclusion, stigmatization, and scapegoatingor of targeted neglect and social invisibility. 
	The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) defines racial discrimination broadly and concretely. Adopted in 1965, its definition of racial discrimination includes any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.
	The reality of racism does not turn only on the definition of the groups that are oppressed, or on the much disputed concept of race itself, but may be driven largely by the perceptions of the oppressor. Racism blights the lives of groups defined primarily by ethnicity, caste, or an identity shaped by religion. Unlike class or other indicators of  social status, these are attributes by which people are  instantly identified and which can not readily be shed. Even if the very idea of race is discounted, racism is a very real and deadly phenomenon. 
	The convention on racial discrimination requires states to guarantee to all individuals  the enjoyment of rights without such discriminationand to ensure that public policies are discriminatory neither in purpose nor in effect. In many countries, the discriminatory effect of public policy, regardless of its intent, serves to lock people away from the exercise of civil and political rightsand by doing so bars their way to the enjoyment of economic, social, and cultural rights. 
	International action to combat racism has long been on the agenda of the United Nations and regional intergovernmental bodies, as well as the object of campaigning by  a vast constellation of nongovernmental organizations.  The apartheid regime in South Africa was a focus of much of this international effort, particularly after the dismantling of legal segregation in the United States and the gradual efforts to remedy its consequences. The end of apartheid in 1994 was a landmark in this struggle, but the challenge remained.  Just one month before Nelson Mandelas May 9, 1994, election to the South African presidency, Hutu extremists launched a campaign of genocide against the Tutsi minority in Rwanda.  
	Racism and intolerance in Africas Great Lakes region  and elsewhere persisted in many forms even where the basis of  otherness itself was clouded. The Hutu-Tutsi divide in Rwanda and neighboring states was itself founded on a blurring over time of social strata into something approximating ethnicity. The so-called ethnic cleansing of the former Yugoslavia, in turn, was driven by a racism defined by ethnicity, religion, language, and national origin. In the year 2000, millions faced violence, internal displacement, the arbitrary loss of their nationality, or expulsion from their countries by reason of their descent. Millions more faced pervasive racism that was less apparent to the casual observerbut was in its effect often no less pernicious.  
	Human Rights Watch in 2000 brought a new focus to the issue of racial discrimination as it affects migrants and refugees and populations identified by caste. The organizations work concentrated on the discriminatory impact of state policy and practice in two areas. These were discrimination in the determination of  nationality and citizenship rights, and discrimination in criminal justice and in the public administration of state institutions, services, and resources.  These issues are discussed further below. 

The World Conference 
Against Racism
	The Third World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance will be held in South Africa from August 31 to September 7, 2001. The conference will be the first forum of its kind since the end of apartheid in South Africa (previous world conferences were held in 1978 and 1983). As such, it can build upon the lessons learned in abolishing the apartheid system, while addressing the racist effect of other policies and practices that continue to afflict whole populations. Its convening reflects both the achievements of the international community and the ongoing challenges it faced in combatting racism. It should celebrate the end of apartheidbut there will be little else to celebrate unless the conference itself catalyzes real introspection by participating governments and real mechanisms for change. 
	With the end of apartheid, there was some concern that in this third conference the continuing challenge of racism would be portrayed by governments  as largely a matter of education, control, and punishment of ordinary peopleto confront racism which was in some way inherent, spontaneous, and natural. There seemed a real risk that the international community would focus first on treating racism as a social disease, its vectors of transmission the ordinary citizen, private groups, and unscrupulous Internet service providers. In initial planning sessions, the role of governments and government officials at all levels, from education ministries to community police, in imposing and enforcing policies with racist effect went largely unvoiced.  Rather, governments vied to hold themselves up as exemplars in identifying  best practices in eliminating overt racism from public policy and private practice and in their pedagogic efforts to preach tolerance. The identification and remedying of the racist effect of government policies and practices where racist intent was not clearly present were largely off the agenda. 
	The preparations for the World Conference were undertaken by governments and civil society alike. Early consultations generated new nongovernmental alliances, bringing together legal reform groups, advocates for migrants and refugees, womens rights activists, faith-based organizations, civil rights activists and human rights groups, veteran campaigners of the anti-apartheid movement, a wide spectrum of minority rights groups, and other grass-roots activists. These nongovernmental organizations have already organized scores of consultative meetings in many countries, while participating in the preparatory meetings, expert seminars, and regional conferences of the United Nations formal program.  The consultative meetings and the expert seminars have already made a significant contribution to the substance of the World Conference and should go some way toward encouraging government representatives to take seriously their responsibilities to combat racism.
	The Preparatory Committee for the World Conference identified five broad themes for the provisional agenda of the conference at its first session in May 2000. These were the sources, causes, forms,  and contemporary manifestations of racism; the victims; measures of prevention, education and protection; the provision of effective remedies; and strategies to achieve full and effective equality. In some of these areas considerable dissent was registered by powerful governments. Two governments of countries in which caste was the focus of discriminatory treatmentIndia and Japancalled for the exclusion of descent-based caste discrimination from the deliberations. Despite Indias massive lobbying effort toward exclusion of victims of caste discrimination, however, there was an apparent consensus that the conference would be inclusive in its identification of the victims of racism and related intolerance. 
	The real break in consensus emerged on the matter of remedies. A draft slate of themes prepared by the African Group of delegates had been broadly acceptable, apart from its fourth thematic point, the question of  remedies.  Dissent turned primarily on the reference to compensation, with former European colonial powers and the United States adamantly opposed to language that implied their acknowledgment of material obligations to remedy past abuses. This was  an echo of debates within the United States on the issue of reparations to address the heritage of slavery and segregation, a context that had led the drafters to choose the less politically charged  term compensatory measures. The dissenters may also have reacted negatively to the recommendation of a U.N. expert seminar on the remedies available to victims, held in preparation for the World Conference in February, on the centrality of reparations: Victims of racial discrimination are entitled to reparation in its different forms, such as restitution, compensation, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non_repetition. Monetary and non_monetary forms of reparation are equally important in rendering justice to victims of racial discrimination. Non_monetary forms of reparation include measures such as verification of the facts and their public disclosure; official declarations or judicial decisions that restore dignity and rebuild reputation; acknowledgment of the facts and acceptance of responsibility; and the commemoration and the payment of tribute to the victims.  
	A late-night compromise placed the word compensatory in brackets: The provision of effective remedies, recourse, redress, [compensatory] and other measures at the national, regional and international level, annotated by a series of explanatory statements from delegates. The Western Group reserved the right to revisit this point. The African delegates declared their intent to support the inclusion of reference to compensatory measures as founded in general principles of international human rights law establishing the right to restitution, compensation, and rehabilitation for victims of grave violations of human rights. 
	The agenda of the World Conference will be discussed further at a special inter-sessional meeting to be held in January 2001 and finalized at the second session of the  Preparatory Committee to be held in Geneva in May-June 2001. Regional conferences are to be held in Santiago, Chile (the Americas meeting, in December 2000), in Tehran, Iran  (the Asia meeting, to include part of the Middle East, in February 2001), in Dakar, Senegal (the Africa meeting, in January 2001). The European regional meeting was held in Strasbourg, France, in October. Expert seminars were held on the protection of minorities and other vulnerable groups (Warsaw, Poland, in July); on migrants and trafficking in persons, with particular reference to women and children (Bangkok, Thailand, in September), and on preventing ethnic and racial conflicts (Addis-Ababa, Ethiopia, in October). In November a seminar on race and gender is to be held in Zagreb, Croatia. 

Nationals Without Nationality
	In many parts of the world people were denied citizenship and corresponding civil rights in their own countries, or stripped of citizenship, solely because of their race or national descent. In some cases this applied to populations that had been present in a country for generations, often predating their countrys independence. In others, children born in their mothers country were denied that nationality because women could not transmit their nationality, rendering the children potentially stateless on gender grounds, or forced to take the nationality of a non_national father. 
	 Denial or removal of the rights of citizenship could be a means comprehensively to deny a population a broad range of human rights.  The issue was  most dramatic as it concerned childrens rights to a nationality and to the full exercise of human rights. Children denied citizenship  in their own country were often denied a right to education, to social services, to many areas of employment as they reached adulthood, or even to documents establishing their identity. In some cases, governments informally recognized members of particular national minorities as distinct from foreignersas in the case of Syrias large Kurdish minority, hundreds of  thousands of  members of Thailands hill tribes, or Kuwaits Bidunwhile according them a restrictive status short of full recognition as nationals:  as if citizens without citizenship.  Democratic participation in the regulation of their own communitys affairs was impossible for this disenfranchised population. International conventions on statelessness were inadequate to address this denial of citizenship rights on national or racial grounds. 
	Arbitrary deprivation of citizenship and disputed nationality was both a cause and consequence of forcible displacement of certain populations, and proved to be a significant obstacle in seeking solutions to long_standing refugee situations.  In South Asia, for example, more than 100,000 Bhutanese refugees remained in exile, the majority of them in southeast Nepal, after most of them were arbitrarily stripped of their nationality and expelled from Bhutan in the early 1990s.  Ten years later, the Bhutanese government continued to block refugee return, claiming that the majority of them were not bona fide Bhutanese citizens and hence enjoyed no right to return.
	Naturalization policies, by which non-nationals received citizenship, were often wholly or largely founded on discriminatory grounds. Denial was often the norm even for people with deep roots in a country who retained no connections with any other. In many regions, changing patterns of migration and catastrophic movements of refugees fleeing war or ethnic persecution had long moved large populations in an ebb and flow across national boundaries. Over decades these population movements resulted in large populations putting down new roots in countries to which they were relative newcomers, but who had no other country to which to return.  The children of these upheavals were the most vulnerable to discriminatory nationality policies and practices. 
	In the Middle East, statelessness most frequently stemmed from the deprivation of nationality, often as a result of conflict over the composition of a state and its borders. A situation of citizens without citizenship also derived from the failure to establish nationality at crucial junctures during the process of state formation, or the redefinition of the terms of nationality that sometimes accompanied or followed international armed conflict. The denial of citizenship was exacerbated by the persistence of nationality laws that typically made it difficult for foreigners to gain nationality, even when an individual was born in a country or resident there for many years; prevented women nationals from passing their nationality to their children; and prohibited dual nationality. Taken together, these factors produced large populations whose statelessness was inherited, and often restricted their opportunity to vote, work, register marriage, births, and deaths, own or inherit property, receive government health and educational benefits, or travel. 
	The problem of statelessness for Palestinian refugees in host countries in the region, Syrian-born Kurds, and Bidun in Kuwait and Bahrain was largely unaddressed or addressed in unsatisfactory ways.  In a report published in October 2000, Human Rights Watch criticized Kuwaits treatment of its 120,000 Bidun residents, many of whom have lived in Kuwait for decades or generations and who should be eligible for naturalization but have  not been granted it. Since the mid_1980s, they have faced widespread and systematic discrimination,  including violations of their right to enter and leave Kuwait, to marry and found a family, and to work.  Their childrens right to education, to be registered immediately after birth, and to acquire a nationality are also violated. The government of Iraq continued to force Kurds and other minorities out of the Kirkuk region and into the three northern autonomous governorates.  
	Particular calamities occurred when governments stripped whole ethnic or racial groups of their recognized nationality, most commonly in situations of upheaval or when new states emerged. Ethiopia summarily denationalized and expelled some seventy thousand Ethiopian citizens of Eritrean origin from their country by early 2000, after war broke out with Eritrea.  Governmentsand opposition groupsalso seized upon the denial of citizenship to  particular groups to further political aims in the absence of crisis, and in doing so sowed new crises. In the Ivory Coast, ethnic politics became a center-piece of political discourse, the questioning by high officials of who was a  true Ivorian leading to intercommunal violence. In Cambodia, members of the ethnic Vietnamese minority faced a new wave of  repression in November 1999, when authorities charged that some 600 ethnic Vietnamese residents of  a floating village were illegal immigrants. The villagers were long-time Cambodian citizens, according to statements to human rights workers, and they said that local authorities confiscated their identity documents before they were forced to flee  to a location near the Vietnamese border.  Discriminatory nationality and citizenship policies and practices in these circumstances were frequently accompanied by racist violence. (See Cambodia.)
	There was some good news.  On August 29, the Thai cabinet granted citizenship to the descendants of three groups of displaced persons: Burmese who entered the country prior to March 1976, Nepalese migrants, and Chinese migrants who had migrated to Thailand since the 1960s.  Members of other groups, including Thailands ethnic minority hilltribes however, remained without a nationality or full citizenship rights. Around 300,000 such people registered with the government were permitted to reside and work in the country but faced restrictions on their movement, could not participate in elections, and could not own land.  Hundreds of thousands of other hilltribe villagers remained unregistered and were officially considered as illegal immigrants. In a potentially important reform, the Thai government in May 2000 delegated decision_making on the citizenship of hilltribe children born in Thailand to district chiefs. (See Thailand.)

Migrants and Refugees
	The preparations for the World Conference come in a  climate of increasing xenophobia and racism in many world regions from which governments have not stood aloof. As economic globalization, regional economic crises, and political upheaval have stimulated movement of people across national borders,  migrants and refugees in particular have been assailed by new measures of discrimination on an enormous scale. Migration and refugee policies are increasingly driven by xenophobic and racist attitudes. The open expression of racist views  by politicians and through the media increasingly threatens the protection of refugees and migrants worldwide, with many governments indicating a greater interest  in erecting barriers and keeping people out than in providing protection.
	In Western Europe, the weakening of the refugee protection regime has been accompanied by both subtle and blatant forms of racist and xenophobic rhetoric. Asylum seekers and migrantsand by extension members of  minorities in generalhave been branded as criminals and job usurpers. This scapegoating provided tools for political mobilization by nationalist parties and even by some in the mainstream. The physical and psychological abuse of migrant workers is fueled by this racist rhetoricand by impunity for such abuse. Women migrant domestic workers who are sexually assaulted are discouraged from seeking legal redress for sexual violence for fear of immediate detention and summary deportation. Racist abuse by private citizens, as the police stand by, is paralleled by a disturbing trend toward racist violence by the police. Some of the countries of Africa, Asia, and the Middle East that have traditionally hosted the vast majority of the worlds refugees cited Western European precedents in justifying their adoption of similar restrictions, while mostly continuing to provide generous refuge to the bulk of the worlds refugees. 
	Several U.N. bodies criticized Australias treatment of refugeesand of its aboriginal minorityin 2000, prompting a harsh rejoinder from that countrys government. In the Pacific, ethnic tensions rooted in longstanding social and economic grievances and a perception on the part of indigenous elites of dispossession by migrants or their descendants, led to a coup in Fiji in May and an attempted coup in the Solomon Islands in June.
	Trends in human population movements and toward an increasingly international labor force make it particularly urgent to address racism as a factor in the generation of  and response to migration and refugee flows, and in its relation to international and domestic conflict. Women migrants and girls suffered in particular, through trafficking and forced prostitution, from their lack of protection in the work place, and in constraints on family life imposed by migration and the specter of statelessness.  Xenophobia, often whipped up by political or religious leaders, served to stimulate discriminatory treatment involving ever greater violence.
	Foreign workers were violently attacked in Libya, where hundreds of thousands of Africans reportedly migrated over the past several years in search of work. Some fifty Chadian and Sudanese migrants were reported killed in clashes between Africans and Libyans near Tripoli in September. Thousands of other migrant workers reportedly fled the country as a consequence of the attacks. 
	The  movement of refugees, migrants, and victims of trafficking was a major issue in Asia, with protection inevitably requiring intergovernmental cooperation. To combat trafficking of Thai women to Japan, for example, both the Thai and Japanese governments needed to reform legislation and crack down on corruption of police and immigration officials. To protect foreign migrant workers against abuse in Malaysia or Korea, countries exporting labor needed to prosecute illegal labor recruiters while the receiving countries needed to step up investigations and prosecutions of abusive employers. 

Racist Impact: Criminal Justice and Public Administration
	A key to the fight against discrimination was to monitor public policy which, through state action or inaction,  discriminated in effect. To this end Human Rights Watch urged states to introduce transparency in governmental practices and monitor the potentially discriminatory effect of policies and practices on people within their jurisdiction. In addition to obstacles to political participation by citizens, the area of criminal justice had a particular potential for discriminatory effect, and at the national or local level involved practiceslike racial profiling, in which ones race was the determining factor in falling under suspicionwith racist intent.  Broader areas of public administration, notably the regulation of public health, housing, employment, and education, also required scrutiny, as alternatively constituting gateways or insuperable obstacles to the enjoyment of fundamental rights. The potential for public policies or practices to have unequal and negative consequences for particular groups required particular scrutiny.
	The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in its General Recommendation on article 1, paragraph 1 of CERD, concluded  that  the convention obliges states to nullify any law or practice which has the effect of creating or perpetuating racial discrimination. (Emphasis added.) As a consequence, it declared that in considering whether differentiation of treatment constituted discrimination, it will look to see whether that action has an unjustifiable disparate impact upon a group distinguished by race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin.  (Emphasis added.)  Such policies or practices could be expressly racist, or, while appearing race neutral, reflect a malign neglect, a refusal to take needed actions to secure equal treatment of all racial and ethnic groups.  Minorities in Turkey, for example, were  statistically invisible as a matter of public policy: the very existence of  a Kurdish minority was denied by the state and reporting on the deprivation of this minoritys rights is criminally sanctioned.
	In many societies, racism was most evident in the area of criminal justice;  in the administration of social services, education, and public housing; and even in restrictions of  freedom of movement and the right to live in a particular area of ones own country. In the states of the former USSR, control of movement and residence continued to be exercised at the national, provincial, or municipal level. In Russia, the enforcement of these restrictions often assumed ethnic or racial dimensions, while implementation of  residency controls through the propiska system of permits served as a pretext for the police harassment, arbitrary arrest, and extortion of  people distinguished by their racial characteristics. Moscow police  in September 1999 were given carte blanche in the wake of  two bombing incidents there to carry out mass arrests of  ethnic Chechens living in the city, taking more than twenty thousand Chechens to police stations. Administrative measures kept Chechen children out of school,  while adults had trouble finding work, registering marriages, or receiving passports. (See Russia.)
	In the United States, racial discrimination in the criminal justice system was increasingly the object of concernproblems the United States went some way to address in submitting its initial report to the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in September (as required as a party to CERD). The report, although five years late, frankly acknowledged dramatically disproportionate incarceration rates for minorities in the criminal justice system and cited studies indicating that members of minority groups, especially blacks and Hispanics, may be disproportionately subject to adverse treatment throughout the criminal justice process. It further acknowledged concerns that incidents of police brutality seem to target disproportionately individuals belonging to racial or ethnic minorities. The report, however,  did not question whether ostensibly race-neutral criminal laws or law enforcement practices causing the incarceration disparities violated CERD, nor did it acknowledge the federal governments obligation, under CERD, to ensure that state criminal justice systems (which account for 90 percent of the incarcerated population) are free of racial discrimination. 
	Criminal justice policies in the United States permanently stripped many of its nationals of fundamental civil rights in a manner disproportionately affecting minorities.  A growing number of citizens were unable to vote because of laws that disenfranchise people convicted of felonies who are in prison, on probation, or on paroleand even, in one quarter of the states, who have finished serving their sentences. An estimated 3.9 million U.S. citizens were disenfranchised, including over one million who had fully completed their sentences. Black Americans were particularly hard hit by disenfranchisement laws: 13 percent of  black men1.4 millionwere disenfranchised. In  two states, almost one in three black men was unable to vote because of a felony conviction. (See United States.)  
	Discrimination in criminal justice and public policy was perhaps most pervasive and deep rooted where discrimination was founded on caste, or, as in the United States, where the heritage of  slavery and legislated segregation remained potent factors.  This sometimes embraced hidden forms of racism that had extraordinary rights-defeating consequences. In India, the emancipation by law of members of  castes once known as untouchablesand now known as Dalitsfailed to eliminate the norms and structures of Indias  hidden apartheid.  De facto segregation continued to be enforced by government authority ranging from the police and lower courts to state and municipal officials. There are more than 160 million Dalits in India and tens of millions of others with similar caste distinctions in other South Asian countries.  
	The U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women raised concerns about the caste system during its February review of Indias initial report under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.  The committee expressed concern over extreme forms of physical and sexual violence against women belonging to particular castes or ethnic or religious groups India. The U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child, in turn, concluded in January that the caste system was an obstacle to childrens human rights.  In Japan, the minority caste known as Burakumin also faced discriminatory treatment, despite the Burakumins de jure equality. The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination ruled authoritatively in 1996 that the situation of Indias scheduled castes, which were based on descent, fell within the scope of the convention. (See India.)
	The de facto segregation of the Roma minority in many nations of Eastern Europe became increasingly visible as European political institutions raised ongoing discriminatory treatment there as a major obstacle to European integration. Harassment and violent attacks against Roma were reported in Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, Serbia, and Slovakia, and expulsion from homes and communities was widely reported.  Roma children often lacked access to schools in Croatia, and in the Czech Republic they were disproportionately shunted into classes for the mentally disabled. In Serbia, Croatia, Hungaryand in the European Union in Greecemunicipal authorities forced Roma out of their homes. In Bulgaria, residents in a neighborhood of Burgas signed a petition on November 4, 1999, calling for the expulsion of Roma and the demolition of Roma houses; villagers in Mechka made Roma scapegoats for a crime committed in April, refusing to allow Roma in public places and threatening them with expulsion from the town. In Serbia, Roma in Sabac were turned away from a public swimming pool.  In Slovakia, the head of the National Labor Office  in November 1999 defended the  offices policy of marking files of persons regarded as Roma with the letter R which he said reflected the complicated social adaptability of the group. The denial of nationality to Roma was also an issue in recent years in the Czech and Slovak Republics, but had been addressed by legislative reform. 

The Work of Human Rights Watch
	The focus of Human Rights Watch in the lead up to the 2001 conference was upon four neglected areas in which the racist effect of government policies and practices vitiated the rights of  huge sectors of  humanity.  They included an emphasis on issues concerning two groups which required particular protectionmigrants and refugees, who in their tens of millions were increasingly vulnerable as a consequence of globalization and political upheaval; and the possibly hundreds of millions of individuals who were oppressed by reason of caste. In both cases, a particular emphasis was made on the double discrimination faced by women who were victimized both by reason of their origins and their gender. The focus was also on policies and practices regarding nationality and racial discrimination in criminal justice and public administration.  
	Human Rights Watch took part in regular briefings of national and international bodies regarding  its findings and recommendations regarding situations of racial discrimination.  In August, in response to a NGO briefing organized by the International Dalit Solidarity Networkof which Human Rights Watch is a memberthe U.N. Sub_Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights passed without a vote a resolution on discrimination on the basis of work and descent.  The resolution was aimed at addressing the plight of Dalits. 
	Human Rights Watch delegates participated in May in the first session of the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference, in Geneva, and took part in the European conference in Strasbourg in October, the first of the five regional conferences to be held. Human Rights Watch had also participated in a series of United States regional meetings of nongovernmental organizations to plan activities around the World Conference. Human Rights Watch presented a paper to the European conference jointly with the European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE) concerning the human rights of refugees and migrants, in a critique of the draft General Conclusions of the European Conference Against Racism. 
	Human Rights Watch explored practical measures behind which to mobilize international action to address these issues during and beyond the World Conference, including:  
  	A call to end the deprivation of citizenship on racial and related grounds, including their intersection with gender. International agreements on statelessness should be ratified as a matter of priority; but these standards alone are inadequate to eliminate this widespread and devastating form of discrimination; 
	 A call to develop an international program of action to make caste- or other descent-based segregation, violence, and abuse as intolerable as apartheid;
 	A call to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families as a measure of protection against discriminatory treatment; to apply international refugee law to refugees without discrimination; and to improve international monitoring by which to detect and remedy discriminatory treatment of migrants and refugees.
 	A call for states to systematically collect and report information on law enforcement and the administration of justice, including juvenile justice, as it concerns different population groups, with a view to identifying and remedying any discriminatory purpose or effect; 
 	A call for states to monitor the administration of public affairs in such areas as education, health care, housing, and the enforcement of labor rights, in order to identify and remedy any discriminatory purpose or effect in public policy and programs.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports: 
Bosnia and Hercegovina: Unfinished Business: Return of Displaced Persons and Other Human Rights Issues in Bijeljina, 5/00
Burma/Bangladesh:  Burmese Refugees in Bangladesh: Still No Durable Solution, 5/00
Burundi: Neglecting Justice in Making Peace, 4/00
Burundi: Emptying the Hills: Regroupment Camps in Burundi, 7/00
China: Tibet Since 1950: Silence Prison or Exile, 5/00
Democratic Republic of the Congo: Eastern Congo Ravaged: Killing Civilians and Silencing Protest, 5/00
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Kosovo: Rape As A Weapon of Ethnic Cleansing, 3/00 
Japan: Owed Justice: Thai Women Trafficked into Debt Bondage in Japan, 9/00
Kuwait: Promises Betrayed: Denial of Rights of Bidun, Women, and Freedom of Expression, 10/00
Malaysia/Burma: Living in Limbo: Burmese Rohingyas in Malaysia, 8/00
Russia/Chechnya: No Happiness Remains: Civilian Killings, Pillage, and Rape in Alkhan_yurt, Chechnya, 3/00
Russia/Chechnya: February 5: A Day of Slaughter in Novye Aldi, 6/00
Rwanda: The Search for Security and Human Rights Abuses, 4/00
Turkey: Human Rights and the European Union Accession Partnership, 9/00
United States: Fingers to the Bone:United States Failure to Protect Child Farmworkers, 6/00
United States: No Minor Matter: Children in Marylands Jails, 11/99
United States: Punishment and Prejudice: Racial Disparities in the War on Drugs, 5/00

REFUGEES,  ASYLUM SEEKERS, AND INTERNALLY 
DISPLACED PERSONS

50 Years On: What Future for International Refugee Protection?
How countries treat those who have been forced to flee persecution and human rights abuse elsewhere is a litmus test of their commitment to defending human rights and upholding humanitarian values.  Yet, fifty years after its inception, the states that first established a formal refugee protection system appeared to be abandoning this principle, and the future of the international refugee regime was under serious threat.
	The year 2000/2001 marked the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of an international refugee protection regime, set up primarily by European states to respond to the needs of some 30 million people displaced during the Second World War. In December 1950, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was established and in July 1951 an international instrument to protect the rights of refugeesthe 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951 convention)came into effect. 
	At the core of the international refugee regime is the fundamental right of any individual to seek and enjoy asylum from persecution in other countries.  Enshrined in article 14 (1) of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the principle of asylum recognizes that when all other forms of human rights protection have failed, individuals must be able to leave their country freely and seek refuge elsewhere.  The availability of asylum can literally be a matter of life or death for those at risk of persecution or abuse.  

A Changing Climate for Refugees
	Until the 1990s most refugee movements were a consequence of Cold War politics, and refugees often had a strategic geopolitical value in the arena of superpower rivalry.  Their existence was used either to discredit countries of origin, or to bolster the image of receiving countries and strengthen alliances with superpower partners, as in the case of Nicaraguan refugees in Honduras, Afghans in Pakistan, and Cambodians in Thailand. 
	Several factors coincided at the beginning of the 1990s to change the political environment for refugees.  First, the end of the Cold War era caused refugees to lose much of their geopolitical and military value.  Host countries preferred to establish good political and economic relations with their neighbors and refugees were viewed as a potential irritant.  Many refugee hosting countries, affected by regional economic crises, claimed that fewer resources were available to host large, long_term refugee populations or fund lengthy and expensive asylum determination procedures.  Refugees were made scapegoats for many countries domestic problem and blamed for threatening national or regional security, draining resources, degrading the environment, and rising crime.  Politicians shamelessly employed xenophobic rhetoric to win electoral support and, with the popular press, peddled images of floods of refugees and immigrants pouring into their countries.  In the industrialized states, particularly, many governments became obsessed with erecting barriers to keep people out, rather than providing protection.  
	While this was occurring, the convergence of political and economic instability throughout much of the world with the increasing global accessibility of international communications and travel meant that larger numbers of people were on the movesome to escape the misery of economic privations, others to escape persecution, conflict, and gross human rights abuse.  As legal channels of migration were curbed, people turned increasingly to alternative methods to reach their country of destination, including the services of opportunistic, exploitative and often dangerous human trafficking and smuggling rings that were able to circumvent routine migration controls.  By the end of the 1990s, governments, particularly in industrialized states, viewed the trafficking and smuggling of persons as one of the most serious aspects of transnational organized crime and joined forces in a concerted drive to end the practice.  Unfortunately, protecting the human rights of trafficked and smuggled persons was not the primary motive behind these efforts.  Instead, combating human trafficking and smuggling became  these governments' primary response to the asylum and migration issue.  Much less attention was paid to why asylum seekers and migrants made use of such methods to reach their country of destination or to the root causes of such outflows, and even less to the need to preserve the right of all persons, regardless of their means of travel, to seek and enjoy asylum from persecution

Industrialized States:  The Beginning and the End of Refugee Protection?

Western Europe
	Nowhere was the retraction in protection more pronounced than in the industrialized countries of Western Europe, North America, and Australiathe very countries responsible for establishing the international refugee regime.  Western European countries made particularly vigorous and visible efforts to control inflows of asylum seekers and perceived abuse of the asylum system.  The pursuit of a zero immigration policy throughout Western Europe since the 1970s, and the closure of almost all alternative legal channels of immigration, coupled with the global trends described above, led to a marked increase in the number of people applying for asylum in Western European countries between 1985 (157,280 applicants) and 1992 (673,947 applicants).  Governments perceived that the asylum system was being abused by individuals who were leaving their countries for economic reasons rather than in pursuit of international protection.  Racist violence rose in many countries, fueled by the anti_immigration rhetoric of politicians and the media, creating a hostile environment for refugees and migrants throughout the region. 

Harmonization of European Asylum Policy
	During the 1990s, European Union (E.U.) countries sought to harmonize their immigration and asylum policies.  This process started in the early 1990s with various non_binding resolutions adopted by member states of the then European Community on different aspects of asylum policy.  Two important treaties, the Schengen Agreement on common border controls, and the Dublin Convention establishing arrangements for identifying state responsibility for assessing asylum applications came into effect in 1997 and 1994, respectively.
	The 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam, effective from May 1999, further advanced harmonization, as states determined common criteria for dealing with asylum applicants, reception of asylum seekers, family reunification, and deportation policies.  A disturbing protocol to the treaty restricted the right of E.U. citizens to seek asylum in another E.U. state.
	In an effort to proceed from the agenda established in the Amsterdam Treaty, in October 1999 a Special Meeting of the European Council on the Establishment of an Area of Freedom, Security and Justice was held in Tampere, Finland.  The Presidency Conclusions of the Tampere European Council were generally viewed as a positive development by advocacy groups as they included a  a reaffirmation of the right to seek asylum, and a commitment to work towards the establishment of a common European asylum system based on the full and inclusive application of the 1951 convention and to harmonize European asylum policies with guarantees to those who seek protection in or access to the European Union.  Less positive, however, was the continuing emphasis on common policies to contain and control asylum and migration movements.
	In December 1998, the E.U. High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration was set up to produce Action Plans on the root causes of migration in six major refugee and migrant producing countries.  The Action Plans focused on integrated strategies to control migration outflows both from the regions of origin and into E.U. countries. 
	In July 2000, the French government, then holding the E.U. presidency, issued an action plan to improve the control of immigration.  Similar to other such E.U. initiatives, the French proposed an information exchange, early warning, and response system to coordinate E.U. member states response to waves of immigration, characterized as a fire-brigade policing approach.  In addition, they proposed establishing a network of E.U. immigration liaison officers in principal migration source countries to help control migration flows.
  
Access to Asylum Barred
	Central to the right to seek asylum is the principle of freedom of movement and the right of an individual to leave any country, including their own.  Yet European asylum policy systematically obstructed these rights during the 1990s.  Most explicit was the introduction of visa requirements for nationals of common refugee producing countries, including those with well_documented human rights problems, such as China, Burma, Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone, Turkmenistan, and Rwanda.  Beginning with a September 1995 Regulation, the E.U. maintained a common list of countries whose nationals were required to obtain visas before entering the territory of any E.U. state.  The October 1999 Presidency Conclusions of the Tampere European Council, and a draft 2000 European Commission (E.C.) Regulation on a common visa regime, also contributed to a standardization of visa imposition across the European Union.  As no would_be refugee was likely to be able to obtain a visa to come to a Western European country, this effectively forced asylum seekers either to travel on false or forged documents, or with no documentation.
	At the same time, E.U. countries introduced legislation that penalized asylum seekers who traveled on forged or false documents and the companies that transported them.  Carriers' liability legislation, resulting in heavy fines for airlines and shipping companies that transported undocumented or incorrectly documented migrants, became a requirement under the Schengen Agreement on border controls.  Private travel companies were effectively made responsible for front_line immigration controls and they began to take proactive measures to avoid the fines, including rigorous pre_departure immigration checks by airline staff.
	The E.U. adopted a new policy on border control in October 1996, establishing airline liaison officers.  By July 2000, the U.K., Danish, German, and Dutch governments were all using immigration officers in their embassies and consulates in main refugee-generating countries to assist airline staff in checking the authenticity of travel documents.  In a July 2000 report, UNHCR criticized efforts to intercept potential asylum seekers at the point of departure without a substantive review of their asylum claim as an obstruction of the right to seek asylum which could amount to constructive refoulement if individuals were thereby prevented from leaving countries where their lives and freedom were threatened.  
	Those asylum seekers who did manage to evade pre_departure border controls and reach their country of destination faced punitive measures on arrival.  Increasingly, asylum seekers who arrived in E.U. countries with false, forged, or no documents were immediately detainedostensibly for short periods to allow the authorities to verify their identity, but in practice often for weeks or months.  Illegal entry also impacted negatively on refugee status determination procedures.  Asylum seekers who entered illegally were often given fast_track assessments, or considered as manifestly unfounded cases, and their means of entry contributed to negative assessments of credibility. 
	Article 31 of the 1951 convention explicitly exempted refugees who come directly from the territory where they fear persecution from punishment for illegal entry, provided that they present themselves without delay to the authorities and show good cause for their illegal entry or presence.  Long before the virtual cordon sanitaire was created around Western Europe, the drafters of the 1951 convention recognized that many refugees must leave their countries under extreme circumstances and have little opportunity to obtain legal travel documents or permission to enter their country of asylum.

Containment in the Region
	E.U. and other states also sought increasingly to contain refugee movements within their region of origin.  This began in January 1998 with the E.U.s Action Plan on the Influx of Migrants from Iraq and the Neighboring Region, a panicked response to fears of a possible mass influx of Turkish and Iraqi Kurds into Western Europe.  The proposal set the tone for Action Plans on Somalia, Afghanistan, Morocco, Iraq, and Sri Lanka prepared by the E.U. High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration.  These dealt cursorily with preventive measures such as conflict resolution, development, and poverty reduction in refugees countries of origin, but focused primarily on exporting migration controls, such as airport liaison officers, anti_immigration information campaigns, and readmission arrangements to the source countries.  While welcoming the comprehensive approach to migration that addressed root causes as well as migration policies, advocacy groups criticized the action plans for failing effectively to address human rights violations in countries of origin and the need for refugee protection for those who fled such violations.  Like the first Iraq action plan, the overriding aim of the High Level Working Group action plans appeared to be containing migration in the region and preventing flows of asylum seekers and migrants to E.U. countries.


1951 Refugee Convention Under Threat
	Western European governments sought to dilute their obligations under the 1951 convention and its 1967 protocol, despite reaffirming the centrality of these treaties in both the 1997 Amsterdam Treaty and the 1999 Presidency Conclusions of the Tampere European Council.  In particular, they applied the refugee definition in an overly restrictive way, not intended by the drafters of the convention, thereby excluding many people at risk of persecution from international refugee protection.  Those excluded included people who fled persecution by non_state agents, such as the Taliban in Afghanistan, or situations of generalized violence and civil conflict, as in Colombia.  Governments also insisted that asylum seekers demonstrate actual persecution, not just a credible fear of future persecution.  Advocacy groups, such as the non-governmental European Council on Refugees and Exiles, argued that these narrow interpretations were inconsistent with international refugee law. 
	E.U. states also introduced various alternative, or complementary, protection regimes as substitutes for 1951 convention  protection.  Under most of these regimes, states granted asylum seekers temporary leave to remain on humanitarian grounds, but did not extend to them the full rights and protection of 1951 convention refugee status.  These alternative regimes were often highly discretionary with no consistency between E.U. states regarding the length of stay allowed or the rights afforded to the individual.  Moreover, temporary protectionwhich was initially intended to deal with mass influx emergencies where states were unable to conduct individual refugee status determinationwas increasingly applied as a subsidiary form of refugee protection.
	Taken together, the overly restrictive application of the 1951 convention and the increasing use of alternative, subsidiary forms of protection resulted in states narrowing their obligations under the 1951 convention, the denial of meaningful protection for those in need, and serious erosion of the international refugee protection regime.   Added to this, between 1998 and 2000 various E.U. governments proposed drastic revisions to the 1951 convention in order to make it more relevant to contemporary migration challenges.  The Austrian government, while holding the E.U. presidency, first proposed this in a July 1998 strategy paper that depicted the 1951 convention as a product of the Cold War period that had never been intended to deal with contemporary large_scale refugee movements caused by civil war, inter_ethnic violence, and persecution by non_state agents.  The Austrians proposed a comprehensive, integrated approach to migration that addressed trade and development, as well as migration policy.  This proposal, particularly its reference to the need to amend the 1951 convention, was considered too radical by most E.U. states at the time.
	British Home Secretary Jack Straw reopened the issue in June 2000, at a conference organized by the Portuguese E.U. presidency on a common European asylum system, launching a vigorous attack on the relevance and efficacy of the 1951 convention.  He claimed that the European asylum system was massively abused by economic migrants who had no credible asylum claim and who were brought to Europe by highly organized criminal trafficking or smuggling syndicates.  He characterized the 1951 convention as inadequate and never intended to deal with contemporary massive intercontinental migratory movement.  
	He proposed a new approach to refugee protection whereby E.U. states would designate those countries and ethnic groups most at risk of persecution, agree on quotas of asylum seekers from these countries, and determine asylum claims within regions of origin.  He also proposed a list of safe countries which would include all E.U. states, the U.S., Canada, Australia and many others (our emphasis) from which applications for asylum would not be considered.  A third group would include the accession states and others where there would be a general presumption of safety and asylum claims would be considered under an accelerated process.  
	The British proposal was a worrying return to the notion of safe countries of origin and highlighted yet again the lack of commitment amongst European governments to upholding the right of all individuals to leave their countries and seek asylum. 

Australia:  Xenophobia and Threats to Asylum
	Australia also increasingly pursued a punitive asylum policy and showed little regard for either abiding or being judged by international human rights standards.  Despite only receiving a tiny proportion of the worlds refugees9,450 asylum applicants in 1999, compared with 95,110 applicants in GermanyAustralia reacted with disproportionate zeal to a perceived threat of being overwhelmed by floods of foreigners brought in through illegal people trafficking and smuggling. 
	Australia pursued a draconian policy of mandatory detention for all asylum seekers and other non_citizens who arrived though illegal channels with forged, illegal, or no documents, and who declared themselves as asylum seekers on arrival.  In July 2000, the U.N. Human Rights Committee criticized Australia for its mandatory detention policies and for not informing, nor allowing , NGOs access to inform detainees of their right to seek legal advice.  Asylum seekers were kept in remote detention centers thousands of miles away from major population centers.  
	In October 1999, Australia made amendments to its 1958 Migration Act that, according to UNHCR, seriously undermined refugee protection.  Refugees arriving in an unauthorized manner were refused family reunification rights for a minimum of thirty months after they received refugee status and were not provided with travel documents in violation of article 31 of the 1951 convention; article 28 of the 1951 convention, which provides for travel documents for refugees that permit re_entry; and fundamental principles of family unity upheld in the 1951 convention, in UNHCR Executive Committee Conclusions, and in other international human rights instruments.  
	On August 29, 2000, the Australian government stated that it would restrict future cooperation with U.N. bodies and in particular reject treaty bodies requests to delay the deportation of unsuccessful asylum seekers.  This followed two high profile interventions by the U.N. Committee against Torture seeking a delay in the return of asylum seekers until it had considered their claims that they would face torture in the countries they had fled.  The government also announced that it would undertake a comprehensive review of the interpretation and implementation of the 1951 convention and consider the need for remedial legislation.  
	
The Global Picture
	 The anti_refugee policies and xenophobic attitudes of industrialized states had significant global export value.  Traditionally generous hosting countries in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East referred to the example set in the West when defending their own increasingly restrictive policies and practices.  Nevertheless, the worlds poorer nations continued to host the vast majority of the worlds refugees and in times of crisis endeavored to keep their doors open to those fleeing civil conflict and gross human rights abuse.

Africa
	Traditionally one of the most generous refugee hosting regions in the world, recent years saw a significant shift in African refugee policies.  The plethora of violent internal and regional conflicts that plagued so many African countries over the past decade meant that at the turn of the century few countries were immune from refugee crises.  Yet the presence of militia groups within refugee settlements and the fear that mass refugee movements would result in instability and conflicts spilling over national borders made host countries increasingly wary and contributed to more restrictive refugee policies and, in some cases, lack of safe asylum.  The Great Lakes refugee crisissparked by the Rwandan genocide in 1994 and subsequent and continuing mass movements of refugees across as many as nine countries, and the conspicuous and destabilizing presence of military and political elements in refugee campsheralded the end of the legacy of generous asylum and open_door policies for refugees in Central and East Africa.

West Africa
	By mid-2000, a similar scenario was unfolding in West Africa, where a deteriorating security situation threatened the safety of hundreds of thousands of refugees.  Host to the second largest refugee population in Africa, Guinea earned a reputation as a generous country of refuge.  By September 2000, there were nearly half a million refugees330,00 Sierra Leoneans and 126,000 Liberiansinside Guinea. 
	This pattern of generous hospitality was seriously threatened by the deteriorating security situation in the region in 2000.  A rapid influx of refugees into Guinea from Sierra Leone from May onwards and fears of infiltration by Sierra Leonean rebels, prompted the Guinean government to close its borders with Sierra Leone in early August, although vulnerable groups were subsequently allowed entry following interventions by UNHCR.  Tensions rose between Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia from late July onwards, as each country accused the other of supporting rebel activity.  A series of cross_border attacks from both Liberia and Sierra Leone between August and October claimed the lives of hundreds of Guinean civilians and injured many others.  Most of these attacks occurred close to the Sierra Leonean and Liberian borders in exactly the same areas where the refugee camps were located.  
	The attacks resulted in serious reprisals against Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees in Guinea, both in the border camps and in the cities.  On September 9, Guinean President Lansana Conte made an inflammatory broadcast in which he blamed refugees for harboring rebels and urged the Guinean population to round_up all foreigners.  For several days, armed groups of civilian militias, police, and soldiers broke into the homes of Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees in Conakry, beat, raped, and arrested them, and looted their belongings.  Over five thousand people were detained and hundreds more sought refuge in the Sierra Leonean and Liberian embassies.  Hundreds of refugees fled Guinea, many of them by boat back to Sierra Leone.  Despite pleas for calm and assurances by government officials that Guinea would remain a safe country of asylum for refugees, President Conte made further anti-refugee statements in a speech marking the anniversary of Guineas independence on October 2. 
	The situation for refugees in camps along the Liberian and Sierra Leonean borders was also critical.  Several camps in the Forecariah region on the border with Sierra Leone were attacked by Sierra Leonean rebels and by Guinean civilians, forcing thousands of refugees to flee back into rebel_controlled areas of Sierra Leone.  At the same time, Guineas borders with Sierra Leone and Liberia remained closed to refugees fleeing conflict and human rights violations, and refugees in Guinea were faced with the unenviable choice of remaining unprotected in Guinea, or returning to Liberia and Sierra Leone. 

Guinea in Perspective

Security versus Asylum: The Case of Thailand
	The situation in Guinea exemplified two worrying trends.  The first was governments readiness to indiscriminately blame and take actions against foreigners and refugees when faced with national security threats.  In Thailand, for example, the government reacted harshly when Burmese gunmen seized the Burmese embassy in Bangkok in October 1999 and took five hundred people hostage in the Ratchaburi provincial hospital in January 2000.  Following these events, the authorities announced that all refugees should move to camps along the border and Maneeloy Student Center, a camp for dissident Burmese refugees, would be closed.  Thai authorities deported five Burmese, four of whom had applied for refugee status with UNHCR, to the border town of Myawaddy where they were arrested by the Burmese authorities.  Provincial admission boards were set up to determine asylum claims, and refugee protection was restricted only to those fleeing fighting in Burma.  All other Burmese were declared to be illegal immigrants and risked forcible repatriation to Burma.  In June, the Thai authorities expelled 116 refugees from Don Yang refugee camp in Kanchanaburi Province, and in August, Thai officials returned around one hundred ethnic minority Karen from Nu Pho Camp in Rak province.

Disparity in International Response: The Kosovo Factor
	The second trend highlighted by the Guinea crisis was the gross disparity in the international response to refugee crises.  Despite the similarities with the situation in Macedonia during the Kosovo emergency in 1999, the difference in the international response to the two situations was striking.  Unlike Macedonia, where the international community poured in resources and reacted quickly to evacuate refugees and thus relieve the pressure on Macedonia and help to keep the borders open, the international response to the crisis in Guinea was negligible.  The crisis hardly touched the world media headlines, international funding was seriously lacking, and there was certainly no airlifting of refugees to safety in Western countries.

Attacks on Humanitarian Workers Threaten Refugee Protection
	A major threat to refugee protection throughout 2000 was the alarming spate of attacks on humanitarian workers.  The brutal murders of three UNHCR staff members in Atambua, West Timor, on September 6, and the murder of the head of the UNHCR office and abduction of another staff member in Macenta, Guinea, on September 17, highlighted the extreme dangers  for humanitarian workers worldwide.  The murders provoked a global protest and prompted UNHCR to withdraw all staff from West Timor, as well as from the border areas of Guinea.  At the same time, they left refugees in these areas almost completely unprotected and unassisted with no outside witnesses to abuses.  

West Timor	
	Despite the return of over 170,000 refugees to East Timor since mass forced expulsions in 1999,  as many as 125,000 refugees remained in camps in West Timor where many of them had been held hostage by the same militia leaders responsible for the violence that had erupted in East Timor following the pro_independence referendum vote in September 1999.  Human Rights Watch charged continuously throughout 1999 and 2000 that the Indonesian authorities and army had failed to disarm the militia or prevent attacks on refugees in the camps and on humanitarian workers assisting them.  In September 2000, UNHCR reported a total of 120 incidents of attacks, harassment, and intimidation of humanitarian workers and refugees since it established a presence in West Timor a year earlier.  In August 2000, UNHCR was forced to close down its operations in the camps when three of its staff members were attacked and seriously injured while delivering assistance to Naen camp, outside Kefamenaunu town.  The murder of the three staff in Atambua occurred within a week of UNHCR resuming its operations.  
	Following the withdrawal of nearly all international staff from West Timor, the camps were largely cut off from any international assistance or protection and there was little information about conditions inside.   Most critically, Human Rights Watch and local NGOs expressed serious concerns that the registration of the refugees by the Indonesian authorities without minimal safeguards to ensure freedom of choice and in the absence of international monitoring could result in the forcible relocation of refugees to other parts of Indonesia against their will.  The U.N., on the other hand, insisted that they would not return staff to West Timor until credible security guarantees were in place.  These included the arrest and trial of the perpetrators of the UNHCR murders and other attacks on humanitarian workers; the complete disarming and disbanding of the militias; and the restoration of law, order and security in the camps in West Timor.  More than a month after the killings, although the Indonesian authorities had arrested six suspects, there was no evidence that the militias had been brought under control or that law and order had been restored to the camps.
	The situations in Guinea and West Timor posed a grave dilemma for the international community.  On the one hand, it was clearly unacceptable for humanitarian workers to be the targets of deliberate and vicious attacks.  On the other, the withdrawal of all international staff considerably increased the vulnerability of displaced people and their exposure to attacks, forced return, and other abuses.  Until governments are able to ensure the security of humanitarian workers, the protection of some of the worlds most vulnerable populations will be seriously at risk.

Protecting Refugee Women 
and Children
	Throughout the year, refugee women were victims of sexual and domestic violence.  In Guinea, for example, women were targeted in the retaliatory attacks on refugees in the wake of President Contes inflammatory anti-refugee declarations.  Human Rights Watch reported on the rape of Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugee women by groups of armed civilian militia, police, and soldiers in the September attacks in Conakry.  Women, some of them as young as fourteen, were rapedin many cases gang rapedsexually assaulted, and humiliated, often in the presence of family members.  Many of the women had fled Sierra Leone to escape gross human rights violations, including rape and other sexual assault.  Human Rights Watch charged that UNHCR and the international community were slow to publicly condemn these brutal attacks against refugee women and called on the Guinean government and UNHCR to immediately investigate the incidents of rape and bring the perpetrators to justice.  In 2000, Human Rights Watch issued a report on the high levels of sexual and domestic violence against Burundian refugee women in camps in Tanzania.  The situation in Guinea and Tanzania highlighted the persistent dangers for refugee women and lack of effective protection against or rapid response to sexual violence in emergency situations and to domestic violence in refugee settlements.  

Protracted Refugee Crises: The Right to Return
	Throughout the world, millions of refugees remained in exile unable to return to their homes either because of continuing political instability and insecurity, or because of deliberate obstructions by states unwilling to take them back.  In South Asia, despite high level visits by U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Sadako Ogata to Nepal and Bhutan in April and May 2000, and  U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Refugees, Julia Taft, to Nepal in October 1999, and to Bhutan in January 2000, more than 100,000 Bhutanese refugees were denied their legitimate right to return to Bhutan and remained in camps in southeast Nepal.  The refugees, many of whom were arbitrarily stripped of their Bhutanese nationality despite having lived in Bhutan for several generations, were expelled from the country in the early 1990s during a government crack-down on Bhutanese of ethnic-Nepali origin living in southern Bhutan.  Since then, the Bhutanese government has systematically blocked the refugees return, claiming that the majority are not Bhutanese citizens, and has shunned international offers to assist in resolving the situation. 
	Elsewhere, in Bosnia and Hercegovina, over one million people remained displaced, the majority of them internally, and unable to return to minority areas due to bureaucratic obstructions and lack of available housing.  There was, however, some progress in 2000, and by June UNHCR had registered 19,751 returns, many of them spontaneous, as compared to 7,709 during the comparable period in 1999.
	Palestinian refugees remained the largest and most protracted refugee situation in the world.  In 1997, UNHCR estimated that there were 6.4 million Palestinian refugees worldwide, about half of whom were believed to be stateless.  In March 2000, 3.7 million Palestinian refugees were registered with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) in Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, and the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza.  The Israeli government has made the return of Palestinian refugees both legally and practically impossible since their exodus following the 1948-49 Arab-Israeli war, and the 1967 war, thus denying Palestinian refugees their legitimate right to return to their own country.  Although the resolution of the refugee crisis was a key issue on the agenda of the final status negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO), little progress was made in 2000.  Human Rights Watch supported a rights-based approach to the resolution of the refugee problem that upheld the right of Palestinian refugees to return to their own country, as well as opportunities for local integration in host countries or third country resettlement.  Individuals should be able to choose freely and in an informed manner their preferred option. In the event that individuals are unable to return to their original homes or place of residence, they should be able to return to the vicinity and compensation should be provided according to international standards.

The Challenge of the New Millennium:  Protecting the Internally Displaced 

Debate over Institutional Responsibility
	The plight of internally displaced persons dominated humanitarian debate throughout 2000.  The year began with an impassioned statement by U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Richard Holbrooke during a Security Council session on humanitarian assistance to displaced persons in Africa in January.  Having recently returned from a trip to Angola, Holbrooke expressed dismay at the lack of an effective international response to the problem of internal displacement.  He challenged the very distinction between a refugee and an internally displaced person (IDP) and made a controversial call for a single agency to take responsibility for providing protection to IDPs, citing UNHCR as the most appropriate choice.
	Holbrookes statements triggered a frenzied response within the U.N. system.  While there was a general consensus that the existing system of responding to internal displacement crises was inadequate, there was widespread opposition to giving UNHCR lead agency responsibility for IDPs.  To a certain extent, the debate turned into an ugly turf battle between rival U.N. agencies unwilling to yield more power and responsibility to UNHCR.  But there were also more substantive reasons for the reservations to Holbrookes proposals.  
	Refugee experts pointed out the dangers of collapsing the terms refugee and internally displaced person in legal and protection terms.  Refugees, by definition,  are unable, or unwilling, to avail themselves of the protection of their own country and have crossed an international border in search of protection.  Governments have an obligation under international law to provide refugees with protection and UNHCRs mandate is to ensure that governments abide by these obligations.  Internally displaced persons, on the other hand, remain, if only technically, under the protection of their own governments and do not automatically trigger an international response.  Refugee advocates feared that UNHCRs involvement in providing in-country protection to internally displaced persons could provide an excuse for asylum countries to return refugees to their countries of origin.  Indeed, Western European and other industrialized states were already denying asylum to refugees for whom they believed internal flight alternatives or in_country protection existed in their country of origin. 
	In a July 2000 address in New York, U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Sadako Ogata also expressed reservations about eroding the distinction between refugees and IDPs, because of the specific nature of protection required by each group.  Ogata also criticized the international community for focusing too much on the question of the institutional response to internal displacement, and too little on the underlying political, economic and social root causes. 
	Despite Holbrookes resolute support for a lead_agency model, the U.N. sided with a collaborative approach. A senior inter_agency network was established to review the U.N.s response to situations of internal displacement, under the auspices of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and a special focal point on internal displacement was created in the U.N. secretariat.

Human Rights Watch:  Focus on Protecting Internally Displaced Persons
	While Human Rights Watch did not take a position on specific inter_agency responsibility for internally displaced persons, the organization continued to advocate for more consistent and effective protection for IDPs and for more active adherence by governments with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and other human rights and humanitarian standards pertaining to the internally displaced.  Human Rights Watch monitored and reported on a wide range of situations of internal displacement worldwide.  These included longstanding situations of internal displacement, such as in Sri Lanka, Turkey and Colombia, as well as new displacement crises.  
	The escalation of the border conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea during May 2000 provoked massive displacements of both Eritreans and Ethiopians.  Nearly 1.5 million Eritreans were uprooted by the conflict, including 90,000 who sought refuge in Sudanmore than a quarter of whom had returned to Eritrea by October 2000.  In Angola, a new wave of internal displacement was sparked by the intense fighting following the governmental campaign launched in October 1999 to flush out UNITA from their traditional strongholds in the central highlands.  More than 200,000 persons were displaced during the first half of 2000, and at the end of June, the total number of IDPs was estimated at 2.5 million.  In Colombia, some 134,000 persons were displaced during the first part of 2000, most by paramilitaries as well as guerrillas and the armed forces, adding to the estimated total of 1.8 million IDPs and 80,000_105,000 refugees from Colombia in Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama at the end of 1999. 
	The eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) experienced a rapid deterioration in the humanitarian situation from the start of the year, with fighting in the South and North Kivu areas resulting in major population displacements.  By July 2000, a total of 1.6 million people were displaced in the DRC.  In the Moluccan islands region of Indonesia, clashes between members of Muslim and Christian communities since early 1999 left three thousand or more people dead and displaced hundreds of thousands.  In Russia, hundreds of thousands of Chechens remained displaced in the neighboring republic of Ingushetia following the conflict in Chechnya in 1999. 
	Human Rights Watch identified a wide variety of serious protection problems facing internally displaced persons worldwide.
  
Access to Safety Denied
	Russian authorities continued to deny displaced Chechens access to safety in Ingushetia and elsewhere in the Russian Federation.  On a number of occasions between October and December 1999, Russian forces fired on convoys of fleeing Chechen civilians resulting in scores of deaths and injuries.  In October 1999, for example, at least eleven people were killed when a Russian tank fired on a bus carrying displaced persons near the Russian-controlled town of Chervlyonnaya.  On October 29, a large civilian convoy, including Red Cross vehicles, was attacked outside Shaami-Yurt.  Serious abuses, including widespread extortion, theft, arbitrary arrests, beatings, and in some cases rape, were common at the Russian check points.  Young males were particularly targeted, discouraging many from trying to leave.  Russian officials also repeatedly closed the borders between Chechnya and Ingushetia, Dagestan, Stavropol, and North Ossetia.  In November 1999, for example, 40,000 civilians were stranded for days in heavy fighting when the Russian authorities closed the Ingush-Chechen border.  In January 2000, the authorities announced that males between the ages of ten and sixty would not be allowed to leave Chechnya, although this policy was later retracted under international pressure.  
	  In Sri Lanka,  between May and July 2000, both the armed separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and the government imposed severe restrictions on IDPs trying to move out of areas under their control.  This often meant that civilians were trapped in conflict zones and unable to flee.

Forced Round-ups and Relocation Programs
	In other situations, government or rebel forces deliberately rounded-up civilians and held them in camp-like settlements.  In Burundi, for example, 350,000 people had been forced into regroupment camps around the capital, Bujumbura, by January 2000 as part of the governments counter-insurgency program.  Soldiers used force and threats to move civilians into the camps, killing and injuring dozens.  Despite concerted pressure from the international community, including Nelson Mandela, it was not until June that the authorities began to systematically disband the camps.  By October most of the camps around Bujumbura were closed, but officials continued using temporary regroupment to make it easier for soldiers to cleanse areas of rebels.

Restrictions on Freedom of Movement
	Human Rights Watch reported on numerous situations where freedom of movement was obstructed and the movement of displaced persons manipulated by both government and rebel forces.  In Aceh, Indonesian soldiers reportedly emptied IDP camps by force and prevented others from leaving their homes.  Acehnese rebels, on the other hand, reportedly encouraged displacement, preventing displaced persons from staying with relatives and forcing them into large, more visible centralized camps.  In Congo Brazzaville, rebel militia groups held displaced persons hostage in camps for much of 1999 and prevented them from returning to their homes.  Government authorities also restricted the return of IDPs.  In May 1999, the government facilitated a mass return of IDPs from their hiding places in the forests of southern Congo back to the capital with promises to guarantee their safety.  Instead, soldiers at roadblocks raped and assaulted hundreds of women and girls, and extrajudicially executed scores of young men who were randomly accused of being rebels.    
            
Lack of Access to Humanitarian Assistance
	A serious problem facing internally displaced persons everywhere was lack of access to humanitarian assistance.  Infant and maternal mortality and morbidity rates amongst IDPs were, as a result, some of the highest in the world.  There were three main reasons for lack of humanitarian access:  
 	First, in places such as Chechnya, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Burundi, Congo Brazzaville, Sri Lanka, Indonesias Moluccan islands, and Angola, the extremely dangerous security conditions, lack of security guarantees, landmines, and inaccessibility of camps prevented humanitarian workers from having access to thousands of internally displaced persons.  In the DRC, for example, the U.N. estimated that only one million of the 1.6 million IDPs had access to any humanitarian assistance due to the precarious security conditions in South Kivu.  As a result, infant mortality rates amongst the displaced were the highest in the region and the maternal mortality rate was the highest in the world; 
	Second, were deliberate obstructions to the delivery of humanitarian assistance by government authorities or rebel forces, as in Burundi, Congo Brazzaville, the DRC, Sri Lanka, Aceh, Indonesias Moluccan islands, and Chechnya.  In Aceh, for example, Indonesian authorities in some cases tried to obstruct local NGOs and student groups in their efforts to assist IDPs through physical attacks, detention, torture, and harsh treatment of volunteers, destruction of volunteer posts, and seizure of medical supplies.  In Burundi, soldiers occasionally blocked international agencies trying to bring assistance to the camps, and even when access was resumed many of the camps were inaccessible to relief agencies; 
	Third, humanitarian assistance was limited by inadequate international response and lack of coordination.  In Angola, for example, a U.N. interagency mission in March 2000 concluded that there were serious gaps in the planning, delivery, and monitoring of humanitarian assistance.  And in October 1999, the relief agency, Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders), decried the unbearable silence of the international community toward the forgotten war in Congo Brazzaville.

Forcible Return of Displaced Persons
	Finally, Human Rights Watch reported on the forcible return of displaced persons to areas  where their safety could not be guaranteed, in blatant violation of international humanitarian law and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.  In December 1999, for example, the Russian military compiled a list of twenty-four towns and village under Russian control designated as safe areas for IDP return.  In a letter to the then prime minister Vladamir Putin, Human Rights Watch declared that while the armed conflict continued in Chechnya it was not safe for displaced persons to return.  Documented cases of summary executions of civilians by Russian soldiers, as well as arbitrary arrests, looting, rape, beatings, and extortion in Russian-controlled villages were further evidence of this.  Despite these protests, the Russian authorities took measures to forcibly return displaced persons. These included physically returning railway carriages housing displaced persons in Ingushetia to war zones in Chechnya, refusing to register displaced persons for assistance, and denial of food and shelter. 


The Way Forward
	As the world marked the fiftieth anniversary of an international regime to protect the rights of refugees, the largest group of forcibly displaced persons worldwidethe internally displacedremained largely excluded from any consistent form of international protection and their rights were persistently violated.  Protecting the rights of internally displaced persons, while at the same time preserving and strengthening the right to asylum for refugees, were the two critical challenges facing the international community at the end of 2000.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Bosnia and Hercegovinia: Unfinished Business, The Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons to Bijeljina, 5/00  
Burmese Refugees in Bangladesh: Still No Durable Solution, 5/00
Burundi: Emptying the Hills: Regroupment in Burundi, 6/00
Chechnya: "Welcome to Hell," 10/00
Civilian Deaths in the NATO Air Campaign, 2/00
Eastern Congo Ravaged: Killing Civilians and Silencing Protest, 5/00
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Kosovo: Rape as a Weapon of Ethnic Cleansing, 
3/00 
Japan: Owed Justice: Thai Women Trafficked into Debt Bondage in Japan, 9/00
Kuwait: Promises Betrayed: Denial of Rights of Bidun, Women, and Freedom of Expression, 10/00
Malaysia: Living in Limbo: Burmese Rohingyas in Malaysia, 8/00 
Rwanda: The Search for Security and Human Rights Abuses, 4/00
Tanzania: Seeking Protection: Addressing Sexual and Domestic Violence in Tanzanias Refugee Camps, 9/00
Turkey: Human Rights and the European Union Accession Partnership, 9/00
West Timor: Forced Expulsions to West Timor and the Refugee Crisis, 12/99
United States

As the Clinton Administrations second term ended in 2000, evidence of its domestic human rights legacy was scant.  The country made little progress in embracing international human rights standards at home.  Most public officials remained either unaware of their human rights obligations or content to ignore them.
	As in previous years, serious human rights violations were most apparent in the criminal justice systemincluding police brutality, discriminatory racial disparities in incarceration, abusive conditions of confinement, and state-sponsored executions, even of juvenile offenders and the mentally handicapped.  But extensively documented human rights violations also included violations of workers rights, discrimination against gay men and lesbians in the military, and the abuse of migrant child farmworkers.
	The United States in 2000 submitted reports on its compliance with two international human rights treatiesthe Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishmentto the respective treaty monitoring bodies.  Both reports acknowledged significant abuses of the rights affirmed in those treaties. 
	The initial report of the U.S. to the United Nations Committee against Tortureproduced four years after it was dueacknowledged areas of concern, contention and criticism with regard to police abuse, excessive use of force in prison, prison overcrowding, physical and mental abuse of inmates, and the lack of adequate training and oversight for police and prison guards. Nevertheless, the initial report was incomplete and misleading in several important aspects.  It failed to acknowledge crucial weaknesses in laws and mechanisms to protect the right to be free of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, as well as the serious obstacles abuse victims face in securing legal redress.  It failed also to confront forthrightly the prevalence of abuses against detained and incarcerated men, women and children throughout the United States. 
	The report also glossed over the impact of the reservations, understandings, and declarations the United States made when it ratified the convention.  The United States redefined torture, as prohibited by the convention, to include only conduct already prohibited under the U.S. Constitution and to exclude, with few exceptions, mental torture that is not accompanied by physical torture. It also declared the treaty to be non-self-executing, and then failed to enact implementing legislation, with the result that U.S. residents cannot turn to the courts to seek protection of the rights affirmed under the treaty.  The U.S., in effect, declined to change its laws to bring them up to international standards.
	In May, the U.N. Committee against Torture issued a statement of conclusions and recommendations highlighting a range of U.S. practices that contravened the convention.  The committees concerns included:  ill-treatment by police and prison officials, much of it racially discriminatory; sexual assaults upon female detainees and prisoners and degrading conditions of confinement of female prisoners; the use of electro-shock devices and restraint chairs; the excessively harsh regime of super-maximum security prisons; and the holding of youths in adult prisons. The committee urged the U.S. to enact legislation making torture a federal crime; to withdraw its reservations and declarations to the convention; to take the necessary steps to ensure those who violate the convention are investigated, prosecuted, and punished; to prohibit stun belts and restraint chairs; and to ensure that minors are not incarcerated in adult facilities.
	In September, the U.S. producedfive years lateits initial report to the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.  With unprecedented and welcome candor, the report acknowledged the persistence of racism, racial discrimination and de facto segregation in the United States. The tenor and content of the report signaled the Clinton Administrations recognition that despite decades of civil rights legislation and public and private efforts, the inequalities faced by minorities remained one of the countrys most crucial and unresolved human rights challenges.
	One of the reports most significant weaknesses was in its consideration of the role of race discrimination in the criminal justice system. It acknowledged the dramatically disproportionate incarceration rates for minorities, noted the many studies indicating that members of minority groups, especially blacks and Hispanics, may be disproportionately subject to adverse treatment throughout the criminal justice process, and acknowledged concerns that incidents of police brutality seem to target disproportionately individuals belonging to racial or ethnic minorities. But it did not question whether the ostensibly race-neutral criminal laws or law enforcement practices causing the incarceration disparities violated CERD, nor did it acknowledge the federal governments obligation, under CERD, to ensure that state criminal justice systems (which account for 90 percent of the incarcerated population) were free of racial discrimination.
	The report did acknowledge the dramatic, racially disparate impact of federal sentencing laws that prescribe different sentences for powder cocaine versus crack cocaine offenses, even though the two drugs are pharmacologically identical. The laws impose a mandatory five year prison sentence on anyone convicted of selling five grams or more of crack cocaine, and a ten year mandatory sentence for selling fifty grams or more.  One hundred times as much powder cocaine must be sold to receive the same sentences. By setting a much lower drug-weight threshold for crack than powder cocaine, the laws resulted in substantially higher sentences for crack cocaine offenders. Although the majority of crack users were white, blacks comprised almost 90 percent of federal offenders convicted of crack offenses and hence served longer sentences for similar drug crimes than whites. While recounting the Clinton Administrations unsuccessful effort to secure a limited reform of the cocaine sentencing laws (a reform which, in any event, would still have left black drug defendants disproportionately vulnerable to higher sentences), the report did not venture an assessment of whether the current laws violate CERD. Nor did it consider whether the striking racial differences in the incarceration of drug offenders at the state level was consistent with CERD, reflecting the Administrations general reluctance to subject the U.S. war on drugs to human rights scrutiny. 
	As reflected in the report, the Administration also mistakenly believed that U.S. constitutional prohibitions on race discrimination meet its obligations under CERD. Under state and federal constitutional law, racial disparities in law enforcement are constitutional as long as they are not undertaken with discriminatory intent or purpose. But CERD prohibits policies or practices that have the effect of discriminating on the basis of race regardless of intent. By requiring proof of discriminatory intent, U.S. constitutional law erects a frequently insurmountable obstacle to obtaining judicial relief from criminal justice policies that have an unjustifiably discriminatory impact. Instead of championing reforms that would reduce striking racial disparities in, for example, the rates at which blacks and whites are arrested and incarcerated on drug charges, the Clinton Administration expressed pride in constitutional protections that do not, in fact, meet international standards.
	The U.S. maintained its failure to become party to important human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). It was one of only two countries in the worldwith Somalia, which has no internationally recognized governmentthat had not ratified  the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In addition, little progress was made toward signing and ratifying core International Labour Organization conventions intended to protect basic labor rights, though the Clinton Administration did sign ILO Convention No. 182, the Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour in December of 1999.  It also submitted an ILO Convention concerning employment discrimination to the Senate for ratification, but the Senate did not act.

     Death Penalty   
	An important and positive human rights development was the heightened criticism of the death penalty.  The increasing debate over unfairness in capital cases and the high risk of executing the innocent caused public support for the death penalty to decline to its lowest point in years (60 percent). In September, a bi-partisan group of congressmen released a national opinion poll indicating that 80 percent of Americans supported reforming the death penalty, with 64 percent supporting a moratorium on executions until issues of fairness in capital punishment were resolved.
	Debate about the death penalty was fueled by the record number of executions (145 at the time of this writing) in Texas under Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee; the publication of important national reports; and the first-ever imposition of a moratorium on executions by a state governor. Governor Bushs complacency with the high number of executions in Texas, his refusal to acknowledge the extensively documented lack of adequate legal representation for capital defendants in Texas, and his refusal to oppose the execution of even mentally handicapped defendants or youthful offenders generated widespread media attention and criticism. 
	A comprehensive review of capital cases over a twenty-three year period by a team of university professors revealed that more than two of every three death penalty sentences were overturned on appeal. The study found that capital trials were persistently and systematically fraught with error and injustice, including poor legal representation of capital defendants by incompetent attorneys and prosecutorial misconduct.
	Although racial disparities in the application of the death penalty among the states have long been documented, a new study by the U.S. Department of Justice found dramatic racial and geographic imbalances in the administration of the federal death penalty as well. The study found, for example, that 80 percent of federal defendants who faced capital charges, and 74 percent of convicted defendants for whom prosecutors recommended the death penalty, were members of  minorities.  The study increased public concern that race plays an impermissible role in death penalty decisions.
	Driven by the exoneration of thirteen death row inmatescompared to the twelve executed in the state since the death penaltys reinstatement in 1977Illinois Gov. George Ryan, a Republican, imposed a state-wide moratorium on executions at the end of January.  In New Hampshire, the state legislature passed a bill abolishing the death penalty, but the states governor, Jeanne Shaheen, a Democrat, vetoed the measure. In the U.S. Congress, legislators introduced the Innocence Protection Act, which would require that competent, experienced attorneys be appointed to represent capital defendants and that capital defendants have access to DNA testing, among other reforms. The bills chances for passage appeared slim as the 106th Congress wound down, but its reintroduction during the next Congress seemed likely.
	Despite these positive developments, as of October 24, the United States had put seventy persons to death in 2000, and eighteen more persons were scheduled for execution before the end of the year. The vast majority of executions in 2000 occurred in the Southern states, with Texas accounting for nearly half of all executions. Among those executed were individuals who were mentally impaired  and four juvenile offenderspersons below the age of eighteen when the crimes for which they were sentenced were committed. Approximately 3,682 persons were on death row as of July 1. The U.S. continued to be one of only five countries in the world that executes juvenile offenders.

Police Abuse
	Each year, thousands of allegations of police abuse are filed across the country.  While videotaped police actionssuch as those documenting Philadelphia police officers beating a man after a vehicle chase, Miami-Dade officers kicking a man in the face after a vehicle pursuit, and Los Angeles police officers using excessive force to disperse political protesters during the Democratic National Conventiondisplayed the problem vividly in 2000, most incidents of alleged police abuse took place away from public scrutiny.  Because of inadequate investigative and disciplinary systems, relatively few  police officers who violate departmental rules, or the law, are held accountable.  Victims seeking redress faced obstacles that ranged from overt intimidation to the reluctance of local and federal prosecutors to take on police brutality cases.  During fiscal year 1999, approximately 12,000 civil rights complaints, most alleging police abuse, were submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice, but over the same period just thirty-one officers were either convicted or pled guilty to crimes under the civil rights statute stemming from complaints during 1999 and previous years. 
	In a positive development, the Department of Justice stepped up efforts to check police abuse through pattern or practice inquiries and agreements.  These inquiries, authorized in 1994 legislation, allow the Justice Department to conduct civil investigations into law enforcement agencies to determine whether there is a pattern or practice of civil rights violations.  Two of the countrys largest police departments, the New York City Police Department (NYPD) and the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), were investigated by the Justice Department under these powers and, along with city officials, were negotiating agreements to avoid being sued by the Justice Department and possible, direct Justice Department oversight and court-imposed reforms.  At this writing, progress was slow in talks between Justice Department and New York City officials.  In Los Angeles, city officials had accepted, in theory, a consent decree that addresses some of the reforms required.  The legally binding agreement should ensure that an effective, computerized tracking system to identify officers in need of enhanced supervision is created and utilized; the civilian board of commissioners that oversees the police is strengthened; and that a special unit to investigate shootings and use of force by officers is created.  Other police departments have also been investigated under these powers.
	Several high-profile incidents involving the New York City police, including the assault on Abner Louima in August 1997, the February 1999 shooting death of Amadou Diallo, who was unarmed, and the March 2000 shooting death of Patrick Dorismond, also unarmed, raised concerns that the citys police officers were not adequately trained, supervised, or disciplined.  Following the assault on Louima, the Justice Department initiated an inquiry into the NYPDs management.  A separate Justice Department investigation focused on the Street Crime Unit and allegations of racial profiling by its officers; Diallo was shot and killed by officers assigned to the unit.
	In Los Angeles, the Justice Departments inquiry focused primarily on the origins of the Rampart scandal.  The anti-gang unit based in the LAPDs Rampart Division brutalized residents and framed suspects.  The officer at the center of the scandal, Rafael Perez, provided information about his and other officers misconduct after he was caught stealing cocaine from a police evidence room and sought a lighter prison sentence.
	In one LAPD case, Javier Ovando was shot, allegedly by Perezs partner, and paralyzed and then served three years in prison.  The officers allegedly framed him and placed a gun at the scene to make it appear Perez had been armed.  Approximately one hundred other convictions were overturned as a result of the officers tainted testimony and evidence that had sent individuals to prison.  The expense facing the city and county of Los Angeles arising from civil lawsuits for excessive force, false imprisonment and other violations, as well as investigating and reviewing all cases related to the expanding number of officers implicated in the scandal, was predicted to cost in the hundreds of millions of dollars.  
	The wide-ranging Rampart scandal revealed poor management and practices by LAPD officials and the district attorneys office, and lax oversight by the civilian police commission.  It also demonstrated that many of the key Christopher Commission reforms from 1991 had yet to take hold, leading to ineffectual monitoring of officers behavior.  In a May 2000 letter to the Los Angeles city attorney, the Justice Department stated that it had found, as a result of its investigation, serious deficiencies in City and LAPD policies and procedures for training, supervising, and investigating and disciplining police officers foster and perpetuate officer misconduct.  
	The issue of racial profiling by police received increased attention.  Legislation to require the compilation of statistics on vehicle stops and searches, and the race of vehicle occupants, was under consideration in the U.S. Congress.  Several police departments, in response to pressure from activist groups and concerned political and community leaders, started to compile these statistics voluntarily. The purpose of the data compilation was to document and end the discriminatory and illegal practice by police of stopping and searching vehicles based on the race of the driver or passengers.

Overincarceration, Drugs and Race
	The worlds largest prison population continued to grow because of punitive criminal justice policies that mandated harsh prison terms even for minor nonviolent offenses and increased the length of sentences, and because of increases in the number of inmates returned to prison for parole violations.  In August,  the U.S. Department of Justice revealed that the number of men and women behind bars in the U.S. at the end of 1999 exceeded two million and the rate of incarceration had reached 690 inmates per 100,000 residentsa rate Human Rights Watch believed to be the highest in the world (with the exception of Rwanda). The Department of Justice also revealed that approximately 1.5 million children2 percent of the countrys childrenhad a parent in state or federal prison.  
	Prison was not reserved for notably dangerous or violent offenders: approximately 70 percent of all new admissions to state prison in 1998 (the most recent year for which data was available) were people convicted of nonviolent property, drug or public order offenses. The unrelenting war on drugs continued to pull hundreds of thousands of drug offenders into the criminal justice system: 1,559,100 people were arrested on drug charges in 1998; approximately 450,000 drug offenders were confined in jails and prisons. According to the Department of Justice, 107,000 people were sent to state prison on drug charges in 1998, representing 30.8 percent of all new state admissions. Drug offenders constituted 57.8 percent of all federal inmates. 
	Racial minorities comprised a strikingly disproportionate percentage of the prison population. African Americans constituted 46.5 percent of state prisoners and 40 percent of federal prisoners, although they constituted only 12 percent of the national population. Nationwide, black men were eight times more likely to be in prison than white men, with an incarceration rate of 3,408 per 100,000 black male residents compared to a white male rate of 417 per 100,000. But in eleven states, black men were incarcerated at rates that were between twelve and twenty-six times greater than those of white men.  The Department of Justice estimated that 9.4 percent of all black men in their late twenties were in prison in 1999 compared to 1 percent of white men in the same age group. 
	Female incarceration rates, though much lower than male, reflected similar racial disparities, with black women eight times more likely to be in prison than white. Racial disparities were also pronounced in the incarceration of youths: although juveniles belonging to minority groups constituted one-third of the adolescent population in the United States, they comprised two-thirds of the juveniles confined in local detention and state correctional systems. Minority youths were transferred to adult courts and sentenced to incarceration more frequently than white youths charged with similar offenses.
	Drug law enforcement practices that disproportionately target black Americans contributed to wide disparities in black and white incarceration rates.  Nationally, black men were admitted to state prison on drug charges at a rate relative to population that was 13.4 times greater than that of white men. Black youths with no prior admissions were admitted to public correctional facilities for drug offenses at forty-eight times the rate of white youths. In some states the racial disparities were even worse: in seven states, blacks constituted between 80 and 90 percent of all drug offenders sent to prison and, in at least fifteen states, black men were sent to prison on drug charges at rates that were from twenty to fifty-seven times greater than those of white men. The concentration of drug law enforcement in low income minority neighborhoods and higher arrest rates for black drug offenders than white were primarily responsible for the remarkable racial disparities in drug offender incarceration. 
	Political timidity by legislators meant scant progress in reducing the inordinately high sentences for drug and other nonviolent offenses required under mandatory minimum sentencing laws. In New York, for example, the legislature once again adjourned without reforming twenty-five year old drug law legislation that required the same length of prison sentence for first-time offenders convicted of selling two ounces of cocaine as for murderersa minimum of fifteen years to life.
	A growing number of citizens were unable to vote because of laws that disenfranchise people convicted of felonies who are in prison, on probation or paroleand even, in one quarter of the states, who have finished serving their sentences. An estimated 3.9 million U.S. citizens were disenfranchised, including over one million who had fully completed their sentences. Black Americans were particularly hard hit by disenfranchisement laws: 13 percent of black men1.4 millionwere disenfranchised; in two states, almost one in three black men was unable to vote because of a felony conviction. Legislative efforts and local initiatives across the country to reform disenfranchisement laws proliferated, but most were blocked by conservative opposition. Lawsuits challenging disenfranchisement laws were proceeding in Florida, Pennsylvania and Washington.

Conditions of Confinement
	Prisons remained overcrowded: twenty-two states and the federal prison system operated at 100 percent or more of their highest capacity.  Overcrowding contributed to the growth of private prisons: according to the Department of Justice privately-operated facilities held 5.5 percent of all state prisoners and 2.5 percent of federal prisoners. 
	Most inmates had scant opportunities for work, training, education, treatment or counseling because of taxpayer resistance to increasing the already astonishing U.S. $41 billion spent annually on corrections and because of the prevailing punitive ideology that applauds harsh prison conditions. Idle inmates with long sentences, little hope of early release (and hence little incentive for good behavior) and jammed into poorly equipped facilities, sometimes became violent: in 1998 (the most recent year for which data was available), fifty-nine inmates were killed by other inmates, and assaults, fights, and rapes left 6,750 inmates and 2,331 correctional staff injured seriously enough to require medical attention. Rivalry and tension between race-based prison gangs lay behind many individual assaults and sometimes escalated into violent riots. 
	Men in prison were subject to prisoner_on_prisoner sexual abuse, whose effects on the victims psyche were serious and enduring.  Inmate victims reported nightmares, deep depression, shame, loss of self_esteem, self_hatred, and considering or attempting suicide. Victims of rape, in the most extreme cases, were literally the slaves of the perpetrators, being rented out for sex, sold, or even auctioned off to other inmates.  Despite the devastating psychological impact of such abuse, few if any preventative measures were taken in most jurisdictions, while perpetrators were rarely punished adequately by prison officials.
	Over twenty thousand prisoners were confined in special super-maximum security facilities. They typically spent all their waking and sleeping hours locked alone or with a cellmate in small sometimes windowless cells from which they were released for only a few hours each week for solitary recreation or showers. Super-max prisoners had almost no access to educational or recreational activities or other sources of mental stimulation and were handcuffed, shackled and escorted by officers whenever they left their cells. Although super-max confinement was ostensibly designed to control incorrigibly violent or dangerous inmates, many inmates so confined did not meet those criteria.  An inmate committed suicide at the super-max in Ohio in April, the third suicide since it opened in 1998, while draconian rules and restrictions prompted a prolonged hunger strike at the super-max in Illinois.  Inmates at Wisconsins new super-max prison filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the conditions to which they were subjected,  including round-the-clock confinement in isolation, constant fluorescent lighting in their cells, twenty-four hour video monitoring that permitted female staff to watch prisoners shower and urinate, and inadequate recreation.
	Reports of frequent incidents of physical abuse, racial harassment and excessive use of force continued at Virginias two super-maximum security prisons.  Between January and June 2000, two inmateswho had both been transferred from Connecticut died at one of these prisons, Wallens Ridge State Prison. One of the deaths was a suicide; the other occurred after the inmate had been stunned several times with a 50,000 volt electronic stun device and left in five-point restraints.  New Mexican inmates transferred to Wallens Ridge in 1999 complained of gratuitous and malicious physical abuse by prison guards, including beatings and shocks from electric stun devices. In January 2000, the Federal Bureau of Investigation initiated a preliminary investigation into their claims at the request of the New Mexico attorney general.  
	According to the Virginia Department of Corrections, between January 1999 and June 2000, prison guards at Red Onion State Prison, Virginias first super-max, fired 116 blank rounds and twenty-five stinger rounds of rubber pellets and discharged hand-held electronic stun devices 130 times.  Most other prison systems controlled inmate fights without recourse to firearms or electric shocks.  In June, three inmate bystanders at Red Onion were injured by rubber pellets when guards fired shotguns to break up an inmate scuffle.  Inmates at the prison complained in 2000 of an apparently new staff practice of placing inmates in five point restraints for as long as forty-eight hours because they masturbated or displayed their genitals in front of female staff.  In September, the U.S. Department of Justice announced that it was opening a formal investigation to determine whether inmates constitutional rights were being violated at Red Onion.                            
	A fourteen month long Department of Justice investigation of conditions at Nassau County Jail resulted in a scathing report released in September. The report said the jail had an institutional culture that supports and promotes abuses. The documented abuses included brutal beatings by officers and officers paying inmates to beat other inmates, especially targeting sex offenders.        
	Hampered by lack of counsel, inadequate access to legal materials and legal restrictions on inmate litigation, prisoners rarely obtained  judicial relief against abusive officers, though some did.  In March, a county jail in Oregon paid $1.75 million to settle an excessive force lawsuit brought by an inmate who had been strapped into a restraint chair,  doused with large amounts of pepper spray and subjected to choke holds. He lapsed into a coma for 71 days and suffered permanent brain damage. 
	Criminal prosecution of brutal correctional officers was rare, and convictions in such cases even rarer. In February, four guards from Florida State Prison were indicted on murder charges in connection with the July 1999 beating death of  Frank Valdez. An autopsy revealed that all his ribs had been broken and there were boot marks imprinted on his body.  The guards contended that Valdes injured himself.  They were awaiting trial at this writing. In California, eight prison guards were acquitted in June of federal charges that they staged gladiator-style fights among inmates at Corcoran State Prison. Similarly, in  November 1999, four Corcoran guards were acquitted of setting up the rape of an inmate by a notoriously violent prisoner.  Independent investigations and state legislative hearings in 1998 confirmed a pattern of brutality at Corcoran and the failure of the Department of Corrections to investigate abuses and discipline those responsible. In both court cases, the authorities faced the daunting tasks of breaking through officer solidarity and a code of silence, and of prosecuting prison guards before juries drawn from the rural communities in which the guards livedand in which prisons were a major source of employment.  
	Over 100,000 children in the United States were confined in juvenile facilities.  Many of them faced appalling conditions of abuse and neglect.  In South Dakota, a class action suit was brought challenging widespread physical abuses against girls detained at the State Training School.  The suit charged that guards routinely shackled youths in spread_eagled fashion after cutting off their clothes, sprayed them with pepper spray while naked, and routinely placed them in isolation for twenty_three hours each day for extended periods. Although the state government conducted an investigation of juvenile detention facilities in 1999, it did not implement any reforms to end abusive policies and practices. 
	After twenty_seven years of litigation, the state of Louisiana  agreed in September to significant changes in its juvenile detention system to protect youth from the extensively documented physical, sexual, and mental abuse that had been prevalent, and to provide youth with rehabilitative services and medical, dental, and mental health care.  In May, the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections moved the last remaining detainees out of the Jena Juvenile Justice Center, a for_profit institution run by the Wackenhut Corrections Corporation.  The move came four months after the U.S. Department of Justices mental health expert reported that Jenas environment is unsafe, violent and inhumane for the juveniles incarcerated there. 
	The trend toward trying more children in the adult criminal system continued in 2000, depriving those affected of the variety of rehabilitative dispositions available in juvenile proceedings.  In California, for example, voters approved a measure in March that made transfer to the adult system mandatory in some cases and gave prosecutors the final word in many others; before the measures passage, juveniles were transferred to the adult system only after a judicial hearing.  
	In Maryland, a public outcry over the treatment of children in adult jails, prompted in part by a Human Rights Watch report released in November 1999, led to some improvements in the education provided the incarcerated children.  The Baltimore City Detention Centers school appointed additional teachers and began to offer a full school day to juveniles in the general and protective custody sections, but those held in the segregation and other sections continued to be deprived of regular classroom  instruction.  In Prince Georges Countywhere youths were receiving no education at the time of Human Rights Watchs July 1998 visitthe Department of Corrections and the county board of education began to provide educational services in September 2000.
	In October, the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice notified Maryland that it would investigate conditions of detention at the Baltimore City Detention Center.  The Justice Department planned to examine whether youths were subjected to excessive periods of isolation.   The investigators were also to determine whether all detainees, including youths, received adequate medical and mental health care and whether they were protected from harm.
	Minority youths in the United States were significantly more likely to be sent to adult courts than their white counterparts.  Compared to white youths, children of color in California were 2.8 times more likely to be charged with violent crimes, 6.2 times more likely to be tried in adult court, and seven times more likely to be sentenced to prison when they were tried as adults. 
	Sexual abuse against women by correctional officers remained widespread despite new laws prohibiting it and greater public awareness of the problem.  A U.S. government study in December 1999 found pervasive allegations of sexual abuse and misconduct by corrections officers. Criminal prosecutions of abusive staff appeared to increase.  Cases since December 1999 included, for example, eleven former guards and a prison official who were indicted on charges of sexually assaulting or harassing sixteen female prisoners at a county jail operated by a private corrections company; the conviction of a New Mexico jail guard on federal civil rights charges stemming from the sexual assault of jail prisoners; the sentencing of a New York jail guard to three years of probation after pleading guilty to sodomizing two female prisoners; and the sentencing of an Ohio jail officer to a four year prison term for sexually assaulting three female prisoners.  In Michigan, however, legislators passed a law that took effect in March that exempted prisoners from the protection of the state civil rights act, which prohibits discrimination based on race and gender.  Through this legislation, Michigan suppressed prisoners efforts to seek redress for sexual abuse through lawsuits against the Corrections Department.  In California, although a law went into effect in January that increased the criminal penalties for sexual misconduct, the state failed to ensure that women could safely report abuse.  Women prisoners in one California prison, for example, claimed that their cells were ransacked and personal items damaged or taken after they reported abuse. Others reported being held in protective custody pending investigation of their allegation.  
	A federal circuit court upheld federal legislation, the Prison Litigation Reform Act, that bars lawsuits by inmates seeking damages for mental or emotional injury suffered while in custody where there is no proof of significant physical injury.  Georgia inmates had filed a lawsuit alleging that in 1996 prison officers had made them remove their clothes in front a female guard, tap dance while naked and shave with an unlubricated razor. Under the courts ruling, inmates cannot sue for humiliation, mental torture or non-physical sadistic treatment by guards unless, in effect, they have broken bones or blood to show for it. This restriction on the ability of inmates to vindicate their rights in court was one of many ways in which U.S.  laws and judicial mechanisms failed to meet the standards mandated by the Convention against Torture.           

Labor Rights
	In August 2000, Human Rights Watch published a ground-breaking, 200-page report on violations of workers rights to freedom of association in the United States.  The report was based on field research undertaken during 1999-2000 in California, Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Louisiana, New York, North Carolina, Michigan, Washington, and other states. The report, the first comprehensive analysis of workers rights in the United States under international norms, detailed widespread labor rights violations across regions, industries and employment status.  
	Each year thousands of workers in the United States are spied on, harassed, pressured, threatened, suspended, fired, deported or otherwise victimized by employers in reprisal for their exercise of the right to freedom of association. In the 1950s, victims numbered in the hundreds each year. In 1969, the number was more than 6,000. By the 1990s, more than 20,000 workers each year were dismissed or otherwise victims of discrimination serious enough for the government-appointed National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to issue a reinstatement and back-pay or other remedial ordernearly 24,000 in 1998, the last year for which official figures were available when the Human Rights Watch report was published.
	Loophole-ridden laws, paralyzing delays, and feeble enforcement have created a culture of impunity in many areas of U.S. labor law and practice.  Employers intent on resisting workers self-organization can drag out legal proceedings for years, fearing little more than an order to post a written notice in the workplace promising not to repeat unlawful conduct.
	Human Rights Watch found that millions of workers, including farm workers, household domestic workers, and low-level supervisors, were expressly excluded from protection under the law guaranteeing the right of workers to organize.  In Washington and North Carolina, Human Rights Watch found evidence of campaigns of intimidation against migrant workers.
	Other findings included: one-sided rules for union organizing that unfairly favor employers over workers, allowing such tactics as captive-audience meetings where managers predict workplace closures if workers vote for union representation; workers being caught up in a web of labor contracting and subcontracting that effectively denied them the right to organize and bargain with the employers holding the real power over their jobs and working conditions; employers having the legal power to permanently replace workers who exercise the right to strike; and harsh rules against secondary boycotts that frustrate worker solidarity efforts.
	In another investigation into labor rights in the United States, Human Rights Watch found that the rights of migrant domestic workers with special temporary visas were often violated.  The special visas allowed such workers, most of whom are women, to be employed in the U.S. by foreign diplomats, officials of international organizations, and others.  Because the domestic workers visas are employment_based, they lose their legal immigration status in the U.S. if they flee abusive employers, and may face deportation.  These workers were especially vulnerable to abuses by their employers because they live and work in virtual isolation and often without basic knowledge regarding their rights or the American legal system.  Meanwhile, the U.S. government has failed to establish procedures to monitor employer compliance with employment contracts, humane treatment of workers, and other mandatory terms of these workers special visas.
	In a report describing the treatment of child farmworkers in the United States, Human Rights Watch found that over 300,000 children worked as hired laborers on commercial farms, frequently under dangerous and grueling conditions. The child farmworkers worked long hours for little pay and risked pesticide poisoning, heat illnesses, injuries, and life_long disabilities. They accounted for 8 percent of working children in the United States but suffered 40 percent of work_related fatalities.
	Children working on U.S. farms often worked twelve_hour days, sometimes beginning at 3:00 or 4:00 am. They reported routine exposure to dangerous pesticides that cause cancer and brain damage, with short_term symptoms including rashes, headaches, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting.  Young farmworkers became dizzy from laboring in excessive temperatures without adequate access to drinking water, and were forced to work without access to toilets or hand washing facilities.  Long hours of work also interfered with the education of children working in the fields, causing them to miss school and leaving them too exhausted to study or stay awake in class. Only 55 percent of farmworker children in the United States completed high school. 
	Even to the limited extent that U.S. laws did protect farmworker children, they were not adequately enforced. The U.S. Department of Labor, charged with enforcement of the child labor, wage and hour provisions of federal labor law, cited only 104 cases of child labor violations in fiscal year 1998, even though an estimated one million child labor violations occur in US agriculture every year. Compounding the problem,  penalties were typically too weak to discourage employers from using illegal child labor.

Gay and Lesbian Rights
	The July 1999 murder of Private First Class Barry Winchell at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, by a fellow soldier who believed Winchell to be gay brought overdue attention to the problem of anti-gay harassment in the military. Six years after the Clinton Administrations Dont Ask, Dont Tell policy was codified as law and implemented, the militarys own surveys and investigations found that training on how to implement the law was deficient and that anti-gay harassment remained pervasive in the military.  Many military personnel who faced verbal or physical harassment and feared for their safety made statements acknowledging they were gay, knowing that it would mean the end of their careers but also that if they complained officially about anti-gay harassment they would probably themselves face an intrusive inquiry and discharge. They also knew that harassers were rarely punished.
	Although the Dont Ask, Dont Tell policy was ostensibly intended to allow gay, lesbian, and bisexual service members to remain in the military, discharges increased significantly after the policys adoption.  From 1994 to 1999, a total of 5,412 service members were removed from the armed forces under the policy, with yearly discharge totals nearly doubling, from 617 in 1994 to 1,149 in 1998.  In 1999, the number of such separations dropped slightly, to 1,034; nevertheless, the discharge rate was still 73 percent higher than it had been prior to the implementation of the policy.  Women were discharged at a disproportionately high rate, while the policy provided an additional means for men to harass women service members by threatening to out those who refused their advances or threatened to report them, thus ending their careers.
	The U.S. was increasingly out of step internationally in maintaining restrictions on homosexuals serving in the military.  Most of its NATO and other allies either allowed homosexuals to serve openly or had no policy on the issue.  In September 1999, the European Court of Human Rights rejected a United Kingdom ban on homosexuals serving in the military based on similar grounds as the Dont Ask, Dont Tell policy.
	In U.S. schools, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender students were frequently targeted for harassment by their peers, according to initial findings of a Human Rights Watch investigation.  They were nearly three times as likely as their peers to have been involved in at least one physical fight in school, three times as likely to have been threatened or injured with a weapon at school, and nearly four times as likely to skip school because they felt unsafe, according to the 1999 Massachusetts Youth Risk Behavior Survey.  Most alarmingly, the survey found that those who identified as lesbian, gay, or bisexual were more than twice as likely to consider suicide and more than four times as likely to attempt suicide than their peers.
	Efforts to provide a safe, supportive environment for these students were hampered by discriminatory legislation in several states.  For example, a South Carolina statute provided that health education in public school may not include a discussion of alternate sexual lifestyles from heterosexual relationships including, but not limited to, homosexual relationships except in the context of instruction concerning sexually transmitted diseases.  Similarly, a measure on the November ballot in Oregon would provide that the instruction of behaviors relating to homosexuality and bisexuality shall not be presented in a public school in a manner which encourages, promotes, or sanctions such behaviors.
	Several states had legislation or programs in place to address harassment and violence toward lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth.  California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin explicitly prohibited harassment and discrimination against teachers or students on the basis of sexual orientation.  Massachusetts and Vermont, the only states to include questions relating to sexual orientation on statewide, youth risk behavior surveys, had state programs to provide support to gay, lesbian, and bisexual youths. Challenges remained in implementing these programs and statutory protections and in preventing their erosion; in Vermont, for example, a backlash against civil union legislation enacted in April threatened funding for the states youth program.

Immigrants Rights
	In September 2000, the number of detainees held in the custody of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), on average per day, reached a record high of 20,000.  In 1995, there was a daily average of 6,700 detainees.  The dramatic increase stemmed from the 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, which broadened the criteria that require detention and eventual deportation.    
	The increasing numbers of detainees strained the ability of the INS to provide humane and safe conditions in its detention facilities, and the influx of detainees led to a space crisis.  More than half of all INS detainees were held in prisons or local jails intended for criminal inmates, exposing them to treatment and conditions inappropriate to their administrative detainee status and hampering their access to legal assistance.  Asylum-seekers continued to be detained as the rule, rather than the exception, as the INS continued to ignore international standards relating to the treatment of asylum-seekers.  In its own facilities, the INS implemented some standards, but INS detainees assigned to jails were under the direct control of jail officials and INS monitoring of such jails was minimal.  In late October, the INS planned to issue additional detention standards that would apply to its own facilities and to jails, but they had not been made public at this writing.  Congress, however, failed to fund the monitors requested by the INS to ensure that the standards prescribed for its own facilities and the jails with which its contracts were upheld.
	The INS continued to detain unaccompanied children for lengthy periods before releasing them to family members or appropriate guardians.  Human Rights Watch was particularly concerned that more than a third of the children in INS custodynearly 2,000 children during the year ending in September 1999were held in juvenile detention centers and county jails.  Of the nearly 1,300 children held in secure confinement for more than three days, 58 percent were waiting to be transferred to a shelter care or similar facility or were held in such confinement simply because the INS lacked any alternative for them.  By failing to place children in the least restrictive setting appropriate to their circumstances, the INS violated international standards, its own regulations, and the terms of a legal settlement. 
	During the year, the INS reportedly released more than a thousand long-term detainees who had orders of deportation but could not be repatriated for political or other reasons to countries such as Cuba, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.  The INS plan put in place during 1999 required mandatory reviews for detainees who were ordered deported but who could not actually be sent to their home countries, and who were thus facing indefinite detention.  Those who were released had to meet certain criteria, such as having community sponsors, evidence of rehabilitation, and proof that they would not pose a danger to society.
	The 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Acts expedited removal proceedings, intended to process and deport individuals who enter the United States without valid documents with minimum delay, imperiled genuine asylum seekers and resulted in immigrants being detained in increasing numbers.  Asylum seekers with questionable documents were sent to secondary inspection where they had to convey their fears regarding return to their country of origin.  The expedited process was characterized by excessive secrecy, making it virtually impossible to monitor the fairness of INS officials decisions at each stage of the initial review.
	The size of the U.S. Border Patrol continued to grow rapidly to number approximately 8,000 agents, double the 1993 total, raising concerns about the quality, training, and supervision of its agents.  In particular, the agencys capacity to investigate complaints of abuse against its agents, and to take disciplinary actions in appropriate cases, was in question.  Little information was made public relating to the investigation and discipline stemming from such allegations.
	Yet, Border Patrol agents shot border-crossers in questionable circumstances and were accused of sexual assaults, beatings, and reckless vehicle pursuits that caused injuries.  Border Patrol agents said they shot at some border-crossers because they reached for, or attempted to throw, rocks at the agents.  Border Patrol agents are not required to wear protective gear even though this would reduce the risk to agents and the stated justification for resorting to deadly force.

Revelant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Fingers to the Bone: United States Failure to Protect Child Farmworkers, 6/00
No Minor Matter: Children in Marylands Jails, 11/99
Out of Sight: Super-Maximum Security Confinement in the United States, 2/00 
Punishment and Prejudice: Racial Disparities in the War on Drugs, 5/00
Unfair Advantage: Workers Freedom of Association in the United States Under International Human Rights Standards, 8/00
Womens Rights

The year 2000 marked the fifth anniversary of the U.N.s Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, China, an event that heralded respect for womens human rights as a central part of any and all efforts to improve womens status around the globe. Five years later, what gains did women see in government efforts to protect their rights? Activists welcomed important signs of progress, including greater awareness of abuses of womens human rights; stronger international standards for prosecuting violence against women, particularly in conflict situations; and some initial efforts by governments and international actors to implement programs to support womens rights. Still, these steps forward seemed few and far between, especially when contrasted with the scale and scope of ongoing violations of womens most fundamental human rights.
	One of the most striking developments in the past yearevident in June 2000 in the negotiations at the special sessions of the U.N. General Assembly for the Beijing + 5 Review (Beijing + 5) to assess progress in improving womens statuswas how actively some governments were willing to work to thwart recent gains in protecting womens human rights. They set out to master the language of womens human rights while they at the same time sought to undermine the power of the idea and the movement. Perhaps a sign that they had started taking womens rights activists seriously, governments resistance to further progress on womens human rights took several forms, although most of the obstructionist tactics at the U.N. meeting and elsewhere relied on the age-old strategy of divide and conquer.  
	First, and perhaps most threatening, was the refusal of governments to accept that for women to truly enjoy their human rights, they must be treated with dignity in all aspects of their lives. Instead, government actions reflected the belief that women are not entitled to full enjoyment of their human rights.  Hence, while governments condemned some forms of violence against women, they readily excused others and defended laws that denied women their legal rights. In Morocco, for example, a reformist government pledged to pursue programs to measure and respond to violence against women, but allowed proposed reforms to the countrys family codewhich continues to subject female decision-making to male authorityto languish. In other countries, laws that recognized men as the legal heads of households remained in place, denying womens rights to decide for themselves, freely, whether and whom to marry, whether to work outside the home, or even when to seek medical attention. Laws requiring female obedience or subservience were often key to making women dependent on men and tied to abusive relationships. 
	Some governments failed to attack not only certain forms of violence, but also the many laws and practices that either rendered women vulnerable to attacks or made it difficult for them to escape or redress abuse. A government survey in Japan showed that 15.4 percent of women polled had been physically assaulted at least once by their husbands, but police remained reluctant to intervene in such cases and some women reported that police tried to dissuade them from pursuing their claims. In Khartoum, Sudan, a senior government official tried to enforce womens dependency by banning them from jobs in restaurants, gas stations, and similar institutions. When women demonstrated in protest, police set upon them, using tear gas and batons, and arresting over twenty of the demonstrators. 
	Certain governments also acted to deny rights that might protect womens autonomy in their sexual and reproductive decision-making. In the negotiations at Beijing + 5, some governments argued that women do notand should notenjoy rights in this fundamentally personal part of their lives, the right, for example, to make decisions about whether and with whom to have intimate relations free from discrimination, coercion, and violence. They further claimed that such rights were not universal, and defended practices such as those that discriminated against single women or resulted in forced marriage for reasons of culture or tradition.  Rather than tackling those problems as violations of womens human rights, some governments asserted that concern with womens reproductive and sexual autonomy represented the radical agenda of Western activists and did not merit further attention.  They preferred instead to limit the debate to addressing womens reproductive and sexual health needs, and to avoid discussion of government obligations to respect womens rights. Even those governments that claimed the mantle of leadership in promoting womens rightsCanada, the United States, and some European countriesfailed to challenge this onslaught at Beijing + 5.
	By suggesting that some of womens human rights are not universal, some governments raised the prospect that certain  violations could be excused as culturally specific practices and, indeed, that situations of profound inequality could be found acceptable internationally. This was particularly the case with regard to womens enjoyment of their rights in the context of the family. Thus, many governments in South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, appeared content to leave unchallenged the assumption that men have the right to discipline their wives as they see fit. In Pakistan, for example, women accused by their husbands of inappropriate or immoral behavior could be assaulted, maimed, or killed with effective impunity in the name of family honor. Activists maintained that such violenceover eight hundred women died in 1999 in such attackswould persist so long as the countrys laws enshrine male superiority. Activists in India, where on average reportedly fourteen women are murdered each day by their husbands relatives, also called for a stronger government response to violence against women in the family.
	Governments often used the cultural-specificity argument to justify using a separate standard to evaluate their performance in promoting the human rights of women. For example, in Saudi Arabia, press reports in April 2000 indicated that the Interior Minister refused to even discuss lifting a discriminatory ban on womens driving until after society accepts the idea.
	The wide-ranging resistance to protecting womens human rights could be attributed in part to a desire to curb womens effectiveness in joining forces across national borders and turning the attention of the human rights system to abuses of womens human rights and government obligations to prevent and remedy such problems. Despite obstacles, womens human rights activists set new international standards for how women should be treated, and sometimes changed the situation in their local communities. In Jordan, for example, local activists successfully pushed their governments to introduce legislation to improve womens rights. In Russia, crisis centers mounted a national campaign against domestic violence and helped women bring cases to court. In Tanzania, the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) implemented programs to protect women from sexual and domestic violence. In two cases brought in U.S. courts, fugitive former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic was ordered to pay billions of dollars for atrocities, including rape and other sexual violence, committed by his soldiers. And, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) was set to enter into force in December 2000, after Italy became the tenth country to ratify the instrument, thus creating a new mechanism for enforcing womens human rights.
	The following section provides an overview of key developments, positive and negative, for womens human rights in 2000. Our investigations and monitoring throughout the year showed that violence and discrimination against women as committed and tolerated by states remained the norm in the countries in which we worked. Reports from activists and the news media in other countries confirmed the pattern of abuse of womens rights and underscored the need for urgent attention to the problem.

Human Rights Developments
	In 2000, governments further mastered the rhetoric of respect for womens human rights. Often, however this rhetoric was unmatched by meaningful action.  When they took steps to support womens rights, those steps were often cursory and uncoordinated.  Although governments committed themselves to protecting womens human rights, in practice they were generally unwilling to  protect all womens human rights in all spheres of womens lives.  (Emphasis added.) Thus, the South African government, for example, could proudly declare its commitment to womens rights at Beijing + 5, yet thousands of South African women farmworkers had no ability to establish work contracts independently of their husbands.  Similarly, the government of Peru condemned violence against women, while obliging domestic violence victims to undergo mandatory conciliation sessions with their abusers; the Uzbekistan government maintained constitutional guarantees of womens equality but women wishing to divorce their husbands faced major, gender-specific obstacles; the Taliban administration in Afghanistan shrouded its denial of womens rights in the rhetoric of protection but its forces raped ethnic Hazara and Tajik women with impunity; and Japans government treated trafficked women not as victims of abuse but as criminals.  
	As  the cases below illustrate, in most cases governments committed themselves to protecting only some rights, in only some instances, and only when funds were readily available to do so, and, most important, only when minimal political or social capital would be expended. The stark consequence of this for millions of women was that they lived with daily violence and discrimination from infancy to old age. The universality of womens rights, and the indivisibility of those rights, for all practical purposes, was for most women little more than a dream.	

Violence against Women
	In September 2000, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) reported that across the world, one in three women had been physically assaulted or abused in some way, typically by someone she knew, such as her husband or another male member of her family.  In response,  governments publicly condemned violence against women and committed to show political will and provide financial resources for its eradication, but their performance, in practice, failed miserably to meet womens needs.  Whether in Peru or Jordan, the U.S. or South Africa, or other states, men who beat or raped women in their homes or in state custody, or who murdered female family members to restore family honor, or sexually assaulted female students, all too often were able to do so with impunity.  Too often, states response to this violence was perfunctory and short-sighted.  At times officials did not bother to respond at all.  
	 Governments commitment to stopping violence against women was tested and failed in the area of violence against women in the family.  Pakistan was a case in point. There, successive civilian and military-led governments alike have treated violence against women as a low priority.  Under the former civilian government, the officially-appointed Commission of Inquiry for Women reported in 1997 that domestic violence was one of the countrys most pervasive human rights problems.  Yet, the government totally ignored the commissions findings and recommendations.  Pakistans military leaders also performed poorly.  After seizing power in October 1999, the new military government condemned violence against women and identified it as a national problem.  In March 2000, Pakistans Human Rights Commission reported that, on average, at least two women were burned every day in domestic violence incidents.  However, rather than explicitly criminalize all forms of family violence against women or provide clear guidelines for police intervention and protection in such cases, in August 2000,  Pakistans military government formed yet another commission to make yet more recommendations. Moreover, like the civilian administration before it, the military government resisted removing violence against women in the family from its perch of impunity.  At Beijing + 5, Pakistan, along with several other obstructionist countries, lobbied successfully to delete language that identified customary laws and practices such as early marriages, polygamy, female genital mutilation (FGM), and honor killings as violations of womens human rightsfrom the final conference document that outlined future initiatives and actions to implement the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action.
	As with Pakistan, the Jordanian governments commitment to fighting violence against women stopped at womens front doors. From January to late-October, at least thirteen women were killed in Jordan in the name of family honor. Nevertheless, for a second time (the first vote was in November 1999) in January 2000, the lower house of parliament, with a sweeping majority, refused to pass legislation to revoke article 340 of the Jordanian Penal Code, which effectively prescribes minimal punishment for males who kill female family members if they can demonstrate that their motivation was to uphold or restore family honor.  Lower house parliamentarians sought to justify their veto of the proposed reform by asserting that they were protecting Jordans traditional and moral values against Western influences.  However, as it had previously done in October 1999, in February 2000 the parliaments upper house voted to approve the repeal of article 340, and a joint session of the two houses was awaited to finally decide the issue. Despite such setbacks on the parliamentary front, Jordanian civil society activists continued their nation-wide campaign to amend article 340.  Between August and November 1999, the Jordanian National Committee to Eliminate the So-Called Crimes of Honor gathered over 15,000 signatures for a petition that called for abolition of laws that protect perpetrators of so-called honor crimes, and presented the petition to the speaker of the lower house of the parliament in November 1999.  In 2000, the committee and other womens human rights activists continued to gather signatures, raise awareness on the issue, and make honor crimes a national concern.
	In 1999, Russian police reported that, as of 1997, they had registered over four million men as potential abusers of members of their families.  Their figures were based on recorded reports of prior abuse or threats. This startlingly high number of reports was received despite the existence of significant barriers which deterred women from reporting domestic violence. The Womens Alliance, a womens crisis center in Siberia, for example, reported that eighteen of the thirty-five women who called its hotline between May 1999 and May 2000 to report instances of violence against them, told counselors that police officers had refused to take a statement about their abuse.  In six other cases, police had refused to respond to emergency calls from women being subjected to domestic violence.   Official indifference to both domestic violence and sexual violence left women throughout Russia at risk and without recourse.
	Yet, Russia did not pass legislation specifically criminalizing domestic violence and did not provide federal funding for crisis centers to assist their work.  Despite the lack of such support, however, the Russian Association of Crisis Centers for Women, a nationwide alliance of nongovernmental crisis centers, pressed ahead to implement a public education campaign on violence against women.  Television commercials and radio spots spread the anti-violence message throughout the country.   Meanwhile, with a congressional mandate to do so, the U.S. government provided some aid to the crisis centers, making available U.S. $500,000.
	Even in countries where domestic violence was explicitly illegal, womens lives remained in jeopardy.  In Peru, one local womens rights group, DEMUS, estimated that nine out of ten Peruvian women were subjected to some kind of abuse in their intimate relationships.  Nonetheless, the Peruvian Congress failed to reform its family violence legislation in a way that would afford women the greatest level of protection.  Following a consultative process that some local nongovernmental organizations  (NGOs) characterized as more promotional than productive, Congress modified the Law for the Prevention of Family Violence in July 2000.  The amended law has a significantly improved definition of domestic violence, which includes sexual violence, provides a more complete definition of psychological violence, and broadens the scope of the laws application to include intimate partners not living together at the time of the violence.   However, in a move that activists warned could severely undermine the gains of the amended law, Congress left standing the requirement that women who report domestic violence undergo a mandatory conciliation session with their alleged abusers.  In a memorandum to members of the congressional Commission on Women in March 2000, Human Rights Watch challenged this and other shortcomings of the law, arguing that conciliation sessions imposed inappropriate obligations on the victims, obstructed womens access to justice, and endangered womens lives. 
	In South Africa, women confronted violence in the street and in school.  South African womens rights activists reported that the country suffered from one of the highest levels of violence against women in the world.  Not even schools provided safe havens from violence.  Human Rights Watch research in April 2000 found that male students and teachers sexually assaulted female students on a regular basis, but abusers were seldom apprehended and punished.  There existed only few and inadequate mechanisms to refer these cases out of the school system for investigation and prosecution.  Instead, school officials preferred to resolve such cases internally, with the result that girls who were assaulted had no access to justice and found themselves continuing to attend school with those who had raped or abused them, and who remained at liberty to inflict similar abuse on others. 
	Governments frequently did not afford women protection against violence and were reluctant to investigate and punish those responsible, even when their own agents were the alleged perpetrators.  In some cases, they even sought to limit prisoners right to seek redress for abuse. For example, in the United States, a major government study released in December 1999 found that the substantiation rate for allegations of sexual abuse and misconduct by corrections officers averaged about 18 percent in the federal prison system and in the California and Texas state systems.  However, in Michigan state, a law went into effect in March 2000 that excluded prisoners from the protections provided under the state civil rights act, which prohibits discrimination based on race and gender.  Through this legislation, Michigan effectively eliminated the possibility that women prisoners could seek redress for sexual abuse in prison through lawsuits against the corrections department.
	The same U.S. government study reported that the number of women incarcerated in state and federal prisons had climbed to approximately 85,000 by the start of 1999, an increase of more than 500 percent over 1980.  The steady rise in the population of women prisoners, and NGO monitoring and reporting on violence against women in custody, sparked greater public awareness about custodial sexual violence and misconduct, and underscored the need to implement reforms to prevent and effectively respond to these abuses. However, adoption of laws was not enough, as California demonstrated.  Human Rights Watch research showed that, although a California law went into effect in January 2000 that increased the criminal penalties for sexual misconduct against women in custody, California nevertheless failed to ensure that women could safely report these violations without risking retaliation.  During an investigation in 2000, Human Rights Watch found that retaliation by prison guards was perhaps the most critical factor in womens reluctance to report abuse.  Corrections personnel exercised enormous power over prisoners and had wide scope for retaliation. Women prisoners told Human Rights Watch that their cells were ransacked and personal items were damaged or taken after they reported abuse.  Others reported being held in protective custody pending investigation of their allegation.  Increased surveillance of inmates also meant that women had less privacy and were more likely to be the victims of prurient viewing by corrections officers, male and female, while they showered, undressed, or used the toilet. 
Women in Conflict and Refugees
	 Soldiers, militia, and their sympathizers continued to sexually assault women with impunity in armed conflicts around the globe, including in Sierra Leone, Chechnya, East Timor, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Afghanistan, Indonesia, Kosovo, Bosnia, and Angola.  Despite international recognition of rape and other sexual assault in armed conflict as crimes, governments and the international community rarely responded vigorously to investigate and punish such violence.  In fact, they typically went no further than rhetorical condemnation.  In addition, women faced rampant violence and discrimination in their post-conflict lives.  Women refugees, in their countries of refuge, continued to be sexually and otherwise physically attacked by armed groups and civilians.  Women returning to their communities post-conflict found negligible protection from domestic violence or state-tolerated sex discrimination.   
	For example, in Sierra Leone,  under the guise of bringing an end to the human suffering caused by the conflict, the fragile July 1999 Lom peace accord granted a blanket amnesty to Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels for their atrocities, including sexual violence.  From the signing of the peace accord to its collapse in May 2000, RUF rebels never stopped raping women. A hellish cycle of rape, sexual assault, and mutilation continued, perpetrated by all sides, including the Westside Boys rebel faction and pro-government Civil Defense Force militia. Sexual violence often took the form of individual and gang rape; sexual assault with objects such as firewood, umbrellas, and sticks; and sexual slavery.  Despite egregious attacks on women,  the Sierra Leonean police and the U.N. Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) did very little to protect women from further attacks and investigate cases to ensure that perpetrators were captured and punished.
	Similarly, Russian soldiers raped women with impunity in Chechnya. Testimonies collected by human rights activists showed that women, men, and girls detained by Russian authorities were tortured, beaten, and raped.  Witnesses spoke of brutal rapes in Russian-controlled areas of Chechnya, such as the villages of Alkhan-Yurt and Shali.  Despite compelling and overwhelming evidence that Russian soldiers raped women during the Chechen conflict, Russian authorities managed to arrest only one alleged perpetrator, a  colonel, on March 29, 2000.  Charged with the sexual assault and murder of a Chechen woman, as of late October, the colonel was eligible for amnesty.
	In Algeria, armed Islamist groups continued to target women in a conflict that has ebbed and flowed since 1992, when the government suspended elections Islamists were expected to win. Although threatening and assaulting women was part of their basic mode of operation of many of these groups well before the suspension of the 1992 elections, armed Islamist groups adopted violence against women as a more overt strategy between 1993 and 1998. Between 1993 and 1994, they killed women for expressing their opinions and for working in certain professions, such as hairdressers and writers.  They also forcibly took women as wives in temporary marriages.  From 1995 to 1998, they treated women who lived in villages that opposed their rule as spoils of war, raping, abducting, and killing them.  Disputing official government figures of two thousand six hundred, Algerian womens rights activists estimated that these groups raped five thousand women between 1995 and 1998.  They criticized as severely deficient government programs and assistance to victims of sexual violence. 
	In Afghanistan, as the twenty-year civil war continued, the Taliban, which controlled 90 percent of the country, continued to violate womens rights with unabated severity. In addition to severe restrictions on womens access to paid work,  health care, and secondary and higher education, the U.N.s rapporteur for Afghanistan reported that Taliban members had abducted and raped ethnic Hazara and Tajik women with impunity.  Such sexual violence by the Taliban undermined its leaders claim that their policies toward women were intended to protect them from violence and abuse.  
	Violence against women continued to be a constant feature in the complex conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. In March 2000, Human Rights Watch documented dozens of cases of rape and other human rights violations in areas controlled by the Goma-based Congolese Rally for Democracy (Rassamblement Congolais pour la Democratie, RCD) and its Rwandan allies. The RCD raped and otherwise attacked civilians to deter them from supporting its opponents. In one particularly gruesome incident, RCD soldiers beat, stripped, and raped five women who had been detained, reportedly because a RCD soldiers wife accused them of sorcery.  The soldiers then put hot peppers in the womens vaginas, put them in a pit, and buried them alive.  Despite its claim to be the legitimate local authority, the RCD failed to prevent or punish rape and other violence committed by its soldiers or civilians.
	Similarly, in East Timor, pro-Indonesian militia and some Indonesian soldiers raped many women during the weeks of violence surrounding the referendum on East Timors status in August 1999.  At this writing, over 100,000 refugees remain under militia control in West Timor, where violence, including sexual violence, by militia continued. The Indonesian governments failure to disarm and disband the militia undermined its claim that it would bring perpetrators of violence to justice.  However, the attorney generals office, in cooperation with U.N. civilian police, conducted an investigation into the violence and in September 2000 published a list of nineteen suspects whom they plan to charge with various crimes, including rape.
	The ranks of refugees, internally displaced persons (IDPs), and asylum seekers continued to swell in 2000, as large numbers of people fled conflict and persecution at home and sought refuge elsewhere.  The UNHCR reported that, in 2000, twenty-two million refugees and displaced persons were under their protection or receiving assistance from them.  Women who fled their homes in search of sanctuary from violence too often found themselves confronting  yet more sexual and physical violence as refugees. For example, numerous Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees living in Guinea were physically and sexually attacked by police, military, and civilians, following an inflammatory address by President Lansana Conte of Guinea.  On September 6, 2000, the president accused the refugees of supporting rebels responsible for cross-border attacks on Guineas territory. Thousands of refugees in the capital, Conakry, were then rounded up and many women and adolescent girls as young as fourteen years old were sexually abused, often by multiple attackers. As of late-October, the Guinean authorities had neither acknowledged nor investigated the attacks on refugees. 
	Even in post-conflict periods, womens human rights were not protected.  Kosovar women confronted discrimination and a steep rise  in domestic violence, rape, trafficking, and abductions following the war. The government ignored blatant discrimination against women.  Women widowed by war feared the loss of their children due to an Albanian custom requiring the children to be handed over to the deceased fathers family.  Womens rights activists throughout the province fought to draw attention to discrimination against women in the postwar environment and sought political representation in the interim government.  Womens efforts did yield a U.N. regulation mandating that at least 30 percent of each political partys top fifteen candidates must be women.  But most activists felt that little had been done to combat discriminatory practices that relegated women to the traditional homemaker role.

Labor Rights
	Women contended with discriminatory laws and practices in the labor force in 2000 that obstructed and conditioned their participation and denied them their human rights.  For example, even though across the globe women were entering the formal workforce in record numbers, in Sudan womens very right to work was under fierce attack.  On September 3, 2000, the Governor of the State of Khartoum, citing Islamic law,  imposed a ban on women working in public places.  Only days later, on September 9, 2000, however, amid international and local outrage, the Sudanese Constitutional Court suspended the ban, pending review of an appeal lodged by three womens rights groups.
	In addition to statutory discrimination, women faced practical discrimination.  Even as the International Labor Organization (ILO) adopted a new international Convention on Maternity Protection in May 2000 and estimated that 50 percent of the labor force was female, in some countries womens participation in the workforce was determined by their reproductive status.  Not only were womens reproductive functions perceived to be in the way at work, but their bodies were also at risk at work.  Women workers faced sexual harassment and violence on the job, with little hope of redress. Employers often considered womens reproductive and productive roles to be incompatible, and governments did little to challenge them.  In Mexico, Guatemala, and South Africa, for example, governments failed to enforce international and national laws to protect women from discrimination and violence during the hiring process and on the job.  
	In 2000, womens right to exercise reproductive autonomy in the workforce continued to be under attack in Mexico.  Thousands of women working in maquiladoras (export-processing factories) faced frequent discrimination based on their reproductive status. Many transnational corporations regularly required women to undergo pre-employment pregnancy testing, with the aim of denying pregnant women work.  Other corporations went even further, creating unbearable work conditions for pregnant workers to provoke their resignation. Activists complained that, although some corporations had renounced such discriminatory practices, others continued them without sanction by the Mexican government.  
	As in past years, in 2000 the Mexican government continued to undertake merely cosmetic action and to use North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) fora to spread misinformation about its policies.  The Mexican government actively used these meetings to undermine womens rights to reproductive autonomy, equality, and privacy in the work sphere by disseminating informationespecially designed for and targeted at female workersthat represented an arbitrary government policy with no basis in the labor code as law.  In one such example, government pamphlets stated that women workers had an obligation to inform their employers of their pregnancy status.  The Mexican government also used the latest NAFTA-related outlet (a meeting in Puebla, Mexico, on May 30, 2000) to contend that the labor code allowed for postemployment pregnancy testing of working women when that testing was intended to protect the well-being of the woman worker or her fetus.
	Working women in neighboring Guatemala suffered similar rights violations, in which their participation and equal rights in the labor force were limited by statutory discrimination and government inaction.  In an investigation conducted in 2000, Human Rights Watch found that discrimination on the basis of reproductive status was an inescapable fact for both maquiladora line operators and domestic workers in Guatemala. This discrimination took the form of questions about pregnancy status and pregnancy testing as a condition for employment in maquiladoras, post-hire penalization of pregnant workers in factories and private households, and failure to comply with maternity protections in both sectors.  Live-in domestic workers, many of whom were young indigenous women who migrated to the capital from rural villages, were subjected to special regulations in the labor code that excluded all domestic workers from key labor rights protections, such as the eight-hour workday.  Often isolated in private households, domestic workers were particularly vulnerable to sexual harassment.  Government response to gender-specific labor rights violations was negligent at best.  While government officials recognized discrimination on the basis of reproductive status as illegal, they did not take any proactive steps to combat it.  Despite being lobbied by womens rights groups and community associations, as of late October the government had not adopted legislation on sexual harassment, nor had it revised provisions in the labor code that accorded domestic workers lesser rights than other workers. 
	 In the agricultural sector, women were likely to fare equally poorly. Human Rights Watch research in 2000 found that women farmworkers in South Africa were discriminated against and sexually and otherwise physically abused by their coworkers and employers.  Some discrimination was based on marital status.  Married women farmworkers, for example, were denied employment contracts in their own names, such that their jobs were dependent on those of their husbands.  Often, women farmworkers access to housing was also determined by their relationship to a man.   Because the majority of farmowners offered housing only to permanent male employees, single women farmworkers were generally not able to live on the farm.  In addition, women were also paid less than their male counterparts for the same type of work or work of equal value. By denying womens agency and reinforcing their economic dependency on men, these discriminatory practices made women more vulnerable to violence in their homes and the workplace on farms.
	Despite laws prohibiting sex discrimination in the workplace, the South African government did little to protect womens rights in the agricultural sector.  In a landmark April 1999 ruling, the Land Claims Court held that a woman farmworker could not be evicted from the farm where she worked following the dismissal of her husband and that the right to family life afforded the female farmworker the right to allow her husband to continue living in her home on the farm.  Yet, in 2000 the government took no active steps to ensure that this important precedent was enforced.   Many women continued to face unfair evictions because their husbands had been dismissed, and few knew about their rights or how to enforce them.

 Trafficking
	Around the world, governments continued to allow trafficking of women and girls for forced labor and servitude to flourish with near impunity.  Lured with fraudulent promises of lucrative opportunities, women migrated within and across borders for work.  A U.S. Department of State trafficking report released in 2000 found that crime rings and loosely connected criminal networks trafficked between 45,000 and 50,000 women and children into the U.S. annually.  Trafficking did not occur in a vacuum. Violations of womens human rights in countries of originincluding state-tolerated sex discrimination, domestic violence, and rampant sexual violencecontributed to womens vulnerability to abuse.  Whether the women traveled voluntarily, found themselves tricked into migrating, or were sold into the sex industry or  sweatshops, trafficking victims suffered horribly similar human rights violations.  Stripped of their passports, often unable to speak the local language, sold as chattel, and terrified of local law enforcement authorities and their traffickers, many women and girls struggled to pay off the enormously inflated debts owed to traffickers; others attempted to escape.  In the countries of destination, women encountered violence, state complicity, detention, and deportation.
	For example, Nigerian womens rights organizations reported that hundreds of Nigerian women and girls hoping to escape poverty and discrimination at home voluntarily migrated to Europe in response to job offers as domestic workers or waitresses. Upon arrival, many found themselves trapped in forced prostitution, saddled with exorbitant debts, and forced to work under brutal conditions.  Like other trafficked women around the world, Nigerian women struggled to pay off their debt.  Forbidden to refuse any customer, women who dared to resist encountered harsh punishment from their employers, including physical assault.  Some clients also sexually and physically attacked the women; other clients robbed them.  Their status as illegal migrants made the women particularly vulnerable to attacks by customers and traffickers alike.   The Womens Consortium of Nigeria (WACON), a Nigeria-based advocacy group that provides support for victims of trafficking, reported that some employers denounced trafficked women to immigration officials as illegal aliens.  The result was deportation for the victims, often under inhumane conditions.  In May 2000, WACON used the trafficking cases it documented to advocate within Nigeria for, among other things, repatriation procedures guaranteeing victims safety and respect for their human rights, as well as health care and counseling services.   Activists reported that the Nigerian government had arrested several men in connection with the sale of girls to Europe and the trafficking of them to West Africa.  
 	The Israeli government also failed to take even minimal steps to protect trafficked women trapped in that country.  In July, after the publication of a blistering report on trafficking by Amnesty International, and after years of lobbying by Israeli womens organizations, the Knesset amended the criminal code to make the buying and selling of human beings for prostitution a criminal offense.  The law had little impact, however, on the lives of dozens of women still detained in prison in Israel and awaiting deportation.  Despite the new legislation, the Israeli government continued to treat trafficked women not as victims, but as criminals and illegal aliens, housing women in prisons and making them particularly vulnerable to human rights abuses. Nor was the law particularly dissuasive to traffickers, who continued to bring hundreds of women and girls from the countries of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe into Israel for forced labor in the sex industry.   Although Israel yielded to international pressure and began prosecuting a small number of traffickers, its efforts were undermined by its failure to provide minimal guarantees for victims of trafficking, including witness protection, legal assistance, relief from deportation, or third-country resettlement.
 	Danger also plagued undocumented Thai women working in the Japanese sex industry.  As in Israel, Japanese government authorities failed to consider the coercive and deceptive circumstances of trafficked womens arrival and employment in Japan.  Instead, they treated the women as criminals or undocumented workers.
	Although high-ranking Japanese and Thai officials publicly condemned trafficking in women and exhibited some understanding of the slavery-like nature of the abuses involved, women in these countries still lacked any meaningful legal redress.  Japanese officials failed to enforce even the minimal available legal protections.  For example, the Japanese government identified an amendment to the Law on Control and Improvement of Amusement Businesses as its primary effort to address trafficking.  But the narrowly-written law proved wholly inadequate to provide relief for trafficking victims.  Most glaringly, the law lacked criminal penalties: revocation of an establishments license stands as the only punishment for violations.   In March 2000, the police admitted that the new amended provision had not yet been used.  Furthermore, labor officials told Human Rights Watch that officials in the Employment Security Office, as local offices charged with monitoring enforcement of the labor code are called, failed to understand the laws that could be used to prosecute traffickers, and thus rarely enforced them. 
	Likewise, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, traffickers continued to abuse and exploit women from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe with impunity.  In 1999, Human Rights Watch uncovered brothels filled with women trafficked from Ukraine, Moldova, Bulgaria, Belarus, and Romania scattered throughout Bosnia.  In interviews with Human Rights Watch, women in the brothels reported that they had been sold from brothel owner to brothel owner, placed in debt bondage,  threatened, and beaten.  Trafficking showed no signs of abating. One year after Human Rights Watch completed its research, a United Nations report on trafficking into Bosnia confirmed the widespread abuses.  The May 2000 report documented significant local police, international police, and some Stabilisation Force (SFOR) complicity.  Between March 1999 and March 2000, the U.N. intervened in forty cases involving one hundred and eighty-two women, five of whom were under the age of eighteen.  In fourteen of those cases, the U.N. found compelling evidence of complicity by SFOR, local, or international police.  In one case, an SFOR civilian paid seven thousand Deutsche Marks (U.S.$3057) to purchase two women from a brothel owner.  NATO declined to waive the SFOR members diplomatic immunity; he left Bosnia and Herzegovina without legal repercussions.  With growing awareness of the surge in trafficking, U.N. officials initiated a trafficking project in Bosnia in 1999 in cooperation with local nongovernmental organizations and the International Organization on Migration to provide shelter, legal aid, and protection for women who sought to escape their traffickers.  After one year in operation, the program appeared to provide women trafficked into Bosnia with some concrete support.  However, the Bosnian government and international community made little progress on prosecuting those responsible for the abuses. 
 
Womens Status in the Family
	The family remained one of the most contested sites for progress on womens rights.  During  Beijing + 5 at the U.N. in June, governments congratulated themselves on their efforts to ensure equality for women in all spheres of life.  Some governments did, in fact, change national legislation to guarantee womens equality in the family.  For example, according to a September 2000 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) report, both the Czech Republic and Cape Verde enacted new family codes that guaranteed women equality.  Nevertheless, many other governments were unyielding in their resistance to reform personal status laws that discriminated against women.  Governments justified their inaction as preserving their societies morals, unity, religion, culture, and tradition. Countries like Morocco, Rwanda, Algeria, Israel, and Egypt maintained laws and practices that blatantly discriminated against women in marriage, access to divorce, child custody, and inheritance, among other issues.  These laws and practices relegated women to a subordinate status in the family and restricted their autonomy to make decisions about their lives.
	In Morocco, the Family Code granted different rights to women and men and consistently rendered womens autonomy subject to male guardianship and authority.  The introduction by Prime Minister El-Yousoufi of a national plan for the integration of women in development in March 1999 raised hopes that womens status would improve in critical areas.  However, by late 2000, the government had made negligible progress toward implementing the plan, as a result of resistance by conservative and Islamist factions to the plans section on reforming the Family Code.  The section on the reform of the personal status code calls for, among other things, raising the age of marriage for girls and women from fifteen to eighteen, canceling the guardianship requirement for adult women, outlawing polygamy except in certain cases, giving women the right to half of their husbands property after a divorce, and allowing divorced women to maintain custody of their children if they remarry.  In March 2000, conservative and Islamist factions organized a march in Casablanca in opposition to the plan, while progressive factions organized a march in Rabat in support of it.  In May 2000, in response to the intense public debate around the proposed legal reforms, the prime minister appointed a committee of scholars and religious authorities to consider the controversial aspects of the plan and make recommendations to King Mohamed VI. As of late October 2000, this committee had not met.  Moroccan womens rights activists argued that, since the plan addresses only a minimum of their demands, a self-described progressive government should have no problem meeting them.
	In Israel, an amendment to the Equal Rights for Women Law was passed in March 2000. The amendment deals with, inter alia, equal social rights for women in all spheres of life:  the right of women over their bodies, protection against violence and trafficking, and representation for women in the public sector.  The equality proposed by this law extended to all spheres of life except family life.  Issues of marriage and divorce continued to be exclusively within the jurisdiction of the religious courts, be they Jewish, Christian, Muslim, or Druze. These courts controlled womens lives and their right to administer their lives.  For example, under these religious courts, women did not have equal access to divorce. According to the Israel Womens Network, thousands of Jewish women continued to be a gunot,  chained women whose husbands refused to divorce them. Mevoi Satum (Impasse), an Israeli organization dedicated to helping a gunot, estimated that over 97 percent of men who deny their wives a divorce were physically abusive.  
	In January 2000, the Egyptian parliament passed a new law on divorce.  The Khole law opened the possibility for the first time for women unilaterally to request divorce on grounds of incompatibility, while requiring women to forgo alimony and to repay their husbands any dowry.  Many womens rights activists acknowledged that the new law facilitated womens access to divorce, but noted that it is too early to assess its full impact.
	In Uzbekistan, despite the constitutional guarantee of full legal equality between men and women, in practice, women continued to face discrimination in their access to divorce and to marital property. Privileging protection of  the family, over womens equality and autonomy, the Uzbek government erected legal and administrative barriers to divorce.  Courts refused to grant women divorce without permission from local authorities. Also, a husbands refusal to divorce barred his wifes legal claim to marital property, although he, relying on the lax enforcement of laws against bigamy, could re-marry at will.
	On a positive note, the Rwandan Supreme Court, which by law must approve all new legislation before it becomes binding and enforceable, finally approved the inheritance bill adopted by parliament in June 1999. The new  inheritance law became applicable to all Rwandans in November 1999, reversing decades of inequality women faced in the area of  inheritance. Women had encountered barriers in reclaiming their property after the 1994 genocide, mainly due to discriminatory customary law.  By law, Rwandan women can now inherit property from their parents or husbands. The law enables widows whose deceased husbands male relatives had already inherited their property to reclaim it. Rwandan womens rights activists cautioned, however, that without a nation-wide campaign to educate women and society at large about the new law, the daily reality of discriminatory land inheritance practices would continue to dominate most womens lives. 

The Role of the International Community 
	Although womens human rights received much attention from the international community in the year 2000, states and intergovernmental organizations failed to take the substantive actions necessary to prevent and redress violations of womens human rights.  In a variety of fora, states tried repeatedly to abdicate responsibility for ending violence against women and other violations.  Some states disclaimed responsibility for violations in the so-called private sphere.  Some states argued that they were responsible for redressing only gender-based violence, not gender-based discrimination.  And finally, some states tried to attack womens human rights activists in ways designed to divide the movement.  Although womens rights activists were able to withstand most of these attacks, the progress that many had hoped for, especially within the Beijing + 5 review process, simply did not happen.  
      
United Nations
	In June 2000, the United Nations General Assembly held a special session, Women 2000: Gender Equality, Development and Peace in the 21st Century, to review the Beijing Platform for Action.  Delegates from more than 180 states were charged with reviewing the progress made during the previous five years in implementing the Beijing Platform, which was drafted and signed by 189 governments at the U.N. Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing, China, in 1995.  What should have been a moment for states to reflect on progress made in advancing the status of women, to identify obstacles to their advancement, and to renew their commitment to ensuring that women enjoy their human rights and fundamental freedoms quickly deteriorated into a struggle to prevent states backtracking. A small group of obstructionist governments, including Algeria, Nicaragua, Syria, Pakistan, and the Holy See, used Beijing + 5 to attack the very principles of equality underlying the Platform for Action.  Unfortunately for women, the majority of states, while not participating in the attack, failed to mount a vigorous defense of the commitments made in Beijing.  For example, governments such as the U.S., Canada, Australia, and member states of the European Union could have taken the initiative by immediately and publicly condemning efforts to downplay abuses of womens rights.  They could have countered with proposals to strengthen the language of the Platform for Action and called for concrete measures and benchmarks to assess progress.  Instead, these so-called leaders kept a low public profile and allowed much of the debate to be set by the reactionary minority.  As the special session drew near to an end, with the outcome document still unfinished, there were widespread fears among NGOs that this session would be remembered as Beijing - 5.  States finally adopted an outcome document that reaffirmed the Platform for Action and included some advances, but largely failed to call for concrete actions which would move states beyond rhetoric to action.
	The strategies and arguments used by the obstructionist minority at Beijing +5 were familiar to those who had been involved in the Cairo +5 review in 1999 and the ongoing negotiations on the International Criminal Court (ICC). First, some representatives claimed that states do not commit human rights abuses against women; they argued that gender-specific and gender-based forms of violence against women are perpetrated solely by individuals, not state actors.  This argument failed to take into account the experiences of women who face persecution by the state because of their political opinions or because they fail to conform to gender-based stereotypes, or, in some cases, such as under the Taliban in Afghanistan, simply because they are women. This argument also failed to address the well-documented obstacles women encounter when seeking redress after experiencing violence.  Not only are women denied redress through the criminal justice system, but in some countries, like Pakistan, women risk being attacked by the police if they dare to file a complaint.
	Another strategy used in the attack on the Platform for Action involved attempting to separate the issue of violence against women from other violations.  Many countries were willing to condemn violence against women but were insistent that the violence was unconnected to violations of other rights.  Many delegates spoke about the need to end domestic violence, but avoided agreeing to specific actions such as ensuring that their criminal codes prohibit violence by an intimate partner; requiring that police, forensic medical personnel, prosecutors and judges be trained to handle effectively domestic violence cases; and implementing effective protection for victims of domestic violence.  In Jordan, for example, the government has condemned so-called honor killings, but its only means of offering protection to women threatened with murder is to incarcerate them, in violation of their rights to liberty and freedom of movement.
	More generally, these states ignored how womens vulnerability to violence is connected to a wide range of violations of civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights.  For example, even as delegates condemned domestic violence, the concern was too often presented without context.  In particular, governments failed to recognize that in many countries women are denied access to public life, to paid work, to education, to credit, to custody of their children, and to inherit land and property. These human rights violations make women particularly vulnerable to domestic violence by making it almost impossible for them to leave abusive relationships.
	This strategy of refusing to recognize more than a few rights was evident in the fight at Beijing + 5 over whether human rights protect individual autonomy when it comes to decision-making about sex. Womens rights advocates pressed governments to recognize sexual rights in the outcomes document, but states refused, opting instead to call for attention to womens sexual health.  States repeatedly refused to recognize that when women cannot negotiate, on equal terms, if, when and with whom to have intimate relationships, they are more vulnerable to sexual and other forms of violence.  In the effort to exclude the language of sexual rights from the document, states also resorted to attacks aimed at driving a wedge between womens rights activists by insisting that only Western women want sexual rights.
	Even as the highly-politicized Beijing +5 review process was taking place, numerous U.N. programs and agencies released their own reports highlighting the pervasiveness of violence against women, the extent to which women suffer from discrimination in many contexts, and the correlations between poverty and gender.  The United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) reported that 70 percent of the worlds 1.3 billion people living in poverty are women. And, despite the pledges made by governments at Beijing, the situation for women is getting worse in certain areas.  For example, the number of rural women living in absolute poverty, i.e. life-threatening poverty, has risen by 50 percent over the last two decades as opposed to 30 percent for men.  UNIFEM further reported that although women work two-thirds of all hours worked, they earn one-tenth of all income and own less than one-tenth of the worlds property. In April, at the World Education Forum in Dakar, Senegal, Secretary-General Kofi Annan noted that two-thirds of the 110 million children who are not receiving an education are girls. 
	The UNIFEW report and a UNICEF report on domestic violence reinforced the argument that human rights are indivisible and, specifically that for women to truly enjoy the right to freedom from violence, they must be able to enjoy their rights in other spheres as well.  First the UNIFEM report showed that women remain economically disadvantaged in most countries, and that their second class status makes them both vulnerable to violence and unable to escape violence.  The UNICEF report addressed not only the pervasiveness of domestic violence against women and girls, but also the social, economic and health costs both to individuals who suffer the violence and to society.  This correlation between gender and poverty is a problem for developed countries as well as developing countries.  For example, in the U.S., women represent 57.2 percent of people living in poverty.
	The search of womens human rights activists for an end to impunity for gender-based violence was not limited to the domestic sphere.  At meetings held at the U.N. in New York in March and June 2000, states wrapped up their negotiations on the elements of crimes, and rules of evidence and procedures for the International Criminal Court (ICC).  Womens ability to seek redress for sexual violence through the ICC came under fire when a small group of states proposed that all the crimes of sexual violence enumerated in the ICC treaty be exempted if they were committed by a family member or pursuant to religious or cultural practices.  The proposal was ultimately rejected, but not before it was used to undermine the reach of the court by raising the threshold required to establish crimes against humanity.
	At the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Alfred Musema, director of the Tea Factory in Gisovu, was found guilty of genocide, extermination, and one count of rape.  He was found not guilty of other inhumane acts, including the allegations that he repeatedly incited others to have fun with Tutsi women by raping them and, in one case, ordered a woman to be raped and have her breast cut off and fed to her son.  In a separate opinion, Judge Navanethem Pillay dissented.  She did not agree with the factual findings of her fellow judges that Witness M was credible in all of his accounts except for his testimony that Musema ordered rapes.  Pillay argued that there was no basis on which to find that Witness M was not also credible on this one specific issue.  The case raised concerns that investigators for the ICTR may not have conducted sufficiently thorough investigations to compile evidence of the widespread use of rape and other forms of sexual violence during the genocide.  Womens rights activists in Rwanda cited lack of information and trust that the court will actually take the measures necessary to protect them from being publicly identified as two significant reasons that victims of sexual violence have not come forward to speak with investigators about their experiences.  The ICTR opened an outreach center in Kigali in September 2000 to facilitate communication and cooperation between the court and Rwandans.  
	At the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), victims of sexual violence came under attack when an expert witness for the defense in the case of The Prosecutor of the Tribunal against Dragan Gagovic, Gojko Jankovic, Janko Janjic, Radomir Kovac, Zoran Vukovic, Dragan Zelenovic, Dragoljub Kunarac, and Radovan Stankovic (or Foca case) argued that in the absence of corroborating medical evidence, it is as if the rape did not happen.  This testimony highlighted two significant issues for the ad hoc tribunals.  First, in cases of sexual violence, the difficulties of obtaining convictions using the high evidentiary standards required by the tribunal, such as corroborating medical evidence.  Second, the tribunals need to assist survivors of sexual violence in getting medical attention.  In situations of armed conflict, it is unlikely that women will have timely access to medical attention, including the possibility of collecting medically-relevant evidence for a rape investigation.  But, as with other survivors of torture, women should get medical attention as soon as possible and a well-trained medical professional may be able to document other evidence of sexual violence.      
	 These issues must be addressed immediately, as credible reports of sexual violence perpetrated against women in conflict poured in throughout the year from Chechnya, Sierra Leone, Guinea, East and West Timor, Afghanistan, and elsewhere.  In this regard, the U.N. failed again to learn from its past mistakes and to ensure that investigators hired by U.N. civilian police to investigate war crimes and crimes against humanity were experienced in documenting and investigating crimes of sexual violence.  The United Nations Transitional Administration for East Timor (UNTAET) initially not only failed to include investigators with expertise in investigating crimes of sexual violence, but in several cases, when they did attempt to interview women in East Timor, failed to conduct the investigations in a confidential manner to protect the womens identity.  Where the alleged perpetrators remained at large, womens rights groups who had collected this evidence refused further cooperation with UNTAET until an effective witness protection program was put in place. These problems, however, appeared to have been partly rectified by September 2000.
	U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson visited East Timor and met with many women survivors.  However, human rights activists were disappointed that, in her January 2000 report on the situation in East Timor, she failed to press for immediate action to  improve the situation of women victims, for example, by calling for the rapid deployment of  women civilian police with expertise in investigating cases of sexual violence, for the active investigation of leads in specific cases, and for increased efforts to get suspects detained and returned to East Timor.    
	UNHCR faced the ongoing challenge of meeting the protection and humanitarian needs of refugees in increasingly hostile environments.  In Tanzania and Guinea, politicians accused refugees of causing economic hardship and instability in their countries.  As a result, refugees were threatened with violence in Tanzania and attacked by police, solders, and civilians in Guinea. These attacks included rape of women. The deliberate targeting and murder of UNHCR workers in West Timor and Guinea raised the specter of people charged with protecting refugees being left unprotected and exposed to attack, in part because of a lack of political will by the international community to ensure their safety and that of the refugees that they seek to protect.
	The pilot program in the Tanzanian camps funded by the U.N. Foundation continued to address sexual and domestic violence within the camps.  The program received generally favorable reviews for tackling domestic violence, a problem that had been largely unaddressed in the camps, although there remained problems with consistent monitoring and follow up of individual cases.  Similar programs were introduced in camps in Kenya, Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone.  However, all these programs were at risk of being shut down because of the lack of financial support from donor governments.
	UNHCR revised its guidelines on women refugees to reflect the understanding that its protection duties include preventing and addressing both sexual and domestic violence against refugees in and around the camps.  The revised guidelines were scheduled to be submitted to the NGO community for comments in early 2001.  UNHCR also continued its work to elaborate the Executive Committees position on gender-related persecution by examining both procedural and substantive elements of  how to determine asylum claims by women.   UNHCR finally filled the long -vacant position of Senior Coordinator for Refugee Women.
	For the women of Afghanistan, the U.N. was a desperately needed ally in their struggle to survive and enjoy some semblance of their most fundamental human rights, but here the U.N. sent mixed messages. On the one hand, the U.N. played an important role in protesting a Taliban edict closing down female-run bakeries in the summer, and two human rights rapporteurs strongly condemned the Talibans treatment of women. On the other hand, UNHCR continued repatriation efforts, often to areas where womens rights were severely restricted and where their physical well-being was at risk.  This raised questions about whether refugees choosing to repatriate were fully informed by UNHCR of the security issues women face in Afghanistan and who in the household was making the decision.
	At regular intervals since January 1999, 102 countries have met  at the United Nations in Vienna to draft a new Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. The purpose of the convention is to define areas of law enforcement cooperation, legal procedures, and other measures between States relating to all forms of transnational crime. Three Additional Protocols were also being drafted including one to address Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.  A major concern was to ensure that the treaties recognize that victims of trafficking have suffered a variety of human rights abuses and that they have access to redress. 
	At the annual session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women, Radhika Coomaraswamy, whose mandate was extended for another three years, issued a timely report on trafficking against women that explored the complexity of the issue, but strongly called on states to recognize that women who were trafficked are neither criminal nor illegal migrants and should be given the opportunity to seek redress for violations they experienced in the course of being trafficked.  Her report was aimed, in part, at states negotiating a U.N. protocol on trafficking in Vienna.
	The commission also adopted, for the first time, a resolution on Womens Equal Ownership of, Access to and Control over Land and the Equal Right to Own Property and to Adequate Housing.  The commission also appointed a special rapporteur on the right to food and the right to housing, signifying increased attention by the commission to violations of economic rights.  If the special rapporteur successfully integrates a gender-based analysis into the work, this could be a substantial step toward recognition of the relationship between gender-based discrimination and gender-based violence. 
	The Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) raised concerns about the caste system during its February review of Indias initial report under CEDAW.   CEDAW  expressed concern over extreme forms of physical and sexual violence against women belonging to particular castes or ethnic or religious groups, and over customary practices such as dowry, sati, and the devadasi system, all of which contribute to a higher incidence of gender-based violence in the country.      

United States
	Given its self-proclaimed role as a vigorous defender of womens human rights around the world, the U.S. missed several opportunities in 2000 to live up to this claim.  Although 166 countries, including all industrialized nations, had ratified CEDAW, the U.S. still had not.  Despite pressure from womens rights groups, constituents, and colleagues, Senator Jesse Helms continued to resist demands that CEDAW be put to a vote by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which he chaired.  On International Womens Day, Senator Helms redoubled his efforts against CEDAW ratification and publicly vowed never to allow a Senate vote on CEDAW; instead, he promised to leave it in the dust- bin for several more decades.  In May, Senator Helms introduced a resolution calling for the Senate to reject CEDAW. 
	The U.S. government also missed an opportunity to demonstrate its commitment to womens human rights at home when it again failed to take action to prevent sexual abuse of women incarcerated in state and federal prisons. Legislative and remedial measures were either stalled or failing.  For example, in late 1999, Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton introduced a bill in the House of Representatives to withhold federal funds from states that failed to implement five specific safeguards to prevent sexual abuse.  Although the bill was sent to a judiciary subcommittee in November 1999, as of mid-October 2000 the bill was buried, apparently due to lack of support.  
	It was not just the legislative branch that failed women in U.S. prisons.  After the Department of Justice settled its case against the Michigan Department of Corrections (MDOC) alleging widespread sexual abuse, retaliation, and privacy violations, the federal judge presiding over the federal and parallel state cases allowed the state case to continue, expressing his concern that the settlement was not strong enough to protect the women.  The Justice Department failed to monitor its agreement, and even basic provisions such as counseling for women victims of sexual abuse were never provided. A settlement between the private litigants and MDOC was agreed in September.  Michigan agreed to pay several million dollars in damages and to provide significant injunctive relief. 
	Nonetheless, leadership on womens human rights did emerge elsewhere.  In 2000,  the U.S. Senate passed landmark legislation to protect trafficked victims rights in the U.S. and abroad.  The new legislation, among other things, acknowledged that people are trafficked around the world for all types of work; dedicated resources to prosecuting and preventing trafficking in the U.S. and elsewhere; and established a visa that allows trafficked victims to remain in the U.S. to pursue civil or criminal claims against their traffickers.
	In June, Congressman Jerrold Nadler presented a resolution condemning honor killings and urging, among other things, that the Department of State, in its yearly report on human rights, should include information on incidences of honor crimes and on what steps the respective governments are taking to address this problem.  U.S. womens rights groups welcomed this effort as a consciousness raising device, but warned that it was insufficient on its own and called for greater commitment by the U.S. government to raising concerns about violence against women in its bi- and multilateral meetings with other governments.
	While the U.S. Congress was starting to remove violence against women from the cloaked secrecy of the family, at the special session of the U.N. General Assembly for the Beijing + 5 review, the U.S. failed to take a leadership role and rally opposition when several governments sought to exempt violence to which women were exposed in the context of the family, or under the guise of religious or cultural practices, from being considered a human rights abuse.  In a further failure of its purported leadership on womens rights, at Beijing + 5 the U.S. vigorously opposed and had removed from the final document reference to the rights of incarcerated women, arguing that this subject was not in the 1995 Beijing Platform for Action.
	Nor did the U.S. play a strong leadership role on womens human rights in some key bilateral fora. For example, the U.S. government maintained only a nominal commitment to holding Mexico accountable for failing to enforce its labor code with regard to protecting women from sex discrimination based on their reproductive status. In 2000, the U.S. government was content to let the NAFTA review process proceed without intervening in any meaningful way to influence or direct it.  As in past years, the U.S. government missed critical opportunities to strengthen the NAFTA review process.  The U.S. failed to register an official complaint when Mexico used a National Agreement on Labor Cooperation (NAALC) meeting in Puebla, Mexico, to disseminate misinformation about employers having the right to test women workers for pregnancy if such testing is to protect the well-being of the woman or her fetus.  The U.S. also failed to initiate any in-country monitoring to determine the veracity of Mexicos claims, and failed to ensure that concerned NGOs were kept informed in a timely manner about basic developments, such as the holding of public meetings to discuss women workers rights in Mexico.  The final U.S. National Administrative Office report was more than a year overdue as of late October 2000.

European Union
	The European Union evidenced some commitment to womens human rights, launching a U.S. $29.2 million community action program to combat violence against women and children. The grant program, a continuation of the DAPHNE program initiated in 1997, provided assistance to public institutions and  NGOs fighting trafficking, domestic violence, and violence against minority groups and migrants. Open to states applying for membership in the community as well as member states, the mechanism provided funding to dozens of organizations working for womens human rights, including one group created to prevent violence against lesbians.

Council of Europe
The Council of Europe continued its efforts to combat the trafficking of women and children with Recommendation No. R. (2000) 11, adopted by the Committee of Ministers in May 2000. The recommendation encouraged Council of Europe member states to, inter alia, allow victims of trafficking to press charges with the benefit of witness protection, compensate victims with perpetrators assets, grant temporary residence status with access to medical and social assistance, and support the creation of a NGO anti-trafficking network. Regrettably, the document focused only on trafficking into the sex industry, ignoring the phenomenon of trafficking for other forms of forced labor. 

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
	Critics questioned the OSCEs commitment to womens human rights as the institution abruptly downgraded the position of gender adviser from the Office of the Secretary General to the personnel office. Several member states spearheaded an effort in 1997 to create a permanent position of gender adviser to monitor OSCE policies on womens human rights and combat gender discrimination within the institution. The arbitrary decision to remove the gender adviser from a policy-making role undermined the Vienna-based gender advisers ability to press for progress on issues ranging from sexual harassment to improved monitoring of womens human rights violations in the field. The much-vaunted internal sexual harassment policy, created in 1999, met with skepticism from staff members, who doubted the organizations commitment to the correct handling of complaints and feared negative consequences for using the mechanism. And for the third year in a row, the OSCE leadership refused to make public statistics on womens representation inside the OSCEs institutions, thwarting calls for transparency. While the OSCE adopted a substantive and ambitious gender action plan, the political will to implement the policy appeared to be sadly lacking. 
	The OSCEs backsliding on womens human rights internally contrasted with the new programs it initiated to combat trafficking and to train women political leaders in the field. The OSCEs Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) funded a range of anti-trafficking projects in the Balkans, Central Asia, Central and Eastern Europe, and the former Soviet Unionmany carried out in coordination with local NGOs with special expertise on trafficking. In addition, the Austrian government, acting as the OSCE chair in 2000, seconded its former minister for womens affairs, Dr. Helga Konrad, to ODIHR to chair the Stability Pact Task Force on Trafficking in Human Beings. OSCE offices in Central Asian countries provided training programs on human rights documentation and leadership skills to women human rights activists.

Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Democratic Republic of the Congo: Eastern Congo Ravaged: Killing Civilians and Silencing Protest, 5/00
Japan: Owed Justice: Thai Women Trafficked into Debt Bondage in Japan, 9/00
Kuwait:  Promises Betrayed: Denial of Rights of Bidun, Women, and Freedom of Expression, 10/00
Russian/Chechnya: No Happiness Remains: Civilian Killings, Pillage, & Rape in Alkhan-Yurt, 4/00
Tanzania: Seeking Protection; Addressing Sexual and Domestic Violence in Tanzanias Refugee Camps, 10/00
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: Kosovo: Rape As a Weapon of Ethnic Cleansing,  
3/00

