Darfur and Abu Ghraib
by Kenneth Roth
Among the myriad human rights challenges of 2004, two pose fundamental
threats to human rights: the ethnic cleansing in Darfur and the
torture of detainees at Abu Ghraib. No one would equate the two, yet
each, in its own way, has had an insidious effect. One involves indifference
in the face of the worst imaginable atrocities, the other is emblematic
of a powerful government flouting a most basic prohibition. One
presents a crisis that threatens many lives, the other a case of exceptionalism
that threatens the most fundamental rules. The vitality of the
global defense of human rights depends on a firm response to eachon
stopping the Sudanese governments slaughter in Darfur and on changing
the policy decisions behind the U.S. governments torture and mistreatment
of detainees.
In Darfur, the western region of Sudan, massive ethnic cleansing has
sparked much international hand-wringing and denunciation but little
effective action. The systematic violence against civilians by Sudanese
government forces and government-backed militia constitutes crimes
against humanity and has even been described by some as genocide, yet
the international response has been little more than to condemn the
atrocities, feed the victims, and send a handful of poorly equipped
African forces to try, largely in vain, to stop the slaughter. No serious
pressure has been put on the Sudanese government to halt its murderous
campaign. No meaningful protective force has been deployed.
Coming a decade after the Rwandan genocide, the mass murder in
Darfur mocks the vows of never again. How can governments honestly
mouth those words when their actions fall so shamefully short?
Immediate action is needed to save the people of Darfur. The U.N.
Security Councilor, failing action by that body, any responsible group
of governmentsmust deploy a large force capable of protecting the civilian population, prosecute the killers and their commanders, disband
and disarm the Sudanese governments militia, and create secure conditions
so displaced people can return home safely. Continued inaction
risks undermining a fundamental human rights principlethat the
nations of the world will never let sovereignty stand in the way of their
responsibility to protect people from mass atrocities.
The U.S. governments use of torture at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq
poses a different kind of challenge: not because the scale of the abuse is
as large as Darfur, but because the abuser is so powerful. When most
governments breach international human rights and humanitarian law,
they commit a violation. The breach is condemned or prosecuted, but
the rule remains firm. Yet when a government as dominant and influential
as the United States openly defies that law and seeks to justify its
defiance, it also undermines the law itself and invites others to do the
same. The U.S. governments deliberate and continuing use of coercive
interrogationits acceptance and deployment of torture and other
cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatmenthas had this insidious effect,
well beyond the consequences of an ordinary abuser. That unlawful
conduct has also undermined Washingtons much-needed credibility as
a proponent of human rights and a leader of the campaign against terrorism.
In the midst of a seeming epidemic of suicide bombings,
beheadings, and other attacks on civilians and noncombatantsall
affronts to the most basic human rights valuesWashingtons weakened
moral authority is felt acutely.
As the Bush administration begins its second term, its challenge is to
make human rights a guiding force for U.S. conduct and to establish
Americas credibility as a defender of human rights. As a first step,
President Bush and the U.S. Congress should establish a fully independent
investigative commissionsimilar to the one created to examine
the attacks of September 11, 2001to determine what went wrong
in the administrations interrogation practices and to prescribe remedial
steps. Washington should also acknowledge and reverse the policy decisions behind its torture and mistreatment of detainees, hold accountable
those responsible at all levels of government for the mistreatment of
detainees, and publicly commit to ending all forms of coercive interrogation.
Darfur
Many reasons can be cited for the worlds callous disregard for the
death of an estimated 70,000 people and the displacement of some 1.6
million more in Darfur. The second essay of this volume describes several
of these reasons. None, however, justifies this cruel indifference.
Once more, the U.N. Security Council has been hampered by its permanent
members threatened parochial use of their vetoa veto that, as
recommended by the U.N.s high-level panel on global threats, should
never be exercised in cases of genocide and large-scale human rights
abuses. This time, China has been the primary problem, demonstrating
more concern for preserving its lucrative oil contracts in Sudan than
for saving thousands of lives. Russia, protecting its own valuable arms
sales to Khartoum, has seconded this cold-hearted unresponsiveness.
The non-permanent members also share culpability. Algeria and
Pakistan have been models of Islamic solidarity, so long as that is
defined as fealty to an Islamic government rather than commitment to
the lives of Muslim victims. Other African members of the council,
Angola and Benin, placed a premium on loyalty to a fellow African government.
In the U.N. General Assembly, scores of governments, hostile
to any human rights criticism because of their own poor records,
opposed even discussing Sudans murderous campaign, let alone condemning
it.
Even the champions of human rights in DarfurWashington foremost
among them have seemed more focused on limiting their obligation
to the people of Darfur than on ending the killing. A large U.N.-
authorized military force is clearly needed to protect Darfur residents and to create conditions of security that might allow them to return
home safely. But the United States and its Western allies have handed
the problem to the African Union, a new institution with few resources
and no experience with military operations of the scale needed. The situation
cries out for involvement by the major military powers, but they
have chosen to be unavailable. The United States, the United Kingdom,
and Australia are bogged down in Iraq, with the United States going so
far as to say that no new action is dictated by its determination that
the killing in Darfur amounts to genocide; France is committed elsewhere
in Africa; Canada, despite promoting the responsibility to protect,
is cutting back its peacekeeping commitments; NATO is preoccupied
in Afghanistan; the European Union is deploying forces in Bosnia.
Everyone has something more important to do than to save the people
of Darfur from inhuman brutality at the hands of the Sudanese government
and its militia.
Another key step for ending the ethnic cleansing is to ensure that those
responsible for murder, rape, and other atrocitiesand their commanders
face their day in court. The Sudanese government has done nothing
real to see justice done. International prosecution is needed to
silence the smug denials of responsibility emanating from Khartoum
and to signal to the people of Darfur that the world no longer considers
their demise and dislocation acceptable. Just as impunity invited
Khartoum to extend its murderous ways from the killing fields of southern
Sudan to Darfur, so prosecution would demonstrate a refusal to tolerate
in Darfur the kinds of government-sponsored atrocities that have
plagued southern Sudan for over two decades.
To its credit, the Security Council established an international commission
of inquiry for Darfura possible prelude to prosecution. When
the commission reports back at the end of January, the council will have
to decide whether to refer the situation to the International Criminal
Court. Will China see past its oil contracts to allow the referral to go
forward? Will the United States overcome its antipathy for the court to allow prosecution of crimes it calls genocide? Or, as the people of
Darfur suffer and die, will it insist on wasting time setting up a separate
tribunal? The Security Councils many professions of concern will ring
hollow if its answer to the desperate pleas from Darfur is, through delay
or inaction, to let impunity reign.
Darfur today stands as testament to a profound failure of will to prevent
and redress the most heinous human rights crimes. Despite countless
denunciations and endless professions of concern, little has been done
to protect the people of Darfur. A failure of this magnitude challenges
the fundamental human rights principle that the governments of the
world will not turn their backs on people facing mass atrocities. For if
the nations of the world cannot act here, when will they act? How, ten
years after the Rwandan genocide, can the gap between concern and
action remain so wide? How, when the worst of human cruelty is on
display, can the world remain so indifferent? As the death toll rises and
the charade of feigned protection becomes painfully obvious to all, we
must insist that the nations of the world finally rescue the people of
Darfur. Either that or vow never again to say never again.
Coercive Interrogation
The U.S. governments systematic and continuing use of coercive interrogation
jeopardizes a pillar of international human rights lawa centuries-
old proscription, reaffirmed unconditionally in numerous widely
ratified human rights treaties, that governments should never subject
detainees to torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment.
Yet in fighting terrorism, the U.S. government has treated this cornerstone
obligation as merely hortatorya matter of choice, not duty.
This disdain for so fundamental a principle has done enormous damage
to the global system for protecting human rights. Broad public condemnation
has certainly greeted the U.S. governments use of torture and
other abusive techniques. To some extent that outrage has reinforced the rules that Washington violatedbut not enough. Washingtons lawless
example is so powerful, its influence so singular, that its deliberate
breach threatens to overshadow the condemnations and leave human
rights law significantly weakened. If even so basic a rule as the ban on
torture can be flouted, other rights are inevitably undermined as well.
To make matters worse, the Bush administration has developed outrageous
legal theories to try to justify many of its coercive techniques.
Whether defining torture so narrowly as to render its prohibition
meaningless, suggesting bogus legal defenses for torturers, or claiming
that the president has inherent power to order torture, the administration
and its lawyers have directly challenged the absolute ban on abusing
detainees.
The problem is compounded by the weakening of one of the most
important governmental voices for human rights. Washingtons record
of promoting human rights has always been mixed. For every offender
that it berated for human rights transgressions, there was another whose
abuses it ignored, excused, or even supported. Yet despite this inconsistency,
the United States historically has played a key role in defending
human rights. Its embrace of coercive interrogationpart of a broader
betrayal of human rights principles in the name of combating terrorism
has significantly impaired its ability to mount that defense.
Governments facing human rights pressure from the United States now
find it increasingly easy to turn the tables, to challenge Washingtons
standing to uphold principles that it violates itself. Whether it is Egypt
defending renewal of its emergency law by reference to U.S. anti-terror
legislation, Malaysia justifying administrative detention by invoking
Guantnamo, Russia citing Abu Ghraib to blame abuses in Chechnya
solely on low-level soldiers, or Cuba claiming the Bush administration
had no moral authority to accuse it of human rights violations, repressive
governments find it easier to deflect U.S. pressure because of
Washingtons own sorry post-September 11 record on human rights.
Indeed, when asked by Human Rights Watch to protest administrative
detention in Malaysia and prolonged incommunicado detention in
Uganda, State Department officials demurred, explaining, in the words
of one, with what we are doing in Guantnamo, were on thin ice to
push this.
Similarly, many human rights defenders, particularly in the Middle East
and North Africa, now cringe when the United States comes to their
defense. They may crave a powerful ally, but identifying too closely
with a government that so brazenly ignores international law, whether
in Iraq, Israel and the occupied territories, or the campaign against terrorism,
has become a sure route to disrepute. To his credit, President
Bush, in a November 2003 speech, deplored sixty years of Western
nations excusing and accommodating the lack of freedom in the Arab
world. Recalling U.S. efforts to roll back Communist dictatorships in
Eastern Europe, President Bush committed the United States to a new
forward strategy of freedom. Yet because of animosity toward
Washingtons policies, the close collaboration with civil society that
characterized U.S. pro-democracy efforts in Eastern Europe is now
more difficult in the Middle East and North Africa. This animosity is
not anti-Americanism, as it is often misconstrued in an effort to dismiss
it, but anti-American policyism.
Washingtons loss of credibility has not been for lack of rhetorical support
for concepts that are closely related to human rights, but the
embrace of explicit human rights language seems to have been calculatedly
rare. The Bush administration speaks often of its devotion to freedom,
its opposition to tyranny and terrorism, but rarely its commitment
to human rights. The distinction has enormous significance. It
is one thing to pronounce oneself on the side of the free, quite another
to be bound by the full array of human rights standards that are the
foundation of freedom. It is one thing to declare oneself opposed to terrorism,
quite another to embrace the body of international human
rights and humanitarian law that enshrines the values that reject terrorism. This linguistic sleight of handthis refusal to accept the legal obligations
embraced by rights-respecting stateshas facilitated
Washingtons use of coercive interrogation.
What has been particularly frustrating about Washingtons disregard for
international standards is how senseless, even counterproductive, it has
beenespecially in the Middle East and North Africa, where counterterrorism
efforts have focused. Open and responsive political systems are
the best way to encourage people to pursue their grievances peacefully.
But when the most vocal governmental advocate of democracy deliberately
violates human rights, it undermines democratically inclined
reformers and strengthens the appeal of those who preach more radical
visions.
Moreover, because deliberately attacking civilians is an affront to the
most basic human rights values, an effective defense against terrorism
requires not only traditional security measures but also reinforcement of
a human rights culture. The communities that are most influential with
potential terrorists must themselves be persuaded that violence against
civilians is never justified, regardless of the cause. But when the United
States disregards human rights, it undermines that human rights culture
and thus sabotages one of the most important tools for dissuading
potential terrorists. Instead, U.S. abuses have provided a new rallying
cry for terrorist recruiters, and the pictures from Abu Ghraib have
become the recruiting posters for Terrorism, Inc. Many militants need
no additional incentive to attack civilians, but if a weakened human
rights culture eases even only a few fence-sitters toward the path of violence,
the consequences can be dire.
And for what? To vent frustration, to exact revengeperhaps, but not
because torture and mistreatment are needed for protection. Respect for
the Geneva Conventions does not preclude vigorously interrogating
detainees about a limitless range of topics. The U.S. Armys interrogation
manual makes clear that abuse undermines the quest for reliable information. The U.S. military command in Iraq says that Iraqi
detainees are providing more useful intelligence when they are not subjected
to coercion. In the words of Craig Murray, the United Kingdoms
former ambassador to Uzbekistan who was speaking of the U.K.s
reliance on torture-extracted testimony, We are selling our souls for
dross.
None of this is to say that the United States is the worst human rights
abuser. Perusal of this years annual Human Rights Watch World
Report will show many more serious contenders for that notorious title.
But the sad truth is that Washingtons unmatched influence has made its
contribution to the degradation of human rights standards unique.
It is not enough to argue, as its defenders undoubtedly will, that the
Bush administration is well intentionedthat it is the good guy, in
the words of the Wall Street Journal. A society ordered on intentions
rather than law is a lawless society. Nor does it excuse the administrations
human rights record, as its defenders have tried to do, to note that
it removed two tyrannical governmentsthe Taliban in Afghanistan and
the Baath Party in Iraq. Attacks on repressive regimes cannot justify
attacks on the body of principles that makes their repression illegal.
To redeem its credibility as a proponent of human rights and an effective
leader of the campaign against terrorism, the Bush administration
needs urgently to reaffirm its commitment to human rights. For reasons
of principle and pragmatism, it must, as noted, allow an independent,
September 11-style investigative commission to examine completely its
interrogation practices. The administration must then acknowledge the
wrongfulness of its conduct, hold accountable all those responsible (not
just a small group of privates and sergeants), and publicly commit itself
to ending all forms of coercive interrogation. 
Cover-up and Self-investigation
When the photos from Abu Ghraib became public, the Bush administration
reacted like many abusive governments that are caught redhanded:
it went into damage-control mode. It agreed that the torture
and abuse featured in the photographs were wrong, but sought to minimize
the problem. The abusers, it claimed, were a handful of errant soldiers,
a few bad apples at the bottom of the barrel. The problem, it
argued, was contained, both geographically (one section of Abu Ghraib
prison) and structurally (only low-level soldiers, not more senior commanders).
The abuse photographed at Abu Ghraib and broadcast
around the world, it maintained, had nothing to do with the decisions
and policies of more senior officials. President Bush vowed that
wrongdoers will be brought to justice, but as of early December 2004,
no one above the rank of sergeant is facing prosecution.
Key to this damage control was a series of carefully limited investigations
ten so far. Most of the investigations, such as those conducted by
Maj. Gen. George Fay and Lt. Gen. Anthony Jones, involved uniformed
military officials examining the conduct of their subordinates;
these officers lacked the authority to scrutinize senior Pentagon officials.
The one investigation with the theoretical capacity to examine the
conduct of Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and his top aidesthe
inquiry led by former Defense Secretary James Schlesingerwas
appointed by Rumsfeld himself and seemed to go out of its way to distance
him from the problem. (At the press conference releasing the
investigative report, Schlesinger said that Rumsfelds resignation would
be a boon to all Americas enemies.) The Schlesinger investigation
lacked the independence of, for example, the September 11
Commission, which was established with the active involvement of the
U.S. Congress. As for the Central Intelligence Agencythe branch of
the U.S. government believed to hold the most important terrorist suspects
it has apparently escaped scrutiny by anyone other than its own inspector general. Meanwhile, no one seems to be looking at the role of
President Bush and other senior administration officials.
When an unidentified government official retaliated against a critic of
the Bush administration by revealing his wife to be a CIA agenta serious
crime because it could endanger herthe administration agreed,
under pressure, to appoint a special prosecutor who has been promised
independence from administration direction. Yet the administration has
refused to appoint a special prosecutor to determine whether senior
officials authorized torture and other forms of coercive interrogation  a
far more serious and systematic offense. As a result, no criminal inquiry
that the administration itself does not control is being conducted into
the U.S. governments abusive interrogation methods. The flurry of
self-investigations cannot obscure the lack of any genuinely independent
one.
The Policies behind Abu Ghraib
The abuses of Abu Ghraib did not erupt spontaneously at the lowest
levels of the military chain of command. They were not merely a management
failure, as the Schlesinger investigation suggested. They were
the direct product of an environment of lawlessness, an environment
created by policy decisions taken at the highest levels of the Bush
administration, many long before the start of the Iraq war. They reflect
a determination to fight terrorism unconstrained by fundamental principles
of international human rights and humanitarian laweven though
the United States and governments around the world have committed
to respect those principles even in time of war and severe security
threats. The Bush administrations decisions received important support
in the United States from a chorus of partisan pundits and academics
who, claiming that an unprecedented security threat justified unprecedented
measures, were all too eager to abandon the fundamental principles
on which their nation had been founded. Those decisions included: 
 The decision not to apply the Geneva Conventions to detainees
in U.S. custody at Guantnamo, even though the conventions
apply to all people picked up on the battlefield of Afghanistan.
Senior Bush officials vowed that all detainees would be treated
humanely, but that vow seems never to have been seriously
implemented and at times was qualified by a self-created exception
for military necessity. Meanwhile, the effective shredding
of the Geneva Conventions sent U.S. interrogators the signal
that, in the words of one leading counterterrorist official, the
gloves came off.
 The decision not to clarify for nearly two years that, regardless of
the applicability of the Geneva Conventions, all detainees in U.S.
custody were protected by the parallel requirements of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Even when, at the urging
of human rights groups, a senior Pentagon official belatedly reaffirmed,
in June 2003, that the convention prohibited not only torture
but also other forms of ill treatment, that announcement was
communicated to interrogators, if at all, in a way that had no discernible
impact on their behavior.
 The decision to interpret the prohibition of cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment narrowly, to permit certain forms of coercive
interrogationthat is, certain efforts to ratchet up a suspects
pain, suffering, and humiliation to make him talk. Not surprisingly,
those methods became more coercive as they migrated, in
the words of two Pentagon inquiries, from the controlled setting
of Guantnamo to the battlefields of Afghanistan and Iraq.
 The decision to hold some suspectseleven known and probably
many more in unacknowledged incommunicado detention,
beyond the reach of even the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Victims of such disappearances are at the greatest risk of torture and other mistreatment. For example, U.S. forces continue
to maintain closed detention sites in Afghanistan, where beatings,
threats, and sexual humiliation are still reported. Since late
2001, six persons arrested by U.S. forces in Afghanistan have died
in custodyone as recently as September 2004.
 The refusal for over two years to prosecute soldiers implicated in
the deaths of two suspects in U.S. custody in Afghanistan in
December 2002, deaths ruled homicides by U.S. Army pathologists.
Instead, the interrogators were reportedly sent to Iraq,
where some were allegedly involved in more abuse.
 The approval by Defense Secretary Rumsfeld of some interrogation
methods for Guantnamo that violated, at the very least, the
prohibition of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment and possibly
the ban on torture. These techniques included placing
detainees in painful stress positions, hooding them, stripping
them of their clothes, and scaring them with guard dogs. That
approval was later rescinded, but it contributed to the environment
in which Americas legal obligations were seen as dispensable.
 The reported approval by an unidentified senior Bush administration
official, and use, of water boardingknown as the submarine
in Latin Americaa torture technique in which the victim
is made to believe he will drown, and in practice sometimes does.
 The sending of suspects to governments such as Syria,
Uzbekistan, and Egypt that practice systematic torture.
Sometimes diplomatic assurances have been sought that the suspects
would not be mistreated, but if, as in these cases, the receiving
government routinely flouts its legal obligation under the
Convention against Torture, it was wrong to expect better compliance
with the non-binding word of a diplomat.
 The decision (adopted from the Bush administrations earliest
days) to oppose and undermine the International Criminal Court,
in part out of fear that it might compel the United States to prosecute
U.S. personnel implicated in war crimes or other comparable
offenses that the administration would prefer to ignore. That
signaled a determination to protect U.S. personnel from external
accountability for human rights offenses that the U.S. government
might authorize.
 The decision by the Justice Department, the Defense
Department, and the White House counsel to concoct dubious
legal theories to justify torture. Despite objections from the State
Department and professional military attorneys, these government
departments, under the direction of politically appointed
lawyers, offered such absurd interpretations of the law as that
President Bush has commander-in-chief authority to order torture.
By that theory, Slobodan Milosevic and Saddam Hussein
may as well be given the keys to their jail cells, since they, too,
presumably would have had commander-in-chief authority to
authorize the atrocities they directed.
These policy decisions, taken not by low-level soldiers but by senior
officials of the Bush administration, created an anything goes atmosphere,
an environment in which the ends were assumed to justify the
means. Sometimes the mistreatment of detainees was merely tolerated,
other times it was actively encouraged or even ordered. In those circumstances,
when the demand came from on high for actionable intelligence
intelligence that would help respond to the steady stream of
U.S. casualties at the hands of extraordinarily brutal Iraqi insurgentsit
was hardly surprising that interrogators saw no obstacle in the legal
prohibition of torture and mistreatment.
To this day, the Bush administration has failed to repudiate many of
these decisions. It continues to refuse to apply the Geneva Conventions to any of the more than five hundred detainees held at Guantnamo
(despite a U.S. court ruling rejecting its position) and to many others
detained in Iraq and Afghanistan. It continues to disappear detainees,
despite ample proof that these ghost detainees are extraordinarily vulnerable
to torture. It refuses to disown the practice of rendering suspects
to governments that torture. It continues its vendetta against the
International Criminal Court. It refuses to reject in anything but vague
and general terms the many specious arguments for torture contained in
the administration lawyers notorious torture memos. And it still
refuses to disavow all forms of coercive interrogation or to adopt a clear
policy forbidding it. Indeed, it reportedly continued as late as June
2004long after the Abu Ghraib mistreatment became publicto subject
Guantnamo detainees to beatings, prolonged isolation, sexual
humiliation, extreme temperatures, and painful stress positioning 
practices the International Committee of the Red Cross reportedly
called tantamount to torture.
As the Bush administration assembles its cabinet for a second presidential
term, President Bush seems to have ruled out even informal
accountability. Secretary of State Colin Powell, the cabinet official who
most forcefully opposed the administrations disavowal of the Geneva
Conventions, is leaving. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who
ordered abusive interrogation techniques in violation of international
law, is staying. White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, who sought
production of the memos justifying torture and who himself wrote that
the fight against terrorism renders obsolete and quaint the Geneva
Conventions limitations on interrogation and the treatment of prisoners,
has been rewarded with nomination as Attorney General. As for the
broader Bush administration, the November elections seem to have
reinforced its traditional disinclination to serious self-examination.
Apparently seeing the election results as a complete vindication, it
refuses to admit its role in Abu Ghraib and other interrogation abuses.
The Twisted Logic of Torture
A warped and dangerous logic lies behind the Bush administrations
refusal to reject coercive interrogation. Many American security officials
seem to believe that coercive interrogation is necessary to protect
Americans and their allies from a catastrophic terrorist attack. Torture
and inhumane treatment may be wrong, they contend, but mass murder
is worse, so the lesser evil must be tolerated to prevent the greater one.
Yet, aware of how fundamental the prohibition of torture is to modern
civilization, even proponents of a hard-line approach to counter-terrorism
are reluctant to prescribe systematic torture. Instead, they purport
to create a rare exception to the rule against torture by invoking the
ticking bomb scenario, a situation in which interrogators are said to
learn that a terrorist suspect in custody knows where a ticking bomb has
been planted and must force that information from him to save lives.
The ticking bomb scenario makes for great philosophical discussion, but
it rarely arises in real lifeat least not in a way that avoids opening the
door to pervasive torture. In fact, interrogators hardly ever learn that a
suspect in custody knows of a particular, imminent terrorist bombing.
Intelligence is rarely if ever good enough to provide such specific,
advance warning. Instead, the ticking bomb scenario is a dangerously
expansive metaphor capable of embracing anyone who might have
knowledge of unspecified future terrorist attacks. After all, why are the
victims of only an imminent terrorist attack deserving of protection by
torture? Why not also use torture to prevent a terrorist attack tomorrow
or next week or next year? And once the taboo against torture is
broken, why stop with the alleged terrorists themselves? Why not also
torture their families or associatesanyone who might provide life-saving
information? The slope is very slippery.
Israel provides an instructive example of how dangerously elastic the
ticking-bomb rationale can become. In 1987, the Landau Commission
in Israel authorized the use of moderate physical pressure in tickingbomb situations. A practice initially justified as rare and exceptional,
taken only when necessary to save lives, gradually became standard procedure.
Soon, some 80 to 90 percent of Palestinian security detainees
were being tortureduntil, in 1999, the Israeli Supreme Court curtailed
the practice.
Other schemes have also been suggested to allow only exceptional torture.
Judges might be asked to approve torture. Consent of the highest
levels of the executive branch might be required. Yet in the end, any
effort to regulate torture ends up legitimizing it and inviting its repetition.
Never cannot be redeemed if allowed to be read as sometimes.
Regulation too easily becomes license.
The Bush administration tried to allow just limited coercion through
close regulation, but that, predictably, led to more expansive use. Once
a government allows interrogators to ratchet up the level of pain, suffering,
and humiliation, severe abuse will not be far behind. Thats because
a hardened terrorist is unlikely to be moved by minor discomfort or
modest levels of pain. Once coercion is permitted, interrogators will be
tempted to intensify the mistreatment until the suspect cracks. And so,
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment gives way to torture.
As most professional interrogators explain, and as the U.S. armys interrogation
manual confirms, coercive interrogation is far less likely to
produce reliable information than the time-tested methods of careful
questioning, probing, cross-checking, and gaining the confidence of the
detainee. A person facing severe pain is likely to say whatever he thinks
will stop the torture. But a skilled interrogator can often extract accurate
information from the toughest suspect without resorting to coercion.
Moreover, once the norm against torture is breached, it is difficult to
limit the consequences. Those who face increased risk of torture are not
only terrorist suspects but anyone who finds himself in custody anywhere in the worldincluding, of course, Americans. After all, how can
the United States protest others mistreatment of its troops when their
jailors do no more than what Washington does to its own detainees?
In addition, a compromised prohibition of torture undermines other
human rights. That endangers us all, in part because of the dangerous
implications for the campaign against terrorism. Why, after all, is it
acceptable to breach the fundamental prohibition of torture but not
acceptable to breach the fundamental prohibition against attacking civilians?
The torturer may justify his conduct by appeal to a higher good,
but so do most terrorists. In neither case should the end be allowed to
justify the means.
The European Union
As U.S. credibility on human rights wanes, there is an urgent need for
others to assume the mantle of leadership. The European Union is an
obvious candidate, but its performance has been inconsistent at best. At
a formal level, the E.U. has embraced a rules-based order by holding
that establishing the rule of law and protecting human rights are the
best means of strengthening the international order. It has also repeatedly
affirmed that all measures against terrorism must comply fully with
international human rights and humanitarian law. And it has been a firm
supporter of the emerging international system of justice.
Yet European governments themselves have been willing to violate basic
human rights standardseven those involving torture. Sweden, for
example, sent two terrorist suspects to Egypt, a government with an
established record of systematic torture. Stockholm tried to hide behind
the fig leaf of diplomatic assurances from Cairo that the men would not
be mistreated, but those assurances were predictably ignored. Germany,
the Netherlands, Austria, and the United Kingdom have also returned
or attempted to return terrorist or security suspects to places where
they were at risk of torture. The United Kingdom refuses to rule out using information extracted from torture in court proceedings; its fig
leaf is that it does not commission the torture itself, but merely passively
receives its fruits, even though its ongoing relationship with intelligence
partners ends up encouraging more torture.
A similar erosion of human rights standards governing the fight against
terrorism can be found in certain E.U. members detention practices.
The U.K. government suspended core human rights obligations to
allow it to detain indefinitely without charge or trial foreign nationals
who were suspected of terrorist activity. In Spain, terrorism suspects can
be held virtually incommunicado for up to thirteen days, with no ability
to confer in private with an attorney. France asserts the right to detain
for up to three years without charge the French nationals released from
Guantnamo.
These abusive practices compromise the European Unions ability to fill
the leadership void left by Washingtons embrace of coercive interrogation.
At a moment that calls for distance from misguided American
practices, the European Union seems to be opting for emulation. A
clear recommitment to human rights principle is immediately needed if
the European Union is to serve as an effective counterweight to
Washingtons insidious influence on human rights standards.
The Way Forward
The strength of governments commitment to human rights will be
measured in large part by the response to two current challenges. Faced
with Sudanese government-sponsored atrocities in Darfur, will the
world continue to watch ethnic cleansing unfold, or will it respond
meaningfully to end the murder, rape, arson, and forced displacement,
and to force the Sudanese government to create secure conditions so
the displaced can return home safely? The answer will determine
whether the world can credibly argue that there are limits to the horrors
it will allow a government to visit upon its people.
Faced with substantial evidence showing that the abuses at Abu Ghraib
and elsewhere were caused in large part by official government policies,
will the United States continue to treat the torture of detainees as the
spontaneous misconduct of a few low-level soldiers, or will it permit a
fully independent, September 11-style investigative commissionthe
first step toward acknowledging the policy dimensions of the problem,
punishing those responsible, and committing the United States to ending
all coercive interrogation? These steps are necessary to reaffirm the
prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, to redeem Washingtons voice
as a credible proponent of human rights, and to restore the effectiveness
of a U.S.-led campaign against terrorism.
In neither case will the proper response be easy. Saving the people of
Darfur will require a significant commitment of international forces and
resources. Acknowledging the depth of the problem at Abu Ghraib will
be politically embarrassing. Yet both steps are necessary. It is time to
look beyond the convenient excuses and rationalizations to reaffirm
what should be the guiding human rights principles for every nation.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.
Darfur: Whose Responsibility to Protect?
by Michael Clough
In early 2004, mounting evidence of massive human rights abuses in the
Darfur region of Sudan tested anew the international communitys will
and capacity to halt ethnic cleansing and protect civilians. The United
Nations and member states responded with a flurry of missions, humanitarian
assistance, calls for negotiations, demands for action by the government
of Sudan, veiled threats of sanctions, support for African
Union (A.U.) peacekeepers, and a commission of inquiry. By years end,
however, the pallid steps taken by the U.N. Security Council at a special
session on Sudan held in Nairobi, Kenya, had called into question the
commitment of Security Council members to follow through on their
earlier resolutionsand no end to the catastrophic suffering of the people
of Darfur was in sight.
The final act in the tragedy of Darfur is yet to be written. But enough
of the story has already unfolded to conclude that the worlds political
leaders have failed to deliver on the promises made in the wake of the
genocide in Rwanda in 1994 that they would never again dither in the
face of a possible genocide.
In the decade after Hutu genocidaires slaughtered eight hundred thousand
in Rwanda, the United Nations, governments, think tanks, and
other groups around the world undertook a host of initiatives such as
the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty to
identify ways to prevent armed conflict, strengthen U.N. peacekeeping,
and protect civilians, especially children. The result has been a plethora
of new principles, U.N. resolutions, recommendations, proposals, commitments,
and the development of the human security agenda. In
December 2004, the U.N. Secretary-Generals High Level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change (High Level Panel on Threats)
acknowledged the failure of the U.N. to prevent atrocities against civilians and recommended reforms to enhance the U.N.s capacity to carry
out its collective security mandate. The High Level Panel also strongly
endorsed the emerging norm that there is an international responsibility
to protect civilians in situations where governments are powerless or
unwilling to do so. So far, however, these initiatives have afforded no
protection to the people of Darfur.
Between early 2003 and late 2004, the Sudanese government and government-
backed Arab militias destroyed hundreds of African villages,
killed and raped thousands of their inhabitants, and displaced more than
a million and a half others. By December 2004, more than 70,000 people
had died directly or indirectly as a result of the governments military
campaign, hundreds of thousands more were at risk of death from
starvation and disease, and security conditions throughout the countryside
were still deteriorating.
To understand and learn from the still unfolding tragedy of Darfur, the
international community must go beyond never again rhetoric and
ask hard questions about why the U.N. has been unable to translate its
post-Rwanda commitments into effective practice. International policymakers
must confront the assumptions and interests that hobble the
Security Councils ability to respond quickly and decisively to human
rights crises in Africa and elsewhere. The United Nations must find
ways to deter potential human rights abusers and act on early warning
signs to protect civilians before the death toll begins to mount. Security
Council members must address the yawning gap that exists between the
peacekeeping challenge that they are asking the African Union to
assume in Darfur and the capacity of that nascent organization to meet
that challenge.
The Harrowing of Darfur
Public understanding of Darfur has been muddied by the understandable
tendency of those who do not know Sudan to view this territory in the west of the country through the lens of the much more publicized
civil war in the south. But unlike the decades-long struggle between
successive Arab regimes in Khartoum and rebels drawn from predominately
non-Muslim African communities in the south, the fighting in
Darfur is of more recent originand all of the combatants and their
victims are followers of Islam.
At first glance, the fighting in Greater Darfur, which includes the three
states of North, South, and West Darfur, appears to be an ethnic clash.
It pits an Arab-dominated government in Khartoum, aligned with ethnic
militias drawn from some Arab nomadic groups that have long
roamed freely across Darfurs forbidding desert and fertile farmland,
against rebel groups drawn largely from three main African groups, two
of which are traditionally settled agriculturalists or semi-pastoralists.
But the reality is more complex. Until the mid-1980s, Arab herders and
African farmers occasionally clashed, but mostly co-existed peacefully.
In fact, despite the ethnic polarization that now exists, there has been
considerable ethnic fluidity and intermarriage.
The seeds of the conflict in Darfur were sown by decades of government
exploitation, manipulation, and neglect; recurrent episodes of
drought and increasing desertification leading to competition for everdiminishing
resources; a flow of arms and people caused by earlier wars
in Chad; and the failure of the international community to hold the
government of Sudan accountable for the human rights abuses committed
over two decades in other regions of the country. Paradoxically,
however, the immediate spark may have been progress in negotiations
to end the twenty-one-year-long north-south conflict, which created
fears among Darfurians that they might be excluded from the powerand
wealth-sharing formula being negotiated by the government and
the Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), the rebel
group that has waged a civil war in the south since 1983. 
In February 2003, the Darfur rebels of the Sudan Liberation Army
shocked Khartoum by successfully assaulting government military forces
in Fashir, the capital of North Darfur, and achieving a string of military
successes. In response, the Bashir government launched a vicious counter-
insurgency campaign in Darfur, patterned after earlier campaigns it
had conducted in southern Sudan and the Nuba Mountains, using a
proxy militia force, the so-called Janjaweed, made up of members of
nomadic Arab tribes.
The first loud warnings of an impending human rights catastrophe
came in October-November 2003, when U.N. agencies reported that
villages had been burned and Amnesty International reported that
Sudanese refugees in camps in Chad were describing how militias
armed with Kalashnikovs and other weapons . . . often dressed in green
army uniforms, raided villages, burnt houses and crops and killed people
and cattle. Shortly thereafter, Jan Egeland, United Nations under-secretary
for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief, warned that the
humanitarian situation in Darfur had become one of the worst in the
world. In December 2003, as Khartoum imposed tight restrictions on
access to the region and launched a new offensive, U.N. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan echoed Egelands concern.
In April 2004, reporting by U.N. agencies, humanitarian nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), human rights groups, and the media
started to reveal the enormity and nature of what was happeningand,
on April 7, Kofi Annan, addressing the Commission on Human Rights
on the 10th anniversary of the Rwanda genocide, called attention to the
human rights abuses and growing humanitarian crisis in Darfur and
called on the international community to be prepared to take swift and
appropriate action.
Based on its investigations in Darfur and refugee camps in Chad at that
time, Human Rights Watch found credible evidence that the government
of Sudan has purposefully sought to remove by violent means the Masalit and Fur population from large parts of Darfur in operations
that amount to ethnic cleansing. As a result of the mounting evidence
that massive human rights abuses and crimes against humanity were
being committed, the Security Council beganslowly and hesitantly
to pay attention to Darfur.
The United Nations and Darfur
For more than a year, from early 2003 until mid-2004, while the conflict
in Darfur was escalating, the U.N. Security Councils priority in
Sudan was negotiations in Naivasha, Kenya to end the north-south civil
war. Initially, false optimism that those negotiations would lead to a
quick settlement that would change the overall political situation in
Sudan may have caused some member states to discount the warning
signs of a growing crisis in Darfur. Later, as it became increasingly
impossible to ignore the evidence of serious violence and human rights
abuse, the Security Council may have tried to keep Darfur off of its
agenda out of fear that a discussion of Darfur would cause the government
in Khartoum to pull out of the Naivasha talks. As a result, even in
June 2004, when the Security Council passed Resolution 1547, which
established a U.N. mission in Sudan to prepare to monitor implementation
of a final agreement between the government of Sudan and the
SPLM/A, Darfur was barely mentioned.
Before late July 2004, the Security Councils only action on Darfur was
a May 25, 2004 statement by the Council president calling on the government
of Sudan to disarm the Janjaweed militias. This statement
came after the council was briefed on the findings of two U.N. missions
of massive human rights violations and grave humanitarian need, and
after months of insisting that Darfur was not on its agenda. Two
months later, after repeated appeals by a growing number of humanitarian
and human rights groups, and visits to Darfur by Secretary-General
Annan and many foreign ministers from Europe and the United States,
the U.N. Security Council passed Resolution 1556, which demanded that the Sudanese government disarm the Janjaweed and bring to justice
those leaders who had incited and carried out human rights abuses. The
Security Council threatened to consider further sanctions if the government
failed to comply. It also endorsed the deployment of an African
Union force to monitor the April 2004 ceasefire agreement between the
government and the rebels, which was already underway; and imposed a
ban on the sale of arms to all non-governmental entities and individuals
in Darfurin other words the rebels and the Janjaweed militias,
but not the government that organizes, finances, directs, and supplies
the Janjaweed. Resolution 1556 was approved by a 13-0 vote, with
China and Pakistan abstaining.
For the Security Council, Resolution 1556, despite its obvious weaknesses,
was a significant step forward. In the eyes of most observers,
however, it was yet another example of the councils abrogation of its
responsibilities. By the time the resolution was passed, the gravity of the
human rights abuses then still occurring in Darfur was already widely
acknowledged. In late June, for example, Secretary-General Annan told
reporters, We all agree that serious crimes are being committed.
Moreover, there were also already numerous, well documented reports
of direct Sudanese government involvement in the perpetration of massive
human rights violations in Darfur, including eyewitness accounts of
joint ground attacks on civilians by government troops and the
Janjaweed, and official documents containing orders for additional
recruitment and military supply of ethnic militia groups. By July 2004,
stronger measures directed at the government were justified and necessary,
but they werent adopted because at least one permanent member
Chinaand possibly anotherRussiapresumably would have
vetoed any resolution that included sanctions against the government or
authorized direct U.N. intervention.
On September 18, 2004, after nearly two more months in which security
and humanitarian conditions worsened and the government failed to
protect civilians or fulfill its commitment to disarm the Janjaweed and prosecute perpetrators, the Security Council passed Resolution 1564.
Declaring its grave concern that the government of Sudan had not
fully met its obligations, the Security Council reiterated its call for the
government to end the climate of impunity in Darfur by identifying
and bringing to justice those responsible for the widespread human
rights abuses. In addition, it called for an expansion of the African
Union monitoring mission in Darfur and established a commission of
inquiry to investigate reports of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law and to determine also whether or not acts of
genocide had occurred. Finally, it threatened, if the government failed
to comply with this resolution and Resolution 1556, additional measures,
such as actions to affect Sudans petroleum sector and the
Government of Sudan or individual members of the Government of
Sudan. Resolution 1564 passed by an 11-0 vote, with Algeria, China,
Pakistan, and Russia abstaining. Thus, five months after receiving substantial
evidence of government commission of massive human rights
abuses, Security Council action was still largely limited to entreaties,
investigations, veiled threats, and support for an A.U. force.
On November 18-19, 2004 the United Nations Security Council held a
special session on Sudan in Nairobi, Kenya. The main purpose of the
session was to put pressure on the government of Sudan and the
SPLA/M to finalize the Naivasha agreement. In the process of trying to
promote a north-south settlement, the Security Council watered down
its earlier commitment to end the suffering of civilians in Darfur.
Resolution 1574, which passed unanimously, failed to include any specific
criticism of the government of Sudan for failing to meet the
demands to disarm and bring to justice the Janjaweed, which were in
the Resolution 1556 and 1564, and it replaced the mild threats of sanctions
in those resolutions with a vague warning that, in the future, it
might consider taking appropriate action against any party failing to
fulfill its commitments. In addition, it called on the U.N. and the
World Bank to provide development aid, including debt relief to a government which, just months earlier, had been labeled genocidal by the
United States and others.
Despite enormous developments in the institutions, standards, and policies
that set out to protect civilians in conflict, the United Nations is
still an association of sovereign states committed to traditional principles
of international order and constrained by the ability of the five permanent
members of the Security Council to veto collective action. As
the Security Council reaffirmed in all three of the resolutions on
Darfur, the U.N. is committed to preserving the sovereignty, unity,
independence, and territorial unity of its member states. In fact, for the
majority of U.N. members, when there is a conflict, the principle of
state sovereignty still trumps all other principles and norms. The continuing
force of this traditional principle was affirmed by the recent
report of the High Level Panel on Threats, which declared that the
starting point for any new security consensus must be an understanding
that the front-line actors in dealing with all the threats we face,
new and old, continue to be individual sovereign States, whose role and
responsibilities, and right to be respected, are fully recognized in the
Charter of the United Nations.
The norm of non-intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign
state flows directly from the principle of state sovereigntyand few
norms are more fiercely defended by most U.N. member states than
this norm. Many governments, especially those in Africa, Asia, and
Latin America, understandably regard it as one of their few defenses
against threats and pressures from wealthier and more powerful international
actors seeking to promote their own economic and political interests.
But the non-interference norm has also been used by barely legitimate
governments to block international efforts to end gross abuses of
their citizenry. That is what happened in the case of Darfur: Khartoum
used sovereignty, first, as a veil to hide its brutal campaign against
African villagers; and, later, as a shield to fend off calls for international
action to protect its victims.
In addition, the veto power of the permanent members of the Security
Council gives those five countriesthe United States, Russia, the
United Kingdom, France, and Chinaa unique power to protect and
promote their national interests at the expense of global interests. In the
case of Darfur, the main impediment to stronger action by the Security
Council has been China, which owns a 40 percent share of Sudans main
oil producing field. At the councils special November 2004 session in
Nairobi, China, and possibly Russia, which is thought to be the main
arms supplier to the Sudanese government, used the threat of a veto to
pressure other members to water down Resolution 1574. But, as discussed
below, even without the threat of a Chinese veto, it is doubtful
that the council would have passed a resolution containing a serious
threat of sanctions against Khartoum.
Thus even in the shadow of Rwanda, the Security Council in 2004
failed to muster the collective will necessary to act quickly and decisively
to end the humanitarian catastrophe in Darfur and hold accountable
those who are responsible for creating it. This is not likely to change
unless and until the United Nations accepts the principle, as recommended
by the International Commission on Intervention and State
Sovereignty and the High Level Panel on Threats, that all states have a
responsibility to protect civilians faced with avoidable catastrophes,
including mass murder and rape, ethnic cleansing by forcible expulsion
and terror, and deliberate starvation and exposure to disease.
Recognizing the responsibility to protect would provide the Security
Council with the basis it needs to act in the face of a determined refusal
by a sovereign state to protect its own citizens.
The United States and Darfur
In 1994, the Clinton administration initially used fine semantic distinctions
to avoid calling the genocide in Rwanda by its true nameand it
led the Security Council coalition against intervention. In 2004, the
Bush Administration was the first and only Security Council member to declare that the abuses committed in Darfur constituted genocideand
it initially led the push for the Security Council to act. But U.S. leadership
on Darfur was a mixed blessing.
In 2001-2002, the Bush administration had made ending the Sudanese
civil war one of its top foreign policy priorities in Africa. Correctly or
not, many observers believe it did so mainly because of pressure from
conservative religious activists who have long campaigned against
Khartoums Islamist government for its gross human rights abuses in
the non-Muslim south. When the rebel attacks and government counter-
offensive began in Darfur, Washington was among those governments
that were reluctant to criticize Khartoum for fear that doing so
might derail the North-South peace initiative. On April 7, 2004, however,
with a bipartisan handful of U.S. Congressmen calling for sanctions,
President Bush condemned the atrocities in Sudan. In midsummer,
Secretary of State Colin Powell traveled to Darfur. Then, on
September 9, 2004, Secretary Powell told the U.S. Congress that the
State Department had concluded that genocide had been committed
and that the Sudanese government and the Janjaweed bore responsibility.
However, the fact that the Bush administration was waging a globally
unpopular war in Iraq without a U.N. mandate, inevitably affected how
other U.N. member states responded, particularly once the graphic
images of U.S. soldiers abusing Iraqi prisoners in Abu Ghraib were
broadcast around the world. Khartoum seized the opportunity by portraying
U.S. accusations on Darfur as part of a global American assault
on Islam and Arabs. But the most disturbing aspect of U.S. policy
toward Darfur is the striking inconsistency between Secretary of State
Powells finding in September 2004 that the government of Sudan and
the Janjaweed had committed genocide and the administrations apparent
decision in November 2004 to return to its earlier policy of trying
to use carrots to induce Khartoum to sign the Naivasha accords. It was
that shift, and not just the threat of a Chinese veto, that was responsible for the Security Councils failure to even debate the need to take
stronger action to halt continuing human rights abuses in Darfur.
The African Union and Darfur
The idea of African solutions for African conflicts is an old one.
Unfortunately, policymakers in the United States and other major powers
have often used it as an excuse for their own inaction. In Darfur, the
U.N. has sought to place most of the burden of carrying out the goals
contained in Security Council resolutions 1556 and 1564 on the shoulders
of the nascent African Union. Initially, the A.U. role was limited to
providing a small force of military observers to monitor the April 2004
ceasefire agreement between the Sudanese government and two
Darfurian rebel groups. In October, the A.U. agreed to expand its force
to include more than 3,500 monitors, peacekeepers, and civilian police.
Despite its limited mandate, much of the world is looking to the A.U.
to provide the means to halt the human rights abuses in Darfur and
restore security.
The decision to rely on A.U. monitors, peacekeepers, and police had
broad support. Officials in the United States and Europe saw it as a way
to avoid the risk that their military forces would become embroiled in
another Mogadishu-like disaster, where U.S. forces acting under a U.N.
mandate were drawn into a deadly conflict with local warlords. African
leaders viewed it as an opportunity to establish the A.U.s bona fides as
the dominant political-military institution in Africa. And the Sudanese
government apparently decided that the A.U. force was the best alternative
to avoid the possibility of sanctions or U.S. or European intervention.
The ability of the A.U. force to help bring security and justice to
Darfur will depend largely on the commitment of the United States and
Europe to ensure that the A.U. force has the equipment, training, and
logistical support necessary to carry out its mission. But it will also depend on the commitment of the A.U. Peace and Security Council.
Most crucially, the A.U. needs a clear mandate to protect civilians from
attacks. Without such a mandate, the A.U. force could be put in the
position of watching helplessly while civilians are slaughtered.
The A.U. experiment in Darfur is a critical test of Africas ability to
assume responsibility for regional crises. If it succeeds, it could substantially
enhance the international communitys ability to halt future
human rights catastrophes in Africa. If it fails, it could set the stage for a
long series of bitter and divisive debates over the necessity for and legitimacy
of international humanitarian intervention on the continent.
Preventing Future Darfurs
Over the past two decades, countless reports and studies have declared
the need to develop more effective early warning and conflict prevention
mechanisms. The International Commission on Intervention and
State Sovereignty, for example, recently declared that prevention is the
single most important dimension of the duty to protect. Yet, while the
last decade has seen many initiatives in this area, the atrocities in Darfur
provide stark evidence that the international community has not yet
found a way to translate theories of preventive action into effective
practices.
Justice is the most powerful deterrent to future injustice. Justice
requires holding the perpetrators of human rights abuses accountable
and ensuring that the effects of their injustice are reversed.
In the case of Darfur, the Sudanese governments brutal counterinsurgency
tacticsincluding promoting ethnic militias, scorched earth warfare,
aerial bombardment, massive forced displacement, and the blocking
of humanitarian aid to the victimsare the same tactics it used to
combat rebels in other parts of the country. If the international community
had held Sudanese government officials and the militia leaders it backed in its other counterinsurgency wars accountable for the abuses
they committed in those earlier campaigns, Khartoum might have been
deterred from unleashing the Janjaweed in Darfur. But the gross abuses
in southern Sudans twenty-one year war never made it onto the
Security Council agenda. These abuses are almost entirely ignored in
the draft North-South peace accords. Similarly, if the international
community had taken steps to ensure that previous exercises in ethnic
cleansing were reversed, Khartoum would have had less reason to
believe that it would succeed in using force to effect lasting changes in
the map of Darfur.
It is for these reasons that the results of the U.N. commission of
inquirys investigations will be very important. By documenting the
crimes that have been committed, identifying perpetrators, and recommending
the best means to ensure that the perpetrators are prosecuted,
the commission of inquiry can help not just to bring justice to Darfur,
but also to deter future Darfurs. But it will be equally important for the
international community to ensure that the victims of Khartoums ethnic
cleansing strategy are returned to their lands and provided help to
re-establish their lives. Their villages must be restored. Their cattle and
property must be returned or replaced. And they must be compensated
for their loss of family members.
Early action to protect civilian populations against emerging threats is
an equally important international imperative. As the Commission on
International Intervention and State Sovereignty noted, preventing conflicts
from escalating and endangering civilian populations requires
three things: early warning, a preventive action toolbox, and political
will. In the case of Darfur, all three were lacking, but especially the last
two.
There were early warning signs in Darfur. But mere warnings, even if
combined with reports of scattered attacks on civilian populations, are
rarely enough to prompt the international community to act. The problem is two-fold. Global policymakers are reluctant to intervene in
internal matters unless and until localized conflicts escalate beyond
some indeterminable magic threshold that makes them obviously legitimate
matters of international concern; and the global public seldom
begins to demand action until it is presented with graphic evidence of
large-scale suffering. Therefore, even if the ravaging of a few villages by
government forces and ethnic militias is recognized as an early warning
sign, it is almost never sufficient to set in motion early preventive
actions.
The real key to preventing future Darfurs, as noted above, is legitimizing
the idea of early action to protect civilian populations, and then creating
the tools necessary to provide protection. That will require efforts
by both the international institutions and national governments.
Paradoxically, inviting and facilitating early small-scale civilian protection
efforts is the best option a government has to avoid the possibility
of later, much more threatening, calls for international sanctions and
intervention. If, for example, instead of attacking African villages in
Darfur, the government of Sudan had quickly engaged the international
community in efforts to protect villagers from the effects of fighting
between the government and rebels, it would have almost certainly
gained substantial international credibility. This would have obviated
the need for international recriminations and threats against the government
and, at the same time, it would have almost certainly
enhanced Khartoums bargaining position in negotiations with the
Darfur rebels.
The continuing failure of national governments facing the prospect of
deadly domestic conflicts to accept the need for early action to protect
civilian populations presents the international community with a difficult
choice. When conflicts begin to unfold, it can continue, as in
Darfur, to wait for civilian suffering to become so widespread and evident
that global outrage makes international action unavoidable.
Alternatively, it can embrace the idea of an international responsibility to protectand begin to develop the means necessary to act on that
responsibility before its only options are after-the-fact sanctions and
military intervention.
Conclusion
The failure to prevent atrocities in Darfur is almost certain to lead to
more international hand-wringing. But the victims of massive human
rights abuse do not need another chorus of never again or new
rhetorical commitments by the U.N. Security Council. Instead, they
need a determined effort by the United Nations and its member states
to confront the underlying reasons for their failure to deliver on the
commitments they have already made to prevent armed conflict, protect
civilians, and ensure justice.
Michael Clough is currently serving as Africa advocacy director at Human
Rights Watch. Africa Division colleagues Georgette Gagnon, Leslie Lefkow,
and Jemera Rone contributed to the preparation of this essay, as did Iain
Levine, program director at Human Rights Watch.
Religion and the Human Rights Movement
by Jean-Paul Marthoz and Joseph Saunders
Is there a schism between the human rights movement and religious
communities? Essential disagreements appear increasingly to pit secular
human rights activists against individuals and groups acting from religious
motives. The list of contentious issues is growing: on issues such
as reproductive rights, gay marriage, the fight against HIV/AIDS, and
blasphemy laws, human rights activists and religious groups often find
themselves on opposing sides. As illustrated by the Muslim headscarf
debate in France and Turkey, controversies linked to religion also have
confused many in the human rights movement and even led some
activists to express strong reservations about certain public expressions
of religious conscience.
Western Europe, the most secularized continent in the world, has been
in the eye of the storm. The controversy that hit the European Union
in October 2004 around the proposed appointment to the European
Commission of Italian conservative Catholic Rocco Buttiglione illustrates
some of the issues at stake. Unperturbed by the furor he was
arousing, the candidate for Commissioner on Justice, Freedom, and
Securitywho in that function would have been in charge of fighting
discriminationaffirmed in front of bewildered members of the
European Parliament that homosexuality is a sin and that the family
exists to allow women to have children and be protected by their husbands.
Although he insisted that he would nonetheless uphold the
equality of all citizens, he was invited to withdraw his candidacy by the
Commissions president-elect.
In November 2004 the religiously inspired murder of Theo Van Gogh,
a well-known Dutch journalist and filmmaker who two months earlier
had released a controversial film on violence against women in Islamic
societies, triggered an infamous cycle of violence, leading to the burning of mosques and Christian churches. These traumatic events in a
country that prides itself for its tolerance placed the issue of religion,
and more particularly Islam, in the center of public controversy. While
many Dutch people of all faiths and communities demonstrated against
revenge attacks and discrimination, one prominent official responded
with a suggestion to revive, in the name of coexistence, a 1932 blasphemy
law.
The Challenge
Fifty years after its proclamation, writes Michael Ignatieff, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights has become the sacred text of
what Elie Wiesel has called a worldwide secular religion.1 The
growth of the human rights movement has given it the confidence to
take on controversial issues and extend the promise of the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) in areas that it had previously
neglected.
This new frontier, however, is colliding with the return of the religious
in many societies, with what French political scientist Gilles
Kepel has called Gods Revenge,2 featuring the reassertion of more
dogmatic or conservative forms of beliefs inside and outside of mainstream
religious denominations.
While it would be inappropriate for the human rights community to
advocate for or against any system of religious belief or ideology and
wrong to judge or interpret the principles of any religion or faith, it
would be equally mistaken for the human rights groups to turn away
from human rights violations or appeals for discrimination made in the
name of religious principle or law.
Defining how to engage with religious communities thus has become
one of the major challenges for the human rights movement. To paraphrase
Ignatieff, human rights cannot truly go global unless it goes deeply local, unless it addresses plural philosophies and beliefs that
sometimes collide with or appear to resist its appeal to universal norms.
If international human rights standards have a claim to universality their
relevance must be demonstrated in all contexts, and especially where
religion determines state behavior.
This essay argues that the human rights movement needs to be able to
provide clearer answers to the hard questions presented by the demands
of believers and by religious organizations seeking direct political influence.
On the one hand, rights activists should more aggressively stand up for
religious freedom and the rights of believers in secular and religious
societies alike; on the other, they should directly oppose pressures from
religious groups that seek to dilute or eliminate rights protectionsfor
women, sexual minorities, atheists, religious dissenters, and so onthat
such religious groups view as inconsistent with fundamental religious
teachings and deeply held beliefs. Human rights groups should oppose
efforts in the name of religion to impose a moral view on others when
there is no harm to third parties and the only offense is in the mind of
the person who feels that the other is acting immorally.3
A Global Phenomenon
Questions of how the human rights movement should engage with religious
communities are particularly difficult because they occur in a
highly volatile context marked by the rise of fundamentalism, religious
extremism, the fusion between religion and ethnic identity in
many armed conflicts,4 and the worldwide impact of terrorism in the
name of God and responses to it.
The rolling news flows in the global village have given these phenomena
increased visibility and potency. Attacks against Christians in
Pakistan or against Muslims in India, new incidents of anti-Semitism in Western Europe, and hate crimes against Muslims in the U.S. or
Europe immediately take on a global dimension. The worldwide ripples
of the headscarf controversy in Francestreet demonstrations in
Arab countries, diplomatic disavowal, and even crude pressure through
the abduction in Iraq of two French journalists5have vividly underscored
the sensitivity of religious issues in the global village.
Religion indeed plays a pervasive and often powerful role in global
affairs. Problems of a religious nature often implicate international
security as much as they do human rights. In a trend reminiscent of
King Louis XIVs 1649 proclamation declaring French protection of the
Maronite community in Lebanon, or of the 19th century European
powers humanitarian interventions against the Ottoman Empire to
protect persecuted Christians, religious freedom and the fate of religious
minorities have assumed an increasingly prominent place in international
diplomacy.
In 1998, under pressure from Christian groups and representatives of a
number of other faiths, the U.S. Congress passed the International
Religious Freedom Act. The law established an Office of International
Religious Freedom in the State Department and an independent, bipartisan
Commission on International Religious Freedom, and tasked them
with monitoring and reporting on the incidence of religious persecution
around the world. Based on the annual reporting of these bodies, the
U.S. president can take diplomatic and economic measures against
countries of particular concern, making one particular rightfreedom
of religiona unique yardstick of foreign relations.
The religious/human rights equation and its role in global politics are
made still more complex due to major differences among democracies
concerning the place of religion in public life. The gap between a postreligious
Europe and the United States is particularly significant and
not without consequences for the priorities and approaches of the international
human rights movement. A 2002 survey by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life concluded that, among wealthy nations, the
United States stands alone in its embrace of religion. Fifty-nine percent
of the U.S. population surveyed stated that religion played an important
role in their life, against 30 percent in Canada, 33 percent in Great
Britain, 21 percent in Germany, and 11 percent in France.6
The differences extend to the very definition of religion itself. In
France, Belgium, Germany, and Argentina, for example, some religious
groups that are considered legitimate religious denominations in the
United States have been denounced as sects or psychological cults,
as a threat to the foundations of democratic freedom, and, as a result,
subjected to what the groups see as unwarranted discrimination or
harassment. Such differences, mostly raised within the context of OSCE
(Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) meetings, have
been approached with great unease by the various components of the
international human rights movement.
History
Some in secular circles would suggest that history has come full circle.
To them, the human rights movement is the product of the
Enlightenment and, as such, part of a determined attempt at reducing
the power of religion over state and society. Today, however, it is resurgent
religious movements that are challenging the place of human
rights.
In some countries, in France in particular, the history of the human
rights movement is intimately linked to laicit (secularism), to the roll
back of the Catholic Church and the separation between church and
state. The Dreyfus affair at the end of the 19th century was the symbol
of this clash and the founding moment for the French League of
Human Rights (Ligue des Droits de lHomme, LDH). The controversy
around the role of the official Church in supporting Petainism7 during
the Second World War deepened this mutual suspicion. In Spain, the ideological marriage between the Catholic Church and the Franco dictatorship
generally led, until the early sixties, to a chasm between the
democratic opposition and Catholicism.
History, however, also tells another story. In other countries religion
was the prime mover behind campaigns for human rights. The role of
U.S. and English Protestant churches in the anti-slavery campaigns, in
the Congo reform movement,8 and in solidarity with Armenian victims
in the late days of the Ottoman Empire belong to the best chapters of
the history of the human rights movement.9 The social teachings of
the Catholic Church in the late 19th century also created a context that
allowed committed Christians to press actively for social justice and
contributed to the development of strong labor unions and mutual help
associations that fought for social and economic rights.
In South Asia, Hinduism was the inspiration of Mahatma Gandhis long
march for the liberation of India. Since the occupation of Tibet by
China in 1949-51, a religious figurethe Dalai Lamahas been guiding
the Tibetans struggle for freedom, pushing for a democratic, selfgoverning
Tibet in association with China.
In the 1950s and 1960s the human rights movement grew in part thanks
to the involvement of leading religious groups and individuals.
Although the Church took a cautionary approach, Catholic intellectuals
(first among them Catholic writer par excellence Franois Mauriac), journalists,
and activists played a prophetic role in the fight against the use
of torture and disappearances by the French army in the Algerian war
of independence, invoking their faith to combat what they considered
brutal attacks against human dignity.
The civil rights movement in the United States was powerfully inspired
by religious figures, among whom Martin Luther King, Jr., stands as an
icon, and was in many cases supported by mainstream Christian and
Jewish denominations.
After the 1964 military coup in Brazil a significant part of the Catholic
Church, centered around Bishop Dom Helder Camara, inspired by the
teachings of the Second Vatican Council (1962-1965) and of mainstream
Protestant denominations, became a vibrant defender of human
rights. Political coups in Bolivia, Chile, and Uruguay in the 1970s and
civil wars in Central America in the 1980s often placed the official
Church, or at least some of its most powerful voices, on the side of the
human rights movement. The Servicio Paz y Justicia founded in 1974 in
Argentina by 1980 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Adolfo Perez Esquivel,
the Vicaria de Solidaridad in Chile, and the Tutela Legal in El Salvador
were focal points of the human rights struggle.
San Salvador Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romeros last sermon in March
1980, with his passionate plea to the army and National Guard to disobey
an immoral lawBrothers, you come from your own people.
You are killing your own brother peasants when any human order to kill
must be subordinate to the law of God which says, Thou shalt not
killstands out as one of the most powerful documents of the Latin
American human rights struggle.
In the 1980s in the Philippines, the Catholic Church was one of the
major actors in the overthrow of the Marcos dictatorship. In Eastern
Europe, particularly in Poland with its strong Catholic Church and in
East Germany with the Lutheran Churchs support of independent
pacifists and dissidents, religious organizations joined in the fight
against state authoritarianism and repression. In the 1970s, in the wake
of the ratification of the Helsinki Accords,10 Jewish organizations and
individuals in particular played a decisive role in Eastern Europe and
the USSR in the defense of dissidents and fundamental freedoms of
expression, belief, and movement.11
In the 1980s and 1990s, in South Africa, Jews, Christians, and Muslims
fought apartheid, in alliance with secular or even Marxist-inspired organizations such as the South African Communist Party and the
African National Congress.
During all these decades of struggle and speaking truth to power, the
international human rights movement was also strongly inspired by religious
figures, like Joe Eldridge, of the Methodist church, director of the
Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA): My father always said
that we were children of God, he confided. My motivation fundamentally
emerges from a religious perspective. Having been given life, I
believe that we are called to do things that edify life.12
Convergence
In the 1970s and 1980s, religious and human rights groups shared many
objectives, reflecting a common conviction of the universality of the
human rights message and its grounding in the traditions of most religions,
philosophies, and civilizations. Religion-based traditionalism
seemed on the wane and culturalism, the black-boxing of cultures as
exclusivist identity-referents,13 was not allowed to tyrannize human
rights.
Conferences sponsored by UNESCO in the early 1990s on the theme
of inter-religious dialogue14 and, to a great extent, the 1993 U.N.-
sponsored World Conference on Human Rights in Viennaits recognition
of the universal character of human rightswere high points of
this convergence between the human rights movement and mainstream
religious communities. Most in the secular human rights movement
agreed that there was indeed a faith-based commitment to human
rights.
This convergence was also helped by the priorities imposed on the
human rights movement by the brutality of government repression. In
Latin America in particular, civil and political rights were an immediate
question of life and death while issues more likely to separate rights and religious communities were confined to the sidelines: most opted for a
coexistence of differences on flash points like sexuality or abortion. In
Mexico, for instance, the bishop of the state of Chiapas, Mgr. Samuel
Ruiz, could join with secular human rights activists on civil and political
rights issues, and even on social justice concerns implicating rights to
health and housing, while retaining his more traditionalist positions on
issues like sexuality and reproductive rights.
Clouds
Some clouds, however, were already looming over this human rights
euphoria. There was always, of course, some underlying tension. As
human rights scholar Louis Henkin has phrased it: The world of religion
and the world of human rights have not always coexisted comfortably.
Religion, and some particular religions, have not been comfortable
with human rights as an autonomous ideology that is not necessarily
rooted in religion. The human rights ideology, on the other hand, has
resisted the claims of some religions to disregard the claims of other
religions. Some religions have invoked religious dogma to justify distinctions
based on religion, gender, or sexual orientations, distinctions
that may be contrary to the human rights idea.15
Throughout the human rights decades, moreover, churches were not
always unanimous in their human rights commitment and there were
always factions that fought back or hindered the rise of the human
rights movement, sided with military or authoritarian regimes, or were
otherwise complicit in human rights abuse. Most of these factions were
politically and ideologically conservative and they were dogmatically
doctrinaire. They stuck to an interpretation of religious teachings especially
in matters of individual morality and social mores at odds with the
trajectory of the human rights movement. They were seen as adversaries
by all memberssecular and religiousof the human rights
movement.
Terrorism in the name of Islam, the Dutch Reformed Churchs support
for the apartheid regime in South Africa, the Argentinean Catholic
hierarchys passivity or tacit support for brutal military regimes in the
1970s, the killing of Yitzhak Rabin by a Jewish religious militant, and
the support provided by some right wing evangelical churches to leaders
of Latin American most brutal regimeslike former Guatemalan president
Efrain Rios Montt, an ordained minister of the Gospel
Outreach/Verbo evangelical churchare among the most prominent
examples of the use, or misuse, of religion to justify flagrant human
rights abuses.
Religious Blowback
In the 1960s, when secularism was seen by many as inevitable, part of
the unstoppable march of progress, and organized religious communities
appeared to be sidelined as a political force, especially in the
Western world, French writer and minister of Culture Andr Malraux
challenged that orthodoxy, declaring in oracular fashion that the twenty-
first century will be either religious or not be (le 21e sicle sera
religieux ou ne sera pas).
Malrauxs view seems to have been confirmed in much of the world
today: Western Europe excepted, religion has made a strong comeback.
The reemergence of religious discourse, writes Sara Maitland, seems
to have caught many of us on the hop: baffled, irritated and uncomprehending.
For over 250 years, Western democratic thinking has argued,
and even fought for, the secularization of the public domain and the
political arena... By the second half of the last century, indeed, one
might have thought the battle was won... What I see instead is a faltering,
a loss of faith, in the whole Enlightenment project.16
While some have welcomed this development as a necessary counterbalance
to the excesses of materialism and individualism, others have
warned that this religious revival would subvert universal values, sow particularist and divisive attachments, and trigger a broader backlash.
Many people have responded, in short, with the same alarm with which
they greeted Samuel Huntingtons controversial thesis on the lasting
power of and inevitable clash between the worlds major civilizations.
The reasons for this religious comeback are manifold. It expresses both
renewed individual quests for meaning in a secularized, materialistic
world and a more collective search for identity in a world engaged in
the uncertainties and insecurities of globalization and diversity.
In some instances, the reemergence of religion also reflects in part the
failure of the states, especially in the developing world, to provide and
guarantee fundamental human rights for the majority of their populations.
As political scientist Vali Nasr has phrased it: There is a direct
correlation between the scope and nature of religious activism and the
decline of the secular state as a functioning political system and as an
intellectual construct.... In Kemalist Turkey, Pahlavi Iran... secularism
never permeated deep into society... and with little to show in the form
of veritable development, the values that sustained these states came
under attack.17
The growing political influence of religious communities also has been
linked to the theologization of state power. In some countries, ruling
elites have used particular religious interpretations to shore up their
power and maintain the social and political status quo. Saudi Arabia and
Iran are prominent examples.
When religion is merged with the state, human rights suffer. Asma
Jahangir writes that, in Pakistan, the judicial institutionalization of
Islam has taken a particularly heavy toll on the rights of women and
religious minorities, and critics of discriminatory laws are branded un-
Islamic or traitorous. The creed of National Islamization has been
used as a stick to beat all emancipatory and human rights movements.
18
In Uzbekistan, the government has claimed a monopoly on the interpretation
of Islam and has jailed those who diverge from its version of
Islam on charges that such independent Muslims are attempting to
subvert or overthrow the constitutional order. Although the government
has used the pretext that such individuals are colluding with terrorism,
in the vast majority of cases the suspects have not been charged
with terrorism or any other form of violence.19
In Egypt, the governmentciting the contrary dictates of Islamic law
has made reservations to both the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), evading
its obligation to protect womens rights.20
In Nigeria, twelve state governments in the north have added criminal
law to the jurisdiction of Sharia (Islamic law) courts since 2000,21 raising
a number of serious rights concerns and stirring controversy in a
country where religious divisions run deep and where the federal constitution
specifies that there is no state religion. Sharia has been in force
for many years in the north, where the majority of the population is
Muslim, but, until 2000, its scope was limited to personal status and
civil law. Human rights concerns arising in application of religious law
in those contexts have been exacerbated by the turn to Sharia in criminal
law matters.
Human Rights Watch research confirms that Sharia in Nigeria has
been manipulated for political purposes, and that this politicization of
religion has led to human rights violations.22 Application of Sharia in
criminal cases in the twelve states has been accompanied by amputation,
floggings, the death penalty, discrimination against women, and systemic
due process failures. Since 2000, at least ten people have been
sentenced to death; dozens have been sentenced to amputation; and
floggings are a regular occurrence in many locations in the north.
These issues were given world wide prominence through the highly publicized cases of two women, Safiya Hussaini and Amina Lawal, who
were condemned by Sharia courts to death by stoning for alleged adultery.
Although the death sentences eventually were overturned, the
cases highlighted how Sharia could be used to justify flagrant human
rights violations.
The Threat to Free Speech
Religious authorities have long tried to discipline free speech when it
runs counter to religious teachings or dogmas. The paradigm case in
recent years is the Salman Rushdie case. On February 14, 1989, following
the 1988 publication of Rushdies book The Satanic Verses, the political
and spiritual leader of Iran, the Ayatollah Khomeini, issued a religious
edict calling on all zealous Muslims to execute the author of the
book as well as those publishers who were aware of its contents, so that
no one will dare to insult Islam again. The case illustrates the difficulty
some religious communities have in reconciling their deeply held beliefs
with the right to freedom of expression, which is applicable not only to
information or ideas that are favorably received or regarded as inoffensive
or as a matter of indifference, but also to those that offend,
shock or disturb the State or any sector of the population.23
Although the call for murder was rejected by many mainstream Islamic
religious leaders, who condemned it as violating Islamic teachings of
mercy, most of these same leaders did not defend Rushdies right to
freedom of expression and asked for the banning of the book. Others, of
course, supported the fatwa.
The Rushdie case demonstrated the resonance of the accusation of blasphemy
inside of Islam. The responses of leaders of other religions,
however, were hardly exemplary. Although they strongly condemned
the call for murder, many expressed some sympathy for the Muslim
worlds indignation, forming what French philosopher Alain
Finkielkraut called the Holy Alliance of Clergies.24
The conflict between free speech and religion, indeed, is not limited to
Islam. Two years before the Rushdie case, with far less publicity, an
Austrian court acting on a complaint submitted by the Catholic diocese
of Innsbruck had prohibited the Otto Preminger Institut from showing
the film The Council of Love, based on Oskar Panizzas controversial (and
allegedly strongly anti-Catholic) theater play. The judges referred to
article 108 of the Austrian Penal Code banning religious denigration.
In 1994, to the profound dismay of free speech defenders, the sentence
was endorsed by the European Court of Human Rights, relying on a
provision of the European Convention on the rights of others. The
ECHR has tended indeed to show far more deference to state interference
in freedom of expression where the speech has a religious or moral
content than is the case with political or other forms of speech.
The Catholic Church has strongly expressed its hostility toward other
books, plays, and films that it considers collective defamation. In
September 2004, Dan Browns best selling novel The Da Vinci Code was
banned in Lebanon after complaints from Catholic leaders that it was
offensive to Christianity. There are paragraphs that touch the very
roots of the Christian religion, said the president of Lebanons Catholic
Information Center. They say that Jesus Christ had a sexual relationship
with Mary Magdalene... Christianity is not about forgiveness to the
point of insulting Jesus Christ.25
Political correctness in the name of protecting religious sensitivities can
have a similarly chilling effect on free speech. In response to the murder
of filmmaker Theo van Gogh by a Muslim Dutch citizen of Moroccan
origin, the Dutch justice minister, Piet Hein Donner, proposed enforcing
a 1932 law banning scornful blasphemy. In a parliamentary
address said to have horrified Hollands free-thinking intelligentsia,26
the minister said that the law was needed to curb hateful comments
that were destabilizing the country. As Brussels Free University professor
Guy Haarscher has written in another context, Instead of protecting
individuals in their right to adhere to different conceptions of the Good, [a] society [that caters to political correctness] incurs the risk of
depending increasingly on organized groups capable of imposing
hypocrisy and the domination of the most conventional thought.27
Religious Wars
Religion has been a part of bloody conflicts that have engulfed dozens
of countries in the last fifteen years. In Ireland, Cyprus, the Balkans,
Rwanda, Burma, Sri Lanka, Nigeria, Sudan, Israel/Palestine, the
Philippines (Mindanao), and Indonesia, individuals acting in the name
of religion have played an important role in crystallizing group hatred
and violence.28
Human Rights Watch has insisted that religion is more properly seen as
a tool used by those seeking power than a root cause of conflict in
such cases,29 and analysts have pointed out that despite the perception
that religion is always a complicating factor in disputes, religion also
includes the tools that may be necessary to break the cycle of conflict.30
Others counter, however, that in some particularly intractable confrontations
it is the religious factor, not the conflict of interests, that
threatens to prevent a settlement, leading to the continuation of the
cycle of violence and human rights abuses.
Religion also has been thrown into the maelstrom of terrorism in
national and international contexts, from attacks against abortion clinics
in the United States to religiously justified suicide bombings in Israel.31
After 9/11 in particular, politically motivated fundamentalist fervor
and terror seem to go hand in hand on a global scale and immediately
evoke images of suicide bombings, hostage takings, and beheadings.
While such extreme or violent expressions of religious beliefs do not in
themselves create particular dilemmasmainstream religious groups
typically join rights groups in denouncing such attacks on civilians as
crimes against humanitythey can exacerbate tensions between human rights and religious groups, as has occurred in the abortion debate in
the United States, in Israel following suicide bombings, and between
some rights groups and Islamist organizations after 9/11.
Tensions Today
Many common issues continue to be defended together by secular
human rights groups and religious groups. In Western Europe and in
the United States, the resolute defence of the rights of asylum seekers
and economic refugees by mainstream churches as well as their advocacy
in favor of global justice continue to offer wide spaces for cooperation.
In the global South, in actions complementing the work of secular
NGOs, many religious organizations are moving to the forefront of
social and economic rights by providing social services to the poor as a
response to local government retrenchment and insufficient international
development assistance.
However, on other issues at the crossroads of religious dogma and
human rights ideology, of personal moral conviction and public health,
the points of divergence are growing. The attention given by the secular
human rights movement to issues linked to freedom of speech, gender,
and sexuality and sexual orientationalways inherent in the human
rights ideal, but of growing prominence todayincreasingly clashes
with the positions taken by many religious groups. Religious humanitarian
organizations and secular human rights groups can, however, be on
the same wave length when they denounce ethnic cleansing in Darfur
and demonstrate together in front of Sudanese embassies.
The question of womens reproductive rights is a case in point. As
Georgina Ashworth has summed up the issue: Religious fundamentalists,
whether in the United States or the Islamic and Hindu worlds, now
constitute enormous political forces ranged against womens enjoyment
of their human rights, especially their reproductive rights. Not only do
they persecute and make outcasts of proponents of toleration, they also threaten the livelihoods and even the security of anyone courageous
enough to stand up for womens self determination.32
Another case in point is the use of condoms in HIV/AIDS prevention.
In the Philippines, the Catholic Church, which, as noted above, played
an important role in ousting Marcos, has become increasingly hostile to
the human rights movement when it advocates for sexual education and
condom distribution in AIDS prevention campaigns. The Philippines
government has relayed these positions by actively impeding measures
that would prevent this deadly disease, chiefly by hampering access to
condoms and to scientifically-based information on HIV/AIDS. The
Bush administration, following the opinions of U.S.-based conservative
religious congregations, has stopped funding the donation of condoms
or other contraceptive supplies to the country, preferring instead programs
emphasizing abstinence and marital fidelity.
These policies clash with international human rights standards. The
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),
ratified by the Philippines, obliges state parties to take steps
necessary for... the prevention, treatment and control of epidemic...
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, which is deemed to include access to
condoms and complete HIV/AIDS information. The ICCPR establishes
the right to information and all major human rights treaties recognize
the right to life, which is implicated by policies that interfere with
access to life-saving technologies.33
The growing tensions between religious and rights communities also
have led religious leaders at times to subdue their antagonisms and
rivalries to defend common approaches on what they consider shared
tenets of faith. The coalition between the Holy See and the
International Islamic Conference, for example, has been evident in
U.N. conferences on population issues34 and womens rights.35 This
new prominence of so-called ethical issues has created an at times
impious convergence among representatives of some mainstream religions; states that are serious human rights abusers, like Saudi Arabia,
Iran, or Sudan; and, in many cases, the Bush administration.
Working with Fundamentalists?
While the human rights movement has an obligation to oppose efforts
aimed at using religion to justify laws and public policies that contravene
rights standards, it is also critical for the movement to recognize
that religious fundamentalism does not always collide with secular
human rights standards. Many fundamentalist movements, for example,
are deeply involved in helping peoples access to food, housing, health
care, and other social services. Such commitments position many militant
religious movements ambiguously, and positively from a human
rights standpoint, in relation to social and economic human rights.36
On foreign policy issues, although often displaying selective outrage,
Christian evangelicals have been active in generating support for victims
in conflicts such as those in southern Sudan and Darfur.
These examples challenge the human rights movement to define policies
and strategies on how to associate with groups that are sometimes
part of the same campaigns and sometimes actively hostile to human
rights principles, depending on the issue or the context.
Within significant parts of the secular liberal movement there is a clear
dividing line: on the one hand, those who echo French revolutionary
Dantons (in)famous phrase, No liberty for the enemies of liberty and
want to restrict the civil and political rights (including freedom of
expression, association, and assembly) of members of religious groups
believed to pose a threat to a rights-respecting political order; on the
other hand, those who in the name of freedom of religion and free
speech have chosen to defend, like Voltaire, the right of every man to
profess, unmolested, what religion he chooses. While human rights
groups have generally sided with the latter position, some have been tempted to make an exception when it comes to religious movements
seen as intrinsically hostile to the liberal political order.
Terrorism in the name of God has exacerbated these debates. In the
1990s, when violent Islamic movements seemed bent on overthrowing
secular governments in Algeria or Egypt, and more generally after the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 in the United States, October
12, 2002 in Bali, and March 11, 2004 in Spain, the commitment to protect
the rights of everyone, including alleged terrorists, not to be tortured
or disappeared has been under heavy attack, even from quarters
usually associated with the human rights community.
Suddenly human rights groups advocating for consistent standards on
human rights are being accused by some secular groups, with whom
they cooperated on press freedom or gender issues, of being soft on
religious extremism and of risking sacrificing other rights, especially
womens rights, and even democracy, by standing up for the rights of
terror suspects. Human rights groups need to respond forcefully that
the choice is not one between, on the one hand, an anything goes
approach to terror in which civil liberties are among the first victims
and, on the other, the creation of an archipelago of fundamentalist
Islamic states that systemically violate womens and other basic rights.
The real challenge is finding ways to preserve basic rights in efforts to
combat terror in order to strengthen the appeal of liberal, rightsrespecting
societies.
The Headscarf Battles
The law banning conspicuous religious signs in public schools adopted
in France in 2004, as well as the prohibition of headscarves for academics
and students in Turkish public universities, illustrate many of
the tensions described above. In both countries, the battle of the veil
has divided the human rights movement, especially advocates of
womens rights. How to defend freedom of belief, womens autonomy, and the right to education without promoting an often politicized agenda
and the undermining of a broader range of rights by religious groups
is indeed a challenging question for the human rights movement.
In France, the debate on religious conspicuous signscoming on the
heels of tense controversies around migration, Islamophobia, anti-
Semitism, and terrorismhas polarized public opinion and cut across
traditional political alignments. The headscarf controversy raises the
crucial issue of the place of Islam in the French Republic. This is not
only because Frances growing Muslim communities are seen as diverging
from the mainstream on thorny questions like religious conversion,
homosexuality, or divorce, but also because their very existence seems to
call into question the long accepted tenet that life in a Western democracy
will increasingly secularize adherents of all faiths.
The intensity of the debate, however, has expressed much more than
hostility toward Islam. Supported by many other denominations and
most significantly by the Catholic Church, the headscarf has been seen
as a direct challenge to the founding principles of the French
Republican model born in the French Revolution and forged through
the merciless church/secular battles of the 19th century that led to the
strict separation between state and religion, the privatization of faith,
and the proclaimed preeminence of Reason. The headscarf issue
thus has forced French authorities to confront the very nature of the
Republic and to reconsider the concept of lacit (secularism) and to
ponder over its adequacy and relevance in an increasingly multicultural
society.
In its assessment of the legislation shortly before its passage, Human
Rights Watch concluded that the law infringed the internationally recognized
right to freedom of religion, but identified the need to reconcile
seemingly contradictory concerns. Human Rights Watch recognizes
the legitimacy of public institutions seeking not to promote any
religion via their conduct or statements, but the French government has taken this a step further by suggesting that the state is undermining secularism
if it allows students to wear religious symbols. As we concluded:
[P]rotecting the right of all students to religious freedom does not
undermine secularism in schools. On the contrary, it demonstrates
respect for religious diversity, a position fully consistent with maintaining
the strict separation of public institutions from any particular religious
message.
The Turkish Case
Some interesting lessons on an issue whose complexity should be duly
recognized by the human rights movement can be gleaned from the less
publicized example of Turkey.37 In that country, women wearing the
headscarf are not permitted to register as university students, enter university
campuses, or enter examination rooms. Those observed wearing
the headscarf in class are warned about their behavior, and if they persist
in wearing it are suspended or expelled.
In recent interviews, many women told Human Rights Watch they were
heartbroken that their hopes for a career in medicine, science, teaching,
or the arts were permanently blighted. Women have also been detained,
humiliated, ill-treated, and prosecuted. The authorities say that the
scarf is a flag of aggressive political Islam that threatens the secular
order of Turkey and the rights and freedoms of other Turkish women,
but most women affected by the ban say that they wear the scarf as an
expression of Islamic religious piety.
Modern Turkeys legislation on the subject of clothing began with a
1923 decree on dress, signed by Mustafa Kemal Atatrk, founder of the
republic. Those who see themselves as Atatrks most faithful heirs seek
to bar women from education because of their choice of dress, but
Atatrk himself took a relaxed position on the headscarf. He was frequently
photographed on public business with his first wife, who covered
her head. He wrote: The religious covering of women will not cause difficulty.... This simple style [of headcovering] is not in conflict
with the morals and manners of our society.
Students denied access to education have been unable to secure a remedy
through the Turkish courts. And the June 29, 2004 decision of the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in Leyla Sahin v. Turkey has
only made matters worse. The courts judgment reflects the same fears
expressed by those who support the headscarf ban: that recognizing the
rights of devout Muslims threatens the rights of others. But Turkish
society is moving ahead of this zero-sum philosophy of despairin the
day-to-day tolerance of difference that you can see on the street, and in
the solidarity shown when civil society organizations with a largely
Muslim membership stand up for non-Muslim rights (as Mazlum-Der
has done) and organizations with a largely secular membership stand up
for the right to wear the headscarf (as the Turkish Human Rights
Association has done).
Various political groupings have exploited the headscarf issue in order
to curry support from their respective devout or secular constituencies.
Pinar Ilkkaracan, coordinator of a local non-governmental organization
working on womens rights, told Human Rights Watch in 2003 that this
is an issue open to easy political manipulation: We as Women for
Womens Human Rights (WWHR) are against any attempt that aims at
imposing restrictions and regulations on womens dress code.
Therefore, WWHR has made a number of statements condemning the
ban on the [headscarf] at the universities, which violates the human
right of female students for education. But this issue is being exploited
by the political parties on both sides of the question. Men in power
should not use womens bodies for a battlefieldand that is what is happening
in many parts of the globe.
It is not a condition of fundamental rights that those who enjoy them
must hold tolerant and liberal opinions, but it is a fact that much of the
resistance to the headscarf is inspired by a fear of what might happen if the tables were turned, and an outright Islamist regime were making the
rules. A fairly widespread suspicion among Turkeys secular population
is that the religious parties have a master plan of eliminating secularism
by salami tactics, and that the headscarf is the first slice. They fear
that tolerance shown on this issue will be followed by a ramping up of
demands, and they quote the proverb, If you give the devil the little
finger, he will soon take the whole hand. The alarm felt by those who
see the headscarf as the thin end of a dangerous wedge has been aggravated
by a catalogue of attacks by Islamic extremists directed specifically
at people who have criticized the wearing of the headscarf at universities.
Human rights groups working on the headscarf issue must address these
threats. Human Rights Watch did so in 2004 by calling on Turkish
authorities to acknowledge the long and sorry history of state failure to
protect women from gender-based violence and discrimination, and
commit itself to programs to remedy continuing shortcomings in that
protection. We also recommended that any new legislation on higher
education include provisions to offer reassurance to those who feel their
rights could be put at risk by a change of policy with regard to the
headscarf. Such provisions might be legislative or regulatory safeguards
for the rights of women who choose not to wear the headscarf, as well
as strong public endorsements of womens freedom to dress according
to their own free choice. But the most important gesture the government
could make would be actively to seek out civil society groups representing
women and gather their views through the broadest possible
consultation before changing the headscarf law.
A convincing consultation would give opponents of the headscarf an
opportunity to express their strong reservations and to suggest safeguards
or undertakings that the government could make to protect society
against the erosion of civil libertiesand in particular, womens civil
libertiesthat the opponents fear would result from a lifting of the
headscarf ban. By listening to the concerns of women from all sides of the argument, the government may be able to break away from the pessimistic
zero-sum game and move toward a genuine pluralism that
allows women to make their own free choice whether to wear the headscarf
or not.
Combating, Convincing, or Integrating
The secular human rights movement sometimes sees conservative religious
movements as an artifact of history and itself as contemporary,
ahead on the infinite road of human progress and modernity. Some
suggest that it runs the risk, echoing culturalist approaches purporting
to establish a hierarchy between societies and philosophies, of seeing
itself as superior and antagonistic to other cultures and norms. Rather
than trying to enshrine the human rights project into different faiths
and cultures, of trying to legitimize human rights norms within religions
and not alongside or against them, human rights activists might
be tempted to dismiss such faiths and cultures as obstacles to economic
or human rights modernity.
Is the liberal human rights movement in fact implicitly imperialistic,
striving to replace existing religious traditions with some of new
faith?38 Secular humanists, like religious believers, warns Professor
Diane Orentlicher, must take care lest a worshipful faith in human
sanctity blind them to their own capacity for fallibility. Even a secular
humanism is susceptible to harmful immoderation if unchecked by critical
self scrutiny.39
Such arrogance, where it exists, can reflect a desire to sidestep the
complexities of some issues. The headscarf issue is in this context a
wake up call for a human rights movement comfortably embedded,
especially in continental Europe, within secularism; the different facets
of the controversy test its capacity to understand complex societal
processes and individual quests. A woman (re)veiling herself does not
necessarily equate with submission. If based on affirmative and free choice, it can be an expression of liberation and self-assertion. Ignoring
or despising traditional cultures and religious beliefs can cripple the
best-intentioned attempts at promoting political reform and respect for
fundamental human rights.
Similarly the human rights movement must examine why fundamentalism
has been raising expectations in so many parts of the world.
Political authoritarianism, economic prostration, social inequities, cultural
alienation, and unresolved international conflicts all call for
renewed action on civil and political as well as economic, social, and
cultural rights.
The Way Forward
Understanding and engaging does not mean retreating into a more conventional
and consensual mode. Confronted with a growing assertion of
religion in private life, the increased political power of religions, and the
rise or revival of religious conservatism, the human rights community
must step up with a clear message and a distinctive voice. To paraphrase
Edward Sad, it must be someone whose place it is publicly to raise
embarrassing questions, to confront orthodoxy and dogma (rather than
to produce them) and whose raison dtre is to represent all those people
and issues that are routinely forgotten or swept under the rug.40
There is still space for convergence and coalitions between human
rights and religious communities. On some basic freedoms and rights
this is already a reality: most secular human rights groups and religious
groups have united in combating hate crimes and discrimination against
Muslims in the wake of the September 11 attacks and the ensuing war
on terror. Most have reasserted the absolute duty to protect civilians in
armed conflicts.
These alliances should not be sacrificed lightly. In recognition of the
importance of religious conscience for many people, the human rights movement should do more to defend religious freedom. In that spirit
Human Rights Watch has been defending the fundamental rights of
independent Muslims in Uzbekistan, Christians in Iraq, Jews in Iran,
Jehovahs witnesses in Georgia, and Mennonites in Vietnam. Such commitment
should include the defense of the rights of fundamentalists,
i.e., including those who would threaten liberal conceptions of rights if
they were in power, so long as they do not physically attack or otherwise
impinge on the rights of non-believers.
At the same time, however, the human rights movement should not sacrifice
its most valued principles and objectives in order to protect its
good relations with religious communities. Human rights defenders
should not shirk in particular from insisting on a distinction between
private religious morality and religiously motivated public policy that
infringes rights. Public expression and political mobilization of religious
groups or believers on matters of rights are legitimate. When private
religious morality imposes itself on society and threatens to change
public policy in a way detrimental to rights, however, the human rights
movement should speak out and draw the line.
Jean-Paul Marthoz is international media director at Human Rights Watch;
Joseph Saunders is deputy program director.
1 Michael Ignatieff, Human Rights as Politics and Idolatry (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2001), p. 53.
2 Gilles Kepel, La Revanche de Dieu. Chrtiens, juifs et musulmans  la reconqute du
monde (Paris: Le Seuil, 1991).
3 As emphasized in the next essay in this volume, defense of the same basic principle
is essential to safeguarding the dignity and humanity of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender people, whether efforts to restrict their rights are made in the
name of religion or of tradition, culture, or societal values.
4 See Harold R. Isaacs, Idols of the Tribe, Group Identity and Political Change
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1989).
5 The group that abducted Georges Malbrunot, Christian Chesnot, and their
Syrian driver initially sought repeal of the French law on conspicuous religious
signs.
6 Among Wealthy NationsU.S. Stands Alone in its Embrace of Religion, The
Pew Research Center for the People & the Press, December 19, 2002, p. 2.
7 Marchal Ptain, a former First World War hero, ruled France during the
German occupation. His government, based on an ultra conservative Catholic ideology,
collaborated with the enemy and in the deportation of Jews. Although many
Catholics took part in the Rsistance and the Catholic hierarchy protested the
deportations, especially after the July 16 round-up of 12,884 Jews at the Velodrome
dHiver, the image of the Church was tainted in many liberal circles.
8 Adam Hochschild, King Leopolds Ghost (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1998).
9 Suzanne Moranian, The Armenian Genocide and American Missionary Relief
Efforts, in Jay Winter. ed., America and the Armenian Genocide of 1915 (Cambridge
(U.K.): Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 185-213.
10 The Helsinki Accords were the result of the final act of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe held in Helsinki (Finland) in 1975 between
the NATO Countries and the Soviet bloc. The civil rights section of the agreement,
the so-called third basket, committed the participating states to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
11 See Jeri Laber, The Courage of Strangers: Coming of Age with the Human Rights
Movement (New York: Public Affairs, 2002).
12 Margaret E. Keck and Kathryn Sikkink, Activists beyond Borders (Ithaca, New
York: Cornell University Press, 1998), p. 91.
13 Ken Booth, Three Tyrannies, in Tim Dunne and Nicholas J. Heeler, eds.,
Human Rights in Global Politics (Cambridge (U.K.): Cambridge University Press,
1999), p. 33.
14 In particular the conference organized by UNESCO on the contribution of religions
to the culture of peace, held in Barcelona in December 1994.
15 Louis Henkin, Human Rights: Ideology and Aspiration, Reality and Prospect,
in Samantha Power and Graham Allison, eds., Realizing Human Rights: Moving from
Inspiration to Impact, (New York: St. Martins Press, 2000), p. 29. Ironically, some
religious groups have resisted freedom of consciencereligious or otherwisein
some contexts. Prominent examples include refusal to respect the rights to reject
religious orthodoxy, to change ones religion, to become atheist, or to proselytise.
Such rights are protected by a number of human rights provisions, including article
18 of the UDHR. Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom,
either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his
religion or belief in teaching, practise, worship and observance.
16 Sara Maitland, In Place of Enlightenment, Index on Censorship, April 2004, p. 8.
17 Vali NASR, Religion and Global Affairs: Secular States and Religious
Oppositions, SAIS Review, Summer-Fall 1998. Volume XVIII, Number Two, The
Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies, The John Hopkins
University, Washington, pp. 34-5.
18 Asma Jahangir, Human Rights in Pakistan: A System in the Making, in S.
Power and G. Allison, eds., Realizing Human Rights, pp. 168-9.
19Human Rights Watch, Creating Enemies of the State: Religious Persecution in
Uzbekistan New York: Human Rights Watch, 2004.
20 Human Rights Watch, Divorced from Justice: Womens Unequal Access to
Divorce in Egypt, December 2004.
21 Human Rights Watch, Political Sharia?, Human Rights and Islamic Law in
Northern Nigeria, September 2004. Human Rights Watch does not advocate for
or against Sharia per se, or any other system of religious belief or ideology, and
takes no position on what constitutes proper Sharia.
22 Human Rights Watch research in northern Nigeria also revealed patterns of
fundamental human rights violations which are not peculiar to Sharia but typify
the human rights situation in Nigeria as a whole. For example, systematic torture
by the police, prolonged detention without trial, corruption in the judiciary, political
interference in the course of justice, and impunity for those responsible for
abuses occur not only in the context of Sharia cases, but are widespread in cases
handled by the parallel common law system.
23 European Court of Human Rights, Handyside against United Kingdom, December
7, 1976.
24 Cited in Le Monde, October 25, 1989.
25 Da Vinci Code banned in Lebanon, BBC News online, September 16, 2004.
26 Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, Blasphemy law revival upsets the Dutch elite, The
Daily Telegraph, November 18, 2004.
27 Guy Haarscher, La lacit (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, Collection
Que sais-je?, 2004), p. 93.
28 Malise Ruthven, Fundamentalism: The Search for Meaning (Oxford (U.K.):
Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 3.
29 Human Rights Watch, Slaughter Among Neighbors: The Political Origins of
Communal Violence, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995).
30 The Power of Religion, The Fletcher Forum of World Affairs, Winter/Spring
1996, Medford, MA, p. vii.
31 Human Rights Watch, Erased In A Moment: Suicide Bombing Attack Against Israeli
Civilians (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2002).
32 Georgina Ashworth, The Silencing of Women, in Tim Dunne and Nicholas J.
Wheeler, eds., Human Rights in Global Politics (Cambridge (UK): Cambridge
University Press, 1999), p. 273.
33 Human Rights Watch, The Philippines: Unprotected, Sex, Condoms, and the
Human Right to Health, May 2004.
34 Mark Herstgaard, The Holy War against Birth Control, Mother Jones,
March/April 2003.
35 G. Ashworth, The Silencing of Women, p. 268.
36 John Kelsay and Sumner B.Twiss, eds., Religion and Human Rights (New York:
The Project on Religion and Human Rights, 1994), p. 27.
37 Much of the discussion of the case of Turkey that follows is a slightly revised
version of text written by Jonathan Sugden, Human Rights Watch Turkey
researcher. It first appeared in Memorandum to the Turkish Government with Regard
to Academic Freedom in Higher Education, and Access to Higher Education for Women
who Wear the Headscarf, Human Rights Watch, June 29, 2004.
38 John Kelsay and Sumner B.Twist (Ed), Religion and Human Rights, The Project
on Religion and Human Rights, 1994, New York, p.119.
39 Diane Orentlicher, Relativism and Religion, in M. Ignatieff, Human Rights as
Politics and Idolatry (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), p.147.
40 Edward Said, Representations of the Intellectual (New York: Pantheon Books,
1994), p. 11.
Anatomy of a Backlash: Sexuality and the
Cultural War on Human Rights
by Scott Long
What is at issue in cultural terms is a conflict of interest between the whole
body, which is the Zimbabwean community, and part of that body represented
by individuals or groups of individuals. The whole body is more important than
any single dispensable part. When your finger starts festering and becomes a
danger to the body, you cut it offthe homosexuals are the festering finger.
STATEMENT IN A PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE IN ZIMBABWE, 19951
A tale of one city: Cairo, in 1994, hosted the U.N. World Conference
on Population and Development. The meeting marked a major advance
in recognizing womens sexual autonomy. Its final declaration linked
sexuality, health, and human rights, affirming that reproductive health
implies that people are able to have a satisfying and safe sex lifein
effect, that control over the enjoyment of ones own sexuality was essential
to the well-being of both women and men.
Much the same affirmation was made the next year, at the U.N. World
Conference on Women in Beijing. The impact on local activists was
considerable. The Cairo conference, for instance, gave strength to campaigns
against female genital mutilationin Egypt and elsewhere. But
other, more sinister notes were struck. The Kenyan press, for instance,
paid leering attention to lesbian activists marching at the Beijing meeting,
leading then President Moi to declare: The government rejects
the immoral culture of homosexuality and lesbianism raised during
the womens conference.2
Switch to Cairo seven years later. Police seized dozens of men in raids
on cruising areas and a discotheque where men who have sex with men
were believed to gather. The press accused them of staging a homosexual
wedding service. Prosecutors charged them with debauchery, the language for sex between men in Egyptian law, and alleged they
belonged to a blasphemous, Satanist cult assaulting culture and religion.
Their sensational trial inaugurated a massive, national crackdown
on homosexual conduct, in which hundreds of men have been seized
and torturedas well as a moral panic about sexual deviance escaping
state control. Local human rights groups that tried to intervene have
been smeared as agents of perversion.3
A spectre is stalking the arenas where human rights activists work. Its
avatars range from politicians in Zimbabwe to policymakers in the
United States. It might be called an alliance of fundamentalisms, though
not all its agents embrace the term. The forces in question define themselves
most often by what they claim to defendand that shifts from
time to time and territory to territory: culture, tradition, values,
or religion. What they share is a common target: sexual rights and
sexual freedoms. These are most often represented by womens reproductive
rights, the assault on which continues. The most vividly drawn
and violently reviled enemy typically is homosexuality. Gay and lesbian
rights, the dignity of people with different desires, the basic principle
of non-discrimination based on sexual orientation: all these are painted
as incompatible with fundamental values, even with humanity itself.
The target is chosen with passion, but also precision and care.
Movements for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender people,
along with movements that assert sexual rights more generally, are
arguably the most vulnerable edge of the human rights movement. In
country after country they are easy to defame and discredit. But the
attack on them also opens space for attacking human rights principles
themselvesas not universal but foreign, as not protectors of diversity
but threats to sovereignty, and as carriers of cultural perversion.
In many countries, forces opposed to universal rights standards have
found their strongest stance is to declare themselves defenders of
authentic (though often invented) cultural tradition.4 Culture talk increasingly opposes itself to rights talk. Rights are treated as
invaders. Sexuality has turned into a key battleground in the conflict.
The cultural argument against sexual rights sees itself as striking the
exposed flank of rights protections. The onslaught also has devastating
effects on public healthas essential measures to prevent HIV/AIDS
are scrapped in the name of morals, and as vulnerable people are driven
into the shadows.
Fundamentalism not only pits culture against rights, it paints a
somber picture of society in which sexualityand, implicitly, a range of
other human experiencesdemands continual and restrictive state
scrutiny and control. Against this bleak and onerous vision, rights
activists must reassert basic principles of personal freedom; but they
must also affirm that human beings require the autonomous enjoyment
of their sexualities to lead satisfying, fulfilled, fully human lives.
The standard articulated in the preceding essay in this volumethat
rights groups must oppose efforts to legislate morality where the only
offense is in the mind of the person who feels someone else believes
or behaves immorallyapplies not only when the motive is religious
but more generally, whether campaigns to restrict rights are carried out
in the name of faith, tradition, culture, or collective values. At the same
time, rights activists must see defending sexual rights not as a distraction
from their traditional preoccupations, but as a necessary and logical
development. Human rights are the possessions of embodied human
beings, whose dignity is bound up with the capacity to inhabit and experience
their bodies as their own. Everyone deserves the free enjoyment
of their sexuality. No one who does not hurt other people should be a
prisoner of others consciences.
Movements and Moral Panics
The last fifteen years have seen great growth worldwide in the visibility
of people gathering, organizing, and campaigning around sexuality and around sexual rights, sexual orientation, and gender identity. There
are many causes. One lies simply in the spread of democratic governments
in the 1980s and 1990s. As dictatorial regimes recededin Latin
America, in Eastern Europe, in Africaand civil society asserted itself,
activists for sexual rights and sexual orientation also claimed freedom to
join that self-assertion. Models for organizing thus proliferated as well.
Emerging groups across Africa that identify as lesbian, gay, or transgender
may look to, and learn from, the work courageous people have performed
in achieving equal protection in South Africa (where many
activists in turn got their education in the anti-apartheid movement) or
answering a dictators vilification in Zimbabwe.
Meanwhile, movements around womens health issueswhether
female-genital mutilation or access to reproductive health services
increasingly approached their work through a rights-based framework.
Womens sexuality, when viewed through the prism of human rights,
could be seen as an empowering capacity, not a source of vulnerability
(as movements opposing violence against women had long tended to
portray it)as something to be prized and defended.5
HIV/AIDS put sexuality squarely in the center of health policy debates;
and HIV/AIDS activists also pushed public health discourse to open up
to rights-based approaches. This soldered links between sexual minorities
and the languages of rights. Indeed, the struggle against the epidemic
has given many groups previously marginalized to the point of
invisibility a new importance in human rights discussions, including
drug users, prisoners, sex workers, and migrant workers.
The emergence of new or once-hidden identities in political life and in
human rights discourse has prompted part of the backlash. Lesbian,
gay, sexual orientation, gender identitythese concepts have
been employed by activists in diverse places to explain who they are and
why their constituencies share common ground. At they same time such
concepts are decried as inauthentic imports or cultural impositions. Of course, as has been widely noted, homosexuality, in the sense of a
social self built around the gender of ones object of desire, is a construct
that originated in modern industrialized societies.6 It is only one
way of attaching cultural meanings to the phenomena, universally
found, of homosexual desire and conduct. Yet the charge (heard sometimes
from intellectuals as well as from conservative politicians) that
those who translate these terms into settings other than their origin are
the agents of an alien lexicography, pursuing their self-definition in foreign
termsthis claim does not hold up. It neglects the creativity and
capacity for bricolage with which humans reinterpret and adapt ideas to
their own environments and needs: a constant change and interchange
which is one of the basic workings of culture.
And in fact ideas as much as identities are ultimately at stake in the
backlash. Advocacy around the rights of so-called sexual minorities,
however they define themselves, neither takes place in a vacuum nor is
reducible to a minority concern. This advocacy asserts a broader principle:
that people should control their own sexualities; that, in the context
of respect for others dignity and consent, everyone has the right (as the
World Health Organization puts it) to pursue a satisfying, safe, and
pleasurable sex life; and that this pursuit is not inimical to cultural and
social values, but supports peoples healthy integration into culture and
society.7 It is an assertion which lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
activists make together with activists for womens rights, campaigners
against censorship, and other human rights defenders. The claim to sexual
freedom is the deepest threat. The extension of human rights
beyond consciences to bodies is the unbearable presumption.
Sexuality is something on which every societyprobably every person
imposes a portentous array of meanings. It may be the most highly
symbolized of human experiences. Fundamentalists fear sexuality
emerging from the cocoon of significance in which they feel traditions
once contained it. Yet this apprehension of escape itself becomes a metaphor for other, larger anxieties about cultural, social, or political
change. Sexuality stops being an experience and becomes an emblem.
Gay and lesbian rights and the promise of equality serve, to their fundamentalist
opponents, as symbol rather than tangible threat. Those
opponents rarely bother to examine the substance of what such equality
might entail. It is the monstrous apparition of mens and (particularly)
womens sexualities breaking the frame of traditional, authoritarian control
that terrifies them, and leads them to call on the law to repress the
genie back into the bottle. They are right that the liberatory impulse of
human rights will not be restrained from defending freedoms in peoples
intimate and physical, as well as political, lives. They are at their
most dangerous in acting on the insight. Using sexuality as metaphor
for broader processes of change, they extend their attack to the logic
and essence of human rights themselves.
One feature of fundamentalist discourses is the way their different terms
collapse into one another. Culture loses its variety and becomes indistinguishable
from morality, and morality from religion, which in
turn is defined by and often defines tradition. Collectively they can
colonize nationhood until it becomes not a political entity but a
rhetorical weapon. All these words will run through the examples of the
backlash. In all cases, however, fundamentalisms strip these terms of
ambiguity or negotiability. They become, in the fundamentalist vision,
not ideas to be debated or environments in which to live, but mandates
enforced by law.
Sometimes the backlash around sexuality has been overtly nationalistic.
When the film Fire, depicting a love affair between two women, was
released in India in 1998, it was met by riots and was hauled before the
national Censor Board. Both violence and silencing were instigated by
the right-wing government and its allies. One leader of the Hindu
nationalist Shiv Sena party said lesbianism is not in our national culture,
and wondered why the women had been given Hindu instead of Muslim names.8 Similar arguments have been used to support the arrest
and harassment of HIV/AIDS outreach workers.9 In defending Indias
law penalizing homosexual sexa relic imported and imposed by
British colonialismthe government has claimed it was needed to preserve
true Indian mores and identity.
Sometimes the attacks show a mingling of religion, culture, and nationalism:
as when Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, who has devoted a decade
to steady homophobic attacks, wondered how immoral and repulsive
organizations, like those of homosexuals who offend both against the
law of nature and the law of morals of religious beliefs espoused by our
society, should have any advocates.10 Usually, however, they are meant
to send two ominous messages: that freedom is a gift, not a given; and
that if one groups freedoms can be stripped away, so can others. Thus
Mugabe has said:
Freedom is not a selfish, one-way street. The greater
the freedom one enjoys, the greater the responsibility
one owes the community which bestows that freedom.
 If we accept homosexuality as a right, as is being
argued by the association of sodomists and sexual perverts,
what moral fibre shall our society ever have to
deny organized drug addicts the rights they might
claim and allege they possess under the rubric of individual
freedom and human rights, including the freedom
of the press?11
Mugabe meant it. His threats to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
people were a prelude to crackdowns on farm workers, farmers, trade
unions, opposition parties. The press freedoms whose exclusivity he
claimed to prize went out the window early in the process.
Political leaders in many African countries have imitated Mugabes rhetoric.
Yet by contrast, in neighboring Namibia, where President Sam Nujoma indulged in similar attacks for years, human rights activists
quickly saw the assaults as aimed at all their work and at the core values
of human rights themselves. One said, The government is making
attacks on homosexuality a central part of its outlook. But it will not
end with homosexualityit is to create a culture of intolerance, a culture
that will grow. Either we change this culture and become more tolerant,
or it will get worse.12
Disentangling intolerance from culture led to danger. Another activist
whose organization condemned Nujomas statements related how he
and his co-workers have been attacked as traitors, as spies, and as being
un-African. And we have been attacked for promoting homosexuality.
 We are not promoting homosexuality, we are promoting human
rights.13 It is to their credit that human rights organizations fought
back, and affirmed both that homosexuality belonged to, and that
human rights principles were integral to, Namibias diverse culture.
In Egypt, the crackdown on homosexual conduct was used to isolate
and defame the countrys embattled human rights organizations. Few
groups intervened: those who did faced condemnation. The message
was clear: that human rights had become the portal to perversion.
Theyre defending Egyptian perverts under the pretext of human
rights! one tabloid headline raged.14 A columnist asked of sexual perverts,
What moral debasement has this group arrived at? What kind
of people are they, without religion, moral values, or honor claiming
human rights? What human? What rights?15
Similarly, in Jamaica in 2004, attacks on a Human Rights Watch report
linking endemic homophobic violence to the spread of HIV/AIDS
turned into attacks on human rights groups in general. A writer charged
that homosexual surrogates attached to Human Rights Watch have
ripped into Jamaica for what it imagines is wide scale abuse here
against male homosexuals. Homosexuals have always found that their
viral-like attachment to key groups in civil society and other bodies where social activism is a calling card has always assisted them as a
launching pad from which they can subtly foist their sexuality on a
nation of people totally turned off from and sickened by the abnormal
and filthy act of one man having sex with another man.16
Others threatened mainstream Jamaican human rights activists. The
Jamaica Police Federation, representing most of the countrys police
officers, ominously lashed out at Human Rights Watchs local accomplices
for deliberately maligning the police and the state. Declaring
that The government and the police cannot be held responsible for
either the careless liaisons by homosexuals or the cultural responses of
the population towards gays, it called on the Minister of Justice to
slap on sedition charges where necessary to both foreign and local
agents of provocation.17
Religious groups have played a significant role in the backlashand a
significant role in opposing it. Within many religious traditions, powerful
voices have spoken up to defend sexual rights, along with human
rights principles generally. Still, evangelical Protestant churches in
Africa (many of them North American in origin) have often preached
homophobia. The Catholic Church in many places has lent official
weight to campaigns against equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people, as well as against reproductive rights.18 Yet the role
of churches or mosques in whipping up fears around sexuality should
not be overstated. In most places the backlashs leadership remains lay.
In many countries the roles of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
that identify themselves as defending religious values, without being
tied to a particular institution or denomination, have been more powerful,
and their rhetoric more ferocious, than most religious figures.
This is nowhere more true than in the United States. Controversies
over lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender peoples claim to equality
have burgeoned since 2003. That year, the Supreme Court struck down
the countrys remaining sodomy laws. Social conservatives saw this as a blow to their own authority, and as the loss of one of the basic ways in
which governments declared their disapproval of homosexualitya
disapproval manifested in a jail cell. Later that year, courts in the state
of Massachusetts ordered that the full rights of marriage be extended to
same-sex partners. At least in one jurisdiction, it seemed, equality was at
hand.19
Individual states have wide latitude in the U.S. to set their own marriage
policies; however, the federal government has intervened in the
name of overarching principlesmost notably when the Supreme
Court struck down laws against interracial marriages as fundamentally
discriminatory. Social conservatives therefore took a two-pronged strategy.
They have pressed, with great success, for states to amend their
own constitutions to ban equality in civil marriage. Eleven such initiatives
came on the ballot in 2004; eleven states passed them, often by
enormous margins. Some of these amendments ruled out legal recognition
of same-sex relationships in any form, such as civil unions. Their
sweeping wording could conceivably bar companies from granting
domestic-partner rights to same-sex employees, or actively prohibit a
lesbian from visiting her partner in the hospital. The zero-sum meanness
of such provisions reveals the underlying mindset, that certain relationships
can be protected only by taking a legal bulldozer to others.
The motive is not defending marriage, but fear: fear of difference, of
the other. The only union they defend is the shotgun coupling imposed
between government and religious compulsion.
The second strategy was to go national. President Bush has urged passage
of a amendment to the U.S. constitution which would bar equality
in civil marriage. It would be the first constitutional change in American
history not to affirm a basic right but to ban a specific group from
enjoying it. Legislative proposals to achieve the same effect nationwide
are multiplying as well.
In the United States as in other countries, panics over sexual nonconformity
have often been connected to political repression. Consider
how, in South Africa, the legal prohibition on interracial sex became a
foundation of the apartheid regime; consider too how, during the
McCarthyite period in the United States in the 1950s, the search for
invisible and insidious communists was paralleled by campaigns to root
down and crack down on homosexuals, in local communities and in
government itself. The strong desire of some social conservatives to
expand state control over personal life, while eviscerating the states secular
character, was suggested by the influential conservative leader Bob
Jones in greeting the 2004 election returns. Warning that liberals
despise your Christ, he urged the victorious president to exercise
forceful leadership in passing legislation that is defined by biblical
norm regarding the family, sexuality, sanctity of life, religious freedom,
freedom of speech, andit is not clear how compatible this is with the
rest of the listlimited government.20
But the blend of social conservatism and sexual fear in U.S. policy is up
for export, where its effects are still more dangerous. Under the influence
of religious and conservative NGOs, the United States hasboth
domestically and in its capacity as the worlds largest donor to
HIV/AIDS programsheavily promoted HIV prevention programs
that define sexual abstinence and marital fidelity as the sole solutions.
The United States Leadership against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and
Malaria Acta foreign aid program passed in 2003, and commonly
known as Presidents Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR)
mandates that one-third of prevention spending go to abstinence until
marriage programs. In the United States, such federally-funded programs
have censored scientific information about the efficacy of condoms,
and called marriage the only reliable strategy for preventing sexual
transmission of HIV.21 In teaching that heterosexual marriage is the
sole safe environment for sex, these programs implicitly but intrinsically
condemn lesbians and gay mens sex livessince, in most countries, they cannot marry. The programs also cut off people at risk of HIV
from information that could save their lives.
The result, in countries that are candidates for PEPFAR funding, has
been a rash of statements endorsing abstinence and condemning condoms.
In May 2004, for instance, President Yoweri Museveni of
Uganda, who had long supported condoms as part of a prevention strategy,
changed his position and declared that they should only be provided
to sex workers.22 In March 2004, Zambia reportedly banned distributing
condoms in schools, claiming they spread promiscuity among
youth.23
One characteristic of many of these assaults on sexuality is that fundamentalist
forces interpret oppositionattempts to keep their proposals
from being enacted into policyas an attempt to silence them altogether,
or to keep them from urging their principles upon free individuals.
Thus promoting an open public sphere where religious institutions and
others with different views can speak is treated virtually as an initiative
to suppress the church. One canand human rights activists do
oppose those who want gay sex criminalized, while respecting the opponents
consciences and safeguarding their political freedoms. Yet in a
strange inversion, those who vociferously object to applying human
rights principles sometimes claim that any debate itself breaches their
basic rights.
They do this by claiming that individuals rights violate the rights of
the community to enforce moralityand silence. This appropriation
of rights language should not be curtailedthe words are available to
allbut it deserves to be questioned. When an Australian evangelical
group claims that anti-discrimination legislation would infringe the
rights of heterosexuals,24 it may seem marginal. The Catholic Bishops
Conference of the Philippines carried more authority, though, when
answering Human Rights Watchs criticism of government policies
heavily church-supportedthat impeded condom use.25 A spokesman said, If we speak the language of rights, let it be about authentic
human rightsrights which foster human dignity.  The right to religious
belief is a paramount human right. Will Human Rights Watch
deny that?26
The right to religious belief does not mean that belief can tyrannize
over others bodiesor deny others what they need to save their health
and lives. The exercise of individual conscience is not infringed if governments
give men and women information and condoms that will help
them survive. Human rights groups should and typically do stand up
fiercely for religious freedom and the rights of believers. They should
also stand up against religious groups seeking to dilute or destroy rights
protections on the sole ground that they safeguard actions which faith
or teaching may condemn. This holds true whether the freedoms at
stake are those of religious dissenters, atheists, women, or men, or
whether they involve consensual sexual behavior. Human rights principles
should not be twisted into a tool to suppress expression, conscience,
or conduct, when the only harm is in the mind of someone who
takes moral umbrage at anothers behavior or belief.
Finally, the public health consequences of the policies in question
expose how untenable are fundamentalist forces claims to be defending
rights or to be standing up for communities. When HIV/AIDS outreach
workers are assaulted, in the name of national tradition; when
people are force-fed unscientific propaganda instead of life-saving facts,
in the name of safeguarding the family; when they are refused condoms,
in the name of moral values: it is communities who suffer, as HIV infection
spreads. More than ideology is at stake in the backlash over sexuality.
Societies are devastated. People die.
In the International Sphere
Far from conferences and Cairo, another important thing happened in
1994. The U.N. Human Rights Committee, in its landmark decision in Toonen v. Australia, held that so-called sodomy lawslaws criminalizing
consensual homosexual conductviolated standards of privacy and
equality, and that sexual orientation was a status protected against discrimination
by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR).
This has been the single most important U.N. move to affirm equality
based on sexual orientation. It has supported the grassroots struggles of
countless activists. Yet since that year, the United Nations has increasingly
become a battlefield in wars over culture and sexuality.
U.N. conferences such as the Beijing World Conference on Women;
General Assembly Special Sessions such as the 2001 meeting on
HIV/AIDS or the 2002 gathering on children; and increasingly the
annual meetings of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights have been
sidetracked or taken over by fierce contests over questions of sexuality.
In the process, an odd alliance has emerged. It brings together the
countries of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC); the
Holy See (which, though not recognized as a state, occupies observer
status at the United Nations); and a group of mostly U.S.-based NGOs,
some identifying as Catholic, some rooted in evangelical Protestantism
or Mormonism, all with domestic records of combating reproductive
rights and sexual rights. Under the Bush administration, the latter have
had sometimes tacit and sometimes overt backing from their government.
27
The alliance merits some comment. Its members work together closely,
visibly planning strategy in tandem at some sessions. Yet their opportunistic
transcendence of the conflicting confessional, political, and
social traditions they represent boldly defies any contention that cultures
are or should be self-contained, insulated, or incapable of negotiating
across differences. They model the diversity they deny. At various
venues the members of the alliance have all claimed to be defending the
traditional family, as if unaware of the different entities the term might describe in Arizona and Qatar. The irony of finding present and
former officials, including diplomats, from powerful OIC countries
serving on advisory boards to U.S. NGOs identified with the Christian
right is profound. To add to the irony, many of the U.S. NGOs now
devoting time and resources to U.N. advocacy oppose the U.N. and all
international human rights mechanisms. One highly prominent U.S.
advocate said in 2000, Should the U.S. get out of the U.N.? Thats a
question I always steer clear of, principally because to participate in the
U.N. in the way that I do, you must at least have a veneer of supporting
the U.N.28
The goals that unite them are simple to sum up: deleting sexuality.
They fight to roll back the affirmations of reproductive and sexual
rights in the Cairo and Beijing Platforms for Action; to restrict or eliminate
mentions of family planning, sexuality education, reproductive
rights, and related issues; and to keep language on sexuality, sexual
rights, or sexual orientation out of any U.N. documents, ever.
Sexual orientation has been a key issue for these opponents, both in
its own right and as a wedge to attract the votes of other countries from
the developing world. One writer comments that religious and socially
conservative groups in the U.S. are turning to the developing world as
an innocent, unspoiled frontier, which might possibly be rescued from a
morally bankrupt West.29 At the Beijing conference in 1995, a flyer
claiming to be from unnamed, conservative women from Developed
Countries offered to apologize to people from the less developed
world  [for the Wests] direct attack on the values, cultures, traditions
and religious beliefs of the vast majority of the worlds peoples.30 At
Beijing +5 (the General Assembly session five years after the World
Conference on Women) a similar anonymous flyer courted developing
states, blaming conference delays on perversions: If the West would
stop pushing homosexual and abortion rights on unwilling countries,
the document would be done. Dont blame the developing countries with the courage to defend their values and their right to self-government!
31
More is involved than flyers. The rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender people simply appear an easy sacrifice in the eyes of this
alliance. The 2001 U.N. Special Session on HIV/AIDS saw a furious
(and ultimately successful) campaign to rid the final document of specific
references to vulnerable groups, including men who have sex with
men, drug users, and sex workers. OIC states fought to prevent the
International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission from
addressing a panel on human rightsan issue which finally came to a
General Assembly vote (where the OIC narrowly lost).
Debates around sexual orientation reached new intensity in 2003 and
2004, at the annual meetings of the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights. In 2003, Brazil introduced a resolution on Human Rights and
Sexual Orientation, which expressed deep concern at violations of
human rights all over the world against persons on the grounds of their
sexual orientation. The resolution came with little warning; few NGOs
had a chance to mobilize fully to support it that year. It met with frenzied
opposition, though, from some Commission members and from
conservative NGOs, above all in the United States. Pakistan, in an aidememoire
on behalf of the OIC, stated:
The resolution has been built on an assumption for
the purposes of the resolution that the concept [of sexual
orientation] encompasses various manifestations of
sexual behaviour. The list could always be expanded to
include heinous activities like pedophilia and other
errant behaviour.  The draft resolution directly contradicts
the tenets of Islam and other religions. Its adoption
would be considered as a direct insult to the 1.2 billion
Muslims around the world.32
This language imitated that of Christian-based NGOs in the United
States, who had quickly circulated misinformation about the key terms
meaningsuggesting that any of the sexual disorders listed in the
American Psychiatric Associations Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
(DSM) could qualify as a sexual orientation. Thus, they claimed, 22
different sexual orientations could be protected by the resolution,
including bestiality or pedophilia. They warned the resolution would
offer special human rights (rather than equal human rights), calling it
infamous, dangerous, and, worst of all, likely to pave the way for
the legalization of same-sex marriage across the world.33
As the lobbyists well knew, sexual orientationas understood in ordinary
speech as well as in repeated references in official U.N. documents
describes whether a persons sexual and emotional desires are
directed primarily to people of the same or opposite sex, or to both. It
has nothing to do with the conditions listed in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual.34 Yet the distortion of language and medical fact, the
conflation of human rights principles with protecting bestiality, had
their effect. In a chaotic session, the resolution narrowly lost on a procedural
questionby two votesbut was postponed until the following
year. 2004 saw unprecedented global mobilization of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender activists, and a sweeping coalition of other human
rights groups, to support the measure. However, OIC countries applied
equally unprecedented pressure, threatening to quash possible trade
relations with Brazil. Sexuality at the United Nations had finally graduated
to the kind of issue that economic ties could hang on. Brazil postponed
the resolution again. Its future fate is unknown.
In a further sign of how the attacks on sexuality widen into attacks on
general rights standards, in 2004 Egypt also spearheaded a battle by the
OIC to remove sexual orientation from a crucial Commission resolution
on extrajudicial executions. Repeatedly in the past, the same opponents
had sought to undermine the work of the U.N. Special
Rapporteur on extrajudicial killings, whose reports drew attention to state-condoned or state-sponsored murders in many of their countries.
They had used her work on murders of sexual minorities to discredit
her work on honor killings of women, implying the second led to the
first. And they used both to try to dismantle her mandate. This year,
they made it clear they would be happy to kill the resolutionone basic
to the United Nations human rights mechanismsif it condemned
killings of lesbians and gay men.
Although the move was defeated, the story here returns again to Cairo:
for it was evident that Egypt was driven in part by the desire to keep
unwanted U.N. attention away from its violent domestic crackdown on
gay men. The local backlash and the international one meet.
Cultures and Their Faces
On the night of September 29, 2004, FannyAnn Eddy, founder of the
Sierra Leone Lesbian and Gay Organization, was brutally murdered in
the groups offices in Freetown. Although the motives for her killing
remain unclear, many suspect she was targeted for her visibility as a lesbian
and an activist. Human Rights Watch worked closely with her.
This essay is dedicated to her memory.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people have learned one lesson
over the last twenty years: violence follows visibility. People can be
killed for their courage in standing up, in speaking out about themselves.
Yet FannyAnns life and death, on a continent where homosexuality
is again and again called un-African, call attention to another
truth. Cultures are made up of faces. They are not monoliths; they are
composed of diverse individuals, each contributing to and minutely
changing what the culture means and does.
When a culture is reinvented for ideological purposes as a faceless,
seamless wholeincapable of dissent from within, so that any dissenter
automatically becomes an outsider; incapable of changing, so that growth seems like destructionit has ceased to be an environment in
which people can live and interpret their lives. It has become a rhetorical
weapon to be wielded against individuals, a tool of repression. And
any phenomenon that embraces innumerable Africans like FannyAnn
can be called good or bad, right or wrong; but it cannot be called un-
African.
The forces described here draw their strength from fear. They share an
anxiety: that norms governing personal life, which family or community
or religion used to inculcate, are losing strength. They share an ambition:
to enlist the states authority to enforce those norms. If there is a
useful definition of fundamentalism, perhaps it is this drive to seize
the state, turn its spotlight on private life, and make it the agent of a
newly-codified tradition. They fail to understandor, perhaps, they
understand too wellthat a norm changes when it becomes a law: that,
once backed by all the power of a modern state, it loses the flexibility
and negotiability that are the essence of a tradition. It can only punish
and repress, and it will find new victims.
The role of human rights principles, unquestionably, is to mark out
spaces of personal freedom, to affirm areas where individual privacy and
dignity and autonomy should prevail against state or community regulation.
But human rights principles also defend communities. They guard
them against measures which, by isolating or marginalizing people,
threaten the whole body politic with epidemic disease. They protect
minority and subcultural communities against change or uniformity
forced on them by the state. They ensure diversity both among communities
and cultures, and within them.
A dialogue between rights talk and culture talk is overdueone
which explores not only the real meaning of culture, but the actual
workings of rights. Rights work does not promise utopia, only an endless
process of protecting basic human values against constantly renewing
threats. But it also does not promise the dissolution of cultures or the annihilation of traditions. It helps to ensure that they remain
responsive to the human beings they contain. To conserve is to care for,
not to preserve unchanged. The dialogue will happen only if true conservatives,
who respect the past because they grapple with its complexities,
dismiss the false ideologies of cultural uniformity that exploit sexuality
with no other real goal than to reject, exclude, and destroy.
Scott Long directs the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
Program at Human Rights Watch. Jonathan Cohen, researcher with the
HIV/AIDS and Human Rights Program, assisted in conceptualizing and
researching this essay.
1 Quoted in Human Rights Watch and the International Gay and Lesbian Human
Rights Commission, More than a Name: State-Sponsored Homophobia and its
Consequences in Southern Africa, 2003, p. 16.
2 Moi says no to unAfrican sins, The Nation (Kenya), September 24, 1995.
3 See Human Rights Watch, In a Time of Torture: The Assault on Justice in Egypts
Crackdown on Homosexual Conduct, 2004.
4 See Mahmood Mamdani, ed., Beyond Rights Talk and Culture Talk: Comparative
esays on the Politics of Rights and Culture (Palgrave, 2000); see also, for a study of how
traditions are manufactured to suit political and social agendas, E. B. Hobsbawn
and Terence Ranger, eds., The Invention of Tradition (Cambridge, 1992).
5 See, for instance, Lynn P. Freedman, Reflections on Emerging Frameworks of
Health and Human Rights; Rebecca Cook, Gender, Health, and Human Rights;
and Alice M. Miller, AnnJanette Rosga, and Meg Satterthwaite, Health, Human
Rights, and Lesbian Existence, all anthologized in Jonathan M. Mann, Sofia
Gruskin, Michael A. Grodin, and George J. Annas, Health and Human Rights: A
Reader (New York: Routledge, 1999).
6 Or, more precisely: the option of organizing a lifelong social identity around the
experience of homosexual desire has historically been available only in certain cultural
and class settings, modern industrial capitalismwith its loosening of the economic
function of traditional family networksbeing one. (The word homosexual
itself, a hybrid of Greek and Latin roots, was only coined in 1869.) In other settings
homosexual desire has been interpreted in other ways: as something to be
consummated only at certain stages in the life-course, for instance. See David
Halperin, One Hundred Years of Homosexuality and Other Essays on Greek Love
(Routledge, 1990) for a fuller discussion. A number of recent movements have
adopted, or adapted, more traditional identities as axes for organizing around sexual
difference. In south Asia, for instance, older cultural identities for people who
might, in a Western context, be called transgender, such as hijra or meti, as well
as identities such as koti referring to men who have sex with men, carry a resonance
not at all reducible to Western equivalents. Alternatively, in Zimbabwe, men within
the group Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe have carved out their own space and
sub-sub-culture, calling themselves chengetanai (a Shona word meaning taking care
of each other) or liberated queens, and identifying themselves much more by
their dissidence from gender norms than by their sexual behavior.
7 See World Health Organization, Technical Consultation on Sexual Health:
Working Definitions, at http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
gender/sexual_health.html, retrieved November 22, 2004.
8 Bal Thackeray, quoted in Protest in front of Dilip Kumars house justified, says
Thackeray, Times of India, December 14, 1998; Hindu leader says lesbian film
should be about Moslem family, Agence France-Presse, December 14, 1998. For a
full account of the Fire controversy, see a report by the Campaign for Lesbian
Rights, India (CALERI), Emergency Jaari Hai/Lesbian Emergence (New Delhi, 1999).
9 See Human Rights Watch, Epidemic of Abuse: Police Harassment of HIV/AIDS
Outreach Workers in India, 2002.
10 Quoted in Human Rights Watch and the International Gay and Lesbian
Human Rights Commission, More than a Name: State-Sponsored Homophobia and its
Consequences in Southern Africa, 2003, pp. 13-14.
11 Ibid..
12 Ibid., p. 31, quoting Norman Tjombe, Legal Action Centre, Namibia.
13 Ibid., quoting Phil ya Nangoloh, National Society for Human Rights, Namibia.
14 Special report: How could anyone believe them after this ridiculous statement?
Theyre defending Egyptian perverts under the pretext of human rights! Rose al-
Youssef, July 15, 2001.
15 Wagih Abu Zikri, columnist in al-Akhbar, February 17, 2002.
16 Mark Wignall, What do these homosexual activists want? Jamaica Observer,
November 21, 2004.
17 Sergeant David White, public relations officer, Jamaica Police Federation,
Charge those groups for sedition, Jamaica Observer, November 25, 2004.
18 In some countries the Orthodox Church has campaigned particularly militantly
against sexual rights. In Romania, the church engaged throughout the 1990s in a
long, ultimately unsuccessful struggle to prevent the repeal of that countrys brutal,
Ceausescu-era sodomy law. (See Human Rights Watch and the International Gay
and Lesbian Human Rights Commission, Public Scandals: Sexual Orientation and
Criminal Law in Romania, 1998.) Political calculation underlay the intensity of the
fight. The church was discredited among many Romanians by its tacit support of
Ceausescu, and was searching for an issue to regain clout and credibility; opposition
to reproductive rightsan immensely productive wedge issue for religious
conservatives in other countrieswas closed to it, however, by the acute unpopularity
of Ceausescus pro-natalist, anti-abortion and anti-birth-control policies. The
campaign had international repercussions. In 1998, Orthodox churches threatened
to pull out of the World Council of Churches in outrage at the possibility of discussions
of sexual orientation at its Eighth General Assembly (held in Harare,
Zimbabwe).
19 See Non-Discrimination in Civil Marriage: Perspectives from International
Human Rights Law and Practice, a Human Rights Watch briefing paper, at
http://hrw.org/backgrounder/lgbt/civil-marriage.htm.
20 At http://www.bju.edu/letter, the website of Bob Jones University; retrieved
November 11, 2004.
21 See Human Rights Watch, Ignorance Only: HIV/AIDS, Human Rights and
Federally Funded Abstinence-Only Programs in the United States, September 2002. The
domestic mandate to promote abstinence only education had been a project of
conservative members of Congress since the 1980s. The 1996 welfare reform bill
in the U.S., for instance, required states accepting federal funds to teach abstinence
from sexual activity outside marriage as the expected standard for all schoolage
children, as well as that sexual activity outside the context of marriage is likely
to have harmful psychological and physical effects. The bill points to one of the
origins of the policy: in the endeavor to exert state control over the sexual lives of
the poor. Meanwhile, both domestically and internationally, the Bush administration
has used its commitment to abstinence-only education to funnel funds to
faith-based organizations that are among its political supporters. Groups that
criticize abstinence-only programs have been subjected to fiscal audits, apparently
in response to pressure from the White House and conservative politicians. See
Francoise Girard, Global Implications of U.S. Domestic and International Policies
on Sexuality, International Working Group on Sexuality and Social Policy Working
Papers No. 1, June 2004, at
http://www.healthsciences.columbia.edu/dept/sph/cgsh/IWGSSPWorkingPaper1E
nglish.pdf, retrieved November 21, 2004.
22 Rachael Rinaldo, Condoms take a back seat to abstinence with U.S. AIDS
Money, Inter Press Service, May 24, 2004. The article quotes an anonymous U.S.
official as stating that funds could be used by governments to buy condomsbut
that they should only be distributed to high risk groups.
23 Z. Geloo, Anger at move to declare schools condom-free zones, Inter Press
Service, March 16, 2004.
24 Website of John Mark Ministries, http://jmm.aaa.net.au/articles/10364.htm,
retrieved November 12, 2004.
25 See Human Rights Watch, Unprotected: Sex, Condoms, and the Human Right to
Health in the Philippines, vol. 16, no. 6, May 2004.
26 Patrick Goodenough, Philippine pro-lifers stand by anti-condom policy,
CNSNews, May 6, 2004, at
http://www.cnsnews.com/ForeignBureaus/Archive/200405/FOR20040506b.html,
retrieved November 12, 2004.
27 On reproductive-rights issues at the U.N. level, the Bush administration has
played an open and militant hand. When sexual orientation has arisen, it has been
quieterwith indications that it directs NGOs to do its work for it.
28 Austin Ruse of the Catholic Family and Human Rights Institute (C-FAM),
quoted in Jennifer Butler, New Sheriff in Town: The Christian Right nears major
victory at the United Nations, Public Eye, vol. 16, no. 2 (Winter/Spring 2002).
29 Jennifer Butler, For Faith and Family: Christian Right Advocacy at the United
Nations, Public Eye, vol. 9, no. 2/3, p. 9.
30 Cited in Cynthia Rothschild and Scott Long, Written Out: How Sexuality Is Used
to Attack Womens Organizing, a report by the International Gay and Lesbian
Human Rights Commission and the Center for Womens Global Leadership, 2000,
pp. 63-64.
31 Flyer on file with Human Rights Watch.
32 Copy on file at Human Rights Watch.
33 See Lynn Allred, Thwarting the Anti-Family Agenda: An Eyewitness Account
of the Commission on Human Rights, Meridian Magazine, online at http://ldsmag.
com/familywatch/040505agenda.html, retrieved November 11, 2004. Material
about the 22 sexual orientations was distributed at the 2003 and 2004
Commission sessions.
34 The DSM, of course, actually declares that homosexuality is not a disorder.

Angola
The governments announcement that national elections will be held in
late 2006 is a positive step towards Angolas reconstruction after twentyseven
years of civil war. Serious human rights abuses, however, continue
to be committed. Deepening poverty combined with the governments
lack of transparency and commitment to human rights could undermine
Angolas hard-won peace enjoyed in all provinces, except Cabinda. The
most pressing human rights concerns are: high levels of government
corruption; the armed conflict in Cabinda; lack of respect for womens
human rights; the return and resettlement process; violations of freedoms
of expression, association, and assembly; and expulsions of foreign
migrant workers.
Corruption and Lack of Government Transparency in Public
Financial Matters
Mismanagement of public finances is a major problem that negatively
impacts on Angolans enjoyment of human rights. As previously documented
by Human Rights Watch, U.S. $4.2 billion disappeared from
government coffers between 1997 and 2002roughly equal to all of the
social and humanitarian spending in Angola during the same time. The
government has been forced to take steps to improve transparency, as
international donors were largely unwilling to provide new assistance
until the government became more accountable. In May 2004, it
released the complete report of the Oil Diagnostic study that sought to
determine how much of Angolas oil revenue is deposited into the central
bank and, for the first time, publicly disclosed a large bonus payment
of about U.S. $300 million from ChevronTexaco for the extension
of the Block 0 oil concession. By October 2004, the government reportedly
started to audit Sonangol, the state owned oil company. Despite
these steps, the government has not taken commensurate steps to
account for expenditures. As a result of the governments limited efforts,
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund maintains a cautious stance towards the government and refuses to engage in a formal
lending program until there is greater transparency in both revenues
and expenditures.
Armed Conflict in Cabinda
The armed conflict in Cabinda, an oil-rich enclave separated from the
rest of Angola by the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), is one
of the worlds longest but least reported conflicts. For more than forty
years, Cabindans have been subjected to low intensity guerilla warfare,
as factions of the Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave
(FLEC) have fought for independence. The conflict escalated in late
2002 when the government deployed some 30,000 soldiers to Cabinda,
which led to an increase in violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights abuses against the civilian population by the Angolan
Armed Forces (FAA) and to the virtual destruction of FLECs military
forces by mid-2003.
During 2004, the human rights situation improved due to a decrease in
military operations, but the FAA continues to commit violations against
the civilian population, including killing, arbitrary detention, torture,
sexual violence, and the denial of access to agricultural areas, rivers, and
hunting grounds through restrictions on civilians freedom of movement.
Human Rights Watch found little evidence of recent abuses
against civilians by FLEC factions, probably as the result of FLECs
weakened capacity. The police and judiciary in Cabinda have also violated
due process rights guaranteed in Angolas constitution.
Womens Human Rights
Angolan women and girls are subjected to structural discrimination by
law, practice, and custom. Angola has no specific laws for domestic violence
or marital rape. Its outdated Penal Code imposes only lenient
sanctions for crimes of a sexual nature. Sexual and domestic violence against women and girls is widespread but few cases are reported to the
police and/or prosecuted. Women are reluctant to report cases to the
police given their attitude towards domestic and sexual violence, and the
judiciary is virtually non-existent in the provinces. Unmarried rape victims
in rural areas are often expected to marry the perpetrator as otherwise
they might not find a husband. Customary laws, which govern the
majority of the Angolan population, are discriminatory on family law
issues, including property and inheritance rights.
Lack of respect for Angolan womens human rights is also evidenced in
the field of education, politics and the work place. Only 54 percent of
women and girls over fifteen years are literate compared to 82 percent
of men in the same age group. This gender disparity is compounded in
older age groups and in rural areas. Only sixteen percent of parliamentarians
and three of the twenty-nine ministers are female. Women are
also often paid less than men for the same work and are frequently fired
when they become pregnant.
Women and girls (as well as boys) associated with the National Union
for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) forces were also excluded
from the Angolan Demobilization and Reintegration Program until
mid-2004, when a pilot project for a limited number of female ex-combatants
was implemented.
Return and Resettlement
Since the end of the war in April 2002, four million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and over 250,000 refugees have resettled in Angola. The
majority, however, were resettled in ways that did not fully comply with
Angolan, international human rights, and refugee law, as areas of return
lacked basic social services and had often not been de-mined. By
September 2004, about 190,000 refugees remained outside of Angola,
and according to the government, there are still 340,000 IDPs. The
governments commitment to voluntary return appeared questionable following its announcement in September 2004 that remaining IDP
centers will be closed by the end of the year. At years end, the return
and reintegration process remained highly problematic.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
In the run-up to the scheduled 2006 elections, the promotion and
respect of the rights to freedom of expression, association, and assembly
are crucial. In Luanda and other coastal regions, these freedoms are
generally more respected than in the provinces. Journalists criticizing
the government have been physically abused, threatened, sued, and had
defamation campaigns brought against them. Journalists have also been
denied access to official information, including data on public expenditure.
Opposition activists in the provinces were the target of violence by
the police, army, the Civil Defense Organization, and supporters of the
government. Angolan police broke up some demonstrations violently
but allowed a peace march to go ahead in Cabinda in July 2004. The
state-owned media as well as national radio and television stations routinely
exclude critical voices from their reports and are tightly controlled
by the government. The latter also continue to prevent Rdio
Ecclsia, the Catholic broadcasting station, from extending its signal
outside of Luanda and place excessive administrative and bureaucratic
burdens on civil society, which interfere with their work.
Expulsions of Foreign Migrant Workers
Since December 2003, the Angolan government has expelled about
60,000 foreign migrants from Angola. The migrants are predominantly
from the DRC and work illegally in the diamond mines in the Lundas.
In April 2004, FAA soldiers conducted brutal body searches of
Congolese migrant workers being expelled. The searches included
degrading vaginal and anal searches, beatings, and the looting of their
goods. Some who refused searches were raped or arbitrarily detained.
The government temporarily suspended the expulsions following widespread criticism, but resumed them in August 2004. Expulsions of
Congolese continue in smaller numbers conducted by the police, without
the involvement of the FAA. Fewer human rights abuses were
reported, but Congolese have been arrested and expelled without being
able to collect their family members or personal belongings. Police also
reportedly raped five Congolese women in September 2004 before they
were expelled.
Key International Actors
Donor fatigue has resulted in cut-backs to humanitarian assistance in
2004. By October 2004, less than 60 percent of the original U. N.
appeal of U.S. $262 million for humanitarian assistance to Angola had
been donated, which negatively affected the resettlement and reintegration
of returnees and IDPs. The funding situation is likely to deteriorate
as donors may be more reluctant to finance development programs
given the high levels of government corruption.
The role of the U.N. is gradually being reduced and by the end of
2005, the government will take over the responsibility for coordinating
Angolas development programs from the U.N. Transitional
Coordination Unit (TCU) created in July 2004. The TCU is also
responsible for coordinating the U.N. agencies and its partners until the
end of 2005.
Burundi
Most of Burundi enjoyed relative peace for the first time in a decade
during 2004, but the province of Rural Bujumbura just outside the
national capital remains a battleground between the rebel National
Liberation Forces (FNL) on one side and the combined Burundian
Armed Forces and the Forces for the Defense of Democracy (FDD) on
the other. The FDD is a former rebel movement that joined the government
at the end of 2003. The FNL, drawn largely from the majority
Hutu population, remains outside the peace process that has brought
together other Hutu-dominated groups, including the FDD, with parties
of the Tutsi minority who have dominated political and military life
for generations. All forces in the country-wide civil war and those
involved in the more recent limited combat outside the capital committed
grave violations of international humanitarian and human rights law,
killing and raping civilians and pillaging their property.
The Arusha Accords of 2000, the first of several power-sharing arrangements
between belligerents, provided for a three year period of transition
to be ended with national elections by November 1, 2004. By July
2004, the major parties had failed to agree even on a constitution under
which such elections could be held. With strong backing from regional
heads of state, Hutu-dominated parties pushed through a constitution
in September that was rejected by the leading Tutsi-dominated parties
on the grounds that it failed to provide adequate safeguards for their
rights and security. But just before the new constitution was to take
effect, most of the Tutsi-led parties changed their position and agreed
to work within the new constitution, at least until a national referendum
could be held, now scheduled for the end of 2004, with elections to take
place in early 2005.
In June 2004, a South African-led peace-keeping force, operating under
the auspices of the African Union, was replaced by a United Nations
peacekeeping force known as the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB). Reaching its full complement only towards the end of the
year, ONUB deployed increasing numbers of troops and observers to
Rural Bujumbura but without markedly reducing the number of abuses
against civilians.
Civilians Targeted by Combatants
Government soldiers in collaboration with the FDD fought to extirpate
the FNL from the hills surrounding Bujumbura, areas that had formed
the FNL base for years. In some cases they engaged FNL combatants
but often they also attacked civilian populations thought to support the
FNL by paying them party dues or by giving them food and shelter.
They also attacked civilians in reprisal for FNL ambushes against government
soldiers or FDD combatants. They deliberately killed civilians,
raped women and girls, burned houses, and stole property. FNL forces
assassinated those known or thought to be working with the government
and stole or extorted property from civilians. Combat and abuse
by combatants frequently caused civilians to flee and tens of thousands
spent more than six months of the year living in camps, temporary
lodgings, or in the bush. By late 2004, government and FDD forces
were regularly looting civilians immediately after they had received
humanitarian assistance like food, blankets, or other household items.
The practice had become so widespread that humanitarian agencies
were obliged to suspend deliveries of aid in order to avoid further
attacks on people who were living in abject misery. The FDD, in the
past occasionally allied with the FNL, saw the other movement as a
potential rival for votes if a functional electoral system is established and
apparently were the force most responsible for abuses against civilians
thought to support the FNL
On August 13, 2004, FNL rebels, apparently together with combatants
from other groups, massacred more than 150 Congolese refugees at
Gatumba camp, near the Congolese border. More than one hundred
Burundian army soldiers and dozens of Burundian national police in nearby barracks failed to respond to repeated calls for help from the
civilians, most of them women and children, who were killed by intense
gunfire or were burned to death in their tents. As of early November,
Burundian military authorities had taken no public action against the
officers responsible for this failure to protect civilians under their
charge.
Justice
Despite frequent calls for justice, both national and international actors
appear driven more by expediency than real concern for accountability.
The late 2003 agreement between the government and the FDD, generally
supported by the international community, granted provisional
immunity to all combatants and leaders of both forces, meaning that
justice for their crimes would be at least postponed and probably never
delivered. Prosecutors in the military justice system now claim that they
cannot prosecute accused soldiers because of this provisional immunity.
Hundreds of FDD combatants detained in Burundian jails, including
some accused of crimes resulting in deaths, were released in mid-2004
under this provision. In July 2004 prisoners at most Burundian jails
went on strike for several weeks, demanding that they too be released
either under the terms of this agreement or under another broader
arrangement that provided for the release of political prisoners.
Authorities restored order in the prisons and promised to set up a committee
to examine prisoners demands, thus postponing a decision on
the complicated question.
Under the Arusha Accords, the parties asked the United Nations to
provide an international commission to investigate serious crimes committed
in Burundi since 1962. The Security Council did not act on this
request until April 2004 and then sent a team only to assess the feasibility
of such a commission. The conclusions of the assessment team had not been published by late November, at which time the council seemed
more inclined to dispense with further commissions and move directly
to supporting prosecution. During these years of delay, Burundian
authorities insisted that they wanted an international mechanism to
deliver justice but showed no real commitment to delivering justice for
these crimes in the national court system.
In 2004, authorities began slowly to implement reforms to the judicial
system adopted in 2003 but they have not yet indicted any suspects
under a law passed that year against genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
After a spokesman acknowledged FNL responsibility for the Gatumba
massacre, the government issued arrest warrants for two FNL leaders
but neither has been caught. Faced with the difficulty of prosecuting a
complicated as well as a horrendous crime, some Burundians raised the
issue of joining the International Criminal Court, a process that had
been begun but then stalled in August 2003. Under both domestic and
international pressure, the government completed the ratification procedure
for membership in the ICC, raising the hope that some such
crimes could eventually be punished.
Land and the Return of Refugees
Nearly eighty thousand largely Hutu refugees returned to Burundi from
Tanzania by August 2004, but the flow slowed and even temporarily
reversed with uncertainty about instability that might result from the
failure to hold elections. Hundreds of Tutsi residents also fled from
Burundi to Rwanda in September and October, also fearing violence.
The government faces the problem of finding ways to reconcile the
property rights of returnees with the rights of those who currently
occupy the land. In similar circumstances ten years ago, the return of an earlier generation of refugees and ensuing contests over the control of
land sparked the tensions that led to the beginning of the civil war.
Key International Actors
International actors are committed to avoiding a genocide like that
which occurred in Rwanda, the neighbor and demographic twin of
Burundi, but have been reluctant to commit the necessary resources to
promote real peace: the U.N. agreed to a peace-keeping force only in
2004 and still has not agreed to establish a commission to help deliver
justice for past serious violations of international law.
South Africa bore most of the cost of the initial African Union peacekeeping
force and has also invested substantial political resources in trying
to facilitate agreements in Burundi. Its leadership has sometimes
meshed poorly with that of other heads of state in the region, but all
came together to provide forceful backing for the most recent advance
towards a constitution.
Various international actors, particularly the U.N., tried to move the
FNL towards negotiations in June and July, but after the Gatumba massacre,
they suspended all such efforts. Towards the end of the year, the
U.N. and others discretely signaled a willingness to resume talks with
the FNL, leaving unclear how they could do so without sacrificing justice
for the Gatumba massacre.
The U.N. Human Rights Commission did not renew the mandate of a
special rapporteur for Burundi, but human rights personnel attached to
the U.N. peacekeeping force became increasingly effective in monitoring
abuses.
In late November 2004, Burundi joined international efforts to protect
children and ratified two optional protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child (formally adopted May 25, 2000), that on the involvement of children in armed conflict and that on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography.
Cte dIvoire
The eighteen-month-ceasefire between the government of Cte
dIvoire and northern-based rebels and the peace process initiated at the
same time were shattered in early November 2004 when Ivorian government
aircraft launched bombing raids on the main rebel-held cities
of Bouak and Korhogo. The killing of nine French soldiers in a government
air raid on a French base a few days later provoked a deepening
of the human rights and diplomatic crisis. The French retaliated by
largely destroying Cte dIvoires air force, which in turn sparked a brutal
wave of attacks by pro-government militias against French and other
civilians in the commercial capital Abidjan and western cacao-growing
region. The use of xenophobic hate speech by Ivorian state media during
the November crisis incited the pro-government militias to commit
serious crimes against foreigners, including rape.
In response to the crisis, the United Nations Security Council passed
resolution 1572 which imposed a thirteen-month arms embargo on
Cte dIvoire and threatened economic and travel sanctions if the parties
failed to implement their commitments under the preexisting peace
accords. At years end, the Ivorian government is politically isolated by
the international community. However, neither the embargo nor the
threat of further sanctions have deterred it from threatening to pursue a
military solution to the conflict. The prospect of a renewed government
offensive against the rebels raises serious human rights concerns, particularly
given the more prominent use of the ill disciplined militias and
the governments use of hate media to incite violence against perceived
opponents. The renewed conflict in Cte dIvoire threatens to further
draw in roving combatants from neighboring countries and jeopardize
the precarious stability within the region.
The north and most of the west of the country remain under the control
of the rebel forces known as the Forces Nouvelles (FN), while the
government retains control of the south. Some four thousand French troops monitor the ceasefire line. Neither the faltering peace process
nor the six thousand-strong United Nations peacekeeping mission, the
United Nations Operation in Cte dIvoire (UNOCI), established in
April 2004, have been able to facilitate respect for human rights.
The 1999-2000 military junta, 2002-2003 internal armed conflict
between the government and rebels, and the political unrest that followed
have all been characterized by a serious disintegration of the rule
of law, often with fatal consequences. The issues at the heart of the
Ivorian conflictthe exploitation of ethnicity for political gain, competition
over land and natural resources, and corruptioncontinue
unabated. From 1999 serious atrocities have been perpetrated by both
sides, including numerous massacres, sexual abuse, and the widespread
use of child soldiers. Neither the Ivorian government nor the rebel
leadership has taken concrete steps to investigate and hold accountable
those most responsible for these crimes. Perpetrators have therefore
been emboldened by the current climate of impunity that allows grave
abuses to go unpunished.
Impunity of State Security Forces
State Security Forces continue to act with impunity while the Ivorian
government demonstrates little political will to hold accountable perpetrators
within the government or security forces.
From March 25-27, 2004, pro-government forces participated in a
deadly crackdown against opposition groups who planned to protest the
lack of progress in implementing the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
During the violence, members of the Ivorian security forces, including
pro-government militias and Front Populaire Ivoirien party militants
responded aggressively by using unnecessary and deadly means that
were disproportionate to the supposed threat the march posed. Instead
of dispersing demonstrators with non-lethal means as they assembled,
the security forces shot at and detained them in their communities as they prepared to gather, fired upon them as they attempted to flee, and
executed many after being detained. During the violence at least 105
civilians were killed, 290 were wounded, and some twenty individuals
disappeared after being taken into custody by members of the Ivorian
security forces and pro-government militias, many on the basis of their
nationality, ethnicity, or religion.
From September 2004, security forces have been involved in a number
of incidents, including the disappearance of people close to leaders of
opposition party Rally of Republicans (Rassemblement de Republicains,
RDR), raids by security forces on mosques and market places, and
increased racketeering and extortionparticularly of northern Ivorians,
supporters or perceived RDR supporters, and West African immigrants.
In late September, the Ivorian Army raided several mosques in
Yamoussoukro and detained some 250 people, most of whom were West
African immigrants. On September 29, Ivorian gendarmes raided a market
in the Abidjan suburb of Adjam, and detained 380 mostly northerners
or West Africa immigrants, scores of whom were beaten and
forced to pay money for their release. On October 5, a gardener and
three security guards were abducted by the Republican Guard from the
Abidjan residence of opposition leader Allasane Ouattara. The bruised
body of the gardener was found a few days later floating in a lagoon in
Abidjan.
Attacks on Journalists and Press Freedom by Pro-government
Forces
National and international journalists have on numerous occasions been
threatened and harassed by pro-government forces. In April 2004, Guy-
Andre Kieffer, a French-Canadian journalist who wrote about corruption
in the cacao industry, disappeared in Abidjan and is believed to be
dead. A relative of the president has been charged with complicity in
the kidnapping and murder, though no further arrests have been made.
French prosecutors, who have opened a separate investigation, have accused the government of blocking their investigations. The resumption
of attacks on rebel-held positions was accompanied by attacks on
four private opposition newspapersLe Patriote, 24 Heures, Le Nouveau
Rveil and Le Libral Nouveawhich were on November 4 ransacked,
looted or burned by hundreds of pro-government militias.
The Use of Hate Speech
State owned and private pro-government press continue to play a crucial
role in exacerbating tensions in Ivorian society not only through
unbalanced and sometimes provocative coverage of events, but also by
direct incitation of hatred, intolerance and violence against groups perceived
to oppose the government. The most dramatic example of this
occurred in November 2004 when high-level government officials and
militia leaders speaking on state radio and television, disseminated continual
messages which incited pro-government militias to attack French
civilians. There was at least one instance in which a broadcasters incitement
of an attack included the number plate of a vehicle said to be driven
by French nationals.
The governments widespread use of hate speech and incitement of violence
against French and other Europeans has provoked concerns about
future attacks against the governments more familiar targets: Muslims,
northerners and West African immigrants. The use of hate speech provoked
widespread condemnation by the international community,
including a warning from the United Nations adviser on the prevention
of genocide and an obligation under U.N. S.C. resolution 1572 for the
peacekeeping mission to strengthen its monitoring role of broadcasts
that incite or provide directions for violence. However, the U.N. has
not indicated if the peacekeeping mission is prepared to block the hate
speech transmissions through technical or other means. Impunity of Pro-government Militant Groups and Civilian
Militias
Political developments were throughout the year accompanied by acts
of harassment, intimidation and violence by the pro-government militant
groups and civilian militias. Since 2000, the government has
increasingly relied on pro-government militias for both law enforcement
and, since 2002, to combat the rebellion. From September 2004,
pro-government militia members have reportedly been undergoing military
training in Abidjan. Throughout the year members of the political
opposition, UNOCI personnel, French soldiers, journalists and foreigners
were most often the targets. For example, on March 10, scores of
youth from the Young Patriots, stormed the Ministry of Justice in
Abidjan to protest appointments made by the justice minister, who is
also the president of one of the key opposition parties. As deadlines for
rebels to begin disarming passed in June and October, hundreds of
Young Patriots attacked United Nations and French personnel. After
a small rebel attack on the town of Gohitafla was repelled by French
troops in July, militant youths destroyed tens of UNOCI vehicles in
Abidjan and San Pedro. In November, the mobs attacked, looted and
burned French and other European owned homes, businesses and
schools, provoking a massive evacuation of at least five thousand foreign
nationals. French government sources said at least three of its citizens
were raped and scores of others wounded during the attacks.
Abuses by the Forces Nouvelles
Within rebel-held areas  thought to be at least 50 percent of the
national territory  there are no legally constituted courts, nor has the
rebel leadership established a legitimate judicial authority or shown any
political will to try serious crimes in which their commanders or combatants
were involved. Within FN-controlled areas there were frequent
reports of extortion, looting of civilian property, armed robbery, rape,
arbitrary taxation, abduction, extra-judicial execution of suspected government informants, and attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
and French soldiers.
The most serious incident occurred on June 20-21, 2004, during clashes
between rival rebel factions in the northern city of Korhogo which led
to the deaths of some one hundred people, including civilians.
According to a fact-finding mission by the UNOCI human rights section,
many of those found in three mass graves had been executed or
suffocated after being held in a make-shift prison. Many others were
tortured and subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment.
Inter-communal Conflict Over Land
Longstanding tension over access and ownership of land between
indigenous Ivorians, some of whom have formed into civilian based
militias, and West African immigrant farmers, the majority from
Burkina Faso, continues to claim numerous lives during 2004. The tension,
exacerbated by political rhetoric during the 2002-2003, has forced
thousands from lands they farmed in the west and southwest of the
country. In late December 2003 and January 2004, French soldiers
found the bodies of thirty five people thought to be mostly West
African immigrants in several villages around Bangolo in the west. At
around the same time hundreds of people of Burkinabe origin were
forced by local militias from the Bete ethnic group to leave their homes
around Gagnoa. In March and April 2004, at least twelve people were
killed near Gagnoa and elsewhere in the southwestern part of the county.
Since June 2004, foreign communities around Guiglo and Duekoue
were targeted by an unidentified armed group, resulting in the deaths of
at least seven and displacement of thousands. In November communal
violence between the Bete and Dioula ethnic groups in Gagnoa resulted
in at least five deaths. Reform of the land ownership law was among the
package of legal reforms slated for review under the peace accord, however
the government has yet to undertake action to end the violence
and implement needed reforms. Key International Actors
Throughout most of 2004, the impasse in implementation of the
January 2003 Linas-Marcousses Agreement and fears that it would lead
to a fresh outbreak of violence resulted in a flurry of diplomatic efforts
to resolve the crisis by the United Nations, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union (AU) and the
French government. The Ivorian governments resumption of hostilities
in the face of these efforts resulted in widespread condemnation and
international isolation. It also provoked a crisis in Franco-Ivorian relations.
In February 2004 the Security Council expanded the mandate of the
United Nations mission in Cte dIvoire to become a full peacekeeping
operation, including the deployment of some six thousand peacekeepers
and two hundred military observers. A high level summit in July aimed
at jump-starting the peace-process resulted in the signing of the Accra
III agreement which committed the government to adopt several key
legal reforms by the end of August 2004, including one on citizenship
for West African immigrants, one which would define eligibility to contest
presidential elections, and another which would change rights to
land tenure. The agreement also set October 15, 2004 as the starting
date for disarmament. At years end, none of the key reforms have been
passed by the Ivorian government.
Throughout 2004 the U.N., the European Union (E.U.), and the
United States made repeated calls to both sides to end human rights
abuses, including the incitement of violence through hate speech, and
implement the peace accords. The United Nations, including the
Secretary-General, Security Council and Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have taken a proactive
role in denouncing and investigating serious international crimes
committed in Cte dIvoire, and indeed on numerous occasions have
called for perpetrators to be held accountable. Since 2000 the OHCHR dispatched three independent commissions of inquiry into the grave
human rights situation in Cte dIvoire; the first following the election
violence of October 2000; the second following the violent crackdown
of an opposition demonstration in March 2004; and the third, following
a request by all parties to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement to investigate
all serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated
in Cte dIvoire since September 19, 2002.
Democratic Republic of Congo
After eighteen months in power, the transitional government of the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) remains fragile, far from its
goals of peace and effective administration of this huge central African
nation. Installed after five years of civil war, the uneasy coalition of former
belligerents is plagued by mistrust, dissatisfaction among troops not
yet fully integrated in a new national armyincluding an aborted rebellion
by some of them, and challenges from armed groups outside the
peace process. It also faces continued interference from neighboring
countries, in particular Uganda and Rwanda.
In eastern Congo, soldiers of the national army and combatants of
armed groups continue to target civilians, killing, raping, and otherwise
injuring them, carrying out arbitrary arrests and torture, and destroying
or pillaging their property. Tens of thousands of persons have fled their
homes, several thousand of them across international borders. After the
attempted rebellion and a massacre of Congolese refugees in neighboring
Burundi, ethnically-based fear and hatred have risen sharply, emotions
that are amplified and manipulated by politicians and some civil
society leaders.
An over-stretched United Nations peacekeeping force, the U.N.
Organization Mission in Congo (MONUC), contributes little to protecting
civilians outside of a few urban areas and itself has come increasingly
under attack.
With a weak coalition in Kinshasa, divisions in the army, and growing
ethnic tensions in the east, the DRC is ill-prepared to address the complex
political and logistical obstacles to elections that are now set for
mid-2005. Failure to address these fundamental problems increases the
likelihood of more conflict, potentially destabilizing the entire region.
Continuing Violence against Civilians
During 2004 government soldiers and armed combatants engaged in
numerous skirmishes for control over local areas in eastern DRC. In
many of these incidents they committed grave violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, particularly in Ituri, North and
South Kivu, Maniema, and Northern Katanga. In the northeastern district
of Ituri, known for high levels of violence in prior years, MONUC
soldiers limit abuses in Bunia, the main town, but fail to curb abuses by
armed groups organized on an ethnic basis in the countryside. Further
to the northeast, combatants attacked civilians at the village of Gobu in
January 2004, killing at least one hundred of them. In September,
another fourteen civilians were slain at Lengabo, only a short distance
from Bunia. Women and girls suffer systematic sexual violence in many
zones of conflict and in the Mongbwalu area, some eighty Hema
women accused of being traitors to local communities were summarily
executed.
In May and June 2004 dissident soldiers rebelled and captured the
South Kivu town of Bukavu from government forces. Members of both
forces committed war crimes, killing and raping civilians, some of
whom were targeted on an ethnic basis. Thousands of government
troops arrived to defeat the rebels, many of whom were Tutsi or
Banyamulenge, an ethnic group related to Tutsi. Some of the rebels
then fled to Rwanda while others retreated to North Kivu. Following
the rebellion, thousands of Banyamulenge civilians and others associated
with them in South Kivu feared reprisals and fled to Rwanda or
Burundi. Over 150 of those refugees were massacred in mid-August at
Gatumba refugee camp just inside the Burundian border. Most of the
attackers were Burundian rebels, but some spoke Congolese languages
and may have come from DRC.
Increasing Ethnic Hostility
The Bukavu revolt and the Gatumba massacre sharply increased fear
and hatred between Tutsi and Banyamulenge peoples and other ethnic
groups in eastern DRC. In some places animosity against Tutsi and
Banyamulenge is generalized to all Rwandaphones, people linguistically
or culturally linked to Rwanda. After Banyamulenge civilians were killed
in Bukavu, some Banyamulenge and Tutsi leaders charged that government
soldiers and people of other ethnic groups were committing genocide
against them. In June 2004, Rwandan government authorities
many of them Tutsithreatened to invade Congo to defend Tutsi and
Banyamulenge. After the Gatumba massacre, they repeated the threat,
backed by Burundian Tutsi military officers. Many Congolese who had
suffered under Rwandan occupation from 1996 to 2002 fear another
Rwandan attack and charge that Banyamulenge and Congolese Tutsi
intend to help the Rwandans, as some of them have done in the past.
When Banyamulenge refugees tried to return from Burundi in October,
crowds in the town of Uvira stoned them and attacked the MONUC
troops protecting them. Political, military, and civil society leaders
manipulated tension between ethnic groups, even producing fake documents
meant to prove that others planned attacks against them.
Questions of land use and ownership and of citizenship underlie many
of the conflicts among ethnic communities in eastern Congo; they are
complicated by laws that are poorly written or inconsistently applied.
The government is trying to address these issues through the necessary
reform legislation.
Illegal Exploitation of Resources
In 2003 an independent panel of experts established by the U.N.
Security Council documented links between the illegal exploitation of
resources and conflicts in the DRC but since the publication of its
report only Belgium has launched investigations into possible breaches of international business norms by corporations registered in its territory.
The DRC government, committed to reviewing unfavorable contracts
signed during the five years of war, has made little progress in
doing so. Local organizations as well as international observers report
growing corruption and fraud by officials.
Meanwhile leaders of armed groups in the DRC continue to profit from
the illegal exploitation of resources and to fight for control of lucrative
border posts or strategic mining areas. In 2004 such groups fought for
access to resources like gold, cassiterite, and cobalt in North Kivu,
South Kivu, Ituri and parts of Katanga. In July the Security Council
renewed an arms embargo on eastern Congo and the mandate of a
panel investigating its enforcement, but it limited the scope and hence
the effectiveness of the investigations by not authorizing inquiry into
the financing of weapons purchases.
Civil and Political Rights
Local and national officials continue to harass, arbitrarily arrest, or beat
journalists, civil society activists, and ordinary citizens. Combatants of
armed groups, including those officially integrated into the national
army, continue to prey upon civilian populations, collecting illegal
taxes and extorting money through illegal detention or torture.
Making Justice Work
The pervasive culture of impunity is one of the greatest obstacles to
lasting peace as well as to ensuring civil and political rights in the DRC.
Despite national and international proclamations about the importance
of accountability for past crimes, numerous persons suspected of violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law continue to
occupy posts of national or local responsibility, including key positions
in the newly integrated army. Integrating abusive commanders into a new army may buy their compliance with the transitional process in the
short term, but only prepares the way for future instability.
Delivering justice in the DRC will require enormous human and material
resources. The European Union, assisted by MONUC, has supported
a pilot program for rebuilding justice in Ituri that offers the
potential for replication elsewhere. After the Lengabo killings mentioned
above, MONUC also helped arrest dozens of suspects. At the
invitation of the DRC government, the prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has begun investigating war crimes and crimes
against humanity, an effort that may eventually bring some major perpetrators
to justice. But no progress has been made on finding mechanisms
to deliver justice for the massive crimes committed before July
2002 when the jurisdiction of the ICC begins. Several womens groups
are seeking ways to encourage the prosecution of sexual violence, committed
so widely in the DRC.
Key International Actors
In October 2004, the Security Council increased MONUC troops to
16,700 and strengthened its Chapter VII mandate to protect civilians.
Although the increase fell far short of the 23,900 troops requested by
the U.N. Secretary General, it will give MONUC improved capacity to
deal with recurrent threats to civilians. There have been allegations of
sexual violence and exploitation of women and girls by MONUC forces
themselves. Although the U.N. has announced a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to sexual exploitation by members of peacekeeping forces,
to date there have been no criminal charges brought against any peacekeepers.
An internal U.N. investigation has been initiated to look into
the allegations.
Although Rwanda supposedly withdrew its military forces from DRC in
2002, U.N. sources reported the presence of Rwandan troops in DRC
in 2004. In addition, U.N. experts concluded that Rwanda supported the Bukavu revolt against the transitional government. Meanwhile
Ugandan President Museveni attempted to put pressure on the ICC
prosecutor not to investigate crimes by leaders of armed groups supported
by Uganda.
The U.K., South Africa, Belgium and the European Union intervened
at critical moments in 2004 to prevent breakdowns in the transitional
process. The U.K. also twice dissuaded Rwanda from increased interference
in the DRC by suspending or threatening to suspend aid. In at
least one case South Africa also brought pressure to bear successfully on
Rwanda to create no obstacles to the transition.
Eritrea
Plagued by famine and heightened tensions with Ethiopia over their
joint border, Eritrea has remained a highly repressive state in which dissent
is suppressed and nongovernmental political, civic, social, and
minority religious institutions are largely forbidden to function.
Suppression of Political Dissent and Opinion  Arbitrary Arrest
and Illegal Detention
Eritrea is a one-party state. No political party other than the Peoples
Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) is allowed to exist. No group
larger than seven is allowed to assemble without government approval.
No national elections have been held since Eritrea won its independence
from Ethiopia in 1993. Elections were canceled in 1997 because of
a border war with Ethiopia. They were canceled again in 2001, two
years after the war ended. They remain unscheduled. Regional non-partisan
assembly elections were held in 2004 but the offices involved have
little power.
The government has refused to implement the 1997 constitution, drafted
by a constitutional assembly and ratified by referendum, that respects
civil and political rights. The constitution contains restraints on the
arbitrary use of power. It provides for writs of habeas corpus, the rights
of prisoners to have the validity of their detention decided by a court,
and fair and public trials. The constitution protects freedom of the
press, speech, and peaceful assembly. It authorizes the right to form
political organizations. It allows every Eritrean to practice any religion.
Many individuals arrested in 2001 and many of those arrested since are
held incommunicado in secret detention sites. In September 18, 2001,
the government arrested eleven leaders of the PFDJ after release of a
letter they sent to President Issayas Afewerki, criticizing his leadership
and asking for democratic reform, including implementation of the 1997 constitution. At the same time, the government arrested publishers,
editors, and reporters and closed all nongovernmental newspapers
and magazines. In the years since, the government has arrested scores of
Eritreans because of their ties to the dissidents, their perceived political
views, or their deviation from government dogma.
Although President Issayas has called the detainees traitors and spies,
the government has been unwilling to bring them to trial or to accord
them any semblance of due process. Under the Eritrean penal code,
detainees should not be held for over thirty days without charges. In
late 2003, the African Commission held Eritrea to be in violation of
Articles 2, 6, 7(1), and 9(2) of the African Charter on Human and
Peoples Rights and urged the immediate release of the eleven political
leaders arrested in 2001.
Arbitrary arrests and prolonged imprisonment without trial have not
been limited to political leaders and the press. The government detains
about 350 refugees who fled Eritrea but were involuntarily repatriated
in 2002 (from Malta) and in 2004 (from Libya). They are held incommunicado
in detention centers on the Red Sea coast and in the Dahlak
islands. Faced with the grim prospect of incommunicado detention and
torture, a planeload of 75 Eritreans being forcibly returned to Eritrea
from Libya commandeered their Libyan transport and forced it to land
in Sudan.
Since the closing of the private press in 2001, the government has
maintained a monopoly on access to information. In 2003, the government
posted guards to prohibit access to two information centers operated
by the United Nations Mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).
It then asked UNMEE to close both centers on the grounds that they
were unnecessary and that some of their materials were not suitable for
young children. In 2004 the government expelled the British
Broadcasting Corporation correspondent, the sole resident foreign journalist.
In 2004, as part of its campaign to isolate its citizens and to prevent the
flow of information, the government placed all Internet cafes under
government supervision, thereby controlling access. The government
claimed that it was acting to protect Internet users and to prevent access
to pornographic sites. The government also imposed travel restrictions
on foreign diplomats, requiring government approval for travel
outside Asmara. It prevented UNMEE from using the most accessible
route to service its observers and troops in central and western Eritrea
along the border with Ethiopia, a road that passes through urban centers
and could bring Eritreans into contact with the outside world.
Suppression of Minority Religions
Members of Pentecostal Christian churches have been arrested for possession
of bibles or for communal worship. The government closed all
religious institutions in May 2002 except for those affiliated with the
Eritrean Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Eritrean Evangelical
(Lutheran) churches and Moslem mosques. At the end of 2004, there
were reliable reports that over 300 members of unrecognized churches
were incarcerated. Many of those arrested were beaten or otherwise tortured
during their arrest or while in captivity. Jehovahs Witnesses have
been especially mistreated. Some have been detained for a decade for
refusing to participate in national service even though the official penalty
is incarceration for no more than three years. In September 2004, the
United States designated Eritrea as a country of particular concern
for its intolerance and mistreatment of adherents of minority religions.
The Eritrean government defended its practices on the ground that the
unrecognized churches had failed to register, but the United States
State Department report noted that some of the religious groups had
applied for registration in 2002 and that the government had issued no
registration permits since the registration regime was imposed.
Compulsory Military Service
All Eritreans between the ages of eighteen and forty-five must perform
two years of compulsory national service. In practice, however, the time
for service is repeatedly prolonged. There are frequent sweeps to round
up evaders. During a massive roundup in November 2004, security
forces shot into hundreds of detainees being held in an overcrowded
military prison camp (Adi Abeito) near Asmara, killing as many as twenty
and injuring dozens more, after some detainees managed to collapse
part of the compound wall. The government often uses national service
as retribution for perceived criticism of government policies. Those
accused of evading service are frequently tortured.
Prison Conditions and Torture
Due to the volume of arrests, prisoners are often held in improvised
cargo containers. At Aderser, near Sawa, prisoners are held in underground
cells. At least six high school students were also reported incarcerated
in solitary confinement in underground cells at Sawa in 2003. In
addition to psychological abuse, escapees report the use of physical torture
at some prisons. Prisoners have been suspended from trees, arms
tied behind their backs, a technique known as almaz (diamond).
Prisoners have also been placed face down, hands tied to feet, a torture
known as the helicopter. Prison visits by international human rights
organizations are prohibited.
Relations with Ethiopia
The 1998-2000 war with Ethiopia ended with an armistice agreement
by which Eritrea and Ethiopia agreed to binding arbitration of their
border. In 2003, Ethiopia announced that it rejected the decision of the
independent boundary commission, largely because it awarded the village
of Badme, the flashpoint for the war, to Eritrea. (See Ethiopia).
The Eritrean government uses the possibility of renewed conflict as a justification for postponing elections and for prolonging national service.
Eritrea has increasingly lashed out against the international community
for not compelling Ethiopia to implement the border commission
decision. Throughout 2004, it adamantly refused to meet with the
special envoy appointed by the U.N. Secretary General to attempt to
resolve the border impasse.
Key International Actors
UNMEE maintains just under four thousand troops along the twentyfive-
kilometer-wide armistice buffer line between the two countries. In
September 2004 the Security Council voted to extend UNMEEs mandate
through March 2005.
The international communitys assistance consists of food and other
humanitarian assistance. Because of Eritreas woeful human rights
record, it receives little in other types of assistance. The European
Union (E.U.) announced in 2003 that it would provide Eritrea an
unstated sum under the European Initiative for Democracy and Human
Rights, in addition to a ?96 million five-year aid package (until 2007)
for social and economic development. The E.U. said that its assistance
would depend on the governments willingness to improve civil liberties.
The United States has withheld non-humanitarian assistance, largely
because Eritrea has refused to release two American Embassy local
employees arrested in 2001. (After three years, no charges have been
filed against them.) While the official U.S. position is one of keeping its
distance, U.S. defense department officials, including the secretary of
defense, frequently praise the Eritrean government for its support in
fighting terrorism. 
Ethiopia
The Ethiopian government continues to deny many of its citizens basic
human rights. Police and security forces have harassed, illegally
detained, tortured, and in some cases, killed members of the political
opposition, demonstrators and suspected insurgents. The government
has also continued its efforts to muzzle the private press through the use
of criminal sanctions and other forms of intimidation.
Ethiopia is affected by chronic food security problems, but the governments
attempts to address the issue through a massive resettlement program
appear to be courting humanitarian disaster in some areas.
Police Brutality, Torture, and Illegal Detention
Police forces often use excessive force to quell peaceful demonstrations,
with demonstrators subject to mass arrest and mistreatment. In January
2004, between 330 and 350 Addis Ababa University students peacefully
protesting the arrest of eight other students two days earlier were themselves
arrested by Federal Police. While in detention, the students were
forced to run and crawl barefoot over sharp gravel for several hours at a
time. Police have repeatedly employed similar methods of torture and
yet are rarely held accountable for their excesses. Police also responded
with force in the early months of 2004 to student demonstrations in
secondary schools throughout Oromia. The Ethiopian Human Rights
Council (EHRCO) reported that dozens of students were detained,
some of whom reported being mistreated while in custody. One student
was reportedly shot and killed by police during a student demonstration
in Tikur Inchini.
In August 2004, several dozen individuals were arrested in and around
the town of Agaro in Oromia and imprisoned for allegedly supporting
the outlawed Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). Some prisoners reported
mistreatment while in custody and police reportedly threatened family members wishing to visit detained relatives. As of October 2004, the
prisoners remained in detention even though none had been charged
with any crime.
In July 2004, the Ethiopian government revoked the license of the venerable
Oromo self-help association Mecha Tulema for allegedly carrying
out political activities in violation of its charter. The police subsequently
arrested four of the organizations leaders on charges of terrorism
and providing support to the OLF. The four were released on bail
in August but were arbitrarily arrested a week later.
Repression of Opposition Political Parties
Ethiopia will hold national legislative elections in May 2005, and the
continuing intolerance of dissent on the part of many officials raises
serious concerns as to whether opposition candidates will be able to
contest that poll in an environment free of fear. The last national elections
in 2000, and local elections held in most of the country in 2001,
were marred by serious irregularities including violence directed against
opposition supporters and candidates in the most closely contested constituencies.
Much of that abuse was orchestrated by provincial officials
belonging to parties allied with the ruling coalition. EHRCO observers
monitoring local elections held in Somali state in January 2004 reported
widespread instances of intimidation, harassment, and arrest of opposition
candidates.
Abuses Committed by the Ethiopian Armed Forces
The Ethiopian military has committed human rights abuses against
civilians. In Gambella state, armed attacks directed against the Anuak
community claimed up to 424 lives in the last weeks of 2003 and beginning
of 2004, with at least some soldiers and policemen participating in
the violence. The immediate trigger for the violence was a series of
attacks by Anuak insurgents against civilians of other ethnic groups in the area. A government-appointed Commission of Inquiry largely
absolved the military of any blame, but serious doubts have been raised
about the thoroughness of that commissions work and the credibility of
its findings. Many eyewitnesses allege that military involvement in the
violence was widespread and apparently well-coordinated, and reports
continue to emerge of attacks carried out by the military against Anuak
in the countryside. The violence has left some 50,000 people displaced
within Gambella state and led several thousand Anuaks to flee to
refugee camps near Pochalla, Sudan.
Occasional skirmishes between security forces and armed insurrectionary
bands continue in other parts of the country. Security forces frequently
arrest civilians, claiming they are members of the OLF in
Oromia state or the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) and
Al-Itihad Al-Islamiya in Somali state. Few of those arrested are brought
to trial. Some are released; others are kept in arbitrary detention for
prolonged periods, often without a hearing or cause shown, sometimes
incommunicado. Frequent reports of extrajudicial executions and torture
emerge from Somali region, but access to the region has been
restricted by the military to such a degree that these reports are impossible
to confirm.
Restrictions on the Press
Ethiopias last imprisoned journalist, Tewodros Kassa, was freed from
prison in September 2004 after serving a two-year sentence for allegedly
defaming a dead businessman and inciting political violence.
However, many independent journalists, editors, and publishers continue
to endure harassment and intimidation, and criminal penalties for a
range of speech-related offenses remain on the books.
Serious concerns remain over the governments efforts to introduce a
controversial new press law. The government has agreed to reconsider
some of the more worrying provisions of the law, such as criminal sanctions for offenses by journalists and the creation of a state-run press
council, but it remains to be seen whether any substantive changes will
be made. Ethiopias only independent journalists organization, the
Ethiopia Free Press Journalists Association (EFJA), was shut down
shortly after publicly opposing the draft law in late 2003, ostensibly for
failure to submit required annual audits. The EFJAs leadership was then
purged and replaced at a meeting organized by government officials.
Many of the EFJAs members continue to contest the legitimacy of the
governments actions.
Food Security
Ethiopia has a chronic food insecurity problem, and in recent years
failed rains have left millions of people in need of food aid. In an effort
to find a long-term solution to these problems, the Ethiopian government
has launched a U.S. $3.2 billion plan aimed at ending the countrys
dependence on foreign aid over the next several years. A key component
of that program is the planned resettlement of 2.2 million people
from drought-prone areas to relatively fertile and underpopulated
land. However, appalling logistical failures have left many of the
350,000 who have already moved without access to clean water, health
care, shelter, education, or even food. Many resettled populations suffer
from unacceptably high levels of morbidity, malnutrition, and child
mortality. These problems may worsen as the pace of resettlement
accelerates in the next 2-3 years. Many settlers have been induced to
migrate to the new sites by false promises of schools, clinics, wells, food
aid, and new houses.
Judicial Delay
Thirteen years after the overthrow of the former military government
(the Derg), several thousand of its former officials remain jailed without
trial, charged with genocide, crimes against humanity, and major
felonies. Of those who have been tried, many have been acquitted, some after more than a decade of imprisonment. The loss of evidence over
the years has resulted in some acquittals, but such losses may also make
presenting an effective defense more difficult. Former dictator
Mengistu Haile Mariam, on trial in absentia, remains a guest of the
Mugabe government in Zimbabwe, with little chance of being held
accountable for his abuses so long as he remains there.
Tensions with Eritrea
While the governments of both Ethiopia and Eritrea insist that they are
committed to a peaceful resolution of their ongoing border dispute, the
situation remains at an impasse. In August 2004, the Boundary
Commission charged with demarcating the border reported that it was
impossible for it to make any progress under the present circumstances.
That commissions 2002 decision was rejected by Ethiopia in 2003
when it became clear that the contested village of Badme, where the
war started, would fall on the Eritrean side. Eritrea has refused to negotiate,
insisting that Ethiopia is bound by the commissions decision,
while Ethiopia refused to consider any solution that requires it to surrender
control of Badme. In December 2004, Prime Minister Meles
Zenawi softened his previous position by announcing acceptance of the
Commissions decision in principle and calling for a dialogue over
its implementation.
Human Rights Commissioner and Ombudsman
After years of delay, the Ethiopian government appointed Dr. Kasa
Gebre Hiwot and Abay Tekle Beyene to fill the constitutionally-mandated
posts of head of the Human Rights Commission and
Ombudsman, respectively. Many opposition MPs opposed both
appointments, complaining that they were forced through without
meaningful debate or consultation. It remains to be seen whether the
government will provide these institutions with the capacity to do their
work effectively and respect their independence.
Key International Actors
Ethiopia is considered an essential partner of the U.S. in its war on
terrorism and Washington has generally been unwilling to apply meaningful
pressure on the Ethiopian government over its human rights
record. The U.S. suspects Islamic extremist groups are hiding in bordering
areas of Somalia, and sometimes inside Ethiopia itself. In 2003,
the U.S. military, operating out of its base in Djibouti, trained an
Ethiopian army division in counter-terrorism. The United States is also
the largest donor of bilateral aid in Ethiopia.
The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) maintains
just under 4,000 troops along the twenty-five kilometer-wide
armistice buffer line between the two countries. In September 2004 the
Security Council voted to extend UNMEEs mandate through March
2005.
Kenya
Only two years after the election of the National Rainbow Coalition
Party (NARC), after twenty-four years of autocratic rule by President
Moi, the public euphoria that greeted its entry into power has begun to
wane. The record of the Mwai Kibaki government has been a source of
both hope and disappointment.
The current human rights situation in Kenya is one of few serious abuses.
However, the potential is growing for serious problems in the future
as much of the repressive state machinery from the Moi era remains
intact. And while this government has made some commendable steps
to address human rights concerns, it has demonstrated insufficient willingness
to commit to any institutional changes that would fundamentally
limit the extensive presidential and executive powers it inherited.
Change at the highest levels of power is not being institutionalized, and
high-ranking Kibaki officials are not being held to account for abuses in
the same way as former Moi government officials. The governments
commitment to the rule of law is increasingly coming under question,
amid a backdrop of internal power-brokering and unpunished corruption
scandals within the ruling party. Since the election, the political
divisions among NARC coalition members have deepened along ethnic
lines. Increased political jockeying is rapidly emerging as factions seek
to entrench power before the next election in 2007.
Signs of Hope
Commendable and promising steps have been taken to address human
rights issues. The government appointed to high office several well
known rights activists. Officials enforced universal free primary education.
A more independent government National Human Rights
Commission staffed with qualified persons was sworn in.
A major reform program was initiated for the judiciary, police and
prison services. Public pressure forced out former High Court Chief
Justice Bernard Chunga, accused of complicity in torture and cruel,
inhuman, and degrading treatment of suspected members of Mwakenya,
a clandestine political movement in the 1980s. A massive shake-up of
the judiciary followed an internal report that accused twenty-three
judges of corruption. While the removal of corrupt and politically compliant
judges was a welcome step, the process attracted criticism for the
lack of due process. The process commenced with a committee of
inquiry which did not always take affidavits from accusers, arrived at its
findings without seeking a response from the accused judges, and its
findings were widely publicized in the newspapers before consideration
by the appointing authority. In some cases, there has been no fixed
charge, but a process of new allegations introduced serially as the
inquiry has proceeded so that the affected party does not know what
new allegation he/she may face as the hearing progresses. The expulsion
of judges consideredbut not yet foundguilty of corruption, ineptitude
or improper conduct amounts to a denial of due process. The new
judges have been appointed as acting judges and are serving without
tenure until they are formally appointed.
The freedom of the press and electronic media flourished and there has
been a real expansion of FM radio. This resulted in an increase in public
participation and critical commentary of government actions.
However, the governments response to its own policy has not always
been welcoming. It has threatened curbs and failed to dismantle some
of the restrictive statutory amendments of the Moi years. Thus, an
exorbitant security of one million shillings [U.S.$12,500] for new publications
still remains; Information Minister Raphael Tuju appointed an
extra-legal committee of inquiry in a radio stations operations in displeasure
at their commentaries; and the old Media Bill of the Moi
regime passed in 2002 remains a threat to press freedom.
With strong calls for accountability for past abuses, President Kibaki
mandated three transitional justice initiatives to address human rights
abuses, economic crimes (corruption), and the widespread illegal expropriation
of public lands. The government created a task force to examine
whether a truth and reconciliation commission should be established,
although it has since ignored the recommendation of the task
force to create such a commission. In closely-followed public hearings,
the Goldenberg Commission of Inquiry began to unearth evidence
about the Goldenberg scandal, viewed as the single worst case of corruption
during the Moi era, implicating President Moi and others.
President Kibaki also set up a Land Commission to provide him with a
report on land grabbing by former government officials. That report
was handed to the president in June 2004 with detailed recommendations.
It remains to be seen whether these initiatives will lead to any
prosecutions or reparations.
Disappointments and Concerns
The broadening of human rights space in Kenya since the 2002 election
is a most welcome development, but important human rights concerns
remain. The repressive state machinery that permitted the misrule that
characterized the Moi era remains in place. The fact that this institutional
framework is being retained and can be used by the Kibaki government
remains a continuing danger to sustainable human rights in
Kenya.
Additionally, the governments reform efforts to address the ills of the
past are not always being undertaken with care for due process and
rights protections. In some cases, the approach and justification of the
Kibaki government has been that good intentions can allow it to forego
safeguards in the process of redressing past wrongs.
Constitutional Reform
The NARC government came to power on a campaign promise that it
would make the new constitution a cornerstone of its rule. The draft
constitution has become a symbol of the hopes and aspirations of
Kenyans for a participatory democracy. It contains a strong non-derogable
bill of rights, separation and devolution of powers, and a weaker
presidency through the creation of a prime minister position. Although
a product of consensus and political compromise, it is the most widely
consultative rights document that Kenya has ever seen and contains better
human rights guarantees than the current constitution. Its passage
would be a good first step towards a devolution of executive power and
the creation of an institutional framework for the protection of rights
through an enlarged and enforceable Bill of Rights.
Twice the government has publicly announced deadlines by which the
constitution would be passed; both times it has failed to deliver. On July
3, 2004, peaceful protests in support of the constitution in Nairobi were
met with police using water cannons and tear gas, and during demonstrations
in Kisumu on July 7, live ammunition was fired by police
killing one person and injuring several demonstrators.
Political wrangling among ruling NARC members has scuttled the likelihood
that this draft constitution will be passed in its current form, if at
all. The split is between NARCs two predominant coalition partners:
the National Alliance of Kenya (NAK) headed by President Kibaki, and
the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) headed by Raila Odinga. LDP
members complain that they have been marginalized and are pushing
for Odinga to be appointed prime minister following the passage of the
draft constitution. Appearing unwilling to devolve power from the presidency
and particularly not to a member of the Luo tribethe NAK
faction are blocking passage of the constitution.
The thwarting of the constitutional review process signals an apparent
unwillingness to allow an institutional framework that would devolve or
share power, in particular with other ethnic groups in the country. This
has had an immediate and adverse impact on the issue of the executive
devolution of power and accountability, the rebuilding of independent
state institutions, and the passage of a strong Bill of Rights.
Also, there is growing impunity for actions by those in the inner-circle
of government. Since the new government came to power, there have
been several instances of government ministers publicly expressing their
intention to disregard court injunctions; property expropriated by executive
order, and reluctance to prosecute violations by the presidents
supporters. As corruption scandals or other excesses by current government
officials come to light, the government has been unwilling to dismiss,
investigate or prosecute its members the same way that it is dealing
with former government officials.
Key International Actors
One of the most significant developments came in late 2003 when
numerous international donors officially resumed aid to Kenya. These
renewed pledges indicated widespread support for the Kibaki governments
economic and political reforms.
Donor aid to Kenya had previously been suspended because of rampant
corruption, abuses, and economic mismanagement under President
Moi. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) suspended lending in
December 2000 and shortly thereafter the World Bank followed suit. In
2003, the European Union was the first to announce that it would
resume aid, pledging 50 million euros in budget support and 225 million
euros for development projects. Days later, the IMF announced
that it would also resume dealings with Kenya, approving a U.S.$252.8
million loan, of which roughly U.S. $36 million will be available immediately.
Then, in the last week of November, a group of donors including the World Bank, the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the United States and the United Kingdom
announced pledges totaling U.S. $4.1 billion for 2004-2006, the greatest
portion of which would be available in 2004. Unlike the majority of
aid, to support infrastructure and development projects, the U.S. aid
(approximately U.S. $78 million) was earmarked for its Draining the
Swamps that Feed Terrorism program, to focus specifically on good
governance and security initiatives designed to curb corruption and terrorist
threats.
Many donor pledges still have not been delivered in full due largely to
their concerns about the stalling of constitutional reform, the political
in-fighting in NARC, and corruption scandals in the new government.
Liberia
The peace agreement signed between the Liberian government and two
rebel groups in August 2003 ended more than three years of internal
armed conflict and provided for a transitional government, largely made
up of members of the three former warring parties, to guide Liberia to
elections in 2005. In 2004, the deployment of some fifteen thousand
United Nations peacekeepers and one thousand civilian police, and the
disarmament of more than ninety thousand combatants contributed to a
marked decrease in abuses against civilians and attacks against human
rights defenders. However, the human rights situation remains precarious
as a result of frequent criminal acts by ex-combatants in the face of
inadequate police and civil authorities; striking deficiencies within the
national judicial system; infighting and allegations of corruption within
the transitional government; serious shortfalls in financing the program
to reintegrate and train demobilized combatants; and continued regional
instability, most notably in neighboring Cte dIvoire and Guinea.
There has been little discussion on how to ensure accountability for
past human rights abuses. The selection of commissioners for the truth
and reconciliation commission mandated by the 2003 peace agreement,
lacked transparency. The Nigerian government, which offered former
president Charles Taylor a safe haven in August 2003 when rebels
threatened to take the capital Monrovia, has refused to hand him over
to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which indicted him for war
crimes connected with his support for rebels in Sierra Leone.
Meanwhile, several of Taylors close associates have been implicated in
plans to attack neighboring Guinea, which once served as a haven for
the rebels which led to his removal from power.
Ongoing Insecurity and Related Abuses
Protection of the civilian population remains an urgent priority, particularly
given serious institutional deficiencies within the national police force and judicial system. By the end of 2004, peacekeepers from the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) were deployed in all
major towns and along most highways. Prior to this deployment and the
disarming of ex-combatants there were frequent reports of harassment
of civilians, forced labor in rubber and diamond producing areas, extortion
at market places, looting of foodstuffs intended for aid distribution,
assaults against aid workers, illegal checkpoints, and looting. Civilians
living in rural areas beyond the reach of UNMIL peacekeepers remain
particularly vulnerable to attacks by demobilized combatants from all
former factions. Women and girls living within camps for the internally
displaced remain vulnerable to sexual violence and exploitation, primarily
by other camp residents.
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration of Former
Combatants
During 2004, over ninety thousand combatants including some 12,600
women and six thousand children were disarmed and demobilized.
However, concern was raised about the quantity of arms turned in
only one rifle, rocket launcher, pistol or mortar round for every three
fighters on averageand because combatants were reluctant to surrender
heavy weapons. A key challenge for Liberia is the degree to which
disarmed combatants can be successfully reintegrated and trained. This
is jeopardized by significant shortfalls in funding to support promised
education or skills training programs. The dearth of programs, particularly
in the capital Monrovia where the majority of ex-combatants have
concentrated, makes them vulnerable for re-recruitment; since at least
June 2004, commanders claiming to represent a fledgling Guinean
insurgency and others claiming to support Guinean President Lansana
Conte have engaged in the recruitment of ex-combatants, including
children. In December 2003, the U.N. Security Council voted to reapply
the arms embargo and a travel ban on individuals involved in previous
attempts to destabilize the region. 
Re-establishing the Rule of Law
Decades of corruption and mismanagement, and fourteen years of war
led to the near collapse of most state institutions, including the judicial
system. Over the next several years the international community must
devote significant resources to create a functioning police force, and
professional and independent judiciary. An ambitious rule of law strategy
consisting of four components: police, judicial, corrections, and
human rights, has been integrated into UNMIL. Developing all four
components of the program simultaneously is essential to promoting
the rule of law.
Under former president Taylor the Liberian Police was an arm of
repression and exploitation. Over the next two years, the 1090 strong
civilian police component of UNMIL will train a force of some 3,500
police officers, 1,800 of whom are to be functional in time of the projected
October 2005 elections. UNMIL has undertaken to thoroughly
vet and screen any previous human rights abusers from the new force.
The new Liberian Police Service must be free of political influence, balanced
along gender and tribal lines, and adequately trained in human
rights standards.
Court personnel including magistrates, lawyers and judges have for
decades been subject to poor conditions of service including low
salaries. Their judicial independence has been compromised by political
interference and corruption. Numerous courtrooms were looted and
destroyed during the war and at present the judicial system lacks basic
resources and personnel. There are very few detention facilities and
prisons. Funding to rehabilitate court and prison infrastructure, and
adequately train and remunerate court staff, including public defenders,
prosecutors and judges, is urgently needed and should be a priority for
the international community. 
Accountability for Past Abuses
Civil society has expressed interest in having those most responsible for
atrocities during Liberias fourteen year internal conflict held accountable
for their crimes. However they maintain that the disarmament
process must first be completed and a greater modicum of security
established before any such process is initiated. Meanwhile, the chairman
of the National Transitional Government of Liberia (NTGL) and
several ministers and high-level functionaries, themselves former commanders
within a warring faction, have expressed opposition to trying
war criminals. Through inclusion of an amnesty in the 2003 peace
agreement was avoided, article XXXIV of the accord commits the government
to give consideration to a recommendation for general
amnesty at an unspecified date. The international community should
continue to pressure the Liberian parliament to desist from passing an
amnesty, and must begin to explore ways for those most responsible for
war crimes and other serious violations of international law to be
brought to justice. In preparation, local and international human rights
groups should continue the process of investigating and documenting
atrocities committed since 1989.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
A truth and reconciliation commission was mandated by the 2003 peace
agreement and in January 2004, eight Liberians were appointed as commissioners
by NTGL Chairman Bryant. However, the commissioners
lack the relevant experience, and among them is one of Bryants close
family members. The selection process lacked transparency and there
was insufficient consultation with civil society. After significant input
from the UNMIL human rights section and local and international
human rights organizations, an act which called for the reconstitution of
the commission to include the appointment of international and national
commissioners was drafted and is under consideration by NTGL
members. The selection process for commissioners will require significant input and monitoring by local and international human rights
organizations.
Corruption
Successive Liberian administrations have been characterized by widespread
nepotism and corruption. President Taylor siphoned off public
funds, largely derived from the exploitation of local timber, diamonds
and iron ore. Consistent allegations of corruption by members of the
NTGL, including numerous scandals about lavish spending and the
awarding of contracts have been made. Two commissions envisioned to
stem corruptionthe Governance Reform Commission and the
Contract and Monopolies Commission were set up under the 2003
peace agreement, but have yet to adequately address the allegations.
The U.N. Security Council should refuse to lift sanctions on the sale of
diamonds and timber, imposed respectively in 2001 and 2003, until the
new government is able to assert effective and transparent control over
these revenue sources.
Key International Actors
International Actors, notably the United Nations and Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) were committed to
bringing Liberias recent conflict to an end and filling the security vacuum
left after former President Taylor departed into exile in August
2004. They have yet to address the issue of justice for atrocities committed
during Liberias fourteen year internal conflict and refused to
call on Nigeria to surrender former president Taylor to the SCSL,
despite concerns that he might destabilize Liberia and the region.
ECOWAS took the lead on resolving internal disputes within the
NTGL, but did little to pressure the warring parties to desist from
committing abuses against civilians and address concerns about corruption.
ECOWAS members actively lobbied members of the Liberian parliament to vote against a resolution calling on Nigeria to surrender
Taylor to the SCSL. The United States refusal to commit ground
troops during the rebel assault on Monrovia in 2003 provoked disappointment.
However, the U.S. Congress committed U.S. $200 million
in humanitarian assistance to Liberia and approved US $240 million for
U.N. peacekeeping in Liberia. The U.S. took the lead on the restructuring
of the Liberian Army, which is estimated to be ongoing through
2005 and include a comprehensive vetting component to screen out
notorious human rights abusers. While U.S. $ 520 million was in
January 2004 pledged to reconstruct Liberia, donating nations had by
years end only delivered U.S. $244 million of this amount.
Nigeria
The persistent failure of the Nigerian government to prosecute the perpetrators
of serious human rights violations has contributed to a devastating
cycle of inter-communal conflict. The violence is exacerbated by
the inadequate protection of civilians by the security forces. In 2004,
violence between Christians and Muslims in Plateau state and the city
of Kano, claimed hundreds of lives and led President Obasanjo to
impose a state of emergency in Plateau in May. Ongoing conflict over
control of oil wealth in the Niger delta remains a cause of serious violence.
However, the willingness of the federal government to use dialogue
to respond to problems in the Niger delta and Plateau state, may
signal a softening of the heavy handed approach of the past.
Tackling impunity remains a key challenge for the government. No-one
has yet been brought to justice for the massacre of hundreds of people
by the military in Odi, Bayelsa state, in 1999, and in Benue state, in
2001. The police continue to commit numerous extra-judicial killings,
acts of torture and arbitrary arrests. Several opponents or critics of the
government have been arrested, harassed, and intimidated. Scores of
people were killed in violence related to the local government elections
in March. Sharia (Islamic law) courts in the north continue to hand
down death sentences; however, such sentences have not been implemented
since early 2002. While the federal government has made some
efforts to tackle corruption, it remains pervasive within both the public
and private sectors, leading directly to violations of social and economic
rights; the political elite continued to amass wealth at the expense of the
vast majority of Nigerians who live in extreme poverty.
Inter-communal Violence
Inter-communal violence remains the most serious human rights concern
in Nigeria. Since the end of military rule in 1999, fighting in several
regions of the country has claimed thousands of lives. Plateau state in central Nigeria has been particularly affected, and the first half of
2004 saw an escalation of violence around the southern part of the state.
This culminated in a large scale attack by Christians on the town of
Yelwa in May. Around seven hundred people were killed and tens of
thousands displaced. One week later, Muslims in the northern city of
Kano took revenge for the Yelwa attack and turned against Christians,
killing more than two hundred people. Following the violence,
President Obasanjo declared a state of emergency in Plateau, suspended
the state government, and established an interim administration to
implement a six month peace plan. The plan brought communities
and religious leaders together for dialogue and proposed a reconciliation
commission, which stipulates that persons admitting responsibility
for violence in Plateau state conflicts from 2001-2004, will be granted
amnesty. The state of emergency has, so far, succeeded in calming tensions
and there have been no further outbreaks of violence.
Security forces frequently fail to respond to early warning signs of conflict
and in many incidents, as was the case in Yelwa, they are notably
absent. The violence is often fueled by political actors and community
leaders. Impunity for violations contributes to the cycle of violence and
emboldens the perpetrators. In the aftermath of the conflict in Plateau
and Kano, very few arrests were made and those responsible for instigating
and planning the attacks appeared to have escaped justice.
Conflict in the Niger Delta
The oil rich Niger delta, in the south of the country, remains the scene
of recurring violence between members of different ethnic groups competing
for political and economic power, and between militia and security
forces sent to restore order in the area. Local groups are also fighting
over control of the theft of crude oil, known as illegal bunkering.
The violence is aggravated by the widespread availability of small
armsa problem which exists throughout Nigeria but is particularly
acute in the delta. Despite a massive army, navy and police presence in the area, local communities remain vulnerable to attack by the militias,
criminal gangs and security forces. Oil companies rarely speak out publicly
about such abuses; indeed, some of their own practices have contributed
to the conflict.
Following the deaths of seven people, including two US citizens, in an
ambush on an oil company boat in April 2004. warring factions in Delta
state declared a ceasefire. Rivers state, where there are large numbers of
armed gangs, saw some of the worst violence in 2004: hundreds of people
were killed (some by security forces and others in fighting between
the groups) and thousands of people displaced from their homes.
President Obasanjo, in an unprecedented move, invited rival groups to
Abuja at the end of September for negotiations, indicating just how
seriously he takes the threat to securityand oil productionin Rivers
state. This may signal a shift away from the heavy handed approach of
the past, but it remains to be seen whether the federal government will
heed demands for greater resource control for the people of the delta.
Abuses by Police
Despite repeated promises of reform by senior government and police
officials, extra-judicial killings, torture, ill treatment, arbitrary arrests
and extortion remain the hallmarks of the Nigerian police. Throughout
the years, a large number of extra-judicial killings occurred not only in
the context of crime fighting operations against alleged armed robbers,
but also during routine duties such as traffic control. Cases of torture
and ill-treatment by the police during arrest and detention are common.
Police often take advantage of situations of generalized violence and
disorder to carry out further killings. For example, in May 2004, riots
between Muslims and Christians in Kano left more than two hundred
people dead, dozens of whom had been shot dead by the police. In very
few cases were the individuals responsible for these acts or their superiors
brought to justice.
Freedom of Expression
Despite significant gains in civil liberties since the end of military rule,
several restrictions on freedom of expression remain. There were
numerous cases of arrests, detention, ill-treatment, intimidation and
harassment of critics and opponents of the government. In September
2004, the offices of Insider Weekly magazine were raided by the State
Security Service (SSS) and two staff members were arrested for criticizing
the government. During anti-government protests in May, police
used tear gas and detained several protestors in Lagos. Similarly during
nationwide strikes to protest against an increase in the price of fuel in
June and October, several labor union activists were detained and
obstructed by police. In other incidents, members of the Movement for
the Actualization of the Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB), an Igbo
self determination group critical of the government, were repeatedly
harassed and arrested.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Sharia
Sharia (Islamic law), which was extended to cover criminal law in 2000,
is in force in twelve of Nigerias thirty-six states. Sharia has provisions
for sentences amounting to cruel inhuman and degrading treatment,
including death sentences, amputations and floggings. However, the
number of sentences that have been handed down by Sharia courts has
decreased and there appears to be a reluctance on the part of the
authorities to carry them out. No executions or amputations have taken
place since early 2002 though a number of defendants remain under
sentence of death. For example in September and October 2004, two
women in Bauchi state, were sentenced to death by stoning for adultery.
Both are currently appealing their sentence. Many trials in Sharia
courts fail to conform to international standards and do not respect due
process even as defined by Sharia legislation; defendants rarely have
access to a lawyer, are not informed about their rights, and judges are
poorly trained. The manner in which Sharia is applied discriminates against women, particularly in adultery cases where different standards
of evidence are required making it more likely that women will be convicted.
Political Violence
Politically motivated killings and violence continued to be a regular
occurrence in Nigeria. Most incidents of violence involve fighting
between factions of the ruling Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) or
between the supporters of the PDP and the main opposition All Nigeria
Peoples Party (ANPP). Local party leaders regularly hire and arm thugs
to intimidate political opponents, and then protect them from prosecution.
In the weeks preceding the local government elections in March
2004, numerous prominent politicians were killed or targeted in assassination
attempts. Local candidates, election officials and rank and file
party members were also killed in many incidents that went unreported.
On polling day, voting in many local government areas was marred by
electoral violence and in some areas elections had to be postponed due
to insecurity. Local monitoring groups observed substantial flaws in the
preparations for elections, and widespread irregularities and fraud during
voting.
Key International Actors
Under President Obasanjo, Nigeria continues to enjoy a generally positive
image in the eyes of foreign governments. The country has
assumed regional significance through Obasanjos chairmanship of the
African Union and his efforts to broker peace in the Darfur region of
Sudan. This, combined with Nigerias economic significance as a major
oil producer, creates an unwillingness on the part of key governments
notably the United Kingdom and United Statesand intergovernmental
organizations such as the African Union and the Commonwealth
to criticize Nigerias human rights record, despite abundant evidence of
serious human rights problems and little action on the part of the government to address them. Former Liberian President Charles Taylor,
indicted by the Special Court for Sierra Leone for war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and other serious violations of international humanitarian
law, was granted asylum in Nigeria in 2003. Despite a landmark
decision by the special court in May 2004, which ruled sitting heads of
state are not granted immunity, Nigeria continues to refuse to surrender
him to the court.
Rwanda
Ten years after the end of a genocide and war, the Rwandan government
has created a veneer of stability by suppressing dissent and limiting
the exercise of civil and political rights. It often cites the need to
avoid another genocide as the purported justification for such repressive
measures. Victorious militarily in 1994, the ruling Rwandan Patriotic
Front (RPF) also won elections ending a transition period in 2003, bolstering
its margin of victory by fraud, arrests, intimidation, and appeals
to ethnic fears and loyalties.
In 2004, the RPF further reinforced its control by attacking civil society
organizations, churches, and schools for supposedly disseminating
genocidal ideology. Authorities arrested dozens of persons accused of
this crime.
Judicial authorities carried out a sham trial of a former president and
seven others, but few other trials. Tens of thousands of persons
remained jailed on accusations of genocide, some of them detained
more than ten years, and the prosecutor general estimated that another
500,000 persons would be accused of genocide.
In the course of reforming the judicial system, authorities obliged
judges and judicial personnel, more than five hundred of them, to
resign. Fewer than one hundred were re-appointed to positions in the
new system. During this year nearly half the 106 mayors were also
obliged to resign. Authorities insist that those removed lacked competence
or were corrupt, a remarkable charge given the numbers and
responsibilities of those removed.
Limits on Civil and Political Rights
In 2003, a parliamentary commission charged the leading opposition
party with divisionism and called for its dissolution. Although there was no further official action against the party, it vanished from the
scene. In June 2004 a similar parliamentary commission called for the
dissolution of the League for the Protection of Human Rights in
Rwanda (LIPRODHOR), the leading human rights organization in
Rwanda, and of four other civil society organizations, said to have
spread divisionism or its more extreme manifestation, genocidal ideology.
Fearing immediate arrest, a dozen LIPRODHOR staff members
fled the country. In its lengthy report, the commission also charged
more than 300 persons, many Protestant and Catholic churches, international
organizations like Care International, Pax Christi, Trocaire,
and Norwegian Peoples Aid, as well as a staff member who administered
grants for the Dutch embassy in Rwanda with supporting the dissemination
of divisionism and genocidal ideology. It asked that
11.11.11, a Belgian coalition that funded many organizations in
Rwanda, be prohibited from operating in the country. The commission
offered no significant proof for any of its charges, which it made publicly
in parliament and over the national radio. Still suffering the consequences
of the 1994 genocide, Rwandan authorities understandably seek
to end ideas that might contribute to genocide, but the parliamentary
commission seemed intent on eliminating not just those ideas but also
public criticism of government policies, discussion of crimes committed
by the RPF, and expression of support for candidates opposed to the
RPF.
Authorities continue to harass and arbitrarily detain those who tried to
organize a political alternative to the RPF. Pierre Gakwandi and
Leonard Kavutse, both arrested on charges of divisionism prior to the
presidential elections and named in the 2003 parliamentary commission
report, remained in pre-trial detention. Others accused of divisionism
lost employment or were deprived of their passports.
The government frequently invokes the role of the media in inciting the
1994 genocide as justification for restricting press freedom, leaving only
one independent newspaper struggling to survive. In March 2004, the editor-in-chief and senior journalist of that newspaper, Umuseso, fled the
country after receiving death threats from a high-ranking government
official. This editor was the third to flee Rwanda since the journal
began publishing in 2000. His successor, detained or interrogated at
least four times in the remaining months of the year, was tried on accusations
of divisionism and defaming a high-ranking RPF official. In late
November he was acquitted of the divisionism charge and punished
with only token fines and damages on the other charges, a decision that
gave some hope for greater press freedom.
Justice and Impunity
In June 2002, Rwanda launched a system of state-run popular justice
called gacaca to deal with most of the one hundred thousand genocide
suspects who had spent years in pretrial detention. But by late 2004
only ten percent of some eleven thousand gacaca courts had held pretrial
hearings and none had actually tried any suspects. Gacaca was supposed
to reduce the prison population but persons confessing to guilt as
part of the process have named tens of thousands of new suspects.
Authorities estimate that five hundred thousand more persons may yet
be accused, an astonishing number that raises questions about why so
many persons waited until ten years after the crime to accuse suspected
perpetrators. Some convicted persons are to serve half their sentence at
home in a work-release program, but the details for its operation had
not been set at the end of 2004.
Meant to involve everyone in the community, gacaca has failed to
attract widespread participation, in part because it was seen as one-sided
justice: although originally mandated to try war crimes committed by
RPF soldiers during the period of the genocide, gacaca courts have not
been allowed by authorities to consider such cases. Acknowledging that
attendance at gacaca was poor in eight of twelve provinces, authorities
reformed the system in mid-2004, simplifying the procedure and reducing
the number of judges for each jurisdiction. In addition, authority to consider war crimes was struck from the mandate, thus eliminating any
possibility of justice for RPF crimes under this form of popular justice.
Gacaca jurisdictions were authorized to reopen cases of persons previously
acquitted by the standard courts, thus violating the usual protection
against double jeopardy. To deal with the problem of flagging
attendance, the revised law requires citizens to participate and sets punishments
for those who fail to attend.
In early 2003, the president granted conditional release to some 24,000
persons who had confessed their guilt for genocidal crimes. Although
those released are supposed to face trial at some point, few Rwandans
believe that they will do so. The possibility that thousands of confessed
criminals would never account for their crimes in public proceedings
further undermined the legitimacy of gacaca in the eyes of some
Rwandans.
In April 2004 former President Bizimungu, former Minister
Ntakirutinka and six co-defendants were brought to trial after spending
two years in pre-trial detention. The accusations against Bizimungu
included several treason-related charges, illegal possession of a firearm
and embezzlement of public funds. Despite the gravity of the charges
and the number of accused, the prosecution presented its case in only
six days. Prosecution witnesses against Bizimungu and Ntakirutinka
repeatedly contradicted themselves and each other. The judge denied
their right to fully cross-examine some witnesses and refused to allow
them to call others. The prosecution presented a single witness against
the other six co-defendants. His evidence was inconsistent, uncorroborated
and later challenged by seven defense witnesses. Despite the
weakness of the prosecution case, the court convicted all eight, sentencing
Bizimungu to ten years in prison, Ntakirutinka to ten years in
prison, and the others to five years each. All eight defendants remain in
detention awaiting appeal. Until the end of 2004, the Rwandan government opposed investigations
of RPF crimes by the U.N. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and itself did little to investigate and prosecute its soldiers for
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the genocide
or subsequently. Unless the ICTR tries some of those accused, RPF soldiers
will escape punishment for their crimes, reinforcing past patterns
of impunity.
Key International Actors
Burdened by guilt over their inaction during the genocide, many foreign
donors generously support the Rwandan governmentcredited
with having ended the genocidewhile ordinarily overlooking its
human rights abuses. U.N. Security Council members issued only a
mild reprimand when the matter of Rwandan obstruction of ICTR
investigations was brought before them. Documentation of illegal
Rwandan exploitation of DRC resources by a U.N. panel in 2002 and
2003 elicited only mild criticism. Foreign leaders also generally
applauded the 2003 elections even though observers, including those of
the European Union, reported widespread abuses.
In 2004 the United Kingdom, Rwandas most generous donor, reportedly
twice suspended or threatened to suspend aid in order to restrain
Rwandan intervention in the DRC. South Africa also supposedly
brought pressure to bear on Rwanda for the same reason. But the U.K.
and others still hesitated to criticize abuses inside Rwanda, although the
European Union did finally issue mildly critical letters concerning the
Bizimungu trial and the attack on civil society for genocidal ideology.
Rwanda sharply rejected these reproofs.
Sierra Leone
The human rights situation has vastly improved since Sierra Leones
devastating civil war was officially declared over in January 2002.
However, implementation of the rule of law remains weak and questions
remain about the governments willingness to guarantee economic,
social, and cultural rights. The mismanagement and corruption of public
funds, coupled with high unemployment among young adults, a
drastic increase in basic commodity prices, and continued insecurity
within the sub-region, render Sierra Leone vulnerable to future instability.
Sierra Leones civil war was characterized by egregious human rights
abuses on all sides but especially by rebel forces. A confluence of factors
helped end the war, including the deployment of a 17,000-member
United Nations peacekeeping force known as UNAMSIL, a U.N. arms
embargo against neighboring Liberia, and the commitment of British
troops to stop a rebel advance against the capital, Freetown, in 2000.
Despite the disarmament of some 47,000 combatants, and the successful
completion of presidential and parliamentary elections in 2002 and local
elections in 2004, the deep rooted issues that gave rise to the conflict
endemic corruption, weak rule of law, crushing poverty, and the
inequitable distribution of the countrys vast natural resourcesremain
largely unaddressed by the government.
Significant progress has been made, however, in achieving accountability
for war crimes committed during the decade-long war and some
hopeful developments that may build respect for human rights. During
2004 the Special Court for Sierra Leone commenced its first trials, the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission submitted its report to the
government, and the Parliament passed an act establishing the National
Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone. Nevertheless, the draw-down and eventual complete withdrawal of
UNAMSIL peacekeepers set for June 2005 and continuing insecurity in
neighboring Liberia, Guinea, and Cote dIvoire give cause for concern.
During 2004, the military strength of UNAMSIL was reduced from
11,500 to fewer than 5,000 troops. Given continuing concerns about
the extent to which the Sierra Leone police and army can ensure the
security of the country and will uphold the rule of law, a residual force
of some 3,250 UNAMSIL military personnel will remain in Sierra
Leone until at least June 2005.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The U.N.-mandated Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL), established
to bring to justice persons who bear the greatest responsibility
for atrocities during the war, has so far indicted thirteen individuals,
including former Liberian president Charles Taylor and former Sierra
Leone government minister Hinga Norman. The first trials commenced
in June 2004. The first of two chambers is currently holding
two trials  of the Civil Defense Forces (CDF) and Revolutionary
United Front (RUF)  on a rotating basis. A delay in the establishment
of the planned second trial chamber threatens to seriously undermine
the courts capacity to complete operations efficiently.
Since starting operations in 2002, the SCSL has made significant
progress, including indicting suspects from all warring factions; charging
all indictees with child soldier recruitment and most indictees with
gender based crimes; establishing a defense unit to ensure protection of
the rights of the accused; issuing precedent-setting decisions on international
jurisprudence; conducting outreach to the local population; and
employing Sierra Leoneans to work in every organ of the Special Court.
However, several concerns remain about the SCSL operations. These
include insufficient resources for the witness protection unit, outreach
section, chambers and defense office; that the existing indictments reflect an inappropriately narrow interpretation of the courts mandate,
such that several particularly brutal regional or mid-level commanders
have not been indicted; and that Nigeria has so far failed to surrender
Charles Taylor to the SCSL. Taylor, indicted by the SCSL on seventeen
counts of crimes against humanity and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law, was in August 2004 offered a safe haven by
the Nigerian government when rebels threatened to take the Liberian
capital Monrovia. The international community, most notably the
United Nations Security Council, has failed to exert sufficient pressure
to ensure that Taylor is surrendered to the court.
In October 2004, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC),
created in 2002 in accordance with the terms of the 1999 Lom peace
accord, released its final report. The TRC was tasked with establishing
an impartial historical record of the conflict, promoting reconciliation,
and making recommendations to prevent a repetition of the violence.
The operation of the TRC was plagued with management and funding
problems, however, the public hearings were well attended and the final
report contains some significant findings and recommendations. The
TRC faulted years of bad governance, endemic corruption, and the
denial of basic human rights as having created the conditions that made
conflict inevitable, and noted that many of the causes of conflict have
yet to be adequately addressed. The recommendations were aimed at
promoting good governance and providing for the wars most vulnerable
victims. They included the strengthening of the judiciary, abolition
of the death penalty, that senior public officials disclose their financial
interests, and that special funds be set up to care for children, amputees,
and women victims. The TRC also called on Liberia and Libya, which
supported the RUF and AFRC, to make symbolic and financial contributions
to a war victims fund. 
Corruption
Corruption and mismanagement within both the public and private sectors
in Sierra Leone remain endemic. The government Anti-Corruption
Commission (ACC), created in 2000 largely due to pressure from international
donors, has been subject to political interference, with few convictions
for corruption-related offenses. The ACC has the power to
investigate allegations of corruption within the public and private sectors.
Once investigations are complete, the Attorney General, who has,
in the past, been subject to political pressure, determines whether there
are grounds for prosecution. Since October 2003, three judges from
Commonwealth countries have been attached to the Sierra Leone High
court to hear cases referred by the ACC. However, the planned
appointment of a Commonwealth-provided prosecutor has yet to materialize
and is undermining the independence and success of the ACC.
Dysfunctional Judicial System
Efforts to refurbish numerous court buildings destroyed during the war
have helped improve court infrastructure, and by the end of 2004 magistrates
courts were functioning in all of Sierra Leones fourteen
provinces. However, insufficient numbers of judges, magistrates, public
defenders, and prosecutors continue to result in huge back-logs, and
those charged with criminal offenses spend months and in some cases
years in pretrial detention. Low salaries paid to magistrates and judges
make them susceptible to corruption. At years end, there were over 80
former rebel combatants held since their arrest in 2000 under a nowrepealed
Emergency Powers Act, without regard for due process rights.
At least 15 individuals, including two women, were on death row following
convictions for felonies, however, no executions were carried
out.
The system of local courts presided over by traditional leaders or their
officials and applying customary law is the only form of legal system accessible to an estimated 70 percent of the population. Customary law
applied by the local courts is often discriminatory, particularly against
women, and the local courts frequently abuse their powers by illegally
detaining persons and charging excessively high fines for minor
offences, as well as adjudicating criminal cases which should by law be
tried in the higher courts.
Sierra Leone Army and Police
The Sierra Leone Army and Sierra Leone Police have over the years
been the source of considerable instability, corruption, and human
rights violations and have enjoyed near-complete immunity from prosecution.
Efforts by the British-led International Military Advisory and
Training Team (IMATT), which since 1999 has endeavored to reform,
restructure, and rehabilitate the army, have led to considerable improvement
in the professionalism of the force. However, shortages in equipment,
vehicles, and communications equipment undermine their operations,
particularly along the volatile and isolated borders with Liberia
and Guinea. In 2004, few reports were made of abuses, extortion, or
indiscipline by the army.
While there have been improvements in the conduct of the police, and
at years end the government had successfully re-established a police
presence in all provincial and major towns in Sierra Leone, reports of
extortion, bribe-taking, and unprofessional conduct remain common.
The Commonwealth Police Development Task Force (CPDTF) has
since 1998 been responsible for restructuring and retraining the police.
Low salaries, lack of training capacity, and inadequate resources remain
key challenges.
Key International Actors
The international and donor community has since 1999 spent billions
of dollars to bring about peace and stability in and facilitate the postwar reconstruction of Sierra Leone. Although this level of commitment
is welcome, it has not always been accompanied by willingness to use
the leverage such a high dependency on aid gives to put pressure on the
Sierra Leone government to address the conditions giving rise to continued
human rights abuses.
The United Kingdom and United States have taken the lead in rebuilding
Sierra Leones infrastructure and institutions. The U.K. has for the
last several years spent some U.S.$60 million per year on rebuilding and
restructuring the army, police and judiciary. The U.S. spent some U.S.
$45 million on reconstruction, the reintegration of former combatants,
and improving the control and management of the diamond sector.
South Africa
South Africas third general elections marked that countrys tenth year
of its constitutional democracy. The institutional and policy framework
have laid the foundation for the promotion and protection of human
rights. However, human rights concerns remain; particularly in relation
to the rights of detained and accused persons; excessive use of force by
police; the rights of foreign nationals; and violence against women. Ten
years since the first democratic elections, the realization of social and
economic rightssuch as access to primary education in rural areas
has become a pressing human rights issue. Although many human rights
problems can be partly attributed to the legacy of apartheid, the current
government could do more to implement policies that address and prevent
abuses.
Police
Although the government has introduced significant reforms, inappropriate
and excessive use of force by police remains a serious human
rights issue. From April 2003 to March 2004, the Independent
Complaints Directorate (ICD), a statutory oversight body, received
reports of 383 deaths in police custody, with twenty percent of these
deaths resulting from deaths in police cells. Other deaths are in course
of effecting arrest. While it is encouraging that the reporting mechanism
is in place, the increasing number of deaths, particularly in police
custody, is worrying. The police have prevented the ICD from initiating
inspections at police holding cells absent a complaint. Police have also
on occasion used excessive force against peaceful demonstrators.
Increasingly, police have been involved in violent confrontations with
communities protesting against a lack of services. Police officers killed a
seventeen-year-old boy and injured more than twenty children after firing
rubber bullets on protestors of eNtabazwea township previously
designated for Africansoutside Harrismith on a national road on
August 30, 2004. On October 5, in a protest against the installation of pre-paid water meters in Chiawelo, Soweto, police used stun grenades
and batons to disperse demonstrators.
Prisons
Overcrowding in South Africas prisons continues to be a problem. As
of March 31, 2004, 187, 640 prisoners were being held in facilities that
should accommodate 110,787. The numbers of sentenced has increased
from 92, 581 in January 1995 to 133, 764 as of March 31, 2004.
Overcrowding continues to threaten the health and living conditions of
prisoners and impedes rehabilitation efforts. Sexual assaults and gang
violence are a further threat to the safety of prisoners. To ease overcrowding,
the Inspecting Judge of Prisonsan independent oversight
bodyhas recommended the early release of prisoners who are too
poor to afford bail. As of March 31, 2004, thirteen thousand detained
personsabout a third of the pre-trial populationcould not afford
bail.
Despite almost a decade since the death penalty was declared unconstitutional
and abolished in South Africa, 106 prisoners remain incarcerated
under the death sentence. The government is yet to commute their
sentences to life imprisonment.
Children in Detention
Despite international law requirements that child offenders not be
detained except as a last resort, the number of juveniles in detention
facilities- mostly jails - awaiting trial continues to increase. There are
currently more than two thousand child offenders in detention awaiting
trialup from around five hundred in 1995. While in some cases juveniles
are held separately from adults, this is not always the case, leaving
them particularly vulnerable to sexual abuse, violence, and gang related
activities. The Child Justice Bill, deliberated in the South African Parliament during 2004, proposes a restorative justice approach in an
attempt to move children out of the criminal justice system.
Rights of Foreign Nationals
South Africa has seen a large increase in the number of undocumented
migrants from Southern Africa and asylum seekers from the rest of
Africa since 1994. As of 2003, the department of home affairs has
received 152, 414 asylum applications since 1994. Although the 1998
Refugee Act provides a legal system to protect the rights of asylum
seekers and refugees that incorporates international standards, significant
problems remain in its administration. Concerns have been raised
about intolerance of foreign nationals, particularly in effecting arrests
for deportation. The ICD is investigating police officers for unlawful
arrest of a South African woman who was too dark, and subsequently
prepared for deportation on September 29. Close to fifty thousand
undocumented migrants from Mozambique and Zimbabwe work on
commercial farms. Yet, South Africa deports around four thousand people
per month mostly to Mozambique and Zimbabwe, who return illegally
to South Africa.
Violence against Women and Children
Violence against women and children is widely recognized as a serious
concern in South Africa: 52, 733 rapes and attempted rapes were
reported to the South African police between April 2003 and March
2004 a slight increase from the previous. The South African government
has taken important legislative steps to try to combat violence
against women, including introducing a new Sexual Offences Bill to
remove anomalies from the existing law, which was discussed in
Parliament during 2004. Police continue to receive training in handling
rape cases. Specialized courts are being established, yet conviction rates
remain low. In a country where one quarter of adults are HIV-positive,
rape can mean a death sentence. In April 2002, the government pledged to provide rape survivors with post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP)antiretroviral
drugs that can reduce the chances of contracting the virus
from an HIV-positive attacker. Government inaction and misinformation
by high-level officials as well as administrative delays in dispensing
the antiretroviral drugs continues to impede access to this lifesaving
program. Children, an estimated 40 percent of rape and attempted rape
survivors, are especially harmed by government failure to address their
needs.
Social and Economic Rights
South Africas economic disparities contribute to human rights concerns.
It is estimated that twenty-two million peopleroughly half the
population, the great majority of them Africanslive in extreme poverty.
About a fifth of the South African population receives government
financial assistance.
People living in rural areas apparently have particular difficulty in
accessing their rights to health care and social services. Regarding education,
although access to public schooling for children is widely available
and enrollment has increased since 1994, there are wide disparities
in schools resources: about 40 percent of state-run schoolsmostly
those in rural areashave no electricity and approximately 30 percent
no clean water. Physical access to education in rural areas is of particular
concern. Some learners must walk up to thirty kilometers each day
to and from school, exposing them to dangers such as sexual violence
and contributing to high drop-out rates. The government established a
ministerial committee on rural education in May to examine concerns
about schooling in rural South Africa.
South Africas Regional Role
In the promotion of human rights, democracy and peace, South Africa
has played a key role in the first year of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, and is hosting the Pan-African Parliament. South
Africa has increased its role in seeking peaceful solutions to conflicts in
Africa by providing military personnel in peace support operations, and
monitoring and supporting post-conflict reconstruction in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Burundi and conflict resolution in
Darfur, Sudan.
Sudan
As peace talks aimed at ending the twenty-one-year civil war in southern
Sudan were nearing completion, the crisis in the western Darfur
region intensified in 2004. The government of Sudan answered the military
challenge posed by the two rebel movements in Darfur, the Sudan
Liberation Army (SLA) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM),
by arming, training and deploying Arab ethnic militias known as
Janjaweed, who had an additional agenda of land-grabbing. The
Janjaweed and Sudanese armed forces continued a campaign begun in
earnest in 2003 of ethnic cleansing and forced displacement by bombing
and burning villages, killing civilians, and raping women. The first half
of 2004 saw a dramatic increase in these atrocities. By years end hundreds
of villages were destroyed, an estimated 2 million civilians were
forcibly displaced by the government of Sudan and its militias, and
70,000 died as a direct or indirect cause of this campaign.
The Crisis in Darfur
The government-sponsored death and displacement in Darfur was initially
a counterinsurgency tactic of employing ethnic proxy militias to
conduct a campaign of ethnic cleansing, as it has done in southern
Sudan for much of the last twenty years. The extent of the humanitarian
catastrophe produced by government policies in Darfur finally came
to the attention of the world as the numbers of internal displaced persons
(IDPs) mounted from one to two million.
On April 8, a Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement was signed in
NDjamena, Chad between the government of Sudan and the two
Darfurian rebel movements under Chadian, African Union (A.U.), U.S.
and E.U. auspices. This agreement committed the government of
Sudan to neutralize the Janjaweed militias and called for the A.U. to
set up a ceasefire commission (CFC) to monitor and report on ceasefire violations. It took several months, however, for the CFC to become
operational.
The government of Sudan again promised, this time signing a Joint
Communiqu on July 3 with U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to
disarm the Janjaweed, improve humanitarian access, human rights and
security, and to seek a political resolution to the conflict. Pressure
increased with the adoption on July 30 of U.N. Security Council
Resolution 1556 which reiterated the steps outlined in the Joint
Communiqu, called for restrictions on arms transfers to all non-governmental
entities, including the Janjaweed, and imposed a thirty-day
deadline on the Sudanese government to disarm the Janjaweed militias.
The continued failure on the part of the government of Sudan to rein
in the Janjaweed militias and halt all attacks by them and its other forces
on civilians led the Security Council to pass resolution 1564 on
September 18. This second resolution threatened sanctions on the government
of Sudan if it did not comply fully with this resolution and the
previous one, and authorized the establishment of an international
Commission of Inquiry to investigate reports of violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur by all parties,
to determine also whether or not acts of genocide have occurred, and to
identify the perpetrators of such violations with a view to ensuring that
those responsible are held accountable. The resolution also pressed the
government of Sudan to accept a larger A.U. ceasefire monitoring force.
The Sudanese government claims that it is unable to neutralize and disarm
the Janjaweed, yet it has refused to accept international help to
achieve this. Not one Janjaweed leader has been investigated or accused
of a crime. The few prosecutions that the government of Sudan has
undertaken have turned out to be against detainees involved in crimes
unrelated to the Darfur conflict or convicted of different charges
months or years earlier. The government of Sudan set up a national
commission of inquiry to investigate crimes committed in the Darfur conflict but it has accomplished nothing to date. The Janjaweed and the
Sudanese army share several camps, and there are numerous reports of
coordinated attacks on civilians launched from these camps. Members
of the Janjaweed are quietly being incorporated into regular police
forces, the army and the popular defense forces (government Islamist
militia under army jurisdiction). Ceasefire violations are a regular
occurrence throughout Darfur and no penalties have been applied to
any party. The Security Council, although threatening sanctions if the
human rights menace of the Janjaweed was not curbed, let deadlines
come and go without imposing any further sanctions or enforcing the
sanctions already mandated.
The North-South Peace Process
The twenty-one-year conflict fought largely in the south between the
ruling Islamist military government in Khartoum and the rebel Sudan
Peoples Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) inched closer to resolution
in 2004. In May, the government of Sudan and the SPLM/A
signed the last of six key political protocols in Naivasha, Kenya outlining
power and wealth sharing arrangements for southern Sudan for a
six-and-a-half-year interim period, after which a self-determination referendum
in the south will decide whether the south becomes independent.
However, the agreements totally ignore human rights considerations,
such as accountability for crimes committed during the war, truth
telling, and the enforcement of international human rights and humanitarian
law in the future. The Naivasha protocols contemplate national,
state and local elections at an undetermined time between the signing of
the final agreement and the referendum on succession.
The U.S., U.K. and Norway pushed the almost three-year intensive
negotiations between the two parties, then came increasingly under fire
for deliberately excluding other rebel and political movements from the
peace process. The escalation of the crisis in Darfur highlighted the
widespread discontent with the partial resolution, and spawned at least two other rebel movements in the west in 2004. Renewed pressure from
the international community to conclude the peace talks as a necessary
precursor to addressing the conflict in Darfur brought the two parties
back to the table in October, although this peace process was definitely
in jeopardy as the Sudanese governments good faith was questioned by
its resort to ethnic manipulation and scorched-earth tactics in the west.
The Security Council held a special meeting in Nairobi, Kenya on
November 18-19 and passed Resolution 1574 offering economic assistance
and debt relief to Sudan if the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
is signed by the end of 2004. With respect to Darfur, the Resolution did
not threaten further measures, only a milder warning to take appropriate
action against any party failing to fulfill its commitments. It left
out the explicit demand of previous resolutions for Khartoum to disarm
and prosecute the government-backed Janjaweed militias.
The Humanitarian Situation
Sudan is home to the worlds largest internally displaced persons (IDP)
population, which grew in 2004 from 4 million to almost 6 million. The
IDPs in Darfur continue to grow in number and face constant insecurity.
Those who managed to reach camps accessible to humanitarian assistance
were at physical risk, frequently of rape, when venturing outside
to collect fodder, food or firewood. Many remained in rural areas inaccessible
to aid agencies, including in rebel held zones, and were vulnerable
to attacks by the Janjaweed. The U.N.-agreed creation of safe
areas in Darfur, protected by the government of Sudan, raised the risk
of consolidating ethnic cleansing and caused increased clashes between
the government and the rebels, who were not consulted on the safeareas
plan. More than 200,000 Darfurian refugees were in Chad in
2004.
A combination of insecurity, drought, widespread looting and the
missed planting season increased the risk of famine as almost 2 million people in Darfur (estimated population of 5-6 million) were in need of
food aid. Lack of sanitation and health services in the IDP camps caused
massive outbreaks of diseases such as diarrhea and malaria which caused
thousands of deaths, especially in vulnerable groups such as infants and
the elderly.
The plans of the estimated 4 million southern war displaced persons to
return home were put on hold as the signing of the Naivasha peace
agreement was delayed.
Key International Actors
The United States eventually took the lead in the U.N. Security
Council which passed four resolutions on Sudan in 2004. The U.S. legislatures
passed a joint resolution on July 23 declaring that the Sudanese
government and the Janjaweed were guilty of genocide. Secretary of
State Colin Powell authorized a survey of Darfurian refugees in Chad
and concluded from it that genocide has been committed and may still
be occurring in Darfur.
Because of international resentment over the U.S. war in Iraq, however,
the U.S. had difficulty diplomatically in convincing others to take a
stronger stand on Darfur. The United Nations Security Council has
been divided over sanctions. China and Russia, both with large investments
in Sudan, threaten to veto resolutions that called for sanctions
against the Sudanese government for failing to disarm the Janjaweed
and stop attacks against civilians. Sudans election to the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights on May 5 was another indication of the
international communitys failure to censure the government of Sudan
for abuses in Darfur. On November 24, the UN General Assembly
voted down a resolution condemning Sudan.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights sent eight
human rights monitors to Darfur in August and promised in October to double that number. Following her September mission to Sudan, U.N.
High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour recommended
the deployment of an international police force in Darfur and
denounced the total impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of atrocities in
the region. Louise Arbour was accompanied on her mission by Juan
Mendez, the U.N. Secretary Generals special advisor on the prevention
of genocide.
The recently-created African Union deployed up to 136 ceasefire monitors
to Darfur and more than 625 Rwandan and Nigerian troops as a
protection force for these A.U. monitors. Nigerian President Olusegun
Obasanjo hosted A.U. talks in Abuja between Khartoum, the SLA and
the JEM in late 2004 but these talks broke down and the ceasefire was
in tatters.
The A.U. volunteered to send a civilian protection force of up to 2,341
troops and 815 civilian police, a suggestion seconded by the Security
Council. The Sudanese government rejected the proposal but backed
down after the language was watered down to provide A.U. protection
for civilians within their eyesight.
By many assessments, at the end of 2004 the fledgling A.U. and its
member countries still lacked the funds and capacity to mount an effective
operation seven times the size of its 2004 force in Darfur, with
civilian protection needs remaining unmet.
Uganda
The war in northern Uganda, which started when President Yoweri
Museveni and the National Resistance Movement/Army took power
eighteen years ago in 1986, continued in 2004. Violence and related
human rights abuses abated somewhat by mid-year yet predictions of an
imminent military solution to the conflict proved unfounded. The war
pits the northern Lords Resistance Army (LRA) against the governments
Ugandan Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) and the people of
the three northern districts where the Acholi live  and the war has
expanded to parts of eastern Uganda in 2003-04. In February, the LRA
committed the worst massacre of the entire conflict in an eastern district
by attacking Barlonyo internally displaced persons camp, defended
only by a small local defence unit, and killing more than 330 people.
The LRA continues in its practice of abducting children, who remain
the main victims of this war. President Museveni did, however, take an
unprecedented step in referring the case of Ugandas LRA to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in December 2003. The ICC
agreed to undertake an investigation but peace activists in Uganda
remain wary that Museveni will manipulate this international institution
to punish his foes, and thereby diminish chances for a negotiated settlement,
while avoiding investigation of the Ugandan armys abuses.
Ugandan security agencies have proliferated and are implicated in torture
and illegal detention of suspected rebels and their sympathizers.
The Ugandan government continued to support armed groups in the
conflict in the Ituri region of the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), despite officially withdrawing from eastern DRC in accordance
with the Luanda accords signed in September 2002.
The War in Northern Uganda
The LRA persisted in its policy of abducting northern Ugandan children
to use as soldiers and forced sexual partners for its forces in 2004. 
This has brought the number of abducted children to a new high. More
than 20,000 children have been seized by the LRA over the course of
the war. In total, more than 1,300,000 civilians are currently forced to
live in government-controlled displaced camps.
In 2004, the LRA continued with renewed severity its attacks on civilians
living in displaced persons and Sudanese refugee camps and others
it considered to be collaborating with the UPDF. An LRA raid on
Barlonyo camp near Lira in eastern Uganda resulted in up to 337
deaths. This attack was followed by a protest demonstration of more
than 10,000 people, angry at the lack of government protection in the
camps. Many questioned the willingness and effectiveness of the UPDF
to protect civilians against the LRA, claiming that it is often absent or
too late to respond when the LRA strikes. President Museveni, in a rare
move, apologized for UPDFs failure to stop the massacre. The LRA
continued in its offensive through the year, killing civilians, abducting
children, destroying and looting property and taking captives to porter
the loot in a number of other raids on internally displaced persons
camps. Cases of LRA mutilation of suspected spies, including cutting
off lips and limbs, were reported.
The UPDF has also committed abuses in the north, including arbitrary
detention, torture, rape, and stealing. A few civilians have pending civil
actions for damages on account of this ill treatment; the UPDF soldiers
are rarely criminally prosecuted for abuse of civilians. Furthermore, the
failure to protect civilians in the north has been persistent. The Human
Rights Committee, a body that monitors state compliance with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, noted in its concluding
observations on Uganda the failure of the state to ensure the
right to liberty and security of persons affected by the armed conflict in
northern Uganda.
President Museveni referred the war in northern Uganda, particularly
the LRAs role in it, to the ICC in December 2003. This was the first time a state has made such a referral. The ICC prosecutor, Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, since launched an investigation but it is not clear that
the serious crimes committed by the government will also be investigated.
The Conflict in DRC
Despite the official withdrawal in May 2003 of Ugandan troops,
Uganda continues to provide support to armed groups in Eastern DRC,
particularly in the Ituri region, which they partially occupied from 1998
to 2003, and where the UPDF committed war crimes and other violations
of international humanitarian law. Continued support for proxies
in DRC has been in part to ensure allies in Ugandas strategic border
region, but also to ensure continued control over the lucrative trade in
natural resources from the DRC, particularly gold. A report in mid
2004 by a U.N. arms monitoring panel documented Ugandan complicity
in arms trading across the border, and Ugandan forces intervened on
at least one occassion to ensure their allies in Ituri remained in control.
In August and September 2004 local sources reported further assistance
by Ugandan troops to General Jrme Kakwavu, leader of an Ituri
based armed group responsible for the torture and killing of civilians. In
a move to deflect Ugandas role in supporting such groups, President
Museveni wrote secretly in August 2004 to the U.N. Secretary General
requesting provisional immunity from prosecution for armed group
leaders operating in Ituri, and the suspension of investigations by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in DRC but not in Uganda.
Torture and Other Abuses by Ugandan Security Forces
Ugandan security and intelligence agencies have used torture to coerce
detainees to provide information or confess, detaining suspects in illegal
places of detention called safe houses, and holding them for weeks or
months without ever charging them with any crime. Methods of torture
include suspending suspects tied kandoya (tying hands and feet behind the victim) from the ceiling, severe beating and kicking, and
attaching electric wires to the male genitals.
Among the agencies accused of torture are the UPDFs Chieftancy of
Military Intelligence (CMI), the Internal Security Organization (ISO),
the Violent Crime Crack Unit (VCCU) and ad hoc agencies such as the
Joint Anti-Terrorist Task Force (JATF.) In October the Uganda Human
Rights Commission (UHRC) found that torture continued to be a
widespread practice amongst security organizations in Uganda, being
commonly used to humiliate and breakdown suspects in investigation.
The torture and illegal detentions in safe houses seem related to military
intelligence and security force suspicions that the detainees, who
are often involved in political opposition activities, are linked to armed
rebel movements. Many previously or currently politically active suspects
are charged with terrorism or treason, both of which carry the
death penalty. By constitutional provision detainees in such cases may
be held for up to 360 days without being charged with any crime
although they must be held in legal places of detention.
Political Freedom
The present political system restricts prospective candidates to standing
on an all-inclusive movement platform. The movement system is
based on the idea of one supposedly all-inclusive movement in which
individual candidates run for elections based on their personal merit.
The system was introduced in 1986 by the victorious rebel forces led by
current President Museveni. In practice, this no-party system has significantly
curtailed civil and political rights of those who are in political
opposition. A legal challenge to the legitimacy of the movement system
in Uganda was successful at the Constitutional Court in June. The
court ruled that a 2000 referendum which had confirmed one-party rule
was null and void. However, following an angry outburst from President
Museveni on the decision was subsequently overturned by the Supreme Court in September. Presently the Constitution specifically requires
Parliament to amend the constitution to allow the President to serve
more than two terms in office, but the authorities plan a referendum on
the issue  possibly to be combined with a referendum on whether a
multi-party political system should be reinstituted. The referendum is
planned for February 2005.
Press Freedom
The temporary closure by army and police of the independent Monitor
newspaper in late 2002 has had a chilling effect on that newspaper and
on free speech generally. Journalists from the paper continued to come
under attack in 2004, two of whom were publicly denounced as rebel
collaborators by the spokesman for the UPDF.
However, in February the Supreme Court enhanced freedom of expression
in Uganda by repealing a frequently invoked law allowing reporters
to be prosecuted for reporting subversive false news in a ruling in
favour of the Monitor newspaper. Following this the Chief Magistrates
Court in Kampala in April ruled in favour of The Monitor in another
case brought by the government who alleged the newspaper had endangered
national security by reporting on the war in the north.
HIV/AIDS
Uganda continues to face a generalized epidemic of HIV/AIDS despite
being widely acknowledged as a regional success story in combating the
epidemic. In 2004, senior government officials, including President
Museveni, made numerous comments undermining the effectiveness of
condoms as a strategy to prevent sexual HIV transmission. These comments
were apparently linked to the prospect of significant foreign aid
from the United States for programs that emphasize abstinence only
as an HIV prevention strategy. Abstinence only programs have been
shown to censor critical and lifesaving information about condoms and HIV prevention, in violation of the human right to information and the
highest attainable standard of health.
Key International Actors
The humanitarian situation in northern Uganda remained dire in 2004,
with 80 percent of the entire northern population in displaced persons
camps. Security remains very poor for relief agencies as well as for the
population itself, and in several areas the UPDF refuses to escort relief
convoys to camps on account of danger.
A group of international donors meets regularly with the Ugandan government
and negotiates budget items, including defense spending, with
it. These donors provide one-half of the budget of the Ugandan government,
their funds going directly to the treasury once the budget has
been agreed.
The U.S. government is not part of this donors group, and has provided
military assistance and training to the UPDF to enable it to protect
civilians in northern Uganda as well as become an effective counterinsurgency
forcean approach the donors group does not endorse. No
special human rights conditions are attached to this U.S. military assistance.
This aid has facilitated the pursuit of a purely military solution to
the conflict in the north, an approach Museveni has long endorsed that
has been widely criticized by civil society in the north.
Zimbabwe
The human rights situation in Zimbabwe continues to be of grave concern.
Repressive laws such as the Public Order and Security Act (POSA)
and the Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act (AIPPA)
remain in place. The government continues to use these laws to suppress
criticism of government and public debate, and those most affected
included representatives of Zimbabwe civil society, opposition party
supporters, and the independent media.
The government also tabled in parliament new legislation regulating
the operations of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and the
AIPPA Amendment Bill which reportedly seeks to tighten existing
media laws. Concerns were expressed that these new laws would further
curtail fundamental rights to freedom of expression and association.
Food security remains a pressing issue and concerns have been raised
about the availability of food and the risk of political interference in
food distribution in the run-up to parliamentary elections in March
2005.
Elections
Serious concerns also exist about whether parliamentary elections,
scheduled for March 2005, will be free and fair. The last two elections
in Zimbabwe were marked by widespread violence and serious electoral
irregularities.
In July 2004, the government announced that it would undertake electoral
reforms that would comply with guidelines drafted by the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). In October, the
government tabled in parliament the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission
(ZEC) Bill, which would establish an independent authority to administer
all elections and referendums in Zimbabwe. The main opposition party, Movement for Democratic Change (MDC,) dismissed the governments
attempts at electoral reform, and argued that they were
superficial and failed to address much needed electoral changes. Morgan
Tsvangirai, the leader of the MDC, also called for the postponement of
the elections to allow for reform of Zimbabwes electoral laws and
processes. However, the government insisted that elections would take
place as scheduled.
An inclusive national electoral institution would make a significant contribution
to the holding of free and fair parliamentary elections.
However, there were concerns that the ZEC bill did little to enhance
the prospects of a free and fair election. There were questions about the
independence of the electoral commission, and confusion over the functions
of the commission and other electoral bodies. The proposed law
would also centralize control over voter education in the Commission,
thereby restricting the role of NGOs. Moreover, an independent electoral
commission would not be a remedy for repressive laws such as
POSA and AIPPA that have contributed to an uneven playing field.
It remains to be seen whether the government would fully implement
electoral reform and create an environment conducive to a fair electoral
process in time for the March 2005 elections.
Freedom of Expression and Association
In October 2004, the Non-Governmental Organizations Draft Bill was
tabled in parliament for discussion and debate. If enacted, the law would
require NGOs to register with a government-appointed Council of
NGOs that would have virtually unchecked power to investigate and
audit the groups activities and funding. National and foreign NGOs
would be required to register with the Council by submitting the
names, nationality and addresses of its promoters, and sources of
funding. Registration could be denied or withdrawn at any time if the
Council determined that the organization ceased to operate bona fide in furtherance of the objects for which it was registered. The law would
also empower the Council to constantly monitor NGOs, and noncompliance
with its rules and regulations would result in fines and imprisonment
with no possibility of recourse to the courts.
Of particular concern were the limitations that the proposed law would
place on NGOs active on issues of governance, including human rights.
The draft law stated that no foreign NGO would be registered if its
sole or principal objects involve or include issues of governance.
Similarly, local organizations working on matters such as governance
issues would be barred from receiving any foreign funding or donation.
The proposed law would undermine fundamental freedoms of
association and expression and place each and every NGO at the whim
of the government.
Food Security
On May 12, 2004, the government announced that Zimbabwe would
not require general food aid from the international community or food
imports in 2004-5, as it had predicted a bumper harvest.
Representatives of NGOs, United Nations agencies, and donor countries
feel, however, that the government has over-stated the crop yield
and that a large number of rural and urban Zimbabweans will require
assistance as the year progresses.
In June, a member of Parliament raised questions about the governments
estimate, leading Parliament to authorize an investigation. If the
governments projections of a bumper crop were not met,
Zimbabweans primary access to food assistance would be through the
governments Grain Marketing Board (GMB.) Since 2002, donors have
provided food aid to Zimbabweans through a program separate from
the GMB program. The governments persistence, however, in permitting
the GMB to conduct its operations and distribution practices without
transparency rendered uncertain Zimbabweans access to domestically-managed food assistance. GMB distributions were often irregular
and insufficient to meet high demands. Many Zimbabweans also cannot
afford to buy the GMBs subsidized maize.
Problems with access to food could also be compounded in the months
approaching the parliamentary elections in March 2005. Representatives
of civil society, relief agencies, and donor countries warned that access
to subsidized maize distributed by the GMB was likely to be subject to
political interference in the pre-election period, with supporters of the
opposition suffering most, as had been reported to have been the case in
previous elections. Relief agencies expect interference in and restrictions
on their operations during the election run-up, including their targeted
feeding programs that provide food to acutely vulnerable
Zimbabweans, such as orphans and households with chronically ill
members.
In late November 2004, it was reported that the government would
allow the World Food Programme to distribute 60000 tons of food aid.
Key International Actors
In August 2004, SADC approved the Principles and Guidelines
Governing Democratic Elections, which require member states holding
elections to safeguard the human and civil liberties of all citizens,
including the freedom of movement, assembly, association, expression
and campaigning during electoral processes. More significantly, all
SADC member states, including Zimbabwe, signed the SADC electoral
protocol, and agreed to hold elections in line with these principles.
The South African government continued to play a principal role in
trying to improve the situation in Zimbabwe. In October 2004,
President Thabo Mbeki of South Africacurrent chair of the SADC
Organ on Politics, Defense and Securityheld discussions with Morgan
Tsvangirai , the MDC leader, on the situation in Zimbabwe and the forthcoming parliamentary elections. Morgan Tsvangirai also flew to
Mauritius to hold discussions with President Paul Berenger in his
capacity as chair of SADC.
In July 2004, the African Union (A.U.) adopted a critical report on the
human rights situation in Zimbabwe. The report was prepared by
experts from the African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights,
based on a mission to Zimbabwe around the 2002 elections. The adoption
of the report was seen as a significant step by the AU in addressing
Zimbabwes human rights record.
The European Union formally renewed sanctions on Zimbabwe in
February 2004. The Union added another year to sanctions that were
first imposed in 2002. It decided to keep in place measures that ban
nearly 100 Zimbabwean government officials from entering the E.U.,
and froze any assets they might hold in Europe. The E.U. also decided
to extend an embargo on shipments of military supplies to Zimbabwe.
These sanctions have not had the anticipated effect, and Zimbabwe government
officials have been able to attend international meetings hosted
by E.U. countries.
Argentina
Serious problems continue to beset Argentinas criminal justice system.
These include police abuses, prison overcrowding, torture of detainees,
and degrading conditions of detention in police lockups. Under strong
public pressure to deal more effectively with violent urban crime, the
government of President Nstor Kirchner passed laws in 2003 increasing
the use of pretrial detention and lengthening jail sentences for violent
offenders.
On a positive note, the Kirchner government continues to press for
accountability for human rights violations committed during Argentinas
period of military rule (1976-1983). At this writing, roughly one hundred
former military and police officers had been detained, and several
key trials were underway.
Police Abuses
Police frequently fail to observe international norms concerning the use
of lethal force and, as a result, the death rate in confrontations with suspects
is high. Extrajudicial executions and torture by police are also serious
problems, although the true number of extrajudicial executions is
hard to gauge. According to official figures, twenty-five people, including
four minors, were killed in 2003 during armed clashes involving
federal police officers in the city of Buenos Aires. In 2004, victims
included fifteen-year-old Hctor David Herrera, who was killed on
April 16, reportedly shot at close range by members of the federal
police.
The March 2004 kidnapping and murder of twenty-three-year-old Axel
Blumberg led his father, Juan Carlos Blumberg, to initiate a high-profile
public campaign against impunity for violent crimes. In response to
demonstrations by thousands of people, the government rushed through
laws that lengthened sentences for armed robbery and for arms offenses.
The new laws increase the maximum length of cumulative sentences for
violent crimes to fifty years, drastically restricts the possibility of provisional
release for the accused, and bars convicts from early release. In
addition, a bill approved by the Buenos Aires city legislature in
September modified the citys misdemeanor code by increasing penalties
for many misdemeanors to a maximum of sixty days of detention, a
period longer than that contemplated in the Criminal Code for some
crimes. The Center for Legal and Social Studies (Centro de Estudios
Legales y Sociales, CELS), a nongovernmental human rights group,
criticized the Buenos Aires law as manifestly repressive and in breach
of the Argentine Constitution and international human rights treaties.
Detention Conditions
The Argentine prison system is seriously overstretched, and torture and
mistreatment of detainees is widespread. In October 2004, the
Committee against Torture of the Provincial Commission of Memory
(of Buenos Aires province), after analyzing 3,500 criminal complaints
against officials of the Buenos Aires prison system, published dramatic
findings indicating that abuse is systemic.
Due to prison overcrowding, 5,441 people were being held awaiting
trial in police lockups in the province of Buenos Aires as of July 2004.
According to a report by CELS, there were up to ten detainees each
crammed into cells measuring 1.8 by 2.5 meterswith no beds, ventilation
or natural lightrequiring detainees to take turns sleeping on the
floor. At this writing, a collective habeas corpus petition lodged by CELS
in 2001 on behalf of detainees held in police lockups was still pending
before the Supreme Court. In August 2004, Human Rights Watch, the
International Commission of Jurists, and the World Organization
against Torture co-presented an amicus curiae brief to the court in support
of the position taken by CELS.
The detention and mistreatment of juveniles in police stations in the
province of Buenos Aires continues to be a serious problem. In a report
published in December 2003, CELS revealed that many children are
held illegally with adults on police premises but do not appear in official
statistics. In October 2004, the press reported that three hundred juveniles
were being held illegally in police lockups in the province.
Reproductive Rights
Argentina has taken important steps toward guaranteeing womens right
to reproductive health, most notably through the implementation of a
national program on reproductive health and responsible procreation
in 2002. However, women continue to face multiple obstacles in their
access to contraception and to information on reproductive health care.
Some of these obstacles constitute violations of international human
rights standards: denial of access to voluntary tubal ligation; pervasive
domestic violence without effective recourse; deliberate dissemination
of misinformation or withholding of information on contraceptive
methods in the public health care system; and severely limited access to
abortion, even where not punishable by law. These violations are exacerbated
for low income women by grossly inadequate services in some
areas and a seriously overburdened public health care system.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Following the congressional annulment in August 2003 of the full
stop and due obedience lawswhich had obstructed prosecutions of
those responsible for human rights abuses committed during military
rulehuman rights trials continue to advance. The Minister of
Defense, Jos Pampuro, stated in June 2004 that since the current president
entered office, ninety-seven former military officers had been
detained for past human rights abuses. Among the most high-profile
prosecutions are those involving fifteen former agents of the Navy
Mechanics School (ESMA), including Alfredo Astiz, and thirty former officers of the First Army Corps. In September 2004, Judge Jorge Urso
indicted nineteen former military officials, including ex-junta leader
Gen. Jorge Videla, for involvement in Operation Condor, a collaborative
venture of the military regimes of the Southern Cone countries in
the 1970s to arrest, torture, and disappear dissidents located in each
others territory.
In March 2004, a federal court in La Plata sentenced Miguel
Etchecolatz and Jorge Berges, a former police commissioner and doctor,
respectively, to seven years of imprisonment for concealing the identity
of the baby daughter of Ada Sanz, who was abducted by the security
forces in 1977 when nine months pregnant and disappeared. Berges
personally had handed the baby over to a civilian couple who raised her
under a false name. It was the first time that a court in La Plata has
convicted anyone of human rights violations, although up to two thousand
people are said to have disappeared there during military rule.
A final judicial decision on the constitutionality of the annulment of the
full stop and due obedience laws was still pending at this writing. In
October 2003, the Supreme Court referred the case to the Criminal
Cassation Panel. The same panel also was due to rule on whether the
reopening of the ESMA case violated Argentinas prohibition on double
jeopardy.
In August 2004, the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by a former
Chilean agent who had argued that the life sentence he received for the
1974 assassination of Chilean army commander Gen. Carlos Prats
should be thrown out because the statute of limitations had elapsed. In a
landmark decision, the court ruled that, as a crime against humanity, the
murder was not subject to a statute of limitations.
In a symbolic event commemorating the twenty-eighth anniversary of
the March 24, 1976, military coup, President Kirchner ordered portraits
of two leaders of the military juntas that ruled the country until 1983 removed from the walls of the Military College. Kirchner also visited
the ESMA and signed an agreement with the city government to turn
the building into a museum of memory.
Freedom of Expression
Although Argentina has a free and vibrant press, progress on bills to
extend rights of free expression and access to information remain disappointingly
slow. Press freedom groups have lobbied Congress to adopt
legislation to make defamation of public officials punishable only by
civil damages, as opposed to criminal sanctions. A bill to this effect
introduced into the Senate in October 2002 is still bogged down in the
legislative process. Also held up in the Senate is a bill, already approved
in the lower house in May 2003, that would give Argentine citizens the
right to information held by public bodies.
Journalists in some Argentine provinces face threats and physical attacks
for their reporting. The perpetrators of such crimes are rarely prosecuted.
Key International Actors
Recently declassified U.S. government documents reveal the strong
support given by former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to the
Argentine military junta in 1976, at a time when the junta was responsible
for massive human rights abuses. According to a record of a conversation
between Kissinger and Argentinas then-Foreign Minister, Adm.
Csar Augusto Guzzetti, Kissinger told Guzzetti: [I]f there are things
that have to be done, you should do them quickly. But you should get
back quickly to normal procedures. The documents show how
Kissinger undermined efforts by the U.S. Congress and the U.S. ambassador
in Argentina to press the Argentine military to stop the abuses.
Trials continue in Spain of ESMA agents Adolfo Scilingo and Ricardo
Miguel Cavallo, the latter of whom was extradited from Mexico in June
2003. Courts in other countries, such as Germany, continue investigating
crimes committed during the dirty war against their nationals. In
November 2003, a Nuremberg court issued international warrants for
the arrest of former president Jorge Rafael Videla and two other former
military officials for the murder of two German students in 1976 and
1977. All three suspects were already under house arrest in Argentina
on other human rights charges.
Brazil
Egregious abuses in the criminal justice systemincluding extrajudicial
killings and torture by police and prison authoritiesremain Brazils
most pressing human rights problem, but in 2004 there were new
threats to freedom of expression. A foreign correspondent was nearly
expelled from Brazil for an article that President Luiz Incio Lula da
Silva considered offensive, and the government took steps to create regulatory
bodies for the countrys film, broadcast, and print media.
Socially and economically marginalized populations are among those
hardest hit by long-standing and systemic weaknesses of the criminal
justice system. The problems of forced labor and human trafficking, as
well as rural violence and land conflicts, also target the countrys poorer
citizens. As in the past, perpetrators of human rights abuses enjoy
impunity in the vast majority of cases.
Police Violence
Both civil and military police forces are frequently responsible for serious
abuses, including torture, extrajudicial executions, disappearances,
and acts of racism. In the first six months of the year, the state police
ombudsman for So Paulo reported 109 homicides by police. Although
high, the figure represented a 73 percent decrease from that of the previous
year, when police killings reached an eleven-year high. In Rio de
Janeiro, the only state to publish such data monthly, police killed 593
people during the first eight months of 2004, representing a 25 percent
decline from the previous years figure. Despite these decreases, unofficial
estimates have placed the total number of police killings in Brazil at
around 3,000 annually. Indeed, the death toll may be even higher as
many states do not record such figures correctly and some do not
record them at all.
Complaints of police abuse tend to cite brutality, murder, corruption,
and a lack of interest in maintaining order in certain areas. In October
2004, rights groups accused the Rio police of sitting on the sidelines in
the favela of Vigario Geral while rival drug gangs engaged in deadly gun
battles, endangering the lives of the areas residents.
Free Expression
Brazil tarnished its record of respect for freedom of expression in May
2004 when it took steps to expel a foreign correspondent for commenting
on the presidents alleged drinking habit. In response to an article
published in the New York Times, the government canceled Larry
Rohters visa, stating that it was inconvenient for him to stay in the
country. The government later changed course and allowed him to
remain.
With the introduction of legislation to create a National Journalists
Council just three months later, the government cast further doubt on
its commitment to press freedom. The draft law, still pending at this
writing, would empower the council to orient, discipline and monitor
journalists and their work and require all journalists to register with the
body. A violation of the councils rules could result in fines or even dismissal
from the official registry. Critics of the proposed measures,
among them the countrys main journalism, film, and television associations,
called the draft law the worst affront to press freedom since censorship
under the military dictatorship.
Also widely criticized is draft legislation that would establish a National
Cinema and Audiovisual Agency. The agency would have the power to
conduct prior review of programming and could veto certain programs
if they were judged not to meet standards of editorial responsibility.
In a related move, the government has also proposed legislation, passed
by the Senate on June 29, 2004, to register, regulate and control non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Federal funding to these organizations
would be conditioned on their registry, and they would be
required to report annually on all private and public funding they
receive, including donations.
Detention Conditions
According to the federal Ministry of Justice, the number of inmates in
Brazilian prisons rose from 114,000 in 1992 to 300,000 in 2004. Severe
overcrowding and institutionalized violencesuch as beatings, torture
and even summary executionsare chronic and widespread in Brazilian
prisons. In April 2004, a riot in Urso Branco prison in the northwestern
state of Rondonia left nine inmates dead, two of whom were decapitated
in front of shocked onlookers. According to press reports, the prison
was designed to hold 350 inmates, but housed some one thousand more
than capacity at the time of the riots. In a step toward greater transparency,
the government recently announced the creation of a System
of Penitentiary Information (Infopen), which it says will make data on
prison conditions available online, and will be updated regularly by state
officials.
Children are vulnerable to abuses in the juvenile justice system.
Although they are promised special protection under Brazilian and
international law, children in Brazil are routinely detained in abusive
conditions, where they face violence at the hands of other youths or
prison guards, and are unnecessarily confined to their cells for lengthy
periods of time. As of early 2004, the Justice Ministry reported that
13,489 under-eighteen-year-olds were in detention, half of them in the
state of So Paulo alone, exceeding the capacity of the countrys juvenile
detention centers, which are designed to hold 11,199. In May 2004,
rights groups called for more transparency in cases of abuse, following
public allegations that a new body within So Paulos state juvenile
detention system charged with investigating such abuses had thrown out
94 percent of the cases that came before it in its first year of operations. According to these groups, official sources counted ten deaths in custody
and twenty-six riots in So Paulo juvenile facilities in the same
period.
Impunity and Access to Justice
The vast majority of human rights crimes in Brazil go unpunished,
reflecting widespread corruption and other factors. Lack of access to
justiceespecially for the poorest and most vulnerable sectors of society
is a major problem, even according to Brazils own Secretariat for
Human Rights. Though the federal government created a Public
Transparency and Anti-Corruption Council in September 2004, additional
efforts are necessary to increase transparency and to ensure that
human rights abusers are punished adequately.
The Brazilian government has yet to pass federal laws to criminalize a
number of serious human rights offenses. Such laws, if enacted and
enforced, would contribute significantly to improving the countrys
poor record of allowing abusers to go free.
Forced Labor and Trafficking in Human Beings
More than a hundred years after slavery was formally abolished in
Brazil, a modern-day version of this hateful practice continues to thrive
in rural areas. In 2004, the Labor Ministry made progress toward
addressing the issue of forced labor through a national campaign conducted
in partnership with the International Labor Organization. As of
September 2004, mobile inspections teams had freed 2,078 people in
situations of forced labor. Worryingly, however, three inspectors and
their driver were killed on January 28, 2004, in Una, Minas Gerais, as
they were investigating forced labor on ranches in the region.
The Brazilian Ministry of Justice, in partnership with UNODC,
launched a program in May 2004 against human trafficking. According to the U.N., most victims of such trafficking in Brazil are women, who
are trafficked through international prostitution networks. A U.S.
Congressional report estimated that between eight hundred and nine
hundred women are exported for these purposes each year.
Rural Violence and Land Conflict
Though urban violence in Brazil grabs the most attention, the problem
of rural violence is extremely serious. The Pastoral Land Commission
has reported that 1,349 people were murdered in rural areas between
1985 and 2003. Only seventy-five cases have gone to court, however,
and, of these, forty-four resulted in acquittal. In 2003 alone, seventythree
rural laborers were murdered, the highest number since 1990 and
up nearly 70 percent from the previous year.
In January 2004, twenty-nine illegal diamond miners were killed on the
Roosevelt reservation, home of the Cinta-Larga indigenous peoples in
the state of Rondnia. Members of the tribe claimed responsibility for
the massacre, stating they were acting to protect their land, which has
been the site of violent clashes and invasions by miners for decades.
Key International Actors
The U.N. special rapporteur on the right to adequate housing, Miloon
Kothari, visited Brazil in May and June 2004. He expressed concern
regarding the removal of indigenous communities from ancestral lands
in Alcntra, Maranhodue to expansion of an aeronautical missile
launch baseurging that such removals be carried out only with the
consent of the populations facing displacement.
In an official visit to Brazil in early October, U.S. Secretary of State
Colin Powell praised the countrys role in supplying peacekeeping
troops to Haiti, a country suffering from political turmoil and natural
disasters.
Chile
Chile has made significant progress in recent years in prosecuting former
military personnel accused of committing grave human rights violations
during the dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet (1973-1990.)
A new code of criminal procedure, in force all over the country except
Santiago (where it will be introduced in 2005), has strengthened due
process guarantees for criminal defendants and greatly reduced the incidence
of torture. Yet special procedures that violate due process rights
are still being use in prosecutions of members of the Mapuche indigenous
community, charged under terrorism laws for attacks on farms and
pine plantations in the Araucana region. A still unresolved legacy of the
Pinochet era is the problem of military court jurisdiction over crimes
involving police.
Prosecutions for Human Rights Violations under Military Rule
According to the Catholic Churchs Vicariate of Solidarity, 311 former
military personnel, including twenty-one army generals, had been convicted
or were facing charges for human rights violations by mid-2004.
In early January 2004, the Santiago Appeals Court upheld the conviction
of Gen. Manuel Contreras, former head of the Directorate of
National Intelligence (DINA, or Pinochets secret police), and three
lower-ranking DINA agents, for the 1975 disappearance of detainee
Miguel Angel Sandoval Rodrguez. In November, the Supreme Court
dismissed a final appeal against the conviction, ruling that the crime of
kidnapping was not covered by an amnesty law enacted by the military
government in 1978.
In recent years, the courts have deemed the 1978 amnesty to be inapplicable
in disappearance cases since a disappearance must be considered
a kidnappingan ongoing crimeunless the victims remains have
been found and the courts have thereby established his or her death. Following the Supreme Court verdict, the government announced that
a building on an army base would be adapted as a special prison for
human rights offenders.
In a surprise ruling, the Santiago Appeals Court stripped Pinochet of
his immunity as a former head of state in May 2004, allowing him to
face trial for the disappearance of twenty people in the 1970s. The
Supreme Court narrowly affirmed the decision in August. The crimes
form part of Operation Condor, a clandestine scheme by the military
regimes of Chile, Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, and Paraguay to kidnap
and disappear dissidents from each others countries. As of December
1, 2004, the investigating judge in the case was assessing reports on
Pinochets medical condition before deciding whether to indict him. In
December Pinochet lost his immunity again, this time to face possible
prosecution for the 1974 assassination in Buenos Aires of former army
commander Gen. Carlos Prats and his wife, Sofa Cuthbert.
It is the third time that the Chilean courts have cleared the way for
Pinochet to be prosecuted for human rights violations. His first prosecution
ended in July 2002, when the Supreme Court ruled that the
eighty-eight year-old former dictator suffered from moderate dementia,
making him unfit to stand trial. Pinochet also faces a criminal investigation
and a tax office probe after a United States Senate investigation
revealed in July 2004 that a Washington, D.C., bank held millions of
dollars in secret deposits for Pinochet while he was in detention on
human rights charges in London.
Confronting the Past
Chile has been confronting human rights violations of the past in other
important ways. On November 28, President Lagos presented on television
the report of the National Commission on Political Imprisonment
and Torture (Comisin Nacional sobre Prisin Poltica y Tortura), which he had established in 2003 to receive testimonies from victims of
torture under military rule and recommend reparation measures.
The report was based on testimony from 35,000 people, many of whom
had never testified before about the abuses they had suffered. It concluded
that torture had been a systematic state practice and recommended
various reparation measures, including that victims receive a
state pension of about 112,000 pesos a month (approximately
U.S.$190). Human Rights Watch criticized the governments decision
to keep the testimonies secret for fifty years, and urged that it send
information about alleged perpetrators to the courts for investigation.
The dramatic findings of the report prompted a national debate in the
news media. Prior to the reports release, the armys commander-inchief
acknowledged for the first time the armys institutional responsibility
for human rights violations during military rule. Until his statement,
the armys position had always been that human rights violations
were solely the responsibility of individual officers. The other branches
of the armed forces accepted the findings of the report, but insisted that
responsibility for the abuses was individual rather than institutional.
Due Process and Police Abuses
The introduction of the new Code of Criminal Procedure in all parts of
Chile except the capital has helped reduce complaints of torture and
mistreatment by the uniformed police (Carabineros). The new code
requires a judge to review all detentions within twenty-four hours in a
public hearing at which the defendant, his or her defense lawyer, and
the prosecutor are present. Confessions must be ratified by the defendant
in court to be admissable in criminal proceedings. The Public
Defenders Office, created under the new code as an independent body
under the supervision of the Ministry of Justice, provides free expert
legal counsel to those unable to hire a lawyer. These and other measures
have greatly strengthened due process protections for defendants. 
Unfair Trials of Mapuche
Not all Chileans have benefited equally from the new code, however.
During 2004, twelve members of Chiles largest indigenous community,
the Mapuche, as well as a non-Mapuche sympathizer, were tried on terrorism
charges for crimes committed in the context of land conflicts
with private owners and forestry companies. Several provisions of
Chiles antiterrorism law restrict the due process rights of the accused.
The government claimed that arson attacks by Mapuche on farmhouses,
woods, and fields in the Araucana region in southern Chile were
orchestrated acts of terrorism, intended to generate fear in the groups
affected and to pressure them to abandon their properties. In a report
published in October 2004, Human Rights Watch argued that the terrorism
charges were an exaggerated and inappropriate response to the
disorder, which was directed mainly against property and had not
claimed any lives. The Chilean antiterrorism law allows the identity of
witnesses to be withheld from defendants, permits the prosecution to
conduct investigations in secret for up to six months, and allows defendants
to be held for months in preventive detention prior to the
issuance of a formal indictment.
In a trial in Temuco in October 2004 of eight Mapuche defendants facing
charges of illicit terrorist association, the prosecution presented at
least ten witnesses who appeared in court behind screens and spoke
through voice-distorting microphones. The practice of concealing from
defendants the identity of their accusers breaches due process rules
established in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
To the credit of the Public Defenders Office, whose lawyers provided
free legal counsel to the Mapuche, the court unanimously acquitted the
defendants in early November.
The police reportedly mistreat and insult inhabitants of Mapuche communities,
including women, children, and the elderly, when police make arrests or conduct searches. Complaints of such abuse are investigated
by military tribunals that have a near-perfect record of ruling in favor of
police. Acts of violence by civilians against the police are also dealt with
by military tribunals, in clear breach of international fair trial standards.
Human Rights Watch has urged the Chilean government to introduce
legislation limiting the jurisdiction of military courts to military offenses.
Restrictions on Freedom of Expression
For the second consecutive year, Congress in 2004 dragged its feet on
legal reforms to protect freedom of expression. In December 2003, the
lower house of Congress approved a bill to amend the Criminal Code
and Code of Military Justice to remove provisions that penalize strongly-
worded criticism of the president, military officers, and members of
Congress and the higher courts, a type of law known as desacato.
Delaying the bills approval, senators insisted on linking desacato reform
to broader proposals to protect the privacy and reputations of those in
the public eye. A bill hurriedly approved by the lower house in
December 2003, which could subject media that comment on politicians
private lives to crippling damage awards, was discussed at length
in the relevant Senate committee in 2004. As of November 1, 2004,
however, neither bill had been submitted to a vote. 
Colombia
Colombias forty-year internal armed conflict continues to be accompanied
by widespread violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law. All actors in the conflictguerrillas, paramilitary groups,
and the armed forcescommit serious violations, such as massacres,
assassinations, and kidnappings.
In 2004, while pursuing an aggressive military offensive against guerrilla
groups, the government engaged in peace negotiations with paramilitary
groups. The negotiations may result in the demobilization of several
thousand individuals who claim to have been members of paramilitary
groups. At the same time, however, paramilitaries have been flouting
the OAS-monitored ceasefire they agreed to at the start of negotiations,
while consolidating their control over vast areas of the country. And the
demobilization process continues to lack sufficient safeguards to ensure
that paramilitaries responsible for the commission of atrocities are
brought to justice.
The government has yet to take credible action to break ties between
the military and paramilitary groups. Impunity, particularly with respect
to high-level military officials, remains the norm.
Negotiations with Paramilitary Groups
The Colombian government has been negotiating the demobilization of
paramilitary groups since early 2003. The negotiations have been mired
in controversy: an initial demobilization of several hundred individuals
in late 2003 is now widely viewed as a failure because many of those
who demobilized were in fact criminals posing as paramilitaries, and
because of reports that, of those who were not impostors, many have
continued to engage in paramilitary activities. In addition, the paramilitaries
have not adhered to the ceasefire agreement that they initially
announced in November of 2002. A report by Colombias Public Advocate released in October 2004 stated that in the first eight months
of the year it had received complaints involving 342 apparent paramilitary
breaches of the ceasefire, including kidnappings, forced displacement,
extortion, targeted homicides, and massacres.
A significant obstacle to a full and effective paramilitary demobilization
is the lack of a legal framework to govern the demobilization process
and the benefits to be provided to those who demobilize. A draft bill
initially proposed by the administration of President Alvaro Uribe in
2003 would have allowed cooperative paramilitary leaders responsible
for atrocities to go virtually unpunished. After an international and
domestic outcry, the proposed law was modified. However, a new version
of the bill circulated in April 2004 still contains serious flawsa
failure to provide for thorough investigations of paramilitary crimes and
illegal assets, and a loophole allowing those convicted of atrocities to
entirely avoid incarcerationthat make the effective demobilization and
dismantling of paramilitary structures unlikely.
In November 2004, the government announced a schedule for the
demobilization of three to four thousand paramilitary troops by the end
of the year, applying similar procedures to those that were used in the
Cacique Nutibara demobilization.
Military-Paramilitary Ties
Paramilitary groups maintain close ties with a number of Colombian
military units. The Uribe administration has yet to take effective action
to break these ties by investigating and prosecuting high-ranking members
of the armed forces credibly alleged to have collaborated with paramilitary
groups.
Credible reports indicate that some of the territories from which the
military has ejected the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(Fuerzas Armadas Revolutionarias de Colombia, FARC) are now under the control of paramilitary groups, which continue to carry out indiscriminate
attacks on the civilian population.
Impunity
The Attorney Generals Office continues to make little progress in
prosecuting commanding military officers against whom there are credible
allegations of human rights violations. Prosecutors appear to lack
the political will necessary to take on such high-ranking and well-connected
suspects.
In 2004, for example, Attorney General Luis Camilo Osorio announced
that he would not file charges against General Rito Alejo del Ro. Del
Ro had been under investigation for allegedly supporting paramilitaries
who had attacked villages, executed local civic leaders, and provoked
mass displacement and severe hardship for thousands of people in
northern Colombia between 1995 and 1997. The evidence against Del
Rio was compelling enough to prompt then-President Andrs Pastrana
to dismiss Del Ro in 1998. The U.S. government cancelled his visa to
the United States in July 1999, on the ground that there was credible
evidence that implicated him in international terrorism, among other
crimes.
Anti-terrorism Measures
Colombias Constitutional Court struck down on procedural grounds a
constitutional reform, proposed by the Uribe administration and
approved by Congress in 2003, that would have allowed the military to
perform arrests and searches, and intercept private communications,
without a warrant or any prior judicial review. The government is widely
expected to reenact the reform in 2005, this time following the requisite
legal procedures.
The government continues to carry out mass arrests of individuals suspected
of collaborating with guerrilla groups, a tactic that has resulted
in abuses by security forces and judicial authorities. Authorities have
frequently based both individual and mass arrests on inadequate or
unreliable information, in some cases obtained solely from secret
informants or demobilized individuals in contexts in which authorities
know or should know that the information is unreliable. Such arrests,
even if wrongful, can turn individuals into targets for attack after their
release. For example, university professor Alfredo Correa de Andreis
was assassinated by unknown assailants shortly after being formally
cleared of charges, based on allegations by a secret informant, that he
was a FARC ideologue.
Human Rights Monitors and Other Vulnerable Groups
Colombia is an extremely dangerous place for human rights monitors,
who have for years been threatened and attacked because of their work.
The problem has recently been exacerbated by statements from government
officials, who in 2003 and again in 2004 publicly accused human
rights organizations as well as individual human rights monitors of
being guerrilla collaborators or apologists for terrorism. After sustained
international criticism, President Uribe and other government officials
have started to conduct meetings with representatives of domestic and
international human rights organizations.
Other particularly vulnerable groups include journalists, academics,
labor union leaders, and members of indigenous groups. In August
2004, for example, three labor union leaders in Arauca were apparently
killed by members of the armed forces.
The Kankuamo, like many other indigenous communities, has been
repeatedly targeted by guerrilla and paramilitary groups who are fighting
for control of traditional Kankuamo lands in Colombias Sierra
Nevada mountains. Assassinations and massacres have resulted in hundreds of Kankuamo deaths and the decimation of entire towns. In July
2004, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights told Colombia to
adopt measures to protect the community. But the continued killing of
Kankuamo leaders raises doubts about the governments willingness to
comply with this decision.
Violations by Guerrilla Groups
While in retreat in some parts of the country, guerrillas continue to
commit frequent and serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Abuses include massacres, extrajudicial executions, and kidnappings
for financial or political gain.
The Uribe administration expressed willingness in 2004 to negotiate the
release of FARC members not convicted of committing atrocities, in
exchange for the release of hostages held by the FARC. The FARC has
refused this exchange, however, stating that the government should first
establish a demilitarized zone where the exchange could occur.
Child Recruitment
At least one of every four irregular combatants in Colombia is under
eighteen years of age. Of these, several thousand are under the age of
fifteen, the minimum recruitment age permitted under the Geneva
Conventions. Eighty percent of the children under arms belong to one
of two guerrilla groups, the FARC or the National Liberation Army
(Ejrcito de Liberation Nacional, ELN). The remainder fights for paramilitaries.
Many children join up for food or physical protection, to escape domestic
violence, or because of promises of money. A few join under coercion
or out of fear. Others are street children with nowhere to go.
Children as young as thirteen are trained to use assault rifles, grenades,
and mortars. 
Key International Actors
The United States remains the most influential foreign actor in
Colombia. In 2004 it provided more than U.S.$700 million to the government,
mostly in military aid. Although 25 percent of the security
assistance included in this package is formally subject to human rights
conditions, the conditions have not been enforced: the full amount of
aid continues to flow to Colombia even though the government has
failed to break ties between the military and abusive paramilitary
groups.
The U.S. Congress has approved a doubling of U.S. troops and an
increase in U.S. private contractors in Colombia for 2005. The troops
and contractors are to provide logistical support and training to the
Colombian military in counter-narcotics and counter-insurgency operations.
In February 2004, the Organization of American States (OAS) authorized
the establishment of an OAS Mission in Colombia to provide
technical support to the verification of the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities, demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration initiatives.
The Mission has faced numerous obstacles, including lack of funding
and refusal by paramilitary leaders to concentrate their forces in the
demilitarized zone, which renders it impossible for the mission to perform
its verification function. However, the OAS Mission has also been
the subject of controversy, with critics charging that the Mission is
becoming overly involved in the negotiations, improperly lending the
OASs legitimacy to a flawed process.
The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights is active
in Colombia, with a presence in Bogot, Medelln, and Cali.
Nonetheless, its relations with the government are difficult due to
Colombias repeated failure to implement the offices human rights recommendations.
Cuba
The Cuban government systematically denies its citizens basic rights to
free expression, association, assembly, movement, and a fair trial. A oneparty
state, Cuba restricts nearly all avenues of political dissent. Tactics
for enforcing political conformity include police warnings, surveillance,
short term-detentions, house arrests, travel restrictions, criminal prosecutions,
and politically-motivated dismissals from employment.
In April 2003, authorities sentenced seventy-five dissidents to prison
terms ranging from six to twenty-eight years, and all but thirteen
released in 2004 for humanitarian reasonsremain incarcerated at this
writing. Raul Rivero, a poet and journalist, and Marta Beatriz Roque, a
prominent independent economistand the only woman sent to prison
during the crackdownwere among the thirteen who were released.
Legal and Institutional Failings
Cubas legal and institutional structures are at the root of rights violations.
The rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly, movement,
and the press are strictly limited under Cuban law. By criminalizing
enemy propaganda, the spreading of unauthorized news, and
insult to patriotic symbols, the government curbs freedom of speech
under the guise of protecting state security. The government also
imprisons or orders the surveillance of individuals who have committed
no illegal act, relying upon laws penalizing dangerousness (estado peligroso)
and allowing for official warning (advertencia oficial).
The government-controlled courts undermine the right to fair trial by
restricting the right to a defense, and frequently fail to observe the few
due process rights available to defendants under domestic law. 
Trials and Releases of Political Dissidents
The first major political trial since the 2003 crackdown was held in
April 2004 in the central Cuban city of Ciego de vila. The trial
involved ten defendants, among them Juan Carlos Gonzlez Leiva, a
blind lawyer who is the president of the Cuban Foundation for Human
Rights (Fundacin Cubana de Derechos Humanos). Gonzlez Leiva was
sentenced to four years of house arrest on charges of disrespect for
authority, public disorder, disobedience, and resisting arrest. Several
other defendants, including Virgilio Mantilla Arango, received prison
sentences of up to seven years. The prosecution was based on a political
protest that they held at a provincial hospital in March 2002.
In September 2004, Rene Montes de Oca Martija, the leader of Cubas
Pro Human Rights Party (Partido Pro Derechos Humanos de Cuba),
was sentenced to eight months in prison for the crime of contempt of
authority.
Thirteen incarcerated dissidents were granted provisional release in
2004, ostensibly for humanitarian reasons. In addition to Raul Rivero,
fifty-nine, and Marta Beatriz Roque, fifty-nine, they included librarian
Roberto de Miranda, sixty-two, who suffered from serious health problems
in prison, and independent journalist Manuel Vasquez Portal, fiftytwo.
Prison Conditions
Prisoners are generally kept in abusive conditions, often in overcrowded
cells. Prisoners typically lose weight during incarceration, and some
receive inadequate medical care. Some also endure physical and sexual
abuse, typically by other inmates with the acquiescence of guards. In
October 2004, human rights advocate Luis Enrique Ferrer Garcia was
reportedly stripped and beaten by police and prison officials in the
Youth Prison of Santa Clara. The following month, dissident Juan Carlos Herrera Acosta was reportedly beaten to unconsciousness by
prisoners who called him traitor, worm, coward. Other incarcerated
dissidents report receiving death threats and being subjected to other
forms of harassment.
Political prisoners who denounce poor conditions of imprisonment or
who otherwise fail to observe prison rules are frequently punished by
long periods in punitive isolation cells, restrictions on visits, or denial of
medical treatment. Dissident Oscar Elias Biscet was frequently punished
in this fashion. These abusive conditions are particularly hard on older
dissidents, some of whom are in their sixties and in poor health.
Death Penalty
Under Cuban law the death penalty is possible for a broad range of
crimes. Because Cuba does not release information regarding its use of
the penalty, it is difficult to ascertain the frequency with which it is
employed. As far as is known, however, there have been no executions
since April 2003.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights monitoring is not recognized as a legitimate activity, but
rather is stigmatized as a betrayal of Cuban sovereignty. No local
human rights groups enjoy legal status. Instead, human rights defenders
face systematic harassment, with the government placing heavy burdens
on their ability to monitor human rights conditions. Nor are international
human rights groups such as Human Rights Watch allowed to
send fact-finding missions to Cuba. And Cuba remains one of the few
countries in the world, and the only one in the Western Hemisphere, to
deny the International Committee of the Red Cross access to its prisons.
Labor Rights
The government recognizes only one labor union, the Workers Central
of Cuba (Central de Trabajadores de Cuba, CTC). Independent labor
unions are denied formal status and their members are harassed.
Workers employed in businesses backed by foreign investment remain
under tight government control. Under restrictive labor laws, the
authorities have a prominent role in the selection, payment, and dismissal
of workers, effectively denying workers the right to bargain
directly with employers over benefits, promotions, and wages.
Key International Actors
In mid-April 2004, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights voted
twenty-two-to-twenty-one to adopt a resolution deploring the actions
which occurred last year in Cuba in respect to sentencing of political
dissidents and journalists, a reference to the heavy sentences meted out
to dissidents in April 2003. A number of Latin American countries
voted in favor of the resolution.
The U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) awarded independent journalist Raul Rivero its annual
press freedom award in May. Rivero, sentenced to a twenty-year term of
imprisonment during the 2003 crackdown, was honored for his brave
and longstanding commitment to independent reporting, the hallmark
of professional journalism.
The European Union continues to maintain its common position on
Cuba, making improvement in economic and trade relations contingent
on Cubas progress on human rights. In October 2004, however, Spains
new ambassador to Cuba criticized E.U. policy toward the island and
said that his government would work to thaw relations. A few days later,
three European politicianstwo Dutchmen and a Spaniardwho visited Cuba to meet with dissidents were arrested at Havana Airport,
detained briefly, and expelled from the country.
The U.S. economic embargo on Cuba, in effect for more than four
decades, continues to impose indiscriminate hardship on the Cuban
people and to block Americans from traveling to the island. In early
May 2004, President Bush announced new measures to tighten the
embargo. The measures included stricter limits on cash remittances and
on visits to family members. In October, for the thirteenth straight year,
the U.N. General Assembly voted by an overwhelmingly margin to
urge the U.S. to end the embargo.
Guatemala
Eighteen years after the return of civilian rule and eight years after the
signing of peace accords, Guatemala has made little progress toward
securing the protection of human rights and the rule of law, essential
features of a functioning democracy. Ongoing acts of political violence
and intimidation threaten to reverse the little progress that has been
made in recent years. With the United Nations concluding its ten-year
verification mission at the end of 2004, efforts to establish new forms of
international collaboration on human rights issues face strong opposition
from powerful sectors within the country, as well as legal hurdles
created by the Constitutional Courts highly restrictive interpretation of
the Guatemalan constitution.
Impunity
Guatemala is still suffering the effects of an internal armed conflict that
was, in many respects, the regions most brutal. A U.N.-sponsored truth
commission estimated that as many as 200,000 people were killed during
the thirty-six-year war that ended in 1996. Government forces were
responsible for the vast majority of the killings.
Guatemalans seeking accountability for these abuses face daunting
obstacles. One is the weakness of a justice system that relies on prosecutors
and investigators who receive grossly inadequate training and
resources. The courts routinely fail to resolve judicial appeals and
motions in an expeditious manner, allowing defense attorneys to engage
in dilatory legal maneuvering. The army and other state institutions fail
to cooperate fully with investigations into abuses committed by current
or former members. The police do not provide adequate protection to
judges, prosecutors, and witnesses involved in politically sensitive cases.
Of the 626 massacres documented by the truth commission, only one
case has been successfully prosecuted in the Guatemalan courts. In 2004, a lieutenant and thirteen soldiers were found guilty of the 1995
Xamn massacre in which eleven civilians were murdered; they were
sentenced to 40 years in prison each. By contrast, the prosecution of
former military officers allegedly responsible for the 1982 Dos Erres
massacre, in which 162 people died, has been held up for years by dilatory
motions by the defense.
The few other convictions obtained in human rights cases have come at
considerable cost. In the case of Myrna Mack, an anthropologist who
was assassinated in 1990, it took over a decade to obtain the conviction
of an army colonel, Valencia Osorio, for his role in orchestrating the
killing. During that time, a police investigator who gathered incriminating
evidence was murdered, and two other investigatorsas well as
three witnessesreceived threats and fled the country. The conviction
was subsequently overturned by an appeals court in 2003, only to be
reinstated by the Supreme Court in 2004. However, Osorio was able to
escape police custody and has not served his sentence.
Clandestine Groups
Over the past three years, there have been an alarming number of
attacks and threats against Guatemalans seeking justice for past abuses.
The targets have included human rights organizations, justice officials,
forensic experts, plaintiffs, and witnesses involved in human rights cases.
They have also included journalists, labor activists, and others who have
denounced abuses of authority.
There is a widespread consensus among local and international
observers that the people responsible for these acts of intimidation are
affiliated with private, secretive, illegally armed networks or organizations,
commonly referred to in Guatemala as clandestine groups.
These groups appear to have links to both state agents and organized
crimewhich give them access to considerable political and economic
resources. The Guatemalan justice system, which is ill-prepared to contain common crime, has so far proven no match for this powerful and
dangerous threat to the rule of law.
Excessive Use of Force
While political violence is no longer carried out as a matter of state policy,
members of the national police still sometimes employ excessive
force against suspected criminals and others. These cases usually entail
the abuse of authority by poorly trained police officers.
In August 2004, for instance, national police used excessive force against
workers who had occupied Nueva Linda, a private plantation on the
Pacific coast, according to the National Human Rights Ombudsman.
After the workers resisted police efforts to evict them from the property,
a gun battle erupted, killing eleven people, including four police.
Journalists who witnessed the confrontation reported that the police
carried out several extrajudicial executions. They also reported being
threatened and beaten by police.
Workplace Discrimination
Women and girls working in Guatemalas two female-dominated industries
the export-processing (maquiladora) and live-in domestic worker
sectorsface widespread sex discrimination at the hands of private
employers and the government. Domestic workers are denied key labor
rights protections, including minimum wage guarantees and an eighthour
workday, and have only limited rights to paid national holidays.
Younger women and girls, in particular, sometimes face sexual harassment
and violence in the homes where they work.
Women and girls working in the maquiladora sector, though formally
protected under the law, encounter persistent sex discrimination in
employment based on their reproductive status, with little hope for government
remedy. Guatemalan maquiladoras, many of which are suppliers for well-known South Korean and U.S.-based corporations, discriminate
against women workers in a number of waysincluding requiring
women to undergo pregnancy tests as a condition of employment; denying,
limiting, or conditioning maternity benefits to pregnant women;
denying reproductive health care to pregnant workers; and, to a lesser
extent, firing pregnant women.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA)
was scheduled to close its operations at the end of 2004. In preparation
for that date, MINUGUA sought to strengthen the capacity of key state
institutions to promote the goals of the 1996 peace accords and train
young Guatemalan professionals as verifiers and promoters of the
accords. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights reached an agreement with Guatemala to establish an
in-country office that would provide observation and technical assistance
following MINUGUAs departure. However, the agreement,
which still had not been ratified by the Guatemalan Congress at this
writing, has faced significant opposition from some legislators.
The United Nations has also entered into an agreement with
Guatemala to establish a special commission to investigate and promote
the prosecution of the clandestine groups. The Commission for the
Investigation of Illegal Groups and Clandestine Security Organizations
(CICIACS) grew out of a proposal developed by the Guatemalan government
and local human rights groups, in consultation with members
of the international community. Both the U.S. and European diplomatic
corps have supported the creation of the CICIACS and expressed their
intention to help finance its operations. The agreement has not been
ratified by the Guatemalan Congress, however, and its prospects for ratification
have been greatly diminished by a finding of the Constitutional
Court that several of its articles were unconstitutional. The government
has said it would propose modifications to the initiative that would make it consistent with the courts restrictive interpretation of the constitution.
The Inter-American human rights system has provided an important
venue for human rights advocates seeking to press the state to accept
responsibility for abuses. In 2004, Guatemala accepted state responsibility
for several cases brought before the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, including the 1990 murder of anthropologist Myrna
Mack and the 1982 Plan de Snchez massacre.
Haiti
The bicentennial of Haitis independence, 2004 was a year of turmoil,
lawlessness, and humanitarian disaster. The interim government, which
took power in March, has been unable to impose its authority over large
swathes of the country or uphold the rule of law. With only a small,
demoralized, and poorly-trained police force, the government has had
to rely on the U.N.-mandated multinational force to maintain security,
but that forces numbers are insufficient for restoring public order and
stability.
In responding to mounting violence, the Haitian police are responsible
for frequent illegal arrests and, in some instances, extrajudicial executions.
The justice system is in disarray, with even the most serious
crimes going unpunished. Prison conditions remain deplorable.
Haiti also suffered humanitarian tragedy in 2004, further impoverishing
and destabilizing the country. Tropical Storm Jeanne slammed through
Haiti in September, killing at least two thousand people, flooding certain
areas, and adding to the countrys litany of troubles. Armed gangs,
taking advantage of the lack of security, stole humanitarian assistance
meant for victims of the storm. Aid groups threatened to suspend operations
if their safety could not be protected.
Violence, Lawlessness, and Instability
In February 2004, rebel forces captured large sections of the country
and pushed President Jean-Bertrand Aristide from office. The rebels,
who began by taking over police stations in the northern city of
Gonaives, included a solid core of former officers and soldiers from the
countys disbanded army, as well as former paramilitaries responsible for
innumerable atrocities during Haitis 1991-1994 military government.
Among their leaders was Louis Jodel Chamblain, one of the founders of
the Revolutionary Front for Haitian Advancement and Progress (Front rvolutionnaire pour lavancement et le progrs hatien, FRAPH), who
had been sentenced in absentia to life in prison for the September 1993
murder of activist Antoine Izmery, as well as for involvement in the
1994 Raboteau massacre.
The scene of the greatest violence was Saint Marc, a town an hour
south of Gonaives. During much of February, the town was terrorized
by a violent pro-government death squad known as Bale Wouze, or
Clean Sweep. Family members of the dead gave Human Rights Watch a
list of twenty-four people who were killed in the violence, including
Kenol St. Gilles, who was burned alive by Bale Wouze members on
February 11.
Haitis violence and instability did not end with the establishment of an
interim government in March 2004. Despite the arrival of international
military forces mandated to reestablish a stable and secure environment,
much of the country remains under the control of irregular armed
groups. The Haitian National Policea demoralized and discredited
force by the end of the Aristide presidencyis small, poorly trained,
and under-resourced. Its personnel are outnumbered and outgunned by
former soldiers, criminal gangs, and other irregular armed groups.
Although a few weak attempts at disarmament have been made, the
country remains awash with illegal weapons.
Former soldiers wanting back pay and the reinstatement of the army
occasionally threaten to rise up against the government to enforce their
demands. They have taken over police stations, former barracks, and
other buildings in several cities and towns, painting the buildings yellow,
the armys traditional color. They frequently have manned checkpoints,
patrolled streetssometimes in state vehiclesand taken over
other government functions.
Armed gangs, some of which claim affiliation with the political party of
former President Aristide, were responsible for a wave of escalating violence beginning in September 2004. Nearly two hundred people were
killed in the months of September and October. On September 30,
three police officers were reportedly shot to death in Port-au-Prince,
with two of them later found decapitated.
Police Abuses
In responding to the wave of violence in September and October 2004,
police arrested and detained people illegally, often carrying out arrests
without warrants and failing to bring detainees before a judge within
the forty-eight hour period mandated under Haitian law. Detainees
included Yvon Fuille, the president of the Haitian Senate, and two
other politicians associated with the Aristide government, who were
arrested on October 2 at Radio Caraibes in Port-au-Prince. Indeed,
hundreds of Aristide supporters were reportedly arrested on suspicion
of involvement in violence. Whether the police have evidence to justify
some of the arrestslike that of Father Gerard Jean-Juste, picked up on
October 13 at his parish in Port-au-Princeis far from clear.
Beatings and extrajudicial executions by police have also been reported.
In November 2004, the National Coalition for Haitian Rights (NCHR),
a nongovernmental human rights group, called for the establishment of
an independent commission to investigate police responsibility for the
October 26 killing of seven to thirteen youths in Fort National, a poor
area of Port-au-Prince. According to reports received by NCHR, the
youths were tortured by a commando unit of masked police officers
before they were killed.
Justice
The justice system was essentially destroyed in February 2004, with
court buildings in several cities and towns looted, burned, or both, and
valuable court documents lost. The countrys prisons and jails were
entirely emptied.
The new government has promised to rebuild the justice system and
put an end to the impunity for which Haiti is notorious. Yet progress
has been slow. Although the government arrested a number of people
implicated in the February killings in Saint Marc, it has made few
advances in prosecuting the case. And in August 2004, in a critical setback
for justice, a jury acquitted former paramilitary leader Louis Jodel-
Chamblain and ex-military police Capt. Jackson Joanis of the 1993 murder
of Antoine Izmery. The trials were a hastily-conducted sham.
Prison and jail conditions are dire. Many detention facilities are still not
in functioning condition; those that do hold prisoners are generally
dirty and crowded, and often lack sanitary facilities.
Election Conditions
Interim Prime Minister Gerard Latortue has promised to hold elections
in 2005. Yet unless the government and U.N. forces succeed in stabilizing
the country, it is doubtful that Haiti will have the security conditions
necessary for free and fair elections. In October 2004, further
complicating progress toward elections, the chairwoman of the provisional
electoral council resigned after a dispute with the councils treasurer
over the alleged misappropriation of funds.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders, working in a dangerous, highly-politicized
environment, face threats and intimidation. Anonymous death threats
were reported by Renan Hedouville, the head of the Lawyers
Committee for the Respect of Individual Liberties (Comite des Avocats
pour le Respect des Libertes Individuelles (CARLI)), and Mario Joseph,
a lawyer with the International Lawyers Office (Bureau des Avocats
Internationaux (BAI)).
Key International Actors
Multinational troops arrived in Haiti just after President Aristide
departed. In April 2004, the U.N. Security Council approved just over
8,300 peacekeeping troops for Haiti: 6,700 military personnel and 1,622
civilian police. The troop deployment in Haiti is headed by Brazil,
which is seeking a permanent seat on the U.N. Security Council.
Unfortunately, as of mid-October, the U.N. Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) had far fewer personnel than allotted: a mere
three thousand military troops and 650 civilian police. Besides Brazil,
the countries sending troops included Argentina, Chile, Nepal, Peru,
Sri Lanka, and Uruguay.
Despite Haitis dire human rights and humanitarian conditions, the
United States continues to deny Haitians on U.S. territory temporary
protection from deportation back to Haiti. It also intercepts Haitians
who flee their country and repatriates them immediately. In late
February 2004, in a clear violation of international refugee protections,
the U.S. Coast Guard dropped off hundreds of asylum seekers in the
main port in Port-au-Prince, the site of violence and widespread looting.
The Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), a fifteen-
member group of Caribbean countries, suspended ties with Haiti
after President Aristide went into exile. In November CARICOM leaders
decided to maintain the suspension, stating that it was based on
fundamental principles of respect for human rights, due process and
good governance.
In October, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) expressed grave concern over human rights conditions in
Haiti.
Mexico
Several of Mexicos most pressing human rights problems stem from
shortcomings in its criminal justice system. They include torture and
other ill-treatment by law enforcement officials, and a failure to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for human rights violations.
President Vicente Fox has repeatedly promised to address these problems
and has taken important steps toward doing soestablishing a special
prosecutors office to investigate past abuses and proposing justice
reforms designed to prevent future ones. Neither initiative has received
adequate government support, however, and it is unclear whether
President Fox will be able to advance these programs in the two years
that remain in his presidency.
Torture, Ill-treatment, and Police Brutality
Torture is a persistent problem within the Mexican criminal justice system.
A factor perpetuating the practice is that some judges accept the
use of evidence obtained through violations of detainees human rights.
Prison inmates are subject to abuses, including extortion by guards and
the imposition of solitary confinement for indefinite periods of time.
Children in some juvenile detention facilities are forced to live in
squalid conditions and are reportedly subject to beatings and sexual
abuse. Foreign migrants are especially vulnerable to abusive practices by
government agents.
Abusive police practices were evident in several high profile cases in
2004. In May, police in Guadalajara, Jalisco, clashed with protesters
during the final day of the EU-Latin America summit and, several
hours later, swept through the area around the protest, rounding up
people as they sat in public parks, rode buses, walked down the street,
and as they were being treated in the Red Cross clinic. Police beat some
of the detainees during and after their arrests, and held over fifty people incommunicado for two days. During this time, detainees were denied
access to legal counsel and subjected to physical mistreatment and
abuse. Several former detainees reported being coerced into signing
false confessions as a result of torture and other abuses.
In March 2004, President Fox proposed reforms designed to fix features
of Mexican criminal procedure that perpetuate and even encourage the
use of torture by law enforcement officials. The new legislation would
disqualify all evidence obtained illegally and allow confessions to be
entered as evidence at trial only when they were made in the presence
of a judge and defense counsel. The impact of these provisions was
undercut, however, by language that could exempt suspects in organized
crime cases from these and other due process guarantees. At this writing,
the Mexican Congress had yet to vote on the bill.
Impunity
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims
of violent crime and human rights abuses. The causes of this failure are
varied and include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and a
lack of political will. One prominent example is the unsolved murders of
hundreds of young women and girls over the last decade in Ciudad
Jurez, a city on the U.S. border in Chihuahua state.
The states efforts to prosecute those responsible for the killings have
been fraught with problems. In October 2004, a Chihuahua judge sentenced
bus driver Victor Garcia Uribe to successive fifty-year prison
terms for the murders of eight young women. Garcia was convicted on
the basis of a confession that he said he made under torture and that he
later recanted. There was no physical evidence linking Garca to any of
the murders. In 2002, police gunned down Garcas lawyer, Mario
Escobedo Salazar, under highly suspicious circumstances. Escobedo and
another lawyer had reported receiving telephone threats for three
months from unidentified male callers who warned them that they would be killed if they continued representing Garca and another suspect.
That other suspect died while in police custody. Three other individuals
facing charges for some of the Jarez killings have also recanted
confessions that they claim were coerced through torture.
A major shortcoming of the Mexican justice system is that it leaves the
task of investigating and prosecuting army abuses to military authorities.
The military justice system is ill-equipped for such tasks. It lacks
the independence necessary to carry out reliable investigations and its
operations suffer from a general absence of transparency. The ability of
military prosecutors to investigate army abuses is further undermined
by fear of the army, which is widespread in many rural communities and
which inhibits civilian victims and witnesses from providing information
to military authorities.
The Special Prosecutors Office
In 2001, President Fox established a special prosecutors office to investigate
and prosecute past acts of political violence, including massacres
of student protesters in 1968 and 1971, and the forced disappearance of
hundreds of government opponents during the countrys dirty war in
the 1970s. For two years the offices progress was limited by insufficient
cooperation from the military and inadequate access to government
documents. But in November 2003, the special prosecutor won a landmark
decision from the Mexican Supreme Court holding that statutes
of limitations do not apply to old disappearance cases as long as the
victims bodies have not been found. He then obtained arrest warrants
for several high level officials, and secured the arrests of Miguel Nazar
Haro in February 2004 and Juventino Romero Cisneros in October
2004. Both are accused of participating in the forced disappearance of
Jess Piedra Ibarra in the 1970s.
But these advances have been counterbalanced by significant failures.
All the other suspects have managed to escape arrest. There have been no exhumations, nor any indication that the special prosecutor has made
progress uncovering the fate of hundreds of disappeared people or in
providing Mexico with a comprehensive account of the crimes that took
place. The special prosecutors most ambitious movethe indictment of
former president Luis Echeverrawas thrown out by a trial judge. The
case is now before the Supreme Court.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity is obstructed by collective bargaining
agreements negotiated between management and pro-management
unions. These agreements often fail to provide worker benefits beyond
the minimums mandated by Mexican legislation, and workers sometimes
only learn of the agreements when they grow discontented and
attempt to organize independent unions. Workers who seek to form
independent unions risk losing their jobs and are generally left unprotected
by the government from retaliatory dismissals.
Freedom of Expression
Mexican laws on defamation are excessively restrictive and tend to
undermine freedom of expression. Besides monetary penalties, journalists
face criminal prosecution for alleged defamation of public officials.
Journalists have occasionally faced violence at the hands of government
agents.
Right to Education
Mexico has failed to ensure that tens of thousands of rural children
receive primary education during the months that their families migrate
across state lines to work in agricultural camps. While there is a federal
program to provide primary schooling in the agricultural camps, a lalarge
number of parents choose to have their children work in the fields rather than attend school. The failure to enforce child labor laws facilitates
this choice.
Key International Actors
As part of a Technical Cooperation Agreement signed by President Fox,
the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights maintains an in-country
office that, in December 2003, produced a comprehensive report
documenting ongoing human rights problems and providing detailed
recommendations for addressing them. The Fox administration has
committed itself to developing a national human rights program based
on the reports recommendations, but at this writing had yet to do so.
The administrations justice reform proposal incorporates some elements
of those recommendations while ignoring others, such as the recommendation
to end military jurisdiction over cases involving human
rights violations.
The United States and Canada are, along with Mexico, signatories to
the North American Free Trade Agreement and its labor side accord,
which commits them to enforce their laws protecting workers rights
and grants them authority to hold one other accountable for failing to
meet these obligations. Under the accord, when a government of one
country receives a complaint of violations committed in one of the
other two, it can investigate the charges. However, because the complaint
process is convoluted and enforcement mechanisms are weak, the
accord has had little impact on labor rights violations in Mexico.
Mexico has played a leading role at the international level in pressing
for human rights promotion to be considered an integral part of counter-
terror efforts. It sponsored resolutions to that end at both the U.N.
General Assembly and Commission on Human Rights and successfully
pressed the Commission to name an independent expert on the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.
Venezuela
Venezuelan democracy passed an important test in August 2004 when it
held, in a lawful and peaceful manner, a national referendum to determine
whether President Hugo Chvez should remain in office.
According to election authorities and international observers, a solid
majority of Venezuelans voted in favor of the presidents continued
tenure. But President Chvez and his supporters in the National
Assembly continue to take steps to undermine the independence of the
countrys judiciary and to threaten freedom of the press.
The countrys political polarization has diverted attention from other
pressing human rights issues, including a longstanding problem of
police abuse. Extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects by both state
and municipal police forces are common and all too often go unpunished.
Cases of torture continue to be reported. Violence and anarchy
prevail in many Venezuelan prisons. Refugees from neighboring
Colombia, in areas close to the border, face legal insecurity, difficult living
conditions, and sometimes threats to their lives.
Independence of the Judiciary
In May 2004, President Chvez signed a court-packing law that expands
the number of Supreme Court justices from twenty to thirty-two.
Although the new justices had not been appointed at this writing, the
new law allows the governing coalition to use its slim majority in the
legislature to obtain an overwhelming majority of seats on the countrys
highest court. The law also gives the governing coalition the power to
remove sitting justices by nullifying their appointments.
A political takeover of the Supreme Court would compound the damage
already done to judicial independence by policies pursued by the Court
itself. The Court, which has administrative control over the judiciary,
has failed to grant 80 percent of the countrys judges security of tenure, which is an essential ingredient of judicial independence. In March
2004, three judges were summarily fired after they ordered the release
of people detained during anti-government protests.
Freedom of the Press
Venezuela has a vigorous and uninhibited media. Indeed, as part of the
often heated and acrimonious debate between supporters of the government
and its opponents, members of the media have been able to
express strong views without restriction. Private television companies
have often adopted blatantly partisan positions, airing news and debate
programs extremely hostile to the Chvez government. In response,
many journalists working for media that support the opposition have
been subject to aggression and intimidation by government supporters.
To a lesser degree, journalists working for media sympathetic to the
government have also faced intimidation.
While journalists have a professional responsibility to be objective in
their reporting, it is not the job of government to police such professional
standards. On the contrary, the government has an obligation, no
matter how critical or partisan the reporting, to defend press freedom
by vigorously prosecuting perpetrators of attacks and acts of intimidation.
In the majority of cases, the Chvez government has not done so.
In October 2004, the National Assembly moved to pass a government
bill on the social responsibility of radio and television stations that
would impose excessive restrictions on the content of these media. The
draft legislation would introduce an array of restrictions on broadcasting
content that, if enforced rigorously, would infringe upon basic
norms of free expression. Under the guise of protecting children from
crude language, sexual situations, and violence, the proposed law would
subject adults to restrictive and puritanical viewing standards. The proposed
law also contains loosely-worded rules on incitement to violence and threats to public order that could penalize the stations legitimate
expression of political views.
In addition, the draft law provides for a regime of drastic punishments
for infractions the likely effect of which would be to encourage pervasive
self-censorship. If found responsible for infractions, the stations
could be fined, ordered to suspend transmissions, or even have their
broadcasting licenses revoked.
Police Killings, Torture, and Ill-treatment
Police continue to carry out extrajudicial executions of criminal suspects.
According to the respected nongovernmental human rights group
PROVEA, 130 people, most of them young male criminal suspects,
were victims of extrajudicial execution by national, state, and municipal
police forces between October 2002 and September 2003. About one in
ten of the victims were children under the age of eighteen. In many
cases, the police covered up executions by asserting that the victims
were killed in exchanges of gunfire, despite contrary testimony by witnesses.
Generally, the police responsible for killings escaped justice.
In early February and late March 2004, National Guard and police officers
beat and tortured people detained during and after protests in
Caracas and other Venezuelan cities. After demonstrators clashed with
National Guard units and Chvez supporters, leaving thirteen people
dead and more than one hundred wounded, security forces detained
more than three hundred civilians. Detainees reported being beaten
during and after their arrests with nightsticks, with the flat side of
sabers, and with helmets, gunstocks, and other articles. Some reported
that their captors hurled tear gas bombs into the closed vehicles in
which they were seated, causing extreme distress, near suffocation, and
panic, while others described how the powder from tear gas canisters
was sprinkled on their faces and eyes, causing burns and skin irritation.
Detainees also reported being shocked with electric batons while in custody and defenseless. The alleged abuses appeared to enjoy official
approval at some level of command in the forces responsible for them.
Prison Conditions
Conditions in Venezuelan prisons are cruel, inhuman, and degrading.
Overcrowding is a chronic problem and prisons are virtually controlled
by armed gangs. Prison riots and inmate violence claim hundreds of
lives every year. In 2003 PROVEA estimated the prison murder rate to
be forty times the national average.
Border Security and the Right to Refugee Status
Lawlessness prevails along parts of Venezuelas 1,300 mile border with
Colombia. Colombian paramilitaries and guerrillas, as well as
Venezuelan armed groups and criminal gangs, appear to be responsible
for execution-style killings, but so far such groups have operated with
near-complete impunity.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), 2,691 people had applied for refugee status in Venezuela by
summer 2004. But UNHCR officials say that the real number of
refugees is far higher since most try to blend undetected into the population.
In February 2004, Venezuela began using a newly-established
asylum application process and in June began providing identification
documents to recognized refugees to enable them to exercise their
rights, including to work, study, and obtain medical treatment.
The Venezuelan National Refugee Commission granted temporary protection
status to 292 indigenous Wayu who fled to Venezuela in May
2004 following armed violence in their community of Bahia Portete, in
La Guajira, Colombia. It was the first time that the Venezuelan government
has granted this status. The temporary protection is valid for
ninety days and renewable according to the security and protection needs of the group. This status means they can remain in Venezuela and
get government assistance through the National Civil Protection Office.
Key International Actors
The Organization of American States (OAS) played a key role in brokering
the agreement between the government and the political opposition
to find a peaceful and constitutional solution to the political crisis,
helping set the stage for the August 2004 recall referendum. The U.S.-
based Carter Center, along with the OAS, provided international
observers to help ensure that the referendum took place without serious
incident or disruption by partisans on either side. Both the Carter
Center and the OAS validated the official results of the referendum,
concluding that President Chvez had won a legitimate victory.
UNHCR organized a series of training workshops for the army units
that patrol the border and provided officers with instruction on refugee
rights, international refugee law, and the role of the military in refugee
protection. UNHCR also provided the National Refugee Commission
with continuing technical assistance, training, and expertise.
Afghanistan
Despite some improvements, Afghanistan continued to suffer from serious
instability in 2004. Warlords and armed factions, including remaining
Taliban forces, dominate most of the country and routinely abuse
human rights, particularly the rights of women and girls. The international
community has failed to contribute adequate troops or resources
to address the situation, and basic human rights conditions remain poor
in many parts of the country, especially outside of Kabul.
Progress was made in stabilizing Afghanistans system of governance.
Afghans began exercising their right to participate in the political
process by approving a new constitution in January 2004, and selecting
Hamid Karzai to a five-year term as president in a generally peaceful
election in Octoberthe countrys first universal suffrage, direct vote
for the presidency. Afghans, including notable numbers of women, participated
widely in both processes, but the legitimacy of both processes
suffered due to inadequate preparation by the international community
and the absence of sufficient security and monitoring.
These advances are offset by the blossoming Afghan drug economy and
the continuing effects of widespread poverty. Afghanistan was the
largest worldwide producer of opium and heroin in 2004. Escalating
drug profits stifle efforts to reestablish rule of law and increase reconstruction
and development efforts. Average per capita expenditures for
Afghansthe amount of money an average Afghan spends on food and
essential non-food items in one yearis only U.S. $165. Literacy rates
and school enrollment rates countrywide climb, but still remain
extremely low, especially for women. And the country continues to suffer
from extremely high levels of preventable morbidity and health
problems.
U.S. forces operating against Taliban insurgents continue to generate
numerous claims of human rights abuses against the civilian population, including arbitrary arrests, use of excessive force, and mistreatment of
detainees, many of whom are held outside the protection of the Geneva
Conventions.
Warlordism and Insecurity
Political repression, human rights abuses, and criminal activity by warlords
the leaders of militias and remnants of past Afghan military
forces, who were brought to power with the assistance of the United
States after the Talibans defeatare consistently listed as the chief concerns
of most Afghans. However, the marginalization of two major warlords
Marshall Fahim, the first vice president and defense minister,
and Ismail Khan, self-styled Emir of Heratraised hopes that President
Karzai and the international community had begun to reverse their policy
of relying on warlords to provide security.
Local military and police forces, even in Kabul, have been involved in
arbitrary arrests, kidnapping, extortion, torture, and extrajudicial
killings of criminal suspects. Outside Kabul, commanders and their
troops in many areas have been implicated in widespread rape of
women, girls, and boys, murder, illegal detention, forced displacement,
and other specific abuses against women and children, including human
trafficking and forced marriage. In several areas, Human Rights Watch
documented how commanders and their troops seized property from
families and levied illegal per capita taxes (paid in cash or with food or
goods) from local populations. In some remote areas, there are no real
governmental structures or activity, only abuse and criminal enterprises
by factions.
In July 2004, President Karzai dropped Mohammad Qasim Fahim from
the vice presidents spot on his presidential ticket. The first vice president
and minister of defense for most of 2004, Marshall Fahim, is a factional
leader and for the last three years has resisted many efforts to disarm his forces or to replace factional commanders whom he appointed
to high-level positions in the ministry.
The western city of Herat descended into violence on two occasions
after President Karzai dismissed the the main warlord there, Ismail
Khan, from his post in September 2004. The factional violence led to
the temporary suspension of U.N. and NGO humanitarian operations.
Ongoing factional rivalries impede aid delivery and development in several
provinces in the north and west of the country.
Many districts remain insecure because of violence caused by factions
ostensibly affiliated with the government. The medical aid organization
Mdecins Sans Frontires (MSF, Doctors Without Borders), decided to
pull out of Afghanistan after five MSF workers were killed in the northwest
of the country in June 2004a momentous decision given that
MSF worked in Afghanistan through the worst violence of the early
1990s. Overall, nearly fifty aid workers and election officials were killed
in 2004, far higher than in any previous period.
In the south and southeast of the country, Taliban remnants and other
anti-government forces outside Afghanistans political framework have
continued to attack humanitarian workers and coalition and Afghan
government forces. As a result of attacks, international agencies suspended
many of their operations in affected areas, and development and
humanitarian work has suffered as a result. In some areaslike Zabul
and Kunar provincewhole districts are essentially war zones, where
U.S. and Afghan government forces engage in military operations
against Taliban and other insurgent groups. Hundreds of Afghan civilians
were killed in 2004 during these operationsin some cases because
of violations of the laws of war by insurgents or by coalition or Afghan
forces.
In many areas around Afghanistan, poppy production has reached
record highs, and many factionsincluding Taliban and anti-government forcesare suspected of engaging in drug trafficking. U.N. and
U.S. officials estimated that in 2004 Afghan-produced opium and heroin
accounted for approximately 75 percent of the entire world supply,
and approximately 90 percent of that consumed in Europe. The drug
revenue amounts to approximately U.S.$2.5 billionhalf of Afghanistan
Gross Domestic Product. The inflated profits provide warlords with an
independent source of income which make it especially difficult to
establish rule of law.
The Presidential Election and the Bonn Process
On October 9, 2004, Afghanistan held its first-ever presidential election.
Surprisingly few problems occurred on election day and over eight
million votes were cast. But the international community failed to supply
adequate numbers of international monitors to observe the election,
and the majority of election sites were not adequately monitored. In
many cases Afghans were able to vote relatively freely, but in many
other placesespecially rural areasvoters did not receive adequate
civic education about the secrecy of the ballot and were likely threatened
by local leaders how to vote. Independent political organizers
unaffiliated with factions or their militia forces faced death threats and
harassment and in many areas struggled just to organize. In the months
before the election, Human Rights Watch documented continuing
political repression by local factional leaders.
The presidential elections represented another major milestone in the
political process initiated by the 2001 Bonn Agreement, an accord
signed by representatives of the militia forces who fought with the U.S.-
led coalition against the Taliban, representatives of the former King of
Afghanistan, Zahir Shah, and representatives of various other exiled
Afghan groups. The agreement brought President Karzai to power as
the first interim leader of Afghanistan. Two national Loya Jirgas (grand
councils) were held in 2002 and 2003, and a constitution approved, but both processes were marked by widespread threats and political repression
by warlord factions.
There has been some progress in realizing the aspirations of the Bonn
Agreement. The Afghan government has gradually re-built some of the
apparatus of state power in Kabul. Development efforts have begun in
provinces outside of Kabul, including construction of roads, schools,
and hospitals, contributing to the growth of Afghanistans economy.
And although the majority of school-age girls lack adequate educational
opportunities, millions of girls have returned to school, and universities
are functioning. Training has begun of a new Afghan army and central
police force. The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
created under the Bonn Agreement, expanded its activities. Limited
legal reform processes and training of judges and lawyers have begun.
However, many of the Bonn Agreements most important provisions
have been either forgotten or ignored. Militia forces occupying Kabul
were never withdrawn from the city, no significant disarmament of militia
forces nationwide has taken place (demobilization goals were
reduced to a target of less than 40 percent before the October elections,
which in any case was not met), and many militia leaders have retained
their autonomous leadership over what are essentially private armies.
Women and Girls
Women and girls continue to suffer the worst effects of Afghanistans
insecurity. Conditions are better than under the Taliban, but women
and girls continue to face severe governmental and social discrimination,
and are struggling to take part in the political life of their country.
Afghan women who organize politically or criticize local rulers face
threats and violence. Soldiers and police routinely harass women and
girls, even in Kabul city. Many women and girls continue to be afraid to
leave their homes without the burqa. Because many women and girls continue to fear violence by factions, many continue to spend the
majority of their time indoors and at home, especially in rural areas,
making it difficult for them to attend school, go to work, or actively
participate in the countrys reconstruction. The majority of school-age
girls in Afghanistan are still not enrolled in school.
U.S. Military Operations
U.S. and coalition forces active in Afghanistan under Operation
Enduring Freedom since November 2001, continue to arbitrarily detain
civilians, use excessive force during arrests of non-combatants, and mistreat
detainees. There are also credible reports of Afghan soldiers
deployed alongside U.S. forces beating and otherwise mistreating people
during arrest operations and looting homes or seizing the land of
those being detained.
Ordinary civilians caught up in military operations and arrested are
unable to challenge the legal basis for their detention or obtain hearings
before an adjudicative body. They have no access to legal counsel.
Release of detainees, where it did occur, is wholly dependent on decisions
of the U.S. military command, with little apparent regard for the
requirements of international lawwhether the treatment of civilians
under international humanitarian law or the due process requirements
of human rights law. Generally, the United States does not comply with
legal standards applicable to their operations in Afghanistan, including
the Geneva Conventions and other applicable standards of international
human rights law.
Key International Actors
Without adequate international support, the government has continued
to struggle in addressing Afghanistans security and human rights problems.
The central government has acted to sideline several abusive commanders,
but in most cases the government has negotiated and cooperated with leaders implicated in abuses, as have U.S. government officials
in the country, who continue to be influential actors in Afghanistans
political processes.
In late 2003 NATO took over the U.N.-mandated International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), fielding between six thousand and
eight thousand security troops. ISAF is still mostly limited to Kabul city,
with a small outpost in the northern city of Kunduz. NATO leadership
has repeatedly stated that it wants to expand its geographic scope, but
member nations have not contributed enough additional troops and
logistical support. As a result, planned expansion stages have been
repeatedly postponed.
The United States, along with coalition partners including Germany,
New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, has been expanding small
Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) of fifty to one hundred troops
to several areas, but they have had only limited successes in improving
human rights protections and security. The small size of the teams, their
vague mandates, and their sometimes close working relationship with
local Afghan militiasthe very forces who are creating abusive and
insecure environments in the first placehave stymied further progress.
The United States, the most important and involved international actor
in the country, has started addressing Afghanistans security problems
more seriously, but has not taken the steps necessary to lead other
nations in providing security, troops, funding, and political leadership to
secure Afghanistans future. NATO member states and other potential
troop contributors are also to blame for not providing more troops to
ISAF and adequate overall funding for international efforts in
Afghanistan.
The general failure of U.N. member states to provide an underlying
security framework for reconstruction in Afghanistan has made it
impossible for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA )to carry out many parts of its mandate.
But the leadership of UNAMA has also limited its criticisms of Afghan
warlords and its efforts to monitor human rights and security. As a
result of these decisions, there is little detailed and comprehensive
human rights reporting by the international community in Afghanistan.
Burma
Burma remains one of the most repressive countries in Asia, despite
promises for political reform and national reconciliation by its authoritarian
military government, the State Peace and Development Council
(SPDC). The SPDC restricts the basic rights and freedoms of all
Burmese. It continues to attack and harass democratic leader Aung San
Suu Kyi, still under house arrest at this writing, and the political movement
she represents. It also continues to use internationally outlawed
tactics in ongoing conflicts with ethnic minority rebel groups.
Burma has more child soldiers than any other country in the world, and
its forces have used extrajudicial execution, rape, torture, forced relocation
of villages, and forced labor in campaigns against rebel groups.
Ethnic minority forces have also committed abuses, though not on the
scale committed by government forces.
The abrupt removal of Prime Minister General Khin Nyunt, viewed as
a relative moderate, on October 19, 2004, has reinforced hardline elements
of the SPDC. Khin Nyunts removal damaged immediate
prospects for a ceasefire in the decades-old struggle with the Karen ethnic
minority and has been followed by increasingly hostile rhetoric from
SPDC leaders directed at Suu Kyi and democracy activists.
Thousands of Burmese citizens, most of them from the embattled ethnic
minorities, have fled to neighboring countries, in particular
Thailand, where they face difficult circumstances, or live precariously as
internally displaced people.
Depayin Incident
On May 30, 2003, in Depayin in northern Burma, Suu Kyis traveling
party was attacked by a group of armed men associated with the Union
Solidarity Development Association (USDA), a mobilization organization created by the SPDC. According to eyewitnesses, police were present
at the time of the incident, as were common criminals who had
been released from prison for the purpose of taking part in the attack.
The Burmese government has admitted to four deaths in the incident,
while eyewitnesses have reported far more. As the government continues
to prohibit any independent investigation into the incident, the
number of casualties remains unknown.
Suu Kyi, as well as scores of members and supporters of the National
League for Democracy (NLD) Party, were detained following the
attack. They were held under article 10a of the 1975 State Protection
Act, which permits the authorities to detain anyone considered a threat
to state security for up to five years without charge or trial. U.N.
sources reported that ninety-one of the NLD and pro-democracy
detainees, never charged with any crime, were released within two
months. Suu Kyi remained under house arrest at this writing.
An Aborted Attempt at Reform
In August 2003, former Prime Minister General Khin Nyunt launched
what he called a road map for a transition to democracy in Burma.
The SPDC pledged to eventually hold elections as part of a transition
to a democratic government. The first step was the convening of a
national constitutional convention, a process that had been stalled since
1996 after the NLD and other pro-democracy parties walked out, citing
the SPDCs domination and manipulation of the proceedings.
In May 2004, the National Convention began work. But the SPDC
refused to release Suu Kyi and senior members of the NLD, as well as
to reopen all NLD offices. As a result, the NLD and the Shan
Nationalities League for Democracy (SNLD) and affiliated parties in
the United Nationalities Alliance (UNA) decided not to take part in the
National Convention. Without the participation of the NLD and other
political parties that won the majority of seats in the 1990 elections, the National Convention lost any serious legitimacy and genuine prospects
for instituting meaningful reform.
The sudden ouster of General Khin Nyunt in October 2004 further
diminished hopes for reform. The ousted prime minister and military
intelligence chief had been willing to engage with Aung San Suu Kyi to
break the political stalemate. Lieutenant General Soe Win, who was
named Burmas prime minister after the dismissal, has stated publicly
that the SPDC not only will not talk to the NLD but also would never
hand over power to the NLD.
Political Prisoners
In 2002, the International Committee of the Red Cross reported there
were approximately 3,500 security detainees in Burma. Of these, at
least 1,300 were believed to be political prisoners, including elected
members of parliament. Most, if not all, were arbitrarily arrested for
exercising their freedoms of opinion and expression. The right to a fair
trial, including the right to access a lawyer, continues to be denied to
most detainees, in particular those accused of political dissent. Torture
and mistreatment of detainees is common, especially during pre-trial
detention in military intelligence interrogation centers. Authorities continue
to extend the detention of political prisoners who have served
their prison sentences by placing them under administrative detention.
This practice is used even with elderly and infirm prisoners.
Child Soldiers
On June 4, 2004, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the
Child issued its concluding observations on Burmas compliance with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Committee identified a
range of concerns, including the continued recruitment and use of child
soldiers by Burmas armed forces.
Burma has more child soldiers than any other country in the world,
accounting for approximately one-fourth of the 300,000 children currently
believed to be participating in armed conflicts across the globe. A
2002 investigation by Human Rights Watch found that as many as seventy
thousand children under the age of eighteen may be serving in
Burmas national armed forces. Burma is believed to have an estimated
350,000 soldiers in its national army. Armed opposition groups in
Burma also recruit child soldiers, although on a much smaller scale.
Human Rights Watch documented the use of child soldiers by nineteen
different opposition groups.
While the government still denies such systematic recruitment, it has
for the first time acknowledged child soldiers in the army as an issue.
Largely as a result of an October 2003 report to the United Nations
Security Council by Secretary General Kofi Annan, the government
formed a high-level Committee to Prevent the Recruitment of Child
Soldiers, and announced that a task force was being formed to ensure
inspections for underage recruitment.
Government forces have released small numbers of child soldiers. In
these cases, the parents had reported the recruitment to the ICRC or
the International Labor Organization, requesting their intervention.
For instance, four boys recruited in March of 2004 were released,
apparently because of the ICRCs involvement.
Violations against Ethnic Minorities, Particularly Women
The Burmese army continues to commit gross abuses against civilians,
particularly members of ethnic minorities associated with various resistance
movements in the country. In its campaigns against ethnic minorities,
the army engages in summary executions, torture, and rape of
women and girls.
The SPDCs eight-year campaign of forcibly relocating minority ethnic
groups has destroyed nearly three thousand villages, particularly in areas
of active ethnic insurgency and areas targeted for economic development.
Hundreds of thousands of ethnic minorities have been forced
into as many as 200 internment centers, and those who have passed
through these sites report forced labor, extrajudicial executions, rape,
and torture committed by government troops.
There are an estimated one million internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in Burma, and several hundred thousand Burmese refugees in
Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, and especially neighboring Thailand. The
Burmese government has refused international access to areas of ongoing
conflict, cutting off humanitarian assistance to IDPs in violation of
international humanitarian law.
In February 2004, the Human Rights Watch report Out of Sight, Out of
Mind detailed the increasingly harsh policies of the Thai government
against Burmese refugees and asylum seekers. Many such individuals are
returned to Burma in violation of the internationally recognized principle
of non-refoulement.
Local and international nongovernmental organizations have documented
widespread and continuing sexual violence against ethnic
women by the military in Burma, including new reports by the
Womens League of Burma (WLB) and the Karen Womens
Organization (KWO) in 2004. The KWO documented 125 cases of
sexual violence committed by the SPDCs military troops in Karen State
from 1988 until 2004, half committed by high-ranking military officers.
According to this report, 40 percent of the cases were gang rapes. In 28
percent, women were raped and then killed. The WLB reported sexual
violence in 2003 and 2004 in all provinces with significant ethnic
minority populations as well as in central Burma. Abuses included rape
of women and girls, gang rapes, murder, sexual slavery, and forced marriage.
The report implicated senior and junior military personnel as being perpetrators or complicit in the majority of documented rapes.
The SPDC has denied the findings of these reports, and womens
organizations have reported intimidation of survivors and witnesses.
Key International Actors
The attack and arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi and her supporters in May
2003 drew widespread international condemnation. Despite repeated
visits to the country, the U.N. secretary-generals special envoy to
Burma, Razali Ismail, faced resistance from the SPDC in his efforts to
prompt renewed political dialogue with the NLD and national reconciliation.
Various U.N. actors, including Paulo Srgio Pinheiro, the U.N.
special rapporteur on human rights in Burma, expressed deep concern
over the absence of major opposition parties from the National
Convention.
In July 2003, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which Burma joined in 1997 and is scheduled to chair in 2005, issued an
unprecedented rebuke of a member state when it called on the SPDC to
release Aung San Suu Kyi. Japan, Burmas largest single aid donor, suspended
its development aid to Burma in the wake of the May 2003
attack.
This strong regional position has, however, changed rapidly. Both
ASEAN and Japan have since maneuvered actively to convince the
European Union to accept Burma as a new member of the Asia-Europe
Meeting (ASEM). China and Thailand continue to be the SPDCs closest
allies, politically and economically, although both countries have
expressed some concern over the implications of General Khin Nyunts
dismissal.
The United States maintains economic sanctions on Burma. The
Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 bans all imports from
Burma and reaffirms United States recognition of the NLD as the legitimate government. An accompanying executive order calls for the freezing
of assets of senior SPDC officials.
Cambodia
Political stalemate went hand in hand with only minor human rights
improvements in 2004. The country suffered an eleven-month political
deadlock over formation of a national government following inconclusive
parliamentary elections in July 2003. King Norodom Sihanouk
abdicated the throne due to his advanced age and was replaced by his
son, Prince Norodom Sihamoni, in October 2004.
Authorities continue to ban or disperse most public demonstrations.
Politicians and journalists critical of the government face violence and
intimidation and are barred from equal access to the broadcast media.
In addition, the judiciary remains weak and subject to political influence.
Trafficking of women and children for sexual exploitation through
networks protected or backed by police or government officials is rampant.
The government continues to turn a blind eye to fraudulent confiscation
of farmers land, illegal logging, and widespread plundering of
natural resources.
Despite an agreement between the U.N. and Cambodia to bring senior
Khmer Rouge leaders to justice, serious doubts remain as to whether a
tribunal established within the Cambodian court system can ensure fair
and impartial prosecutions and trials.
Political Violence and Intimidation
All three national elections conducted in Cambodia since the signing of
the Paris Peace Agreements in 1991 have been conducted in an atmosphere
of violence and intimidation. Political violence continued after
elections in July 2003. In October 2003 a radio journalist and a popular
singer were killed, both of whom were affiliated with FUNCINPEC,
the royalist party led by Prince Ranariddh. In January 2004, five political
activists were murdered, including prominent labor leader Chea Vichea. Another labor activist, Ros Sovannareth, was killed in May
2004.
A political standoff after the 2003 elections, in which no one party
received the required two-thirds majority needed to form a new government,
was resolved in July 2004, when FUNCINPEC entered into a
power-sharing agreement with the Cambodian Peoples Party (CPP.)
The opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) and some nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) questioned the legality of the new government,
which was formed on the basis of controversial amendments to the
Constitution.
Weak Judiciary and Impunity
Cambodia has made little progress in reforming its judicial system,
which has been widely condemned for its lack of independence, incompetence,
and corruption. Cases of politically related violence and crimes
committed by government authorities or those with ties to high-ranking
officials are often not prosecuted or even investigated. Chea Vicheas
high profile murder case has been marred by reports of torture being
used to extract confessions from the alleged suspects, threats against
witnesses, and political pressure on the investigating judge, who publicly
questioned the legality of the suspects arrests and called for the case to
be dismissed for lack of evidence.
The Cambodian Bar Association has become increasingly politicized. In
September 2004 the prime minister and three other senior CPP government
officials, none of whom are trained lawyers, were admitted to
the Bar. In November, the Appeals Court nullified the results of a Bar
Association election, in which a legal aid lawyer was elected president.
The court ordered the defeated incumbent, a CPP supporter, to temporarily
reassume the position while a new election was organized. 
Vichea. Another labor activist, Ros Sovannareth, was killed in May
2004.
A political standoff after the 2003 elections, in which no one party
received the required two-thirds majority needed to form a new government,
was resolved in July 2004, when FUNCINPEC entered into a
power-sharing agreement with the Cambodian Peoples Party (CPP.)
The opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) and some nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) questioned the legality of the new government,
which was formed on the basis of controversial amendments to the
Constitution.
Weak Judiciary and Impunity
Cambodia has made little progress in reforming its judicial system,
which has been widely condemned for its lack of independence, incompetence,
and corruption. Cases of politically related violence and crimes
committed by government authorities or those with ties to high-ranking
officials are often not prosecuted or even investigated. Chea Vicheas
high profile murder case has been marred by reports of torture being
used to extract confessions from the alleged suspects, threats against
witnesses, and political pressure on the investigating judge, who publicly
questioned the legality of the suspects arrests and called for the case to
be dismissed for lack of evidence.
The Cambodian Bar Association has become increasingly politicized. In
September 2004 the prime minister and three other senior CPP government
officials, none of whom are trained lawyers, were admitted to
the Bar. In November, the Appeals Court nullified the results of a Bar
Association election, in which a legal aid lawyer was elected president.
The court ordered the defeated incumbent, a CPP supporter, to temporarily
reassume the position while a new election was organized.
In mid-2003 four men were arrested in Cambodia on charges of being
members of the Indonesia-based terrorist group, Jemaah Islamiya,
which has links to al-Qaeda. As of this writing, the men still had not
faced trial, far exceeding the legal pre-trial detention limit of six
months.
In January 2004 the Cambodian government dropped extradition
demands for the return from Thailand of political prisoner and SRP
activist Sok Yoeun, whom the Cambodian government has accused of
organizing a 1998 rocket attack on a convoy that included Prime
Minister Hun Sen. Sok Yoeun, a UNHCR-recognized refugee, was
released from Thai prison in January 2004 and allowed to resettle in
Finland.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal and the ICC
After seven years of negotiations, in 2004 Cambodia approved an agreement
with the United Nations to establish an internationally-assisted
tribunal under Cambodian law to bring Khmer Rouge leaders to justice.
However the Cambodian governments record of interfering with courts
and intimidating judges, as well as the grossly inadequate training of
many judicial officials, gives reason for concern that prosecutions could
be politically influenced.
Pursuant to the agreement with the U.N., the government is to establish
an extraordinary chamber to try senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge
and those who were most responsible for genocide, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity committed while the Khmer Rouge was in
power (1975-79). Based in Cambodia, this mixed tribunal will be
comprised of a majority of Cambodian judges working alongside international
judges, with Cambodian and international co-prosecutors.
In 2002, Cambodia became the first Southeast Asian country to ratify
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. In June 2003, however, Prime Minister Hun Sen agreed to a bilateral immunity agreement
with the U.S. that exempts U.S. citizens from the authority of the
court. The draft agreement is expected to be approved by the National
Assembly by 2005.
Restrictions on Freedom of Assembly
The government placed strict new restrictions on freedom of assembly
in January 2003. Since that time, other than during officially-prescribed
electoral campaign periods, the government has denied virtually all
requests for permission to demonstrate on the ground that such gatherings
would jeopardize national security and public order. Authorities
have rejected requests for rallies by students, victims of domestic violence,
environmentalists, opposition parties, and garment workers.
During 2004, authorities banned, dispersed, or intervened during at
least sixteen public demonstrations in Phnom Penh, sometimes using
excessive or disproportionate force. In January 2004, for example, more
than one hundred garment workers were injured when dozens of riot
police beat protestors with batons and fired into they air as they
marched into a rally of two thousand striking workers from the MSI
Garment Factory.
Freedom of Expression
More than one hundred privately owned newspapers are published in
Cambodia, including some affiliated with opposition groups. However
Cambodias reputation for having one of the freest presses in Southeast
Asia has been tarnished by official attempts to silence free speech and
block access by opposition parties to the broadcast media, the main
source of information for Cambodias largely rural society. Cambodian
television stations are still owned fully or partly by the government.
The government continues to deny a radio broadcast license to the SRP.
In 2003, Chou Chetharith, the deputy editor of the royalist radio station
Ta Prohm, was shot and killed outside the stations Phnom Penh
offices after Hun Sen publicly warned the station to stop broadcasting
insults directed at the CPP.
Conflicts over Land and Resource Rights
Land confiscation continues to be a major issue throughout the country,
with many land conflicts involving ownership claims by individuals or
private concessions backed by military commanders or government officials.
Concessions granted to private companies by the government have led
to increasing landlessness and destruction of the natural resources on
which Cambodias rural population depends for its livelihood. In
October 2004 Hun Sen called for a review of major new land transactions
and a moratorium on new concessions until a subdecree on concession
policy is approved.
Volunteers and staff from human rights groups and environmental
organizations have been threatened, attacked, arrested, and even killed.
In November 2004, six people were wounded in a grenade attack when
hundreds of villagers gathered to peacefully protest commencement of
forest clearing in a long-disputed paper pulp concession granted by the
government to the Pheaphimex Company in Pursat province. Later that
month in Kratie province, community forestry activists were threatened
and one was reportedly beaten by members of the military after villagers
confiscated several chainsaws being used by illegal loggers in a
wildlife sanctuary.
Refugee Rights
Vietnams crackdown on ethnic minority Montagnards in its Central
Highlands region across the border from Cambodia (see Vietnam) continues to generate a steady flow of refugees into Cambodia. While
Cambodian authorities have taken some action to assist refugees when
pressured, political considerations often prevail over refugee rights.
In March 2002 Cambodia closed both of its provincial refugee camps
and began to refuse to accept new Montagnard asylum seekers from
Vietnam. In a positive move, in July 2004 the government authorized
the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to travel to
northeastern Cambodia to retrieve hundreds of Montagnard asylum
seekers. By years end UNHCR had registered close to six hundred new
arrivals.
At the same time, however, in violation of its obligations under the 1951
Refugee Convention and the Convention against Torture, provincial
authoritiesunder instruction from the Ministry of Interiorhave continued
to forcibly return hundreds of Montagnard asylum seekers back
to Vietnam, where they face ongoing persecution and in some cases
arrest, unfair trials, and torture. In addition, officials have harassed and
threatened to arrest Cambodian villagers suspected of providing food or
assistance to asylum seekers before they have come under UNHCR
protection.
In September 2004 Cambodian authorities deported twelve Vietnamese
members of the Cao Dai church. They had come to Phnom Penh from
Vietnam to deliver a letter requesting religious freedom to international
delegates at an ASEAN meeting. UNHCR was refused access to them
before their deportation. In a positive move, seven North Korean asylum
seekers who were detained for several weeks by Cambodian immigration
police were allowed to seek asylum in South Korea in late
September 2004.
Torture
Torture continues to be used with impunity in Cambodia, particularly
by police officers attempting to extract confessions from suspects
detained without access to lawyers. Under Cambodias amended
Criminal Procedure Code, suspects can be held in police detention
the period when police commonly use torture to extract confessions
for up to seventy-two hours. In June 2004 the deputy director general
of the National Police publicly condoned the use of torture to obtain
information from suspects during interrogation. Under pressure, he
later retracted his statement.
Human Trafficking
Despite periodic police raids and temporary closure of brothels, powerful
figures running human trafficking networks, and their accomplices
many of them government officials, soldiers, or policecontinue to be
largely immune from prosecution. The government provides little in
the way of social services, counseling, or job training to child prostitutes
rescued in high-profile aids, resulting in many returning to the hands
of brothel owners or traffickers. Cambodian men, women, and children
continue to be trafficked to Malaysia and Thailand for forced labor and
forced prostitution.
Key International Actors
Cambodia receives more than half of its annual budget from foreign aid
and loans. Cambodias international donors have expressed concerns at
the slow pace of legal and judicial reform, unchecked exploitation of
natural resources, and corruption. In mid-2004 several donors, led by
the Canadian ambassador, successfully pressed the government to
authorize UNHCR to resume field operations in northeastern
Cambodia.
Japan remains the largest bilateral donor to Cambodia and provided the
bulk of the funding for the 2003 national elections, along with the
European Union, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. China is playing
an increasingly influential role in Cambodia, both as a donor and an
investor. The United States has pressed the government to address
political violence and advocated that Khmer Rouge leaders be brought
to trial but it has hesitated to contribute toward the costs of a tribunal.
By December 2004, only three U.N. member states have publicly
announced pledges towards the tribunals projected three-year budget of
US$60 million: Australia ($2 million), France ($1 million), and Japan
($3 million).
In 2003 the World Bank reduced its $18 million loan for Cambodias
demobilization program and called for $2.8 million to be paid back
because of corruption in the administration of the program. In August
2004 the Bank issued a report harshly critical of rampant corruption
within Cambodias investment sector.
The Cambodia Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
continues to downsize its staff and in 2003 closed all of its provincial
offices. During a visit to Cambodia in November 2004 the U.N.
Secretary-Generals Special Representative for Cambodia highlighted
problems with the governments land concession policies and called for
an investigation into the grenade attack against villagers peacefully
protesting a land concession in Pursat.
China
In late 2004, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) called for political reform within the Party in order to strengthen
the Partys ability to lead the nation. Party leaders made clear that
China is to remain a one-party state, but one based increasingly on the
rule of law. While China has made progress in some areas in recent
yearsstrengthening its legal system, allowing more independent news
reporting, and sometimes tailoring public policy more closely to public
opinionit remains a highly repressive state.
The Partys 2004 promise to uphold the rule of law has been compromised
by continuing widespread official corruption, Party interference
in the justice system, and a culture of impunity for officials and their
families. Authorities continue to censor news media. Civil society is also
constrained and most NGOs are government-controlled. China prohibits
independent domestic human rights organizations and bars entry
to international human rights organizations. Chinese citizens who contact
international rights groups risk imprisonment.
In late October and early November 2004, major riots by tens of thousands
of people roiled Henan and Sichuan provinces. The riots were
widely separated geographically and the issues precipitating them were
different, but the riots, and the state response to them, highlighted
growing rural unrest and Chinese leaders preoccupation with social stability.
Leaders continue to isolate areas of discontent, and aim to prevent
information about social problems from spreading.
Fifteenth Anniversary of the Tiananmen Square Crackdown
June 4, 2004, marked the fifteenth anniversary of the massacre in
Beijing, when Chinas leaders ordered the military to fire on civilians
who were trying to prevent troops from entering the city and reaching
protesters in Tiananmen Square. Fifteen years later, the government still forbids any public commemoration of the event. Police harass and
detain those dedicated to securing rehabilitation of victims, payment of
compensation, or reconsideration of the official verdict.
During the sensitive 2004 anniversary period, officials again held wellknown
activists, including Ding Zilin, leader of the Tiananmen Mothers
advocacy group, under house arrest. State Security officers subjected
Dr. Jiang Yanyong to six weeks of intense thought reform. The seventytwo-
year-old military doctor had gained international renown for
exposing the official cover-up of the SARS epidemic in Beijing. He also
had attended to victims the night of June 4, 1989, and, in February
2004, suggested in a private letter to the government that it should settle
the mistakes it committed in 1989. Dr. Jiang was released on July
19, 2004, but remained under house arrest at this writing.
Chinas Legal System
In March 2004, China amended its constitution to include a promise to
ensure human rights. Although the constitution is not directly enforceable
in China, the amendment signals a growing acknowledgement of
human rights.
Despite efforts to strengthen the rule of law in China, the legal system
itself remains a major source of rights violations. Many laws are vaguely
worded, inviting politically motivated application by prosecutors and
judges. The judiciary lacks independence: Party and government officials
routinely intervene at every level of the judicial system in favor of
friends and allies. Trial procedures favor the prosecution, and despite
the public prosecution of a large number of judges, corruption remains
a widespread problem. The criminal justice system relies heavily on
confessions for evidence, creating institutional pressures on the police
to extort confessions through beatings and torture. According to
Chinese experts, legal aid services meet only one-quarter of the demand nationwide. Defense lawyers may face disbarment and imprisonment for
advocating their clients rights too vigorously.
On a more positive note, China recently has begun to hold qualifying
examinations for judges and has signaled its intent to amend laws to
better protect suspects in detention. However, administrative detention,
a common practice in China, still occurs without judicial process.
Persons detained on suspicion of minor crimes such as drug use are
sent to reeducation through labor camps for months or years without
ever coming before a judge.
Restrictions on Freedom of Expression
The growing dynamism of the Chinese-language Internet and domestic
media in China led to some efforts to impose tighter controls in 2004.
Officials expanded the list of topics subject to censorship and introduced
improved methods for enforcing compliance. In October 2004,
the state also banned all reporting on rural land seizures by the government.
In September, New York Times research assistant and author Zhao Yan
was arrested on charges of passing state secrets to foreigners, apparently
for his work uncovering leadership changes in the Communist Party. In
early 2004, authorities banned a best-selling non-fiction book,
Investigation of Chinese Peasants, which documented cases of official corruption,
excessive taxation, and police brutality in rural Anhui province.
Numerous newspapers tested the limits of the possible in 2004, and
some came under attack. Staff of the parent group of the Southern
Metropolis Daily received long prison sentences on charges of corruption;
the former editor-in-chief was fired. The charges were widely
viewed as politically motivated, as the newspaper had been the first to
report on several stories of national significance.
The tension between promoting Internet use and controlling content
escalated in 2004, with Chinese authorities employing increasingly
sophisticated technology to limit public and private expression. Despite
the restrictions, the Internet is emerging as a powerful tool for the sharing
of information and mobilization of social activism in China.
HIV/AIDS
China faces what could be one of the largest AIDS epidemics in the
world. According to official statistics, 840,000 men, women, and children
are living with HIV/AIDS, but the real number could be much
higher. Many Chinese citizens lack basic information about AIDS, and
some AIDS activists face state harassment and detention.
Chinese authorities have taken steps to address the AIDS crisis. In late
2003, national authorities promised to provide antiretroviral (ARV)
treatment to all impoverished HIV-positive persons. The State Council,
Chinas highest executive body, issued a circular in May 2004 ordering
local officials to implement a range of AIDS prevention and control
measures. A revised national law on the protection and control of infectious
diseases, passed in August 2004, prohibits discrimination against
persons with infectious diseases. But as documented in a September
2003 Human Rights Watch report, Locked Doors, lack of basic rights and
abuses by local authorities have hampered efforts to help HIV-positive
Chinese citizens.
At this writing, there still had not been an investigation of the governments
role in the transmission of HIV to villagers in Henan and other
provinces through unsanitary but highly profitable blood collection centers.
No official has been held accountable; some who were involved in
the scandal have been promoted. Henan authorities regularly detain
HIV-positive activists in advance of visits by international dignitaries,
and have recently built a prison to segregate detainees with HIV. They
also continue to impede the activities of some NGOs that provide services to people with AIDS: in 2004, Henan officials closed three NGOrun
orphanages for AIDS-affected children, and briefly detained staff of
the Dongzhen Orphans School. People living with HIV/AIDS in
Henan continue to allege corruption and abuses in the governments
distribution of ARV treatment.
Labor Rights
Chinese workers have yet to reap the benefits of the countrys rapid
economic development. Employers routinely ignore minimum wage
requirements and fail to implement required health and safety measures.
Many former employees of state-owned enterprises lost their pensions
when their companies were privatized or went bankrupt. Millions of citizens
who have left the countryside to seek work in cities face serious
problems. Without official residence permits, these migrant workers
lack access to basic services and are vulnerable to police abuse.
Workers are limited in their capacity to seek redress by the governments
ban on independent trade unions. The only union permitted is
the government-controlled All China Federation of Trade Unions.
Some NGOs in the Pearl River Delta educate workers about their legal
rights and assist them with lawsuits against employers, but they too are
forbidden to discuss, let alone organize, independent trade unions.
Many regions have witnessed massive labor protests. In May 2003, after
trials lacking basic procedural safeguards, Liaoning province labor
activists Yao Fuxin and Xiao Yunliang were given seven and four-year
sentences respectively. Family members report that both men are seriously
ill. In October 2004, after flawed trials, five workers were sentenced
to terms of between two and three-and-a-half years for destroying
company property at a shoe factory in Guangdong during a massive
protest. 
Forced Evictions
A March 2004 Human Rights Watch report, Demolished, discussed how
local authorities and developers are forcibly evicting hundreds of thousands
of residents in order to build new developments. With little legal
recourse, those evicted have taken to the streets in protest, only to meet
severe police repression, detention, and imprisonment. Ye Guozhu, a
prominent advocate, was arrested after he applied for formal permission
to hold a protest march. A Shanghai court sentenced lawyer Zheng
Enchong, who had defended many evicted residents, to three years in
prison for circulating state secrets after he faxed information about his
activities to an international human rights organization.
Legal experts and some government-controlled news media have openly
criticized the governments failure to protect housing rights. The government
has responded with some policy and constitutional reforms,
but widespread corruption and a weak judicial system obstruct implementation.
Hong Kong
In April 2004, the Chinese government unilaterally ruled out universal
suffrage for Hong Kong until 2012-13 at the earliest. Through a reinterpretation
of the Basic Law, Hong Kongs mini-constitution, Beijing
went a step further, reserving for itself the power to void any proposal
for electoral change. Even the power to initiate reform, formerly in the
hands of Hong Kongs Legislative Council (LegCo), was ceded to Hong
Kongs chief executive, chosen by an election committee composed
largely of Beijing appointees. Chinas legislature, the Standing
Committee of the National Peoples Congress which is responsible for
the changes to the Basic Law, has ignored repeated requests for consultation
by representatives of Hong Kongs electorate.
At the time of Hong Kongs 1997 incorporation into the People
Republic of China as a Special Autonomous Region (SAR) under the
principle of one country, two systems, Hong Kong was promised a
high degree of autonomy. As a result of Beijings newly self-arrogated
powers, there is concern in Hong Kong, expressed in massive protest
marches on July 1, 2003, and on January and July 1, 2004, that China
will continue to erode basic human rights protections.
LegCo elections in September 2004 were marred by political interference
from Beijing and intimidation of several prominent critics.
Xinjiang and the War on Terror
China used its support for the U.S.-led war against terrorism to leverage
international support for, or at least acquiescence in, its own crackdown
on Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking Muslim population in Chinas
northwestern Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. Some Uighur
groups press peacefully for genuine political autonomy or for independence;
others resort to violence. Chinese authorities do not distinguish
between peaceful and violent dissent, or between separatism and international
terrorism.
The crackdown in Xinjiang has been characterized by systematic human
rights violations including arbitrary arrests, closed trials, and extensive
use of the death penalty. In September 2004, the regions Communist
Party leader reported that during the first eight months of the year fifty
people were sentenced to death and twenty-two groups targeted for
separatist and terrorist activities. Official sources subsequently clarified
that none of the fifty were executed, but have provided no additional
information on their fate.
Cultural survival for Uighurs, along with other ethnic groups on
Chinas borders, is a constant struggle. Officials have curbed observation
of traditional holidays and use of the Uighur language, and closely control religious education and expression. Controls include a prohibition
against those under eighteen entering mosques or receiving religious
instruction at home; political vetting and mandatory patriotic
education for all imams; restrictions on public calls to prayer; and
instructions aimed at making Koranic interpretation consistent with
Communist ideology.
Tibet
For China, the term Tibet is reserved for the Tibetan Autonomous
Region. However, many Tibetans speak of a greater Tibet, including
Tibetan areas in Qinghai, Yunnan, Gansu, and Sichuan. More than 50
percent of ethnic Tibetans under Chinese authority live in these
regions.
The Chinese leadership continues to limit Tibetan religious and cultural
expression and seeks to curtail the Dalai Lamas political and religious
influence in all Tibetan areas. Severely repressive measures limit any
display of support for an independent Tibet.
In 2002 a Sichuan provincial court sentenced Tenzin Delek Rinpoche, a
locally prominent lama, to death with a two-year suspended sentence on
what appear to have been trumped up charges of causing explosions
[and] inciting the separation of the state. His alleged co-conspirator,
Lobsang Dondrup, was executed in January 2003.
Tenzin Deleks arrest and conviction represent the culmination of a
decade-long effort by Chinese authorities to curb his efforts to foster
Tibetan Buddhism and develop Tibetan social institutions. His case,
documented in a March 2004 Human Rights Watch report, Trials of a
Tibetan Monk, remains a focal point for Tibetans struggling to retain
their cultural identity. Several of Tenzin Deleks associates remain in
prison. Close to a hundred others were detained for periods ranging
from days to months, most for attempting to bring information about 
the crackdown to the attention of the foreign community. Credible
sources report that many of those held were subject to severe ill-treatment
and torture.
Religious Belief and Expression
Although religious practice is tolerated, official Communist Party doctrine
holds that religion, as a belief structure and an organizational
arrangement, will eventually wither and die. Until such time, the
Chinese government believes religion must be strictly controlled to prevent
it from becoming a political force or an institution capable of competing
with the state for the loyalty of Chinas citizens. The states policy
is to avoid alienating believers or driving them underground, but
rather to harness their energies toward Chinas development along the
lines envisioned by the Party.
Chinese officials curb the growth of religious belief and its expression in
practice through a series of laws and regulations. To be legal, religious
groups must register with and submit to close monitoring by the appropriate
authorities, and even that option is limited to the five officially
recognized belief systems: Buddhism, Daoism, Islam, Catholicism, and
Protestantism. Registration brings monitoring and vetting of religious
personnel, congregant activities, finances, and publications. In spite of
the law, unregistered religious activity continues to flourish.
Religious groups not recognized by Chinese authorities are subject to
stringent penalties under Chinas criminal law. Claims by Falungong
spokespeople that practitioners face continuing mass incarceration and
ill-treatment are difficult to assess because of lack of independent confirmation,
but there is no doubt that authorities have targeted practitioners
for imprisonment, reeducation through labor, and abuse.
During 2004, evidence began to accumulate that the same laws and regulations
used against Falungong practitioners were being used to rein in so-called house churchesevangelical Protestant groups that refuse to
register with the government.
The Rights of Women and Girls
Women continue to be underrepresented in Chinas political leadership
and in senior positions in business. A cultural preference for boy children,
combined with state population control policies, has resulted in a
shortage of women and girls in rural areas, creating a lucrative market
for traffickers. While the state has cracked down on some trafficking
rings, many Chinese women and girls, especially those from rural and
ethnic communities, are kidnapped and either sold as wives or trafficked
into the sex industry. During 2004, major stories in the domestic press
also highlighted police brutality against suspected sex workers.
Key International Actors
China played an increasingly prominent international role in 2004. In
the United Nations Security Council, China helped block renewal of a
U.S.-backed resolution seeking immunity from international war crimes
prosecution at the International Criminal Court (ICC) for troops from
non-ICC states serving in any U.N. force. However, China was in part
responsible for the Security Councils failure to impose sanctions on
Sudan for its complicity in violence in the Darfur region. China has
major oil interests in Sudan.
At the 2004 annual meeting of the Commission on Human Rights,
China again blocked consideration of a resolution condemning its
human rights record by calling for a no-action motion. In 2004, as it
had in the past, China suspended its dialogue with the U.S. in retaliation
for the American sponsorship of a resolution. During talks in
Beijing in October and November, both countries agreed to discuss
resuming regular dialogues. Human Rights Watch has called on all of
Chinas bilateral dialogue partners to implement rights benchmarks and establish a timetable for meeting those benchmarks, and ensure transparency
about the process.
Chinas cooperation with U.N. human rights mechanisms has been
thorny. After almost a decade of discussion, China extended an invitation
to the U.N. special rapporteur on torture, but two weeks before
the June 2004 visit was to take place, the government postponed it
indefinitely. China has been unwilling to agree to the standard U.N.
terms for such a visit, which include unannounced visits to prisons and
confidential interviews with prisoners. The U.N. Working Group on
Arbitrary Detentions (WGAD) visited China in September 2004. As it
had after its previous mission in 1997, the WGAD urged China to
bring national laws into compliance with international human rights
standards. Although the WGAD noted more cooperation in 2004 than
during 1997, it cut short its visit to Tibets Drapchi prison after the
state refused requests to meet with prisoners who were severely injured
during and after the 1997 visit.
China has ratified a number of international human rights treaties
including the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the Convention against Torture, and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. It has signed but not ratified the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. China is due for its first review
by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in April-
May 2005.
The U.S. increasingly cooperates with China on counter-terrorism and
anti-drug trafficking efforts and the U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigations maintains an office in Beijing. However, the U.S. in 2004
refused to hand over to Chinese authorities a group of Uighurs detained
at Guantanamo Bay for fear they would face torture or execution.
The European Union is weighing whether to rescind an arms embargo
imposed after the 1989 Beijing massacre. Human Rights Watch opposes lifting the embargo until China addresses issues of accountability, reparations
for victims, and trials for those responsible.
East Timor
Since gaining its independence on May 20, 2002, after two-and-a-half
decades of Indonesian occupation, East Timor has taken important
steps to protect human rights. East Timors new constitution includes
significant rights guarantees and, with the support of the United
Nations, the government has moved forward in a number of areas
including policing. In December 2002 East Timors first government,
under the presidency of former guerilla fighter Xanana Gusmao, signed
all main United Nations human rights treaties.
East Timor still faces myriad problems caused by the legacy of
Indonesias brutal occupation and the destruction of much of the countrys
limited infrastructure by withdrawing Indonesian troops following
the U.N.-supervised referendum on independence in 1999. East Timor
faces severe economic hardship, and has yet to rebuild much of what
was destroyed. U.N. peacekeeping forces remain deployed in the country
because of sporadic but at times lethal border raids by militias based
in Indonesian West Timor.
Efforts to bring Indonesian military and militia leaders to justice for the
killing of more than one thousand East Timorese after the 1999 referendum
have been frustrated by lack of resources, poor cooperation from
Indonesia, and systemic problems in East Timors criminal justice system.
Justice and Reconciliation
Important obstacles to justice remain for victims of the violence that
accompanied Indonesias rule and eventual withdrawal from East Timor.
In 1999 alone, an estimated 1,400 political murders were committed
while a large U.N. mission, present in East Timor to supervise and
monitor the independence referendum, stood helplessly by. Few perpetrators
and no high-level officers have been prosecuted. There has been no judicial accounting whatsoever for previous atrocities committed
during Indonesias twenty-four-year occupation of the former
Portuguese colony.
In late 1999, the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor created the Serious Crimes Investigation Unit (SCIU) to investigate
and prosecute cases in front of two Special Panels for Serious
Crimes (Special Panels) of the Dili District Court. Now under the
authority of East Timors prosecutor general, the SCIU is responsible
for preparing indictments against those responsible for crimes against
humanity and other serious crimes committed in East Timor in 1999.
The two Special Panels are part of the Dili District Court system, and
are comprised of one East Timorese and two international judges. They
have exclusive jurisdiction over murder and sexual offenses that were
committed in East Timor between January 1, 1999, and October 25,
1999, but also have jurisdiction over genocide, torture, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity committed before 1999. The first Special
Panel commenced operations in January 2001.
While the SCIU has been largely successful in prosecuting lower ranking
East Timorese militia in Dilis district court, the Indonesian architects
of the 1999 violence remain at large in Indonesia. International
pressure and arrest warrants have failed to ensure extradition of these
defendants to Dili for trial.
Among those wanted are former Indonesian minister of Defence and
Armed Forces Commander Wiranto, six high-ranking Indonesian military
commanders, and the former governor of East Timor who were
indicted by the SCIU on February 24, 2003. All remain at large in
Indonesia.
Calls in 1999 and 2000 for the establishment of an international tribunal
were blunted when the U.N. secretary-general entrusted Indonesian authorities with responsibility for pursuing justice for the 1999 crimes,
believing that domestic trials should be the first recourse for East
Timors victims. However, despite significant international pressure and
interest, trials of senior Indonesian officers in Jakarta failed to give a
credible judicial accounting for the 1999 atrocities. Twelve of the eighteen
defendants were acquitted. Four defendants who were found guilty
received nominal sentences, which were all overturned on appeal. The
appeals court upheld guilty verdicts for the two East Timorese defendants
on trial, one of which was overturned by Indonesias Supreme
Court in November 2004.
These results have created widespread cynicism among the East
Timorese public, who questions the fairness of a process that leads to
the prosecution of relatively low-ranking Timorese in Dili while the
sponsors of the violence remain freeand in many cases politically
prominentin Indonesia. East Timorese leaders, most notably
President Xanana Gusmao, have publicly stated an unwillingness to
pursue justice through the courts, instead preferring a reconciliationbased
approach. However, Foreign Affairs Minister and Nobel Prize
Laureate Jose Ramos Horta has publicly supported the idea of a U.N
commission to explore future options for justice.
Due to lack of donor support, the SCIU is scheduled to finish all pending
investigations by December 2004, with trials slated to end by May
2005. As a result, the Special Panels are not likely to address the vast
majority of political murders that took place in 1999.
At this writing, it was expected that by December 2004 or early 2005,
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan would announce the establishment
of a commission of experts. The commission likely will be charged with
assessing the successes and failings of both the Jakarta ad hoc trials on
East Timor and the parallel process at Dilis Special Panels for Serious
Crimes.
The Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in East
Timor (Comissao de Acolhimento, Verdade e Reconciliao de Timor
Leste, CAVR) is a national, independent, statutory authority mandated
to undertake truth-seeking, facilitate community reconciliation, report
on its work and findings, and make recommendations for further action.
Complementing the work of the SCIU, the CAVR has been largely successful
in its initial efforts to promote community-based national reconciliation,
an ambitious task after twenty-five years of violence in East
Timor.
East Timors national judiciary and criminal justice system remain weak,
under-resourced, and overburdened. As a result of insufficient staffing,
the Court of Appeal was shut down for eighteen months in 2002 and
2003. Due to public frustrations with formal judicial processes, many
serious crimes, including rape and domestic violence, are habitually
referred to traditional customary law mechanisms rather than to the
courts. Such mechanisms lack basic due process protections and regularly
fail to provide justice for victims, especially victims of sexual violence.
Police
The National Police Service of East Timor (Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste, PNTL), overseen by the United Nations, has grown in strength
and expertise. However, the service remains fragile and underdeveloped
with inadequate training and resources to maintain law and order in a
manner consistent with international human rights standards. Reports
continue of excessive use of force by police when arresting suspects and
abuse of detainees in police detention. The PNTL has now taken over
full control of East Timors thirteen districts from U.N. civilian police.
Key International Actors
The United Nations continues to have a presence in East Timor.
Although armed U.N. peacekeepers are likely to remain in the country
for the foreseeable future, the civilian arm of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) started phasing out in
May 2004, and the Mission is scheduled to finish in May 2005.
East Timor remains in desperate need of long-term international financial
assistance and receives its largest financial contributions from Japan,
Portugal, the United Kingdom, the European Union, the United States,
and Australia.
East Timor continues to have cordial relations with Indonesia, its
largest trading partner. Unresolved issues continue to be negotiated
through a series of bi-lateral talks between the two countries, including
the official border demarcation and how to resolve the ongoing problem
of East Timorese refugees and missing and separated children in
Indonesia.
India
The new coalition government led by the Congress party, which
replaced the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) after elections
in May 2004, has taken some important positive steps with regard
to respect for human rights. These include repeal of the oft-abused
Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) and a re-evaluation of federal government
educational policies that have fostered communitarian resentments.
Attacks on civilians by militant groups and Indian security forces continued
unabated before and after the change in government.
Notwithstanding the repeal of POTA, the government continues to use
other legislation to shield security forces from accountability. Indian
military, paramilitary, and police forces have engaged in serious human
rights abuses not just in conflict-zones such as Kashmir, but also when
dealing with criminal suspects and detainees.
The Gujarat governments failure to bring to justice those responsible
for massive communitarian riots in the state, in which thousands of
Muslims were killed and left homeless, continues to be a source of tension
throughout the entire country. However, the Supreme Court and
the National Human Rights Commission have taken several positive
steps to secure justice for the victims of the riots. The new government
of Manmohan Singh also has to contend with the Indian governments
systematic failure to protect the rights of Dalits, other marginalized
castes and religious minorities. The Congress Party itself has failed to
provide any justice to the victims of serious abuses against the Sikh
community in Delhi and Punjab twenty years ago.
India faces a burgeoning HIV/AIDS problem, as people with HIV and
their families face government and social discrimination.
Rights of Dalits and Indigenous Tribal Groups
Despite legislative measures to protect marginalized groups, discrimination
based on caste, social, or religious grounds continues widely in
practice. Local police often fail to implement the special laws set up to
protect Dalits and members of tribal groups.
Dalits, or so-called untouchables, continue to face violence and discrimination
in nearly every sphere of their lives. Abuses against Dalits range
from harassment and use of excessive force by security forces in routine
matters, to mutilations and killings by members of other castes for
attempting to cross caste barriers. Dalit women are targeted with sexual
violence. Not only do authorities regularly tolerate such discrimination
and violence, in some instances they actively encourage it. In one widely
noted incident in July 2004, for example, police used excessive force
against Dalits who tried to participate in a religious festival in Tamil
Nadu.
Indigenous peoples, or Adivasis, have suffered from high rates of displacement.
Scheduled Tribes that make up 8 percent of the total population
constitute 55 percent of displaced people. This has had a serious
effect on the overall development of these communities, particularly
tribal children. The government continues to use the Land Acquisition
Act of 1894 to displace the indigenous peoples from their lands without
sufficient compensation, as is evident in the Narmada Valley
Development Project. Tribal groups who have converted to Christianity
have been targeted for attack by extremist Hindu organizations.
Impunity of Security Forces
Indian security forces, including the military, paramilitary forces, and
the police, routinely abuse human rights with impunity. The Indian federal
government rarely prosecutes army and paramilitary troops in a credible and transparent manner. The result has been an increase in
serious violations by security forces throughout the country.
The governments repeal of the controversial Prevention of Terrorism
Act (POTA) was a major step forward for civil liberties in India. POTA
empowered security forces to hold individuals for up to 180 days without
filing charges, broadening the scope of the death penalty, dispensing
with the presumption of innocence by placing the burden of proof on
suspects, and admitting confessions into evidence despite the frequent
use of torture. The law was often used against marginalized communities
such as Dalits, indigenous groups, Muslims, and the political opposition.
But POTAs repeal has not ended the legal impunity that security agencies
enjoy. Laws such as the National Security Act, the Disturbed Areas
Act, the Armed Forces Special Powers Act or the Armed Forces (Jammu
and Kashmir) Special Powers Act have spawned abuses in various parts
of the country, including many deaths in custody and widespread allegations
of torture. These laws give security agencies unchecked powers of
detention that often foster torture during interrogation.
For instance in Kashmir and Manipur states, the sites of long-standing
insurgencies, Indian military and paramilitary forces have held suspects
in army camps and barracks and have routinely tortured them, in violation
of domestic and international laws.
In July 2004, Manipur state witnessed unprecedented civilian protests
against the Armed Forces Special Powers Act after army troops sexually
assaulted and killed a woman in custody. That Act provides security
forces virtual immunity for crimes committed in the course of duty. The
new government recently agreed to review the act.
Other laws such as the Public Safety Act and section 197 of the
Criminal Code of Procedure also raise human rights concerns. Section 197 extends immunity to public servants by requiring government
authorization to initiate the prosecution of public servants for crimes
that result from the discharge of their official functions. In effect, it
allows the government to shield security forces from any legal accountability.
In Kashmir, military, paramilitary, and police forces continue their practice
of torturing detainees and custodial killings. There has also been a
nationwide rise in allegations of extrajudicial executions by security
forces, who typically justify their actions by claiming to have killed suspects
in an exchange of gunfire.
Kashmir Conflict
Since November 2003, a cease-fire along the Line of Control in
Kashmir has provided tremendous relief to residents on both sides of
the de facto border. During the intermittent shelling, however, neither
Pakistan nor India took adequate precautions to protect civilians. The
violence inside Indian-controlled Kashmir continued.
Bomb and grenade attacks by militants in crowded market places constituted
the intentional targeting of civilians. Attacks, apparently by separatist
militants, on moderate Kashmiri leaders have hindered the peace
process. Indian police and security services often use excessive force,
and have been responsible for arbitrary detention, torture, and extrajudicial
execution. Since 1989, when the insurgency began, thousands of
people have disappeared at the hands of both militant and government
forces.
Legacy of Communal Violence
Large-scale episodes of communal violence remain unpunished. This
injustice continues to foster communal resentments throughout India.
There has still been no accountability for the deaths of more than two thousand Muslims in the western state of Gujarat during communal
violence that erupted following an attack on a train carrying Hindu pilgrims
in 2002. In Discouraging Dissent, a report released in August 2004,
Human Rights Watch documented the continued discrimination, intimidation
of witnesses, faulty investigation, and apparent interference from
members of the BJP state government in efforts to prosecute those
responsible for the anti-Muslim violence.
The Indian Supreme Court has already ordered two Gujarat cases to be
retried in another state. The criminal justice system in Gujarat, the
Supreme Court concluded, had been abused, misused and mutilated by
subterfuge. Human rights activists and lawyers have petitioned for
fresh investigations and trials in a number of cases where it was felt that
the local courts, prosecutors and police were hostile to Muslim complainants.
Despite these positive developments, rights activists in
Gujarat continue to be harassed on the basis of what police claim are
their anti-national activities. Witnesses, however, remain vulnerable
to threats.
2004 marked the twentieth anniversary of Operation Blue Star, a focal
point in the conflict between Sikh nationalists and state security apparatus
in the Punjab in the 1980s; and the anti-Sikh riots in New Delhi,
which resulted in more than three thousand Sikh deaths. In July, the
National Human Rights Commission called for claims in cases of summary
execution in Punjab. The assignment of individual criminal
responsibility for those and other crimes committed during the period,
however, remains elusive. Also in July, the Nanavati Commission of
inquiry served former prime minister P.V. Narasimha Rao, who was
home minister in the Congress Party government in 1984, a notice for
his failure to act to prevent the attacks on Sikhs. Two others who have
similarly been served notices have recently been appointed ministers in
the new Congress government.
Rights of Children
India has the largest number of working children in the world, millions
of whom work in the worst forms of child labor, including bonded
labor. The Indian government knows about these children and is
required by its own laws to protect them. Instead, for reasons of apathy,
caste bias, and corruption, many government officials deny that they
exist at all.
Both literacy and school enrollment rates overall have improved in the
last decade, but according to UNESCO, approximately half of students
completed grade five. Proportionately fewer girls than boys attend
school, and those that do, drop out at higher rates. Dalits also have
higher illiteracy and drop-out rates and face significant discrimination
in education.
Rights of Those Living with HIV/AIDS
The government estimates that 5.1 million people in India are living
with HIV/AIDS, though many experts suggest the number is much
higher. People with AIDS, as well as those traditionally at highest risk
sex workers, injection drug users, and men who have sex with men
face widespread stigmatization and discrimination. People with AIDS
are denied employment and access to education and healthcare. Those
at high risk face police harassment and other state-sponsored abuse that
undermines HIV prevention and AIDS care services for them. Married
women are also at risk because they are frequently unable to demand
condom use of their husbands, who may have extramarital sexual partners.
At least hundreds of thousands of children are living with HIV/AIDS.
Many more are otherwise seriously affected by Indias burgeoning epidemic
when they are forced to withdraw from school to care for sick
parents, are forced to work to replace their parents income, or are orphaned (losing one or both parents to AIDS). Children affected by
HIV/AIDS are being discriminated against in education and health
services, denied care by orphanages, and pushed onto the streets and
into the worst forms of child labor. Gender discrimination makes girls
more vulnerable to HIV transmission and makes it more difficult for
them to get care. Many children, especially the most vulnerable as well
as the professionals who care for them, are not getting the information
about HIV they need to protect themselves or to combat discrimination.
Inadequate Protection against Gender-based Discrimination
and Violence
Women and girls confront discrimination and violence in practically
every aspect of life. A strong preference for sons over daughters has led
to sharply skewed gender ratios in several states. Sex-selective abortions,
female feticide, and inadequate provision of food and health care to girls
has led to ratios of less than eight hundred women for every one thousand
men in some places. Despite several legal provisions for gender
equality, women still struggle to realize equal rights to property, marriage,
divorce, and protection under the law. Gender-based violence,
including domestic violence, sexual harassment, sexual assault, and trafficking
into forced labor and forced prostitution remain serious and
pervasive problems in India. Domestic violence includes dowry-related
abuses and bride-burning.
Activists continue to campaign for reform of rape laws to protect
women and children from all forms of sexual violence. The pervasive
understanding of rape is that it occurs only when a stranger uses force
on a woman. A marital exemption protects men from being prosecuted
for raping their wives. Marital rape is not recognized or penalized
unless the wife is under the age of fifteen or if she lives separately from
her husband. 
There is inadequate legal protection for abuse against girls, boys, and
men, or for sexual violence between spouses. In the absence of a more
suitable law, section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which penalizes consensual
sexual activity deemed unnatural, is also used to prosecute the
sexual abuse of children and women.
This provision has also been used to penalize men having sex with men,
and has been used as justification for harassment of HIV/AIDS educators.
The Delhi High Court dismissed a legal challenge to section 377,
dealing a disappointing set back for activists working to improve the
rights of gay and lesbian people in India.
Key International Actors
India receives 60 percent of its aid from multilateral donors such as the
World Bank. India decided in 2003 to stop receiving bilateral assistance
from all but six countries, including the United States, the United
Kingdom, and Russia. The decision is widely perceived as an effort to
bolster Indias image as a world power. Increasingly, India has been providing
significant amounts of financial and military aid to its smaller
neighbors, but has not used its increasing influence to make public calls
for better compliance with human rights standards.
The thawing of relations between India and Pakistan began in earnest
in November 2003 with a ceasefire across the line-of-control. That was
followed by a meeting between then-Prime Minister Vajpayee and
President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan in January 2004. The Congress
government continued its predecessors policy of dialogue with Pakistan
to resolve outstanding issues of conflict. The two countries leaders met
in New York in September, where Singh and Musharraf reiterated a
commitment to the bilateral dialogue to restore normalcy and a peaceful
negotiated settlement in Kashmir.
The easing of tensions between India and Pakistan has allowed the
United States to focus its dialogue with India on strengthening bilateral
relations between New Delhi and Washington. U.S. Secretary of State
Colin Powell visited India in March 2004. Human rights issues were
not discussed. The increasingly warm relations between the two countries,
despite the U.S. conferring the status of major non-NATO ally
upon Pakistan, will likely continue under Congress Party leadership.
Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage visited New Delhi in July,
reaffirming to Indian leaders that the United States sees India as an
important partner. India has also been strengthening its military-to-military
ties, conducting joint exercises with United States and other
NATO forces.
India is the largest provider of military assistance to Nepal, which is in
the midst of a brutal civil war. India has not used its position of influence
to push the Nepalese government to improve its human right
records, and has resisted calls for a multilateral peace conference, presumably
to avoid similar calls for resolving the Kashmir dispute.
India has been increasingly close to the brutal military government of
Burma. A delegation of Burmas political opposition was not allowed to
enter India to attend a conference on human rights. In September 2004,
the Indian government welcomed a delegation from the Burmese military
government, but did not raise any concerns about Burmas dismal
human rights record. Thousands of Burmese continue to seek refuge in
India, where they are not granted proper protections under international
law.
Indonesia
Indonesia held national elections in April, July, and September 2004
resulting in a new parliament and new president. While Indonesias first
ever direct presidential election marked another step toward full democratization,
significant barriers to rule of law and human rights remain in
place.
Pressing human rights concerns include the resurgent power of the military
in social and political affairs, ongoing impunity of security forces
responsible for atrocities, abuses associated with armed conflict in Aceh
province, repression in Papua, and disturbing signs of a return to intimidation
of the press and criminalization of dissent.
Indonesia also faces a domestic terrorist threat, with more than two
hundred civilians killed in bomb attacks since 2002 targeting western
institutions: the Australian embassy (September 9, 2004), the Marriott
hotel in Jakarta (August 5, 2003), and a nightclub frequented by
Australians in Bali (October 12, 2002). Under immense international
pressure, in particular from Australia and the United States, Indonesia
has begun addressing this threat through criminal prosecutions and a
slowly improving police force, although the perpetrators of some of the
attacks remain at large.
Elections
Indonesia held parliamentary elections in April 2004, and two rounds of
presidential elections in July and September (previously, members of
parliament had selected the president). Despite voter intimidation in
Aceh province, and widespread reports of money politics in all three
elections, domestic and international observers deemed the elections
notably peaceful and generally free and fair.
The April legislative election brought in a new parliament with the
majority of seats won by the Golkar party of former President (and
autocrat) Soeharto. This result was widely interpreted as motivated in
part by the electorates desire for a return to the security and stability of
the Soeharto era after several years of turbulence and instability.
Indonesias presidential election in July 2004 went to a second round
run-off in September between incumbent Megawati Sukarnoputri and
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, a former general and member of President
Megawatis cabinet. Yudhoyono won convincingly on a platform of
reform and anti-corruption.
Impunity and the TNI
The Indonesian armed forces (Tentara Nasional Indonesia, TNI) continues
to violate international human rights and humanitarian law with
almost complete impunity. Military operations in Papua and Aceh
provinces continue to be characterized by undisciplined and unaccountable
troops committing widespread abuses against civilians. Abuses
include extra-judicial executions, forced disappearances, beatings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, and drastic limits on freedom of movement.
Torture of detainees in police and military custody is also widespread
across the archipelago.
Indonesias executive and judicial branches regularly fail to address such
abuses. Indonesias judiciary in particular is corrupt and subject to political
interference.
To date there has been no legal accounting for the violence instigated
by pro-Soeharto forces in a failed attempt to stave off his fall from
power in 1998 or for the majority of atrocities committed during his
more than three decades in office. Trials for the 1984 killing of civilians by Indonesian security forces at Tanjung Priok in Jakarta finished with
weak verdicts amid ongoing reports of political interference and witness
intimidation.
Despite significant international pressure and interest, trials of senior
Indonesian officers in Jakarta failed to give a credible judicial accounting
for atrocities committed in East Timor in 1999. Twelve of the
eighteen defendants were acquitted. Four defendants who were found
guilty received nominal sentences, which were all overturned on appeal.
The appeals court initially upheld guilty verdicts for the two East
Timorese defendants on trial but one of these verdicts was overturned
by Indonesias Supreme Court in November 2004.
Aceh
In May 2003 the Indonesian government withdrew from peace negotiations
and launched full-scale military operations in Aceh. An estimated
forty thousand new troops were sent to the province to crush an estimated
five thousand members of the Free Aceh Movement (Gerakan
Aceh Merdeka, GAM) in Indonesias largest military operation since the
invasion of East Timor.
Three consecutive post-Soeharto presidents have failed to address the
economic, social, governance, and justice-related grievances underpinning
the fighting. The new war has led to widespread abuses against
civilians with little prospect for a military solution.
Human Rights Watch has documented serious abuses by both sides in
the context of the conflict. Dozens of interviews with Acehnese refugees
in Malaysia make clear that Indonesian security forces continue to
engage in widespread extra-judicial execution, torture, disappearances,
and restrictions on movement, assembly, and association.
At this writing, Aceh remains closed to most diplomats, international
aid workers, international press, and independent human rights monitors.
Indonesian journalists working in the province have faced threats
and reprisals from both Indonesia security forces and GAM. Indonesian
lawyers and NGOs documenting abuses against the Acehnese have been
accused by Indonesian security forces of being GAM sympathizers.
Despite these restrictions, Human Rights Watch interviewed three
dozen Acehnese prisoners in 2004, all of whom had faced serious mistreatment
while in detention; many had been tortured. All had been
detained and convicted without basic due process rights and often on
the basis of trumped up evidence or coerced confessions.
Papua
The Indonesian military regularly responds to low level attacks by the
Free Papua Movement (Organisasi Papua Merdeka, OPM) with disproportionate
force; unarmed civilians continue to be among those injured
or killed in military reprisals. Arbitrary detention, torture, disappearances,
and arson are widespread in this vast and isolated region of
Indonesia.
Jakartas decision in 2003 to divide Papua into three provinces, viewed
by many as an effort to dilute Papuan political aspirations, was met by
widespread local resistance. The province subsequently was divided into
two provinces, with legislated special autonomy provisions largely put
on hold.
Papua has seen a swelling of its population in recent years due to a large
influx of economic migrants and civilians fleeing conflict in other parts
of Indonesia. Tension between these groups is likely to rise unless
addressed. Among other things, indigenous Papuans are predominantly
rural and Christian while major immigrant groups are predominantly town-based and Muslim, creating a volatile mix susceptible to manipulation
by unscrupulous political leaders.
Papua has the highest HIV prevalence in Indonesia and discrimination
against people living with HIV/AIDS is widespread.
Political Prisoners
Although political space for dissent increased enormously after the fall
of President Soeharto, broadly worded laws limiting freedom of expression
remain on the books and are being increasingly used by authorities
to target outspoken critics. Soehartos first two successors, President
B.J. Habibie and President Abdurrahman Wahid, issued a series of
amnesties to release most political prisoners convicted during the
Soeharto era, but by 2003 at least forty-six new prisoners of conscience
had been imprisonedthirty-nine of them during President Megawati
Sukarnoputris tenure between July 2001 and October 2004.
Indonesian Migrant Workers
Hundreds of thousands of Indonesians migrate for work each year, and
the money they send back to Indonesia is critical to the countrys economy.
These workers continue to endure abuses by labor agents and to
confront corruption at every stage of the migration cycle. Women comprise
over 75 percent of these migrant workers. Women migrants typically
seek employment as domestic workers in Saudi Arabia, Malaysia,
and other countries in the Middle East and Asia.
In addition to problems these workers encounter while abroad (See
Malaysia), women domestic workers confront a wide range of human
rights abuses during recruitment, pre-departure training, and return to
Indonesia. Labor recruiters often fail to provide complete information
about job responsibilities, work conditions, or where the women can
turn for help. Some girls and women seeking employment become victims of human trafficking, as they are deceived about they type of work
they will perform, fall into debt bondage, or are otherwise coerced into
exploitative situations. Women expecting to spend one month in predeparture
training facilities in Indonesia are often trapped in heavilyguarded
centers for three to six months without any income. Most have
complained of overcrowded conditions and some reported inadequate
food and water, as well as verbal and physical abuse. Indonesia has taken
some positive steps to address this issue, but new migrant workers legislation
is deeply flawed and officials have not vigorously implemented
necessary protections.
Press Freedom
After the fall of Soeharto, Indonesia for a time was considered a center
of media freedom in Southeast Asia. Critical reporting and commentary
emerged on a scale unimaginable in the Soeharto era. However, the
trend more recently has been toward a more restrictive environment,
symbolized in 2004 by continuing far-reaching restrictions on and
intimidation of journalists in Aceh and by the one-year prison sentence
imposed on Bambang Harymurti, editor of the prominent independent
weekly newsmagazine Tempo, for an article alleged to have defamed
well-connected businessman Tomy Winata. In addition, private business
interests and military officers increasingly file lawsuits and rely on a
corrupt judiciary to influence coverage and in some cases impose potentially
crippling monetary judgments on independent news providers.
Human Rights Defenders
Since the fall of Soeharto the climate for human rights defenders in
Indonesia has improved. However, in Aceh human rights defenders still
suffer threats and intimidation from security forces and GAM when
monitoring and investigating human rights abuses. 
On September 7, 2004 one of Indonesias most outspoken and respected
human rights defenders, Munir, died under suspicious circumstances on
a plane to the Netherlands. The autopsy report, released in November,
concluded that Munir had died due to arsenic poisoning. At this writing
a police investigation was underway.
Key International Actors
Japan is Indonesias largest aid donor, and in 2003 the Koizumi government
played an increasingly important role in helping Indonesia address
pressing problems, most noticeably the conflict in Aceh.
Indonesias relationship with the United States continues to focus on
joint efforts to fight terrorism. Although U.S. military assistance to
Indonesia remains conditioned on accountability for human rights abuses,
the U.S. has made it clear that co-operation in the war on terrorism
is more critical than human rights to normalization of the relationship.
At this writing, Indonesian failure to bring to justice those responsible
for the shooting death of one Papuan and two U.S. citizens in Papua in
2002 continues to limit formal military cooperation. Initial police and
nongovernmental organization investigations had indicated military
involvement in the murders.
The United Nations has a strong presence in Indonesia concentrating
on humanitarian and health programs in conflict areas. U.N. access to
Aceh, however, remains severely restricted.
Indonesias failure to successfully prosecute officers and officials responsible
for atrocities committed in East Timor following the U.N.-supervised
independence referendum there in 1999 has put the onus on U.N.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to act: Annan has said that he would
closely monitor progress of the Indonesian response to the crimes in
East Timor to see that it is a credible response in accordance with
international human rights principles. At this writing, it was expected that in December 2004 or early 2005 Annan would announce the establishment
of a Commission of Experts to assess the success and failings
of both the Jakarta trials, described above, and the parallel process at
Dilis Special Panels for Serious Crimes.
A number of U.N. special rapporteurs have requested to visit Indonesia
to no avail, including the special representative of the secretary-general
on the situation of human rights defenders, the special rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, the special rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, and
the special rapporteur on torture.
Indonesia withdrew from formal Inernational Monetary Fund supervision
of monetary and fiscal policy at the end of 2003, but continues to
require considerable external financial assistance. The Consultative
Group on Indonesia (CGI) meeting, an annual conference of
Indonesias largest donors convened by the World Bank, continues to
pledge significant sums, although donors increasingly are conditioning
assistance on good governance and legal reform.
Malaysia
Malaysia witnessed its first change in leadership in more than two
decades when Abdullah Badawi took over from Prime Minister
Mahathir Mohamad in October 2003. While there has been some
progress since that timenoteworthy examples include the release from
prison of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim in September
2004 and the opening of a notorious detention facility to outside scrutiny
in May 2004significant obstacles remain in place.
Prominent human rights concerns in Malaysia include arbitrary detention
of alleged militants under the Internal Security Act (ISA); restrictions
on media freedom; constraints on judicial independence; and abuses
against refugees and migrants.
Arbitrary Detention of Alleged Islamic Militants
The Malaysian government is holding more than eighty detainees under
the ISA without charge or any type of judicial review. Over the years,
the ISA has been used as a tool to crack down on political opposition
and peaceful dissent. After September 11, 2001, the ISA took on new
life with the arrests of scores of Islamists alleged to be connected to
international terrorist groups. More than three years later, the
Malaysian government has yet to publicly produce evidence against the
detainees or bring any of them to trial.
Human Rights Watch investigations have revealed that police and security
authorities subjected many of the detainees to serious abuses,
including sexually humiliating interrogations, beatings, and sleep deprivation.
In addition, the authorities have denied the detainees basic due
process rights. In the first several weeks after their arrest, the detainees
did not have access to lawyers and were threatened with punishment
and indefinite incarceration for trying to legally challenge their detention.
Prime Minister Abdullah has taken some steps toward remedying the
abuses under the ISA. For the first time in Malaysias history, in May
2004, he permitted journalists to enter the notorious Kamunting
Detention Center where ISA detainees are held. According to media
reports, detainees spoke during the visits of abuses they had suffered
after their arrest. The government announced that the Malaysian
National Human Rights Commission (SUHAKAM) would conduct an
investigation into allegations of abuse at the short-term detention centers
where detainees typically are held for several weeks before being
sent to Kamunting. At this writing, however, SUHAKAM had yet to
report any findings. The government continues to bar independent
monitoring or investigation of conditions inside Kamunting prison.
Restrictions on Media Freedom
The Malaysian media continues to face significant resistance and is
muted in its criticism of government policy. The government maintains
its control through a network of laws curbing free expression, as well as
through direct day-to-day monitoring and control of the media.
Malaysiakini, an independent news website, remains one of the few
openly critical media outlets. While the new government of Prime
Minister Abdullah has not indicated that it will impose new restrictions
on the media, it has not repudiated the censorial policies of the
Mahathir government.
Independence of the Judiciary
The Malaysian judiciary has struggled to regain its independence since
the so-called Operation Lalang crisis of 1988, in which the government
removed several senior judges deemed likely to challenge government
policies. Time after time, in politically charged cases, Malaysias
judiciary has found in favor of the government, with judges aware that
their careers would suffer if they ruled otherwise.
In September 2004, Malaysias highest court ordered the release of
Anwar Ibrahim from prison, potentially signaling a transition toward
greater judicial independence. The former Deputy Prime Minister had
served a nine-year sentence when the court granted his appeal and overturned
the sodomy conviction against him. Anwars trial had been widely
criticized domestically and internationally for being politically motivated
and marred by serious violations of due process.
The court will face another test of its independence in a politically
charged case when it considers the appeal of human rights advocate
Irene Fernandez. Fernandez was convicted in 2003 under Malaysias
restrictive press laws for maliciously publishing false news and sentenced
to a year in prison. Fernandez was arrested in 1995 when
Tenaganita, a nongovernmental organization headed by Fernandez,
published a report documenting beatings, sexual violence, and inadequate
food and water in Malaysias immigration detention camps.
Fernandez seven-year trial, the longest in Malaysian history, became a
symbol of the Malaysian governments hostile stance toward human
rights defenders. At this writing, she was out on bail pending the outcome
of her appeal.
Deportation of Refugees
In July 2004, the Malaysian Home Minister announced plans to round
up and deport some 1.2 million undocumented migrant workers, the
majority of whom are Indonesian. In 2002, a similar mass deportation
program resulted in the death of dozens of Indonesian, including children,
from dehydration and disease while stranded in transit areas waiting
to find a way home.
Among those likely to be sent back to Indonesia are some ten thousand
refugees from the war-torn Aceh region of Indonesia. These refugees
are fleeing a brutal conflict marked by routine, grave human rights violations
(see Indonesia), only to encounter further abuse in Malaysia, where they are denied status as refugees, abused by Malaysia police, and
then often sent back to Indonesia where their lives are at risk. Malaysia
is not a signatory to the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees,
and does not distinguish between Acehnese refugees and other illegal
immigrants, even though the United Nations High Commissioner of
Refugees (UNHCR) has designated all Acehnese refugees to be persons
of concern. In 2003, Malaysia forcibly returned thousands of
Acehnese refugees; such returns continued in 2004.
Abuse of Migrant Workers
Because of its economic success, Malaysia has long attracted migrants
from across Asia. While it relies heavily each year on more than two
million migrant workers from Indonesia, Bangladesh, the Philippines,
and India to meet its labor demands, Malaysia fails to protect their basic
rights.
Human Rights Watch research in 2004 focused on conditions faced by
Indonesian women and girls who work as domestic workers in Malaysia.
They typically work sixteen to eighteen hour days, seven days a week,
without any holidays, and often are forbidden from leaving the houses
where they work, even when not on duty. Some workers confront physical,
verbal, and sexual abuse from employers and labor agents.
Indonesian domestic workers earn U.S.$93-105 per month, less than
half the amount that Filipina domestic workers and other low-wage
workers make. Employers often fail to make complete payments or to
pay at all. In the worst cases, deceived about the conditions and type of
work, confined at the workplace, and receiving no salary, Indonesian
women are victims of trafficking and forced labor.
The Malaysian governments inadequate monitoring of workplace conditions
and profit-motivated labor agencies prevent many domestic
workers from reporting abuses or seeking redress through the Malaysian justice system. Labor agencies do not uniformly provide
domestic workers with information about their rights or, in cases of
abuse, access to Malaysian and Indonesian authorities who could assist
them with legal, health, and other support services. In many cases, labor
agents are guilty of abuses themselves or actively obstruct domestic
workers access to information or help.
Indonesian domestic workers are excluded from several legal protections
guaranteed other workers by Malaysias employment laws and previous
bilateral labor agreements with Indonesia. For example, they are
excluded from section XII of Malaysias Employment Act of 1955,
which would otherwise entitle them to one day of rest per week, and
limit work hours to eight hours per day and forty-eight hours per week.
Malaysias immigration laws and policies often prevent domestic workers
from escaping abusive situations or seeking help from Malaysian
authorities. Domestic workers who escape from abusive situations lose
their legal status once they have left their employers home, and may be
classified as illegal immigrants, detained, and deported, instead of
receiving access to help.
The upcoming deportation of over one million undocumented workers,
and the proposal of enlisting help from volunteers to carry out immigration
raids, only increases the likelihood that abused domestic workers,
rather than being identified as individuals in need of protection and
support, will be summarily deported.
Key International Actors
The September 11 attacks on the United States dramatically altered the
relationship between the U.S. and Malaysia. Previously, the U.S. had
been publicly critical of Malaysias human rights record in general, and
its misuse of the ISA in particular. But the U.S. war on terror led the
U.S. to change its course and dramatically tone down its criticism.
Malaysia has cooperated extensively with the U.S. in counterterrorism
efforts, regularly sharing intelligence information and offering access to
ISA prisoners for interrogations. The countries collaborated on creation
of the Southeast Asia Regional Center for Counter Terrorism, established
in Malaysia in July 2003 with the assistance and training of the
U.S. As a result of this cooperation, Malaysian-U.S. relations have
improved significantly, and the U.S. has shown little desire to criticize
Malaysias human rights record. The U.S. practice indefinitely detaining
terror suspects without charge or trial in the United States, at
Guantanamo Bay, and elsewhere in the world, has weakened its desire,
as well as its ability, to engage in effective human rights advocacy on
behalf of administrative detainees in Malaysia.
In 2004, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which
Malaysia remains an influential member, assumed an increasingly
prominent role in regional affairs. ASEAN facilitated trade negotiations
among member states and between member states and non-member
countries such as India and Japan, and, in September, provided a forum
for member states to discussincreased cooperation and information
sharing on security issues. Despite its increasing importance, ASEAN
has failed to make human rights a priority, remaining silent on issues
such as Malaysias denial of due process rights to ISA detainees.
Nepal
The brutal eight-year civil war between rebels of the Communist Party
of Nepal (Maoist) and government security forces raged on in 2004.
Several serious encounters led to significant casualties on both sides.
Both sides spoke publicly about resuming negotiations, without any real
impact on the fighting.
Under intense international pressure to improve its human rights
record, the Nepali government acknowledged occasional aberrations
in 2004 and publicly renewed its pledge to abide by its human rights
and humanitarian law obligations. In spite of this pledge, the government
has not improved its conduct of the war. Its commitment to support
the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has similarly
gone unfulfilled. The government and its agencies continue to discount
human rights workers as either pro-Maoist or nave.
As the result of months of anti-regression demonstrations in
Kathmandu, the highly unpopular government directly appointed by
the king gave way to an unelected multi-party cabinet in June 2004.
The governments vague promises about holding elections soon were
not satisfied as of this writing, and no election date had been
announced.
The conflict and the political stalemate have had a devastating impact
on the already desperately poor rural population. Nepal is among the
poorest countries in Asia. Almost 40 percent of Nepals twenty-three
million people live below the poverty line. Life expectancy at birth is
just 59.6 years and infant and maternal mortality rates are among the
highest in the region. The literacy rate is only 44 percent. The governments
limited capacity to provide essential health and education services
has been severely curtailed by lack of access to Maoist controlled
areas.
Abuses Associated with the Civil War
Civilians in Nepal are all too often caught in the middle of the civil war.
Refusing to provide shelter to the rebels puts villagers at risk from
Maoists who are ruthless in their punishments; providing such support,
however, leaves them vulnerable to reprisal attacks from the state security
forces. Human Rights Watch documented widespread abuses by
both sides in 2004.
Summary executions of captured combatants and detained civilians are
common in Nepal. According to the NHRC and other human rights
organizations, government security forces have been responsible for
approximately 2000 extrajudicial killings since 2001. In 2004, Human
Rights Watch documented an ongoing pattern of killings which confirms
these reports.
When people are killed during security operations, government security
forces (operating in a joint structure as the Unified Command) almost
always issue a statement identifying the dead as Maoist rebels killed
during exchange of gunfire. Investigations into the circumstances of the
deaths have often revealed that many individuals were already in the
custody of the armed forces at the time they were killed.
According the U.N. Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary
Disappearances, Nepal has the largest number of enforced disappearances
in the world. The NHRC, which closely monitors enforced disappearances,
documented 662 cases of enforced disappearances involving
Nepali security forces between November 2000 and November 2003. If
anything, the crisis of disappearances in Nepal has become more severe
since the breakdown of the last ceasefire on August 27, 2003hundreds
have been detained or abducted since then, and many remain missing.
Disappearances are reported throughout the country. In almost all
cases, the disappeared persons were last seen in the custody of government security forces. Those detained are held in informal places of
detention: tents, government buildings, containers, and army training
centers, making it virtually impossible for family members and lawyers
to learn their fate or locate and gain access to them. The armys disregard
of Supreme Court habeas corpus orders and its blatant lies to the
courts have seriously undermined judicial oversight of detentions, one
of the most important legal protections against disappearances.
The Maoists also perpetrate serious abuses. The brutal summary execution
of civilians is a favored tactic of the Maoists. Often, the executions
are preceded by torture, in many cases in front of villagers and family
members. The Maoists have assassinated or executed suspected government
informants, local political activists or non-Maoist party officials,
local government officials and civil servants, and individuals who refuse
extortion demands from the Maoists. The Maoists also have executed
off-duty army and police officers, often capturing them when they go to
their villages to visit family members. In the vast majority of cases, the
Maoists claim responsibility for the killings, explaining that the executed
individuals are informers, a vague charge which encompasses any
act which defies Maoist dictates. Typically, the Maoists return to the village
of their victim, informing the family or villagers of the killing.
The Maoists clearly use targeted killings to intimidate local villagers,
ensuring that villagers know that deviance from Maoist demands will
result in a brutal death.
Use of Children
Accounts gathered by Human Rights Watch indicate that the Maoists
recruit children, making them carry ammunition and supplies to the
front lines, and using them as cooks and porters.
Because of security concerns and difficulties in gaining access to
Maoist-controlled areas, both government and international aid workers have limited capacity to gather facts, provide protection, and assist former
child soldiers with reintegration into society. While some child soldiers
reportedly returned home after a ceasefire was declared on January
29, 2003, they were not officially demobilized. At the time, these children
told journalists they were afraid that they could be re-recruited if
the conflict resumed; what has happened to them since the breakdown
of talks in August 2003 is unknown.
In addition to the use of children in combat, the Maoists have forcibly
abducted students from schools for political indoctrination. This practice
is well-reported and is readily admitted by the Maoists. Children
and adults who have been abducted describe being given lectures on
Maoism and on their rights as citizens, and being taught Maoist songs
and dances. While most abducted children are returned days or weeks
later, others remain unaccounted for. Some of the girls released after
such abductions have reported sexual abuse to human rights groups.
The Maoist practice of calling either nationwide or regional bandhs
(strikes) has had a paralyzing impact on most businesses and operations.
Of particular concern are the forced closures of schools on strike days,
which results in children missing an inordinate amount of school time.
Violence and Discrimination Based on Gender and Sexual
Orientation
Gender-based violenceincluding domestic violence, sexual assault, and
trafficking into forced labor and forced prostitutionremains pervasive
and deeply entrenched in Nepal. Despite some positive legislative
changes in 2002 providing women with improved rights to obtain abortions
and to inherit parental property, legal discrimination prevents
women from equal rights in passing citizenship to their children or to
foreign spouses, from equal property rights, and from equal rights in
marriage and divorce. There is no domestic violence law, and several
limitations in the rape and sexual offense laws prevent victims from seeking redress through the justice system. Despite the legalization of
abortion, some women remain imprisoned on abortion-related offenses.
Nepali authorities continue to turn a blind eye to a persistent pattern of
police abuse of metis (biological males who cross-dress); men suspected
of having sex with men; women suspected of having sex with women;
and HIV/AIDS outreach workers. In other cases, police have deliberately
failed to protect such individuals against abuses. These abuses violate
both Nepalese and international law, which protect the dignity and
equality of all human beings. They also heighten the risk of HIV/AIDS
for people and communities already marginalized and made vulnerable
by social stigma.
Key International Actors
The government of Nepal has refused any international or foreign
mediation of the civil war against the Maoists, and resisted strong pressure
to allow a joint national and international commission to monitor
human rights conditions in the country. It dangerously stereotypes
human rights workers as leftists and therefore anti-government. When
senior commissioners at the NHRC have received death threats, the
government has provided little or no protection or cooperation.
During the February-August 2003 ceasefire, the international community
increased its pressure on the government to respect human rights.
The most significant international actors in Nepal are India, the United
States, the United Kingdom, and the European Union. India has
opposed a larger international monitoring or mediation role in Nepal
because it opposes a similar international role in Kashmir. India is also
battling its own insurgent Maoist groups. The United States has continued
its policy of refusing to negotiate with Maoist organizations, and
has cast Nepals Maoists as enemies in the war on terror. More
recently, the U.S. passed a bill conditioning military assistance on the
governments compliance with a commitment to cooperate with the NHRC to resolve disappearances. The U.K. has continued its long
tradition of military cooperation with Nepal, a relationship strengthened
by the recruitment of Nepali Gurkha soldiers into the U.K. military.
The international community has supported the NHRC in its appeal to
both the government and Maoists to agree to independent human
rights monitoring in conflict zones. The two sides have agreed to neutral
monitoring as a matter of principle, but neither side has signed a
human rights accord allowing for such monitoring. On February 2,
2004, the E.U. issued a demarche to the Nepali government urging it to
take the deteriorating human rights situation seriously. In March 2004,
the government publicly pledged to abide by its obligations under
human rights and humanitarian law. The pledge came days before anticipated
condemnation of Nepal at the sixtieth session of the United
Nations High Commission for Human Rights in Geneva. Although
welcome, the timing of the pledge aroused serious suspicion, as it
appeared to be timed to ward off a critical Item 9 resolution at the
CHR hearings. Since then, the government has done little to fulfill its
commitments.
Nepal continues to host over 100,000 refugees from Bhutan and has
failed to make progress in finding a durable solution to the fifteen-year
impasse. UNHCR is planning to withdraw assistance in 2005, leaving
the fate of the refugees uncertain. This population is at high risk of
statelessness.
North Korea
The government of North Korea (The Democratic Peoples Republic of
Korea, DPRK) remains among the worlds most repressive governments.
Leader Kim Jong Il has ruled with an iron fist and a bizarre cult
of personality since his father, former President Kim Il Sung, died in
1994. Virtually every aspect of political, social, and economic life is controlled
by the government. Although North Korea has acceded to the
International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic,
Social, and Cultural Rights, it routinely and egregiously violates nearly
all international human rights standards.
Basic services, such as access to health care and education, are parceled
out according to a classification scheme that divides people into three
groupscore, wavering, and hostilebased on the governments
assessment of their and their familys political loyalty. There is no freedom
of the press or religion. The judiciary is neither impartial nor
independent. There is no organized political opposition, no labor
activism, and no independent civil society.
No human rights organization has direct access to the country for
research or investigation. Human Rights Watch has documented
abysmal human rights conditions through interviews with refugees and
escapees from prison camps.
According to U.S. and South Korean officials, up to 200,000 political
prisoners are believed to be toiling in prisons, while non-political prisoners,
the number of which is unknown, are also mistreated and endure
at times appalling prison conditions.
North Koreas deadly famine in the 1990s reportedly killed as many as
two million people. Hundreds of thousands of North Koreans crossed
the border into China for both political and economic reasons and
many now live in hiding from North Korean agents who capture and repatriate them for the crime of leaving their country or from
Chinese authorities who categorize them as illegal immigrants and
forcibly return them to North Korea. Humanitarian groups working in
China also report a worsening problem of trafficking of North Korean
women. Many are abducted or duped into forced marriages, prostitution
or outright sexual slavery, while some voluntarily enter such servitude
to survive or make money. Chinese authorities also routinely
harass aid workers providing assistance to these refugees. Repatriated
North Koreans can face detention, torture, and even execution.
Freedom of Press and Religion
There is no freedom of the press in North Korea. All media are either
run or controlled by the state. All TVs and radios are fixed so that they
can transmit only state channels. The simple act of watching or listening
to the foreign pressor tampering with TVs or radios for this purpose
is a crime that carries harsh punishment. All publications are subject
to supervision and censorship by the state. There is no freedom of
religion. All prayers and religious studies are supervised by the state,
and often used for state propaganda. Independent worship is not
allowed.
North Korean refugees who recently escaped the country have said that
more knowledge of the outside world is slowly spreading by word of
mouth from residents who watch Chinese TV channels despite the risk
of being arrested.
Refugees
Thousands of North Koreans escape to South Korea every year, a small
number compared to those seeking refuge in China. The vast majority
of North Korean refugees in China crossed the border without state
permission, which is required under North Korean law for travel for
any purpose inside the country or abroad. Although the restriction on movement has reportedly become more relaxed inside the country,
authorities still consider it an act of treason to leave North Korea without
permission.
If repatriated, North Korean refugees are interrogated by North
Korean police who often use torture to extract confessions. If they are
found to have crossed the border only once just to find food, they are
usually released. However, if they are found to be repeat offenders or
have had contact with westerners or South Koreans while in China,
especially missionaries, they become subject to harsh punishments
including terms in forced labor camps.
In the fall of 2004, hundreds of North Korean refugees were flown
from Southeast Asia to Seoul via Vietnam. North Korea demanded that
they be repatriated back to North Korea, accusing South Korea of kidnapping
the refugees, and stopped all government-level talks. South
Korea accepts thousands of North Korean refugees for resettlement
every year, far more than any other country that legally admits North
Korean refugees.
Detention and Torture
Those arrested in North Korea are divided into different categories,
depending on the seriousness of their crime, and sent to one of the
corresponding prison facilities. All individuals held in North Korean
prisons are subjected to forced labor. No legal counsel is provided or
allowed throughout the process. Those who are sent to prison face
cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment; many die in prison because of
mistreatment, malnutrition, and lack of medical care. Torture appears to
be endemic.
Death Penalty
Under North Koreas penal code, premeditated murder and so-called
anti-state crimes such as treason, sedition, and acts of terrorism are
punishable by death. During the famine in the mid-1990s, the North
Korean regime added another crime to the list: theft of food. Numerous
eyewitness accounts by North Korean refugees have detailed how executions
are carried out publicly, often at crowded market places, and in
the presence of children.
Right to Education and Work
North Koreas politically determined classification system restricts nearly
all aspects of education, labor, and health care. Although all North
Korean children are required to attend school for eleven years, it is generally
children of the core group who are allowed to advance to college
and hold prominent occupations. Those belonging to wavering
or hostile groups have very limited or no choice in education or work.
Since the famine, even the compulsory education system is barely functioning
in many parts of the country, as many teachers and students
spend more time trying to find food than in classrooms. North Korea
advertises itself as a workers heaven, and has numerous trade unions in
all industrial sectors, but the unions are all controlled by the state.
Strikes and collective bargaining are illegal, as are all independently
organized labor activities.
Discrimination in Medical Care
Access to medical care is also strictly based on the class system, as hospitals
admit and treat patients depending on their social background.
While hospitals for the elite class are equipped with modern medicine
and facilities, those for the rest of the population often lack even very
basic supplies such as bandages or antibiotics. Many North Korean citizens, especially children, suffer from diseases that can be easily treated.
According to testimonies from North Korean refugees, doctors at many
hospitals are forced to conduct surgeries without anesthesia and recycle
needles and bandages.
Civil Society
There is no organized political opposition in North Korea. The ruling
Workers Party controls the parliament, which has only symbolic power,
and all other smaller parties are pro-government and state-controlled.
There are no independent nongovernmental organizations of any kind,
including human rights organizations. State elections are held periodically,
but all candidates are state candidates. Voting is openly monitored
by state officials, and results in an almost 100 percent voting rate and
100 percent approval rate.
Expression of dissent against government policy or doctrines is considered
a serious offense against the state. For political crimes, whether
actual or perceived, collective punishment of entire families is the norm.
Even when the family members of political offenders are not sent to
prison, their choice of schools, residence, and jobs becomes severely
restricted, potentially for generations.
Key International Actors
North Koreas relationship with the international community is seriously
complicated by its self-proclaimed possession of nuclear weapons and
its dismal record on human rights and economic development. In this
atmosphere, North Koreas major international interlocutors are its
immediate neighbors, South Korea and China, both of which wish to
avoid a major humanitarian catastrophe on the Korean peninsula, and
Japan and the United States, which seek to curb North Koreas nuclear
threat.
In late September 2004, North Korea announced that it had created
nuclear weapons to serve as a deterrent against increasing U.S. nuclear
threats. Six nationsNorth Korea, South Korea, the United States,
China, Russia and Japanhave been holding talks for years with little
result to address North Koreas nuclear weapons program.
In the summer the same year, the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights appointed Vitit Muntarbhorn, a Thai academic, as
Special Rapporteur on North Korea. The move came after the
Commission adopted a resolution for the second straight year calling on
North Korea to respect basic human rights. North Korea has largely
shunned talks with U.N. human rights experts, and has yet to engage in
dialogue with Muntarbhorn.
In an unprecedented move, two members of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child were able to visit North Korea in 2004. During
their visit, they highlighted mistreatment of children returned from
China, as well as issues of economic exploitation, trafficking, and juvenile
justice, including cases of torture.
Separately, North Korea has been aggressively pursuing better diplomatic
relations and foreign investment. In the latest move, North Korea
invited British Foreign Office Minister Bill Rammell to Pyongyang in
September 2004 to discuss its nuclear weapons program and human
rights record. According to Rammell, North Korean officials admitted
that Pyongyang attaches little importance to human rights and confirmed
the existence of labor camps for re-education, a small step forward
from previous blanket denials of any human rights abuse.
In October, the U.S. Congress passed and the president signed into law
the North Korea Human Rights Act of 2004, calling for more Koreanlanguage
radio broadcasts into North Korea and increased funding for
nongovernmental organizations that promote human rights, democracy,
rule of law and the development of a market economy.
Pakistan
Since President Pervez Musharraf seized office in a military coup detat
five years ago, Pakistans military has acted with increasing impunity to
enforce its writ over the state and to protect its grip on Pakistans economic
resources, especially land. For instance, in the Okara district of
the militarys traditional stronghold of Punjab, paramilitary forces acting
in conjunction with the army killed and tortured farmers who
refused to cede their land rights to the army. Other pressing human
rights concerns in the country include a rise in sectarian violence; legal
discrimination against and mistreatment of women and religious
minorities; arbitrary detention of political opponents; harassment and
intimidation of the media; and lack of due process in the conduct of the
war on terror in collaboration with the United States. A major military
offensive against alleged Taliban and Al-Qaeda forces in the South
Waziristan area bordering Afghanistan resulted in massive displacement
of civilians and scores of deaths.
Gender-based Violence and Discrimination
Violence against women and girls, including domestic violence, rape,
honor killings, acid attacks, and trafficking, are rampant in Pakistan.
The existing legal code discriminates against women and girls and creates
major obstacles to seeking redress in cases of violence. Survivors of
violence encounter unresponsiveness and hostility at each level of the
criminal justice system, from police who fail to register or investigate
cases of gender-based violence to judges with little training or commitment
to womens equal rights.
Under Pakistans existing Hudood Ordinance, proof of rape generally
requires the confession of the accused or the testimony of four adult
Muslim men who witnessed the assault. If a woman cannot prove her
rape allegation she runs a very high risk of being charged with fornication
or adultery, the criminal penalty for which is either a long prison sentence and public whipping, or, though rare, death by stoning. The
testimony of women carries half the weight of a mans testimony under
this ordinance. The government has yet to repeal or reform the
Hudood Ordinance, despite repeated calls for its repeal by the government-
run National Commission on the Status of Women, as well as
womens rights and human rights groups. Informed estimates suggest
that over 200,000 cases under the Hudood laws are under process at
various levels in Pakistans legal system.
According to Pakistans Interior Ministry, there have been more than
4,000 honor killings in the last six years. Nongovernmental groups
recorded more than 1,300 honor killings in 2003. Proposed legislation
on honor killings drafted in consultation with NGOs and the Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan was sidelined in favor of a far weaker
bill.
Religious Freedom
Sectarian violence increased significantly in Pakistan in 2004. While
estimates suggest that at least 4,000 people, largely from the minority
Shia Muslim sect, have died as a result of sectarian violence since 1980,
the last five years have witnessed a steep rise in incidents of sectarian
violence. For example, in October 2004, at least seventy people were
killed in sectarian attacks perpetrated by both Sunni and Shia extremist
groups in the cities of Multan and Karachi. In recent years, Sunni
extremists, often with connections to militant organizations such as
Sipah-e Sahaba Pakistan, have targeted the Shia. There has been a
sharp increase in the number of targeted killings of Shia, particularly
Shia doctors, in recent years. Those implicated in acts of sectarian violence
are rarely prosecuted and virtually no action has been taken to
protect the affected communities.
Discrimination and persecution on grounds of religion continued in
2004 and an increasing number of blasphemy cases were registered.
The Ahmadi religious community in particular was the target of religious
extremists. Ahmadis also continued to be arrested and faced
charges under various provisions of the Blasphemy Law for allegedly
contravening the principles of Islam. Charges filed include preaching,
distributing objectionable literature, and preparing to build a place
of worship. Other religious minorities, including Christians and
Hindus, also continue to face discrimination.
Military Impunity
In December 2003, in order to push through controversial constitutional
reforms that increased his powers, General Musharraf acceded to
widespread demands to step down as army chief as part of the process of
returning the country to civilian rule. But in October 2004, he reneged
on the pledge made to the country in a televised speech by securing the
passage of the The President to Hold Another Office Act.
During President Musharrafs tenure, Pakistans military increased its
influence over the political and economic life of all Pakistanis. The
starkest example of military impunity came from the brutal repression
of a farmers movement in Okara district of Punjab province, where
tens of thousands of tenant farmers have resisted efforts by the military
to usurp their legal rights to some of the most fertile farmland in
Pakistan. Pakistani paramilitary forces subjected the farmers to a campaign
of murder, arbitrary detention, torture, forced divorces, and
summary dismissals from employment. On two occasions, the paramilitaries
literally besieged villages in the area of dispute, thus preventing
people, food, and public services from entering or leaving for weeks on
end. In Okara, senior military and political officials have either participated
in or allowed violations to occur. 
War on Terror
The conduct of the war on terror in Pakistan led to serious violations
of human rights. Suspects arrested and held on terrorism charges frequently
were detained without charge and subject to trials without
proper judicial process.
In September 2003, Pakistani authorities detained thirteen young men
and boys from Malaysia and Indonesia, the youngest of whom were
under sixteen at the time of arrest, legally attending an Islamic school in
Karachi. They were not alleged to have engaged in any illegal activity,
but were arrested on the claim that they were being trained to engage
in future terrorist activities. They were arrested by Pakistani security
forces, held incommunicado, and interrogated by Pakistani and U.S.
security personnel, and then shipped to their home countries. No
charges have been brought against any of them.
Since March 2004, the Pakistan Army has engaged in an ongoing operation
in Pakistans Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along
the Afghan border, with particularly heavy fighting in the South
Waziristan region. The Pakistan government did not apply international
humanitarian law to the conflict, arguing that though the offensive
was being conducted by its army, it was an anti-terrorist operation. The
government used the draconian Frontier Crimes Regulations to justify
the use of methods such as collective punishment, and economic blockades
of civilians. While Pakistani authorities have prohibited most independent
verification of the events in the South Waziristan, reports of
extrajudicial executions, house demolitions, arbitrary detentions, and
the harassment of journalists abound.
According to government sources, at least sixty-three foreign and local
combatants were killed in the operation. In addition, as the spring
offensive got underway, army and paramilitary troops reportedly evicted
between 25,000 and 35,000 civilians from the area in and around the village of Kalusha on March 16, 2004. Reports indicate that the
Pakistan government made no arrangements for those evicted and
scores of dwellings were destroyed in the subsequent fighting. Locals
reported that upon their return they found belongings and cattle stolen
and several homes arbitrarily converted into military check-posts.
In the immediate aftermath of the army operation, the Pakistan Army
reported the capture of 215 fighters, of whom at least seventy-three
were foreigners from Chechnya, Chinas predominantly Muslim
Xinjiang province, Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and various Arab countries.
There has been no confirmation from the Pakistan government about
the whereabouts of those arrested. Military operations are ongoing in
South Waziristan .
Arbitrary Arrest and Detention of Political Opponents
The government continued to use the National Accountability Bureau
(NAB) and a host of anti-corruption and sedition laws to jail political
opponents or blackmail them into changing their political stance or loyalties
or at the very least to cease criticizing the military authorities.
In April 2004, the president of an opposition party, Makhdoom Javed
Hashmi of the Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy, was sentenced
to twenty-three years in prison on sedition charges for reading
an anti-Musharraf letter to assembled journalists. Meanwhile, Asif
Zardari, husband of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto has begun
his ninth consecutive year in prison. Initially the government filed
twelve cases against Zardari, most based on charges of corruption and
financial impropriety. Though he has been bailed in eight and acquitted
in four of these, in December 2001 a thirteenth case was filed against
him on charges of evading duty on the import of a second-hand car.
Zardari awaits a bail hearing.
Freedom of Expression
The rights to free expression and dissemination of information were
persistently undermined through the arrest of editors and reporters
from local and regional newspapers on charges of sedition.
Rasheed Azam, a journalist and political activist from Khuzdar in
Balochistan province, claimed he was abused and tortured, including
being beaten while hung upside down and subjected to sleep deprivation.
He was released after several months in custody though charges of
sedition filed against him are still being processed. Similarly, Amir Mir,
a journalist working for the high-profile Karachi-based Herald magazine
was reportedly publicly threatened by President Musharraf on
November 20, 2003. Two days later, three unidentified persons set Amir
Mirs car ablaze outside his house.
Two French journalists, Marc Epstein and Jean-Paul Guilloteau, and
their Pakistani assistant, Khawar Mehdi Rizvi, were arrested in Karachi
on December 16, 2003. They were reportedly preparing a report on
alleged links between Pakistani government agents and the Taliban
operating in neighboring Afghanistan. The Frenchmen were granted
bail and eventually allowed to leave Pakistan on January 12, 2004, after
paying a fine. However, Mehdi, reportedly tortured in custody,
remained incarcerated until March 29, 2004, when he was granted bail.
Mehdi faces sedition charges.
While the Pakistani government did not formally restrict access to
South Waziristan during the spring offensive, journalists were repeatedly
detained or prevented from reporting through tactics such as the
destruction or confiscation of equipment. Journalists were eventually
allowed limited access to the affected villages on March 28 upon the
conclusion of the first phase of the operation. However, media access to
FATA in general and South Waziristan in particular remains limited as
military operations continue.
Key International Actors
Pakistan remains heavily dependent on the United States for economic
and military aid. The U.S. has notably failed to press for human rightsrelated
legal reform in the country, in exchange for Pakistans support in
the U.S.-led war on terror. For its part, the government of Pakistan
has excused its failure to uphold human rights and the rule of law by
citing domestic political pressure from hard-line religious groups and
militant organizations.
Pakistans record of ratifying principal international human rights
treaties remains poor. To date, it is signatory to only five international
conventions, and has signed neither the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights nor the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights.
Sri Lanka
The most pressing rights issues in Sri Lanka continue to derive from
the countrys two-decades-old civil war. In April 2004, short but fierce
fighting broke out between rival factions of the rebel Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), the first major hostilities in the country since a
February 2002 ceasefire between LTTE and government forces. In the
fighting, the LTTEs Vanni faction quickly defeated a breakaway
group in the east led by Colonel Karuna Amman. In the aftermath, the
Vanni faction launched intensive campaigns to re-recruit Karunas former
soldiers, which included some two thousand children. The LTTE
has recruited thousands of children since the 2002 ceasefire.
Torture and mistreatment by government security forces and police
continued to be a problem, as did harassment of Tamil civilians crossing
government-controlled security check points.
Child Soldiers
Sri Lankas twenty-one-year civil war has cost more than sixty thousand
lives and has resulted in numerous atrocities by both the LTTE and
government forces. The LTTE has a history of recruiting children
including by forcefor participation in combat. The Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, which came into force in February 2002,
prohibits all use of children under eighteen by non-state armed groups.
Under an action plan agreed to in 2003 between the LTTE, the Sri
Lankan government, and UNICEF, the LTTE was to release children
from its forces back into the community as well as into transit centers
co-managed by UNICEF and the Tamil Rehabilitation Organization
(TRO), publicly identified as a front organization for the LTTE. An
August 2004 Human Rights Watch investigation showed, however, that
while the LTTE has released over one thousand children since agreeing to the action plan, forcible recruitment of children has intensified and
new recruits outnumber those released. The LTTE specifically targeted
for re-recruitment the 1,800 or more child soldiers released by the
Karuna faction after its April defeat.
Political Killings
Political killings by the LTTE targeting rival Tamil party members, suspected
Karuna sympathizers, and journalists intensified in 2004. Human
rights workers who criticize the LTTE have also been threatened.
On July 25, 2004, police found the bodies of eight persons shot dead
while asleep in a government safe house outside Colombo. Most were
believed to be senior aides to Karuna. Police investigating the killings
said they appeared to have been committed by someone within the
house. The LTTE declared that the perpetrators were dissidents
within Karunas own faction.
The LTTE claimed responsibility for the public executions of
Balasuntaram Sritharan and Thillaiampalam Suntarajan on July 8, 2004
at Illupadichai junction, saying the two men had been sentenced to
death as pro-Karuna traitors. The Karuna faction is suspected in a
number of political killings, including that of journalist Aiyathurai
Nadesan on May 31, 2004, and Eastern University lecturer Kumaravel
Thambaiah on May 24, 2004.
Members of rival Tamil parties, particularly the ex-militant groups who
refuse to accept the LTTE as the sole representative of the Tamil
people, have been targeted. Killings in 2004 have included: Valli
Suntharam, a 61-year-old trade union activist and member of the Eelam
Peoples Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF), shot dead in Jaffna
on September 27; Selvarajah Mohan, a 22-year-old Eelam Peoples
Democratic Party (EPDP) supporter, stabbed to death after being taken
from his home in Jaffna district on September 24; Rajadurai Sivagnanam, killed in Batticaloa district on September 22; and
Somasundaram Varunakulasingham, a central committee member of the
EPDP, shot dead in Colombo on September 23.
Police Torture
The police continue to torture detainees. In 2003, the National Human
Rights Commission and the Police Commission agreed on a set of steps
to remedy the situation, including ensuring that families and lawyers
have access to detainees, displaying written summaries of detainees
rights in police stations, and holding officers in command responsible
for torture in their stations.
However, cases of police torture continue to be reported. On
November 5, 2004, twenty-one-year-old Don Mahesh Duminda
Weerasuriya was illegally arrested and tortured by police officers at
Panadura North Police Station who apparently wanted information
about Weerasuriyas uncle. After being tortured at the police station, he
was charged and held at Kalutara Prison where he was detained until
November 10.
On November 23, a man who had won his court case based on charges
of torture while in police custody, was shot and injured by an unknown
assailant while on a bus. The victim, G.M. Perera, had repeatedly been
pressured by the police to drop his case against them. Perera was due to
give evidence against seven police officers in December.
Following the assassination of a high court judge on November 22,
2004, and the attempted assassination of Perera, the president of Sri
Lanka announced the reintroduction of the death penalty for rape, murder,
and narcotics dealing. The death penalty had been dormant in Sri
Lanka for thirty years.
Key International Actors
At a June 2003 conference co-chaired by Japan, Norway, the United
States, and the European Union, donors pledged a total of U.S.$4.5 billion
in post-war reconstruction and development aid to Sri Lanka. The
aid was closely linked to the Sri Lankan governments progress in ending
the use of child soldiers and rehabilitating former combatants, and
ensuring greater minority participation and gender equity in government.
Increasingly, the donor community has been speaking out against continuing
violations by the LTTE. In June 2004, the U.S. and the E.U.
released a statement in which they reiterated the call for a political settlement
to the conflict and specifically mentioned child soldier recruitment
as a continuing problem. On October 1, 2004, the U.S. specifically
called on the LTTE to stop its recruitment of child soldiers.
Thailand
The steady erosion of respect for human rights in Thailand that has
characterized Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatras rule accelerated
sharply in 2004. Thai security forces, increasingly able to act with
impunity, engaged in brutal crackdowns against insurgents in the south
and against alleged drug dealers and users.
The military crackdown against a steadily escalating insurgency in the
countrys predominantly Muslim southern provinces, site of long-simmering
resentments due to economic and political marginalization, culminated
in the death of eighty-six protesters at the hands of security
forces in October 2004 and a retaliatory spate of bombings and beheadings
of locally prominent Buddhists, apparently by Muslim insurgent
groups.
The governments war on drugs resulted in some 2,500 extrajudicial
killings, and seriously hampered efforts to provide HIV/AIDS treatment
to injection drug users. The Prime Minister tried to restrict criticism
by purging dissenting voices in the government bureaucracy and
using government and private means to tighten control of the media.
Violence in the South
2004 witnessed some of the worst violence in the recent history of
Thailands southern provinces. The areas residents, who are predominantly
Muslim and ethnically distinct from the mostly Buddhist Thai,
have long complained about being marginalized economically and politically
from the rest of the country. Since the area was placed under martial
law in January, at least 550 people have been killed, some apparently
by insurgent groups, some at the hands of military and paramilitary
forces.
Nearly two hundred people were killed by military forces during two
particularly violent incidents. On October 25, 2004, during the Muslim
holy month of Ramadan, security forces killed at least eighty-six
demonstrators in the Tak Bai district of Narathiwat province; six were
shot by security forces and some eighty detainees died of suffocation
during transit. The detainees hands had been tied behind their backs
and, still breathing, they were laid on top of one another in military
trucks, in some cases stacked four deep.
In apparent retaliation for this incident, there have been several small
bomb attacks and some thirty murders of Buddhists in the south, with
at least three victims beheaded.
Prime Minister Thaksin, who had championed a tougher response to
the insurgency in the south, appointed a special committee to investigate
the events. At this writing, no prosecutions of security forces
involved in the incident had been announced.
On April 28, 2004, lightly armed Islamic groups launched simultaneous
pre-dawn attacks on police bases and checkpoints in several districts of
Yala, Pattani, and Songkhla provinces in southern Thailand. Thai officials
reported that 107 suspected assailants, most between fifteen and
twenty years of age, and five security officers were killed after nine
hours of violent clashes. Army and police sources unofficially put the
number of dead assailants at more than 120. Approximately fifteen people
were arrested.
At least thirty militants who had sheltered in the Kruesie Mosque were
killed when military forces rushed them using grenades. A governmentappointed
commission concluded that the level of force and type of
weapons used in the attack on the mosque was disproportionate to the
threat posed by the militants. Despite the commissions recommendations,
there has been no accountability for any of the security forces
involved in the attack.
The Brutal War on Drugs
The lack of accountability for the counter-insurgency campaign in the
south reflects the growing impunity of Thai security forces. On
February 1, 2003, Thaksin launched a national campaign that treated
drug offenders as threats to social and national security. Within three
months, 2,275 alleged drug offenders had been shot dead in apparent
extrajudicial executions. At this writing, no serious government investigation
had been conducted into the deaths. On October 3, 2004,
Thaksin announced a new phase of the anti-drug campaign, promising
brutal measures against drug traffickers.
The HIV/AIDS Epidemic
In the past, health experts praised Thailands response to the AIDS epidemic;
government programs providing condoms and HIV/AIDS information
in health clinics and brothels have prevented an estimated
200,000 HIV infections. The war on drugs has reversed some of those
gains. Numerous drug users have reported arbitrary arrest, beatings,
and detention by police officers. International experience shows that
such mistreatment undermines HIV/AIDS programs by driving vulnerable
populations into hiding.
Many drug users are coerced by the government to enroll in government-
subsidized drug treatment programs. Many do so only after being
arbitrarily arrested or threatened with arrest if they do not enroll. And
many enroll even though they have never used illicit drugs or have quit
using drugs before enrolling in treatment. In some cases, drug users
choose not to seek treatment or discontinued it out of fear that identification
as a drug user would result in arrest or murder.
Human Rights Defenders
Thailands once-thriving human rights community has also faced government
pressure and intimidation. In one of the most notable and
alarming incidents, in March 2004 Somchai Neelapaijit, a prominent
Muslim leader and human rights lawyer, was abducted in Bangkok and
is presumed dead. Somchai had been repeatedly threatened after alleging
police torture of separatist suspects in southern provinces where
martial law was enforced and defending two alleged Thai members of
the Jemaah Islamiyah, an Islamist group with alleged links to Al-Qaeda.
Restriction on Freedom of Press and Freedom of Assembly
Prime Minister Thaksin, who owes his own standing as one of
Thailands wealthiest citizens to his control of the Shin Corporation (a
telecommunications empire now controlled by members of his family),
has used government and private channels to mute Thailands oncevibrant
media.
Over the past three years the Thai Journalists Association and the Thai
Broadcasters Association have documented more than twenty cases in
which news editors and journalists were dismissed or transferred, or
their work tampered with, to appease the government. The authorities
have arbitrarily used work permits and visa renewals as effective tools
for pressuring foreign journalists.
Most television and radio stations in Thailand are owned in full or in
part by government agencies. The government also uses disbursement
of corporate and government advertising to reward media outlets, both
Thai and international, that follow the government line and to punish
those that do not. It uses the withdrawal or termination of operating
licenses, or threats of such, to rein in critical private broadcasters.
Media freedom in Thailand has been further undermined by large libel
actions against prominent advocates and independent journalists. Shin
Corp., for example, is suing editors of the Thai Post newspaper and
media freedom activist Supinya Klangnarong over a story which
charged the government with pursuing policies aimed at boosting interests
of the prime ministers business empire.
The government also has clamped down on freedom of assembly, with
regular reports of excessive use of force by police against critics of
Thaksins policies. On October 16, 2004, a 1,500-strong combined force
of police and volunteer militias violently dispersed about one thousand
protesting landless farmers rallying peacefully in Karbi province. The
government dismissed findings of the National Human Rights
Commission that the level of force and type of tactics used in the crackdown
were disproportionate.
Before and during the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
meeting in Bangkok last October, the government also banned some
five hundred human rights and social activists from entering the country
and threatened potential organizers of protests that security forces
would have to take the utmost decisive action.
Refugee Protection
In an apparent effort to forge friendship with Burmas military government,
Thaksin has abandoned Thailands longstanding humanitarian
stance toward Burmese refugees, threatening the security of hundreds
of thousands of such refugees. Under intense pressure from the Thai
government, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) has agreed to move Burmese refugees living in
Bangkok and other urban areas to camps along the Thai-Burma border,
and has stated that it will terminate financial assistance and cease the
renewal of protection certificates for those who do not comply.
On January 1, 2004, UNHCR suspended its screening of new asylum
seekers from Burma and the Thai government assumed responsibility
for such screening. Because Thailand narrowly restricts its protection
and assistance to people fleeing fighting, the government is likely to
reject the applications of Burmese exiles and asylum seekers who are
fleeing persecution for their pro-democracy activities in Burma. Those
who are rejected would be classified as illegal immigrants and face the
risk of being deported to Burma. A June 21, 2003 memorandum of
understanding between Burma and Thailand gives the Burmese military
junta a greater role in the deportation process, increasing the likelihood
that deportees will be persecuted upon their return.
Burmese pro-democracy activists and asylum seekers, many of them
holding the UNHCR person of concern status, have been arrested during
peaceful demonstrations in Bangkok. In May 2004 more than forty
demonstrators at the Burmese Embassy in Bangkok were arrested and
threatened with deportation back to Burma, where they could face persecution.
Key International Actors
During Prime Minister Thaksins tenure, Thailand has lost some of its
standing as a regional hub for human rights protection because of
increasing restrictions on press freedom and the activity of environmental
and human rights activists.
Thailand has increased its already close cooperation with the U.S. as
part of the war on terror, leading President Bush to designate
Thailand a Major non-NATO ally in October 2003. U.S. military and
police officials cooperate with their Thai counterparts in counter-narcotics
operations and border control operations, although both countries
deny that the U.S. has any operational role in the increasingly
bloody counterinsurgency campaign in southern Thailand. Thailand has
enthusiastically pushed for greater counterterrorism cooperation among member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
as well as in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
In August 2003, Thailand captured Riduan Isamuddin, better known as
Hambali, suspected of leading Jemaah Islamiyah and helping to plan the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States and a series
of bombings targeting civilians in Indonesia. The United States took
custody of Hambali and has kept him in an undisclosed location. The
United States has not allowed Indonesian authorities investigating the
terrorist attacks there to interview Hambali.
Thailand provided small but symbolically important assistance to the
United States campaigns in Afghanistan and in Iraq, where a 450-strong
Thai contingent suffered two casualties in December 2003. Thai troops
withdrew from Iraq as part of their planned one-year commitment, at
least partly in response to strong domestic criticism.
The U.N. special rapporteur on extrajudicial and summary executions
has requested a visit to Thailand to complete an investigation into the
October 25, 2004 killings of demonstrators in Narathiwat province.
Thailand has developed strong economic and diplomatic links with the
brutal military government ruling Burma. Thailand has become a major
investor in Burma and has cooperated with the Burmese government in
curbing the political activity of Burmese refugees living in Thailand.
Thailand has also defended Burmas dismal human rights record in
important regional fora such as ASEAN, the Asia-Europe Meeting, and
meetings of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation. 
Peru
Perus progress in carrying out the recommendations of its truth commission,
which reported in August 2003 on human rights violations
committed during the countrys twenty-year internal conflict (1980-
2000), has been disappointingly slow. Movement toward prosecuting
state officials responsible for the worst human rights violations has been
obstructed by military courts. Civilian prosecutors have advanced significantly
in only a small number of cases.
The inefficiency and inaccessibility of Perus justice system, coupled
with local government corruption and lack of transparency, have contributed
to outbreaks of violence in rural areas, such as the lynching of a
controversial mayor. Police use lethal force unjustifiably in dealing with
public protests, sometimes with fatal consequences. Longstanding problems
like torture and inhumane prison conditions continue to give cause
for concern. Journalists in provincial towns and cities are vulnerable to
physical attack and intimidation for criticizing local authorities.
Confronting the Past
Military courts insist on retaining jurisdiction over cases in which military
personnel are implicated, a major obstacle to justice. In June 2004,
the prosecutor investigating the disappearance and extrajudicial execution
in 1992 of nine students and a teacher from the University of La
Cantuta stated that military courts should have jurisdiction in the trial
of Gen. (Rtd.) Nicols Hermoza Ros, who was army commander at the
time of the crime. In August 2004 the Supreme Council of Military
Justice, Perus highest military tribunal, affirmed its prior ruling in
August 1994, acquitting Hermoza, another military official, and former
intelligence chief Vladimiro Montesinos of the crime. The following
day, the Constitutional Court ruled that Perus Constitution did not
permit violations of human rights committed by military personnel to be judged in military courts. Human rights lawyers are now pressing for
the Cantuta case to be reopened in the ordinary courts.
In other cases, bureaucratic inefficiency, insufficient resources, and a
lack of skilled investigators have contributed to delays. For example, a
protracted investigation into circumstances of the 1986 prison massacre
of El Frontn, which began in October 2002, continues to face serious
difficulties two years later. Human rights lawyers representing relatives
of the 122 prisoners who died in the massacre have questioned the identification
of twenty-six bodies carried out by the Medical Legal Service
(SML). Due to these delays, as of November 1, 2004, the prosecutor
had yet to open a criminal investigation.
The special prosecutors of
fice mandated to investigate 159 cases of
disappearance under a friendly settlement with the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, as well as forty-three cases referred to
it by Perus truth commission, has filed charges in only five cases. None
of the defendants is currently in detention. A local prosecutor in Junn
charged General Prez Documet, then military chief of Junn province,
with the abduction and torture in 1991 in Huancayo of Luis Alberto
Ramrez Hinostroza. Ramrez subsequently received repeated death
threats and, in August 2004, was shot and wounded by unidentified
assailants close to his home.
Another prosecutor charged with investigating human rights violations
committed during the government of President Fujimori (1990-2000)
has made greater progress. More than forty former agents of the Colina
group, a death squad responsible for disappearances and extrajudicial
executions in the early 1990s, are currently detained awaiting trial.
Local Corruption and Access to Justice
Although Peru is largely free of the political violence which wracked the
country in the 1980s, there were serious outbreaks of violence in 2004 when irate townspeople vented their grievances against controversial
local authorities, or when supporters of the authorities attacked critics.
In a report published in September 2004, Perus national human rights
ombudsman named seventy-seven municipalities affected by conflicts
between townspeople and local governments. In April 2004, a furious
mob lynched Cirilo Robles, the mayor of Ilave, Puno, who was accused
of corruption. Another government official was seriously injured.
During the same month, men armed with planks, machetes, and other
weapons attacked townspeople in Lagunas, on the Peruvian Amazon,
injuring more than forty, some seriously. The townspeople had surrounded
the town hall to prevent the mayor from evading an accounting
audit. Local government corruption and the failure of the Peruvian
justice system to investigate effectively allegations of corruption and
abuse of power were contributory factors in such outbreaks of violence.
Use of Excessive Force to Quell Demonstrations
According to the nongovernmental National Human Rights
Coordinating Group, eleven demonstrators have died as a result of
excessive use of lethal force by the police and army since the government
of President Toledo took office in 2000. In October 2004, members
of the national police shot and killed two coca growers in San
Gabn, Puno who were protesting the governments failure to pay coca
producers for the cultivation of alternative crops. Eight others suffered
gunshot wounds.
Torture and Prison Conditions
Criminal suspects held for interrogation in police stations are frequently
tortured. Conditions in some prisons continue to be harsh. The
Peruvian nongovernmental human rights group COMISEDH
(Comisin de Derechos Humanos) documented thirty-three cases of
torture between January and November 2004. Nine of the victims died. 
Human rights groups have urged the government to close down the
remote, high-altitude prisons of Challapalca, in Tacna, and Yanamayo,
in Puno. After a visit to Challapalca prison in August 2002 the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights published a damning report
stating that conditions there were inhumane, and that among other
physical abuses new arrivals had been beaten and tortured with electric
prods. So far, the Peruvian government has failed to implement the
commissions long-standing recommendation that the prison be closed,
although the number of prisoners held there has been reduced. About
eighteen were still being held there as of November 2004.
Attacks on Journalists
Journalists and radio commentators in Perus provinces are vulnerable
to physical attack, intimidation, and harassment for criticizing local
authorities. This pattern of abuse has been constant for many years and
shows the precariousness of respect for press freedom in many Peruvian
cities. In February 2004, Antonio De La Torre Echeanda, a journalist
for Radio Orbita, was stabbed to death by two men who attacked him
with knives while he was returning from a party in the town of Yungay.
A few days earlier, De la Torre had broadcast accusations against local
government officials. In March, the mayor, who was suspected of having
ordered the assassination, was arrested and detained in the Huaraz
prison. However, police delayed carrying out arrest warrants against two
others implicated in the murder, including the mayors daughter. In
September, journalist Csar Castro Cano was stabbed and wounded in
Cusco, where he had been investigating alleged mismanagement by a
local government official.
Vietnam
Human rights conditions in Vietnam, already dismal, worsened in 2004.
The government tolerates little public criticism of the Communist
Party or statements calling for pluralism, democracy, or a free press.
Dissidents are harassed, isolated, placed under house arrest, and in
many cases, charged with crimes and imprisoned. Among those singled
out are prominent intellectuals, writers, and former Communist Party
stalwarts.
The government continues to brand all unauthorized religious activities
particularly those that it fears may be able to attract a large following
as potentially subversive. Targeted in particular are members
of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam and ethnic minority
Protestants in the northern and central highlands.
Freedom of Expression
Domestic newspapers and television and radio stations remain under
strict government control. Although journalists are occasionally able to
report on corruption by government officials, direct criticism of the
Party is forbidden. Foreign media representatives are required to obtain
authorization from the Foreign Ministry for all travel outside Hanoi.
Several dissidents and democracy activists have been arrested and tried
during the last several years on criminal chargesincluding espionage
and other vaguely-worded crimes against national securityfor
peaceful criticism of the government or calling for multi-party reforms.
Legislation remains in force authorizing the arbitrary administrative
detention of anyone suspected of threatening national security, with no
need for prior judicial approval.
In July 2004 long-time human rights advocate Nguyen Dan Que, sixtytwo,
was sentenced to thirty months of imprisonment for abusing democratic freedoms, for writing an essay, distributed over the Internet,
about state censorship of information and the media. Other cyber-dissidents
who have been sentenced to prison on criminal charges include:
Pham Hong Son, Le Chi Quang, Nguyen Khac Toan, Nguyen Vu
Binh, Pham Que Duong and Tran Khue.
Internet Controls
The government maintains strict control over access to the Internet. It
blocks websites considered objectionable or politically sensitive and
strictly bans the use of the Internet to oppose the government, disturb
national security and social order, or offend the traditional
national way of life. Decision 71, issued by the Ministry of Public
Security in January 2004, requires Internet users at public cafs to provide
personal information before logging on and has increased the pressure
on Internet caf owners to monitor customers email messages and
block access to banned websites.
In April 2004 the government closed down Vietnam International News
24-Hour, an unlicensed website that had reprinted a BBC article about
Easter demonstrations in the Central Highlands. In August 2004 the
Ministry of Public Security created a new office to monitor the Internet
for criminal content, a measure that appears to be aimed in part at
intimidating people from circulating any information that authorities
could deem to be a state secret or otherwise unauthorized.
Freedom of Religion
The government bans independent religious associations and permits
religious activities only insofar as they are conducted by officially-recognized
churches and organizations whose governing boards are approved
and controlled by the government.
A new Ordinance on Beliefs and Religions went into effect in
November 2004. It pays lip service to freedom of religion but strengthens
government controls over religion and bans religious activities
deemed to threaten national security, public order, and national unity.
Members of the banned Mennonite church have come under increasing
pressure from the government. In June 2004, Pastor Nguyen Hong
Quang, an outspoken Mennonite church leader, was arrested after publicly
criticizing the government for detaining four Mennonites three
months earlier. On two separate occasions during 2004, officials in
Kontum province bulldozed a chapel of Pastor Nguyen Cong Chinh,
superintendent of the Mennonite churches in the Central Highlands. In
September, October, and November, police pressured Mennonites in
Kontum and Pleiku provinces to sign forms renouncing their religion.
In both the central and northern highlands, government officials continue
to ban most Protestant gatherings. Authorities have forced ethnic
minority evangelical Christians to pledge to abandon their religion and
cease all political or religious activities in public self-criticism sessions
or by signing written pledges.
Crackdown in the Central Highlands
In the Central Highlands some ethnic minority Christians have rejected
the government-controlled Evangelical Church of Vietnam and have
sought to manage their own religious activities. Increasing numbers of
ethnic minorities, collectively known as Montagnards, appear to be
joining Tin Lanh Dega, or Dega Protestantism, which combines evangelical
Christianity with elements of ethnic pride and aspirations for
self-rule. Dega Protestantism is officially banned by the government.
In April 2004 peaceful demonstrations by Montagnards during Easter
weekend in the Central Highlands turned violent when security forces
and civilians acting on their behalf ambushed and attacked the demonstrators with clubs, metal bars, and other crude weapons. At least ten
Montagnards were killed and dozens wounded. Hundreds fled from
their villages and went into hiding or attempted to flee to Cambodia (see
Cambodia). Authorities dispatched additional police and military forces
to the region and established security checkpoints along the main roads.
Strict restrictions were placed on travel within the highlands, on meetings
of more than two people, and on communication with the outside
world.
Repression of Buddhists
Religious leaders of the banned Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam
(UBCV), which was the largest Buddhist organization in the country
prior to 1975 and which does not recognize the authority of the government-
controlled Vietnam Buddhist Church, face ongoing persecution.
The government appeared to be easing up on the group in early 2003,
when UBCV leader Thich Quang Do was released from two years of
administrative detention and the prime minister visited UBCV Supreme
Patriarch Thich Huyen Quang. However, in October 2003 the two
UBCV leaders were once again placed under unofficial house arrest and
eleven other UBCV leaders were taken into administrative detention.
Tensions escalated in November 2004 when authorities prevented
Thich Quang Do from visiting Thich Huyen Quang, eighty-seven, who
was severely ill in hospital, and summoned him for questioning on allegations
of appropriating state secrets.
In March 2004, UBCV dissident Thich Tri Luc (Pham Van Tuong) was
released from prison and resettled in Sweden two months later. Thich
Tri Luc, a UNHCR-recognized refugee, had been abducted by
Cambodian and Vietnamese agents in Cambodia and taken to Vietnam
in 2002.
Members of the Hoa Hao sect of Buddhism are subject to police surveillance
and several were thought to remain in detention at this writing. The sect was granted official status in May 1999, although government
appointees dominated the Hoa Hao Buddhism Representative
Committee established at that time. In August 2004 Hoa Hao leader Le
Quang Liem, eighty-four, was released from administrative detention
after more than two years under house arrest.
Religious Prisoners
At this writing, at least ten ethnic Hmong Christians were in detention
in Lai Chau and Ha Giang provinces in the north. More than 124
Montagnard Christians continue to serve prison sentences of up to
twelve years for their involvement in church activities or public demonstrations,
or for attempting to seek asylum in Cambodia. Six
Mennonites are serving prison terms ranging from nine months to three
years for resisting officers on duty, after a half-day trial in November
2004. At least four Catholics, including Father Nguyen Van Ly and
members of the Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix, remain in
prison for expressing criticism of Vietnams human rights record or for
distributing religious books and holding training courses.
Torture in Detention
Prison conditions in Vietnam are extremely harsh. Human Rights
Watch has received reports of solitary confinement of detainees in
cramped, dark, unsanitary cells; lack of access to medical care; and of
police beating, kicking, and using electric shock batons on detainees.
Police officers routinely arrest and detain suspects without written warrants,
and authorities regularly hold suspects in detention for more than
a year before they are formally charged or tried.
Political trials are closed to the international press corps, the public, and
often the families of the detainees themselves. Defendants do not have
access to independent legal counsel. More than one hundred death sentences
were issued in 2004, with twenty-nine crimes considered capital offenses under the penal code, including murder, armed robbery, drug
trafficking, many economic crimes, and some sex offenses.
Key International Actors
At the December 2003 Consultative Group meeting, Vietnams international
donors pledged more than U.S.$2.8 billion in aid for 2004. While
donors publicly have focused on economic growth, good governance,
and poverty reduction programs, they have increasingly expressed concerns
about the governments imprisonment of dissidents, suppression
of freedom of expression and of religion, and its poor handling of the
crisis in the Central Highlands.
In June 2004 Japan, Vietnams largest donor, reversed its traditionally
circumspect stance on Vietnams record on human rights and
announced that its official development assistance to Vietnam would be
linked in part to the governments respect for human rights and steps
toward democracy. In contrast, fellow members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) made virtually no comment on
Vietnams human rights record.
The E.U. has criticized Vietnams decision to classify information and
statistics on executions as a state secret. More than 100 members of the
European Parliament called on the E.U. and European Commission to
highlight Vietnams human rights record during the Asia-Europe
Summit Meeting held in Hanoi in October 2004. During the meetings
the Dutch Foreign Minister, on behalf of the E.U., called for the release
of political and religious prisoners. In November, the U.K. Foreign
Office raised concerns about the plight of non-recognized Buddhist and
Protestant groups in its annual human rights report.
The U.S. re-established diplomatic relations with Vietnam in 1995 and
approved a bilateral trade agreement with Vietnam in 2001. In 2001 and
again in 2004, the U.S. House of Representatives approved the Vietnam
Human Rights Act, which would link future increases in non-humanitarian
aid to progress on human rights. As of this writing the Senate had
not approved the legislation. In 2003 the U.S. State Department cancelled
its annual human rights dialogue with Vietnam because of lack of
concrete results. In September 2004 the State Department designated
Vietnam a Country of Particular Concern because of what it called
Vietnams particularly severe violations of religious freedom.
In July 2004 Vietnam became of one fifteen countries, and the first and
only Asian country, to receive financial aid from U.S. President George
W. Bushs emergency global plan for HIV/AIDS. In November, the
deputy director of UNAIDS called on Vietnam to address continuing
discrimination against people with HIV/AIDS, which she said was
among the worst in the world.
In November 2004 the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
stated that the imprisonment of Nguyen Dan Que was arbitrary and in
violation of international law.
Armenia
Although the international community has looked favorably upon
Armenia for its economic reforms in 2004, the government has failed to
improve its human rights record. The legacy of the 2003 presidential
elections, which were marred by widespread fraud, dominates political
life. An opposition boycott of Parliament, in response to the ruling
coalitions refusal to debate a referendum of confidence in President
Robert Kocharian, exemplified an increased polarization between the
government and opposition.
The opposition led a broader campaign calling on President Kocharian
to step down, triggering a countrywide government crackdown. The
campaign peaked in a massive, peaceful protest on April 12, 2004, which
the authorities dispersed using excessive force. Repeating a cycle of
repressive tactics from the 2003 election, the authorities arrested opposition
leaders and supporters, violently dispersed demonstrators, raided
political party headquarters, attacked journalists, and restricted travel to
prevent people from participating in demonstrations.
In response to international pressure, the government has released some
opposition leaders detained during the crackdown, and has participated
in discussions about cooperation with the opposition. The government
has made limited attempts at reforms in other areas. It set up a council
to fight corruption, a widespread, endemic problem in Armenia. Critics,
including Transparency International, dismissed the measure as ineffectual,
citing the councils lack of independence from the executive. The
judiciary remains under the influence of the executive and torture and
ill-treatment continue in places of detention.
Freedom of Assembly
The authorities restrict the right to freedom of assembly, effectively
banning most opposition rallies. In May 2004, President Kocharian signed a new law on public gatherings that Parliament had adopted
despite criticism from the Council of Europe and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) that the law did not comply
with European human rights standards. Among other things, the
law prohibits public gatherings in numerous specific locations and bans
mass public events for the purposes of election or referendum campaigning
if they interfere with traffic regulations. After the law came
into force, the authorities denied the opposition permission to hold a
rally in at least one case, and permanently banned public gatherings
outside the presidential residence, the site of the April 12 protest.
Repeating a pattern established during the 2003 presidential election,
the authorities restricted travel on major roads to Yerevan when opposition
rallies were held in the capital from March to May 2004. Police set
up roadblocks, stopped cars, questioned passengers, and denied permission
to travel further to those they believed were opposition supporters.
State Violence
Torture and ill-treatment in police custody remain widespread in
Armenia. In 2004, Human Rights Watch documented cases of torture
of opposition supporters in police custody. Police beat and threatened
to rape the detainees, later releasing them either without charge, or
with petty charges punishable with fines or short periods of imprisonment
under the Administrative Code. No officials were held to account
for these incidents.
A dramatic low point in 2004 was the authorities use of excessive force
to break up the April 12 demonstration. Police and security forces violently
dispersed a peaceful crowd of about three thousand protesters
who were calling for President Kocharians resignation. Security forces
sprayed the crowd with water cannons and then beat protesters with
batons, shocked them with electric prods, and threw stun grenades into their midst. High-level government officials later claimed the violence
was not excessive, though no investigation was carried out.
Security forces and unknown assailants have carried out a series of brutal
attacks on journalists who were reporting on opposition rallies.
Attackers confiscated and smashed journalists equipment, significantly
preventing television coverage of these events and their violent dispersal.
Although there was evidence of the identity of attackers, the authorities
charged only two men, who received a fine of less than U.S. $200,
in stark contrast to the custodial penalties imposed on opposition
activists for lesser offences.
An environment of impunity for attacks against government critics continues.
The authorities failed to bring to justice the perpetrators of at
least four attacks on opposition leaders and a human rights activist in
March and April 2004. On March 30, four unknown men assaulted
Mikael Danielian, a human rights defender, punching and kicking him.
Danielian spent four days in a hospital after the attack, which he
believed was aimed at stopping him from monitoring the growing street
protests by the political opposition. The General Prosecutors investigation
produced no results and was closed on June 1.
Arrests and Raids
As the opposition began a series of protests in late March 2004, the
government resorted to its long-established tactic of detaining potential
protesters under the Administrative Code for short periods of time for
what is termed administrative detention. From March to June, police
detained several hundred people, for such offences as petty hooliganism
and failing to carry out a police directive. The trials breached basic
standards, including the defendants right to a lawyer and to present evidence
in his or her defense. Judges imposed penalties ranging from a
fine to fifteen days in prison. 
On March 30, the authorities stepped up the pressure on the political
opposition, opening a criminal case against a coalition of opposition
parties and its supporters. Prosecutors charged a handful of opposition
party leaders with publicly calling for the seizure of power and publicly
insulting representatives of government, keeping them in custody for up
to several months. By September, the prosecutor general had dropped
the charges and released all the accused men. In another example of
political intimidation, on the night of April 12-13 security forces
stormed the Yerevan opposition headquarters of the Republic Party, the
Nationial Unity Party, and the Peoples Party, arrested those present,
and closed two of the headquarters for several days.
Media
Although Armenia has a significant independent and opposition print
media, the government continued to restrict full media freedom in the
country. On April 5, 2004, the Russian television channel NTV had its
broadcasting suspended throughout the country, after broadcasting
footage of opposition protests. The official reason given for the suspension
was technical problems. By the end of September, NTV had not
resumed broadcasting and the government had given its broadcasting
frequency to another Russian channel that does not do news programming.
In October, Kentron, a private Armenian television station, cancelled
a Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) news and
analysis program three days after it began broadcasts. RFE/RL believed
that a high-level government official had forced the cancellation. Local
NGOs continue a campaign for broadcasting rights for A1+ television,
which had been a highly popular and independent channel. The national
broadcasting commission remains steadfast, however, refusing to
grant licenses to A1+ and Noyan Tapan television channels, which were
shut down in 2002 and 2001 respectively.
Freedom of Religion
There was some improvement for religious freedom in 2004 with the
registration in October of the Jehovahs Witnesses, after a string of
rejected applications. However, despite the authorities promises to
release all Jehovahs Witnesses imprisoned for refusing to perform military
service, the courts continue to impose fresh prison terms. In
September, according to the Armenian Helsinki Association, eight
Jehovahs Witnesses were serving prison terms for their refusal to perform
military service, and a further eight, five of whom were in custody,
were awaiting trial for the same offences.
Key International Actors
The U.S. appears to be gaining influence in Armenia, which traditionally
has looked to Russia for military and economic ties. The U.S.
increased military aid and cooperation and, after initially refusing to
involve itself, in 2004 Armenia agreed to send a small contingent of
non-combatant military personnel to Iraq. The U.S. also designated
Armenia as one of sixteen countries to be eligible for a multi-million
dollar aid program called the Millennium Challenge Account. The U.S.
stated that the flow of money was dependent on improvements in
Armenias human rights record.
The Council of Europe effectively engaged Armenia to roll back some
of the governments more authoritarian practices in 2004. The council
continued its scrutiny of Armenias post-accession obligations, noting
progress in complying with some commitments, such as abolition of the
death penalty, while expressing disappointment in other areas, such as
the conduct of the 2003 elections. In April, the councils Parliamentary
Assembly passed a resolution under an urgent procedure, expressing
concern about the government crackdown against opposition supporters
that month. Armenia responded by releasing the opposition supporters who were in custody on criminal charges and dropping the charges
against many of them.
In September 2004, the European Union and Armenia met under the
framework of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Unfortunately, the E.U. failed to use this forum publicly to encourage
human rights improvements, issuing a press release that did not raise
human rights concerns. In a step that could increase the ability of the
E.U. to influence Armenia on human rights, it included Armenia in its
European Neighborhood Policy, giving privileged ties with the bloc.
Officials warned that economic benefits would not flow until at least
2007, when Armenia will have to have negotiated action plans on economic
and political reforms.
Azerbaijan
The Azerbaijani government has a long-standing record of pressuring
civil society groups and arbitrarily limiting critical expression and political
activism. It has done so with a new intensity following the October
2003 presidential elections, which international and domestic observers
said were marred by widespread fraud.
Trials of opposition supporters, accused of the 2003 post-election violence,
did not comply with fair trail standards and showed once again
how the authorities use the criminal justice system to discourage government
critics. An environment of impunity for government officials
implicated in acts of torture, excessive use of force, and election fraud,
shows that the government did not seriously attempt the reconciliation
that the international community was urging after the political and
human rights crisis surrounding the presidential elections. Freedom of
assembly for groups seen to be associated with the political opposition
remains severely curtailed and independent and opposition press face
major barriers to their work.
Post-Election Trials
Over one hundred opposition party members and supporters were tried
on charges relating to the post-election violence. Only four were
released on bail, the rest remained in pre-trial detention for up to six
months. Azerbaijani courts convicted all of the defendants, sentencing
forty-six people to custodial sentences ranging from two to six years.
The remainder were released on three- to five-year suspended prison
sentences. On October 22, the Court of Grave Crimes sentenced seven
opposition leaders to between two and a half and five years in prison for
their role in the post-election violence. According to local observers,
prosecution witnesses retracted their testimony in court, claiming that
Ministry of Interior officials had tortured and coerced them into signing
statements incriminating the defendants. Independent observers raised serious allegations of procedural abuses, including defendants restricted
access to lawyers, and the admission of evidence in court that was based
on confessions extracted under torture. Judges failure to address these
deficiencies called into question, as in the past, the independence of the
judiciary.
State Violence
Torture, police abuse, and excessive use of force by security forces are
widespread in Azerbaijan. Peaceful protests are frequently met with the
use of force and arbitrary arrest. Severe beatings at police stations are
routine and torture methods in pre-trial detention include electric
shock and threats of rape. In 2004, the government failed to address
these problems, perpetuating an environment of almost total impunity
for security force abuses surrounding the October 2003 presidential
elections. Although international interlocutors repeatedly called on
Azerbaijan to investigate allegations of torture by the Organized Crime
Unit of the Ministry of Interior, and security forces use of excessive
violence during the protests following the elections, at the time of writing
the authorities had not prosecuted any cases.
Political Prisoners
Azerbaijan is making some progress toward releasing or retrying political
prisoners, a long-standing problem. By July 2004, following several
amnesties in late 2003 and early 2004, the government had released
thirty-two political prisoners and agreed to retry eleven, from a Council
of Europe list of forty-five. However, the Council of Europe and local
groups maintained that additional political prisoners remain in custody,
and that the recent imprisonment of opposition supporters, accused of
the post-election violence, added to their ranks. The chance of a fair
trial for political prisoners facing retrial remains slim because of the lack
of an independent judiciary. The Council of Europe previously condemned retrials of political prisoners as a sham controlled by the
presidential authorities rather than the judiciary.
Civil Society Organizations
The government attempts to tightly control civil society and pressures
and harasses groups that are critical of government policies. In a dramatic
example of this tendency, the authorities tried Ilgar Ibrahimoglu,
the head of the Center for the Protection of Conscience and Religious
Freedom, and a government critic, for alleged participation in the postelection
violence. In April 2004, a Baku court found him guilty and
handed him a five-year suspended prison sentence, despite serious allegations
that the charges were falsified. While Ibrahimoglu was in custody,
a court ordered the eviction of the Juma Mosque community,
which Ibrahimoglu headed, from the mosque it had used since 1992. In
June, police forcefully evicted worshippers from the mosque, detaining
several of them. On July 30, police prevented the community from
meeting at a private house, raiding the premises and temporarily detaining
all twenty-six members present.
Media Freedom
Authorities use a variety of informal measures to prevent or limit news
critical of the government from reaching the public. Major television
outlets are either state-owned or affiliated and the government fully
controls the issuing of radio and television broadcast licenses through a
licensing board that consists entirely of presidential appointees. The
opposition and independent media are under constant pressure, through
limited access to printing presses and distribution networks, imposition
of crippling fines from government-initiated defamation cases, and
harassment of journalists. In 2004, Hurriet, an opposition newspaper
affiliated with the Azerbaijan Democratic Party, had to suspend publishing
due to financial burdens and government harassment leading to difficulties
distributing and selling the newspaper outside of Baku. In addition, journalists and editors face the threat of physical assault by
unknown attackers bent on intimidation. For example, on July 17, four
masked men kidnapped the editor-in-chief of the independent Baki
Khaber (Baku News) newspaper and demanded that he cease his journalism
work, beating him for two hours before releasing him. Also at
the end of July, an unknown assailant attacked a journalist for the
Monitor, an independent weekly magazine. At the time of writing no
one had been prosecuted for either attack.
Key International Actors
Construction on two new major oil and gas pipelines routed across
Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Turkey is currently underway. The huge foreign
investment in these projects has focussed international attention on
issues of security and stability in the region, sometimes at the expense of
human rights.
United States policy toward Azerbaijan has focused on military cooperation
and oil interests. Since 2001, U.S. military aid and cooperation has
increased significantly in Azerbaijan. Correspondingly, Azerbaijan has
cooperated in U.S. military operations, with approximately 150 troops
in Iraq and thirty in Afghanistan. The U.S. role in Azerbaijan has been
marred by inconsistent and sometimes weak responses to rights abuses,
particularly in response to the 2003 presidential elections.
In September 2004, the European Union (E.U.) and Azerbaijan met
under the framework of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Unfortunately, the E.U. failed to use this forum publicly to encourage
human rights improvements, issuing a press release that did not raise
human rights concerns. In a step that could increase the ability of the
E.U. to influence Azerbaijan on human rights, the E.U. included
Azerbaijan in its European Neighborhood Policy, which brings with it
economic benefits. Officials signaled that these benefits would not flow until at least 2007, when Azerbaijan will have begun to implement
action plans on economic and political reforms.
The Council of Europe has played a constructive role in attempting to
address human rights problems in Azerbaijan, pressing for the release of
political prisoners, greater pluralism, and a devolution of political power
away from the presidency. In January 2004, the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe (PACE) expressed concern about events surrounding
the 2003 presidential elections and called on the government
to rectify the abuses. In October, the PACE reviewed Azerbaijans compliance
with the January resolution, and stated that although some
progress had been made, it was inadequate.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is
one of the largest multilateral investors in Azerbaijan, having committed
more than U.S. $473 million in projects. Although article 1 of the
banks founding document commits the EBRD to promoting democracy,
human rights, and the rule of law, the Bank did not raise human
rights concerns during the human rights crisis surrounding the 2003
presidential elections. Its board approved financing of U.S. $125 million
for the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline in November 2003 and provided
the government with $41 million for road reconstruction projects in
July 2004 with no conditions addressing democracy, human rights, or
rule of law concerns.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europes Minsk
Group, co-chaired by the U.S., France, and Russia, led talks on the conflict
over Nagorno-Karabakh between Armenia and Azerbaijan; however,
no breakthrough appears imminent.
Belarus
The government of Belarus failed to ensure free and fair election in
2004, in large part by attacking the independent media and undermining
freedom of association. The situation worsened in the months leading
up to October 2004 parliamentary elections and a simultaneous referendum
to remove presidential term limits. Several independent newspapers
were closed, and journalists jailed on libel charges.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and independent trade unions
were given warnings or closed. Many opposition politicians were prevented
from registering as election candidates. Some were arrested on
trumped-up charges.
Elections
The 110-member House of Representatives was elected in October
without the election of a single representative from the opposition parties.
According to official statistics, 77 percent of those who voted
approved the lifting of presidential term limits. The results pave the
way for President Alexander Lukashenka to stand for a third term of
office.
The government took full advantage of defective electoral legislation to
manipulate the election campaign and engineer the outcome of the
vote. An Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
observer mission to the October vote emphasized that the poll was
undermined by problems with the election laws, including: the accreditation
process for independent election observers; rules regarding early
voting and the storage of the resulting ballots, and procedures for adjudicating
electoral complaints.
In early 2004, authorities arrested three prominent opposition politicians
on politically-motivated charges. Valery Levonevsky, a member of
the coordination committee of Free Belarus, and his deputy Aleksandr Vasilyev were convicted of defamation on September 7. Both received
two-year prison sentences. Mikhail Marynich, who joined the opposition
after resigning his post as ambassador to Latvia, is awaiting trial on
charges of storing illegal arms.
Would-be candidates for the October elections were denied registration
of their candidacy on questionable grounds. The Central Election
Authority denied the candidacy of Mecheslav Grib, deputy chairman of
the Belarus Social-Democratic Party, Narodnaya Gramada, citing his
failure to register company stock purchased in the early 1990s. It also
rejected the candidacy of Vladimir Parfenovich of the Respublika parliamentary
group, alleging that signatures on his registration petition had
been falsified.
Those opposition candidates who did manage to register their candidacy
faced difficulty campaigning. Election law entitles each candidate to a
total of five minutes broadcast time during the course of the campaign.
However, state-controlled media allowed many pro-government candidates
more than five minutes, while limiting opposition candidates to
the statutory period. State-run newspapers published articles designed
to discredit opposition candidates in the run-up to the vote.
The October elections and referendum were marred by irregularities.
Members of the opposition were barred from observing at voting stations
during early voting and on election day. During the vote count,
officials did not announce numbers out loud as votes were being tabulated,
and observers had only a limited view of the counting process,
making verification impossible. The OSCE observer mission concluded
that the parliamentary elections fell significantly short of international
standards. The OSCE did not monitor the referendum.
During the week following the October vote, opposition activists organized
demonstrations to protest the official results. Belarusian police
beat, detained and arrested dozens of protesters, among them Anatoly
Lebedko, the leader of the leading opposition party, the United Civil
Party. Lebedko was hospitalized with severe injuries. He was discharged
after receiving treatment.
Human Rights Defenders
The government continues to use presidential decrees to suppress
human rights activities. Presidential Edict 24, introduced on November
28, 2003, allows for strict control over foreign financial assistance to
NGOs, and prohibits foreign funding to educational and political
activities. Any NGO, political party, or other organization, deemed to
violate the decree can be shut down. Several NGOs have been closed
down for alleged violations. Others received warnings from the
Ministry of Justice. Two warnings in a year constitute grounds for closure.
At this writing, the Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC), a prominent
NGO, faced closure on charges of alleged tax evasion. Although the
Minsk Economic Court and the Court of Cassation acquitted BHC of
tax violations on June 23, 2004, the Ministry of Justice decided on
September 16 to file another lawsuit on the same charges, after BHC
criticized publicly the October 17 referendum.
On January 29, 2004, authorities closed down the Independent Society
of Legal Research (ISLR), citing repeated violations of the Law on
Public Associations. Independent lawyers believe that the real reason
was that ISLR members had defended other NGOs in court proceedings.
Trade Unions
Independent trade unions are under threat in Belarus. The sole remaining
independent trade union federation, the Belarusian Congress of
Democratic Trade Unions (known by its Belarussian-language abbreviation BKPD) and its affiliates face the constant threat of denial of registration
or closure. The activities of unregistered unions are effectively
illegal. BKPD union members risk dismissal and imprisonment, and
pressure to join state-controlled unions. In March, authorities in
Navapolatsk denied registration to the Free Trade Union (FTU), a
BKPD member, for alleged deficiencies in application documents. The
organization had been registered since 2002, but was required to re-register
after amending its internal bylaws.
In September 2004, BKPD President Aleksandr Yaroshuk was sentenced
to ten days in prison. Yaroshuk was convicted of defamation following
the publication in the independent newspaper Narodnaya Volya
(Will of the People) of his article criticizing the August 2003 decision
by Supreme Court to liquidate the Trade Union of Air Traffic
Controllers of Belarus. Authorities had pressured members of the union
to resign before the courts ruling closed it down entirely.
Media Freedom
All national television stations, and most radio stations, in Belarus are
controlled by the state. Independent radio broadcasts are limited to
non-political music and advertising. Citizens do not receive objective
information from the state-controlled media. Re-broadcasted Russian
television programs are often manipulated through the insertion of
Belarusian footage presented as part of the Russian program.
The long-standing government pressure on independent newspapers
intensified in the run-up to the October elections. Some printing houses
were pressured to stop printing independent newspapers, damaging
their circulation. Several large stores in Minsk refused to sell independent
print media. On August 27, 2004, the Ministry of Information suspended
the operations of the newspaper Navinki (The News) for three
months, saying it had failed to inform authorities about changes in its
publishing schedule, and published articles that the Ministry considered to jeopardize public morals. The Ministry also ordered a three-month
closure of the independent weekly Novaya Gazeta Smorgoni (The New
Newspaper of Smorgon) on August 16, citing an alleged failure to comply
with registration procedures.
Journalists who criticize the government face prosecution. On
September 30, a court convicted Alena Rawbetskaya, the editor-in-chief
of the independent newspaper Birzha Informacii (Stock-exchange
Information), on defamation charges and fined her 1.3 million rubles
(approximately U.S.$630), after the paper criticized the upcoming referendum.
On the day of the elections, Pavel Sheremet, a Russian journalist
from Channel One television was arrested on charges of hooliganism.
Channel One broadcast two documentaries immediately prior to
the elections in which Sheremet described the Lukashenka government
as dictatorial. Sheremet was later released and the case against him suspended
pending additional investigation.
Key International Actors
In June 2004, the U.N. Special Representative on human rights defenders,
Hina Jilani, expressed serious concern over restrictions on freedom
of association in Belarus. She highlighted legislation permitting the
authorities to deny registration to, and close down, NGOs without justification.
Jilani also criticized the governments actions against the
Belarusian Helsinki Committee.
In September, the OSCE Office in Minsk criticized the prison sentences
given to Valery Levanevsky and Aleksandr Vasilyev for allegedly
defaming the president. In July, the OSCE condemned the closure of
the private European Humanities University.
In February, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
(PACE) published a report accusing high-ranking officials of involvement
in the disappearances of former Interior Minister Yuri Zakharenko, former Prime Minister Viktor Gonchar, former electoral
commission chairman Anatoly Krasovski and journalist Dimitri
Zavadski between 1999 and 2000. The report accuses the current
Belarusian Interior Minister, Prosecutor-General and Sports Minister,
as well as a high-ranking officer in the special forces, of involvement.
PACE members demanded that the government investigate the disappearances.
PACE criticized the detention of the human rights activists
Tatsiana Reviaka and Hary Pahaniayla for distribution of its disappearances
report. The body also expressed concern over the decision of
President Lukashenka to hold a referendum on removal of presidential
term-limits.
On April 8, 2004, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights adopted a
resolution expressing concern about human rights in Belarusincluding
the key disappearance cases, flawed elections, and the continued harassment
and closure of NGOsand appointed a Special Rapporteur to
investigate the situation in the country.
In September, the European Union issued a travel ban against the three
government ministers and special forces officer named in the PACE disappearances
report. The ban prevents the four from entering the E.U.
U.S. officials twice criticized the Belarusian government during 2004
for its actions against NGOs, independent journalists, and opposition
politicians. The U.S. State Department has enacted a similar travel ban
to that imposed by the E.U. The State Department expressed doubts
that the results of the October referendum reflected the opinion of the
Belarusian people, and on October 20, three days after the elections,
President George W. Bush signed the Belarus Democracy Act, prohibiting
U.S. financial aid to the Belarusian government, while authorizing
assistance for NGOs and independent media. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Entrenched ethnic divisions among the political elites in Bosnia continue
to shape political and human rights developments in the country.
While ethnic violence has for the most part ended, ongoing ethnic divisions
among Bosnias constituent peoples  Bosniacs (Bosnian Muslims),
Serbs, and Croats  continue to impede progress in key human rights
areas, such as war crimes accountability and the return of refugees and
displaced persons.
War Crimes Accountability
For the first time in years, the NATO-led Stabilization Force (SFOR)
did not arrest a single Bosnian citizen indicted before the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in 2004.
Nevertheless, SFOR intensified efforts to arrest Bosnian Serb wartime
leader Radovan Karadzic, conducting several operations near Sarajevo
and in remote mountain villages in the east of the country, where
Karadzic was believed to be hiding. SFOR also arrested several individuals
believed to belong to the network of persons who were helping
Karadzic hide. Still, Karadzic remained at large as of October 2004.
Leading political and military figures in the wartime Croatian Republic
of Herzeg-Bosnia  Jadranko Prlic, Bruno Stojic, Slobodan Praljak,
Milivoj Petkovic, Valentin Coric, and Berislav Pusic  surrendered to
the Tribunal on April 5, 2004. They are charged with crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed against Bosnian Muslims in
Western Bosnia and Herzegovina during the early 1990s.
Although officials in Republika Srpska (the majority Serb area of
Bosnia) repeatedly agreed to cooperate with the ICTY, Republika
Srpska continued to be the only area of the former Yugoslavia that has
not surrendered a single war crimes indictee to the Tribunal. On
October 15, 2004, the Republika Srpska Commission on Srebrenica submitted to the Republika Srpska government a report concerning the
1995 events in Srebrenica and acknowledged for the first time that the
Bosnian Serb Army had been responsible for the killing of more than
seven thousand Bosniac men and boys. Republika Srpska authorities had
previously claimed that only one hundred Bosniacs had been executed
and that another 1,900 had died in combat or from exhaustion.
Local officials in each entity of Bosnia remain unwilling to prosecute
members of the ethnic majority in their region for war crimes.
Hundreds, possibly thousands, of war crimes committed in Republika
Srpska have yet to be investigated and tried before the Republika Srpska
courts. In May 2004, Republika Srpska opened the first war crimes trial
ever against ethnic Serbs; eleven Serbs are accused of the illegal detention
of Catholic priest Tomislav Matanovic in 1995, who was later
found murdered. In the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (the
Bosniac majority area), there have been more indictments against members
of the local ethnic majority, but these efforts have been plagued by
a lack of support on the part of police and political elites, as well as poor
cooperation between the countries in the region and entities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on judicial matters, and a lack of witness protection
mechanisms.
At the end of 2004, the process of establishing a special war crimes
chamber, as part of the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
nearing completion. The chamber, which is to be based in the Bosnian
capital Sarajevo, is expected to try the most serious war crimes cases. As
of October, however, the position of the special war crimes prosecutor
had not yet been established.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), as of the end of August 2004, 1,001,520 out of a total of
more than 2 million people forcibly displaced during the war had returned to their home areas. Of these, 445,735 persons had returned to
municipalities where they currently constitute an ethnic minority.
UNHCR hailed the figures as a sign of success. However, these statistics
would appear to show that the results of ethnic cleansing in the
country remain largely intact.
The sharp decrease in minority returns that began in 2003 continued in
2004. Between January and the end of August, UNHCR registered
11,529 minority returns to pre-war homes, two-thirds less than in the
same period in 2003. This trend reveals that, nine or more years after
they initially fled, a decreasing number of people are willing to return
to their pre-war homes. Limited economic opportunities in the areas of
return, aggravated by ethnic discrimination in employment, are a principal
impediment to return. What is more, nine years after the war
ended, the homes of tens of thousands of families who had expressed a
desire to return have yet to be repaired.
Key International Actors
The Office of the High Representative (OHR), which oversees civilian
aspects of the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords, stepped up its efforts to
advance the process of war crimes accountability. The OHR played a
key role in establishing the special war crimes chamber in Bosnias State
Court and in drafting the legislation on witness protection, use of ICTY
evidence in domestic proceedings, and the Office of the State Court
Prosecutor, which was introduced in the Bosnian parliament in October
2004.
The ICTY issued a series of important, and in some cases controversial,
judgments in cases arising from the war in Bosnia in 2004. Other
important trials commenced or reached an advanced stage during the
year. On April 19, the Appeals Chamber of the ICTY confirmed an earlier
finding by a trial chamber that in July 1995, Serb forces had committed
genocide in Srebrenica. The Appeals Chamber sentenced Bosnian Serb Army General Radislav Krstic to thirty-five years of
imprisonment. A trial chamber in the case of Bosnian Serb Radoslav
Brdjanin, however, found that no genocide had occurred in 1992 in the
area of Krajina, where Serb forces killed hundreds of Muslim and Croat
civilians and expelled hundreds of thousands. In another controversial
decision, on July 29, the Appeals Chamber reversed the majority of the
trial chambers March 2000 conviction of Bosnian Croat Tihomir
Blaskic and reduced his sentence to nine years. He had initially been
sentenced to forty-five years of imprisonment. While ICTY decisions
have sometimes caused at least initial perplexity among some victim
groups in Bosnia, the integrity of the proceedings before the tribunal
and the legal reasoning underlying its decisions remained remarkable.
Other ICTY judgments in 2004 include the ten year prison sentence for
Miroslav Deronjic, a Bosnian Serb guilty of crimes against humanity in
eastern Bosnia in 1992, and the eighteen year prison sentence for Ranko
Cesic, another Bosnian Serb, for crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed in 1992 in the Luka prison camp near Brcko.
The court also tried two major cases against accused Bosnian Muslims.
On July 23, the prosecution presented its closing argument and concluded
its case against Bosnian Muslim generals Enver Hadzihasanovic
and Amir Kubura, both charged with war crimes against Bosnian Croats
and Serbs in Central Bosnia in 1993-94 The trial of Naser Oric, commander
of the forces of the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
Srebrenica area, for crimes against Serb civilians, began on October 6.
Along with the OHR, the ICTY initiated the establishment of the special
war crimes chamber in Bosnias State Court. In September, the
Office of the Prosecutor made a motion to refer the cases against
Bosnian Serbs Zeljko Mejakic, Momcilo Gruban, Dusko Knezevic, and
Dusan Fustar, regarding the Omarska and Keraterm detention camps in
northwestern Bosnia, to the war crimes chamber. The president of the
ICTY requested additional information from the Office of the Prosecutor on the ability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to provide fair trials
before a competent court.
In June, the E.U. Council approved European Partnership, a document
detailing short- and medium-term priorities for Bosnia and
Herzegovinas preparations for further integration with the E.U., which
had been identified in the European Commissions 2004 Annual Report.
The human rights objectives, which serve as a checklist against which to
measure progress, include: assuming full organizational and financial
responsibility for the 2004 municipal elections; creating an effective
judiciary (including establishing a single High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina); adopting and bringing into force
outstanding legislation supporting refugee returns; completing the
transfer of the human rights bodies to Bosnian control; making progress
on the merger of the State and Entity Ombudsmen; and, full cooperation
with the ICTY, particularly on the part of Republika Srpska. On
October 4, the Commission praised the conduct of the municipal elections
and declared that Bosnia had fulfilled this political condition from
the Partnership.
The E.U. police mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUPM) continues
the international policing operation in the country, which it took over
from the United Nations in the beginning of 2003. At the June 28-29
summit in Istanbul, NATO announced that an E.U.-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) would replace its Stabilization Force (SFOR) before the
end of 2004. On July 12, the E.U. Council indicated formally that,
beginning in December 2004, the E.U. would conduct a peacekeeping
operation in Bosnia in order to contribute to a safe and secure environment
in the country.
Croatia
Croatia made progress in 2004 toward membership in the European
Union (E.U.) but did little to improve its still checkered human rights
record. Key rights concerns include the governments continuing failure
to pursue Croat suspects as aggressively as it does non-Croats in domestic
war crimes trials, insufficient cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and slow progress
toward the return of displaced and refugee Serbs.
The task of enhancing Croatias human rights record now falls to the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), which took power following its
victory in November 2003 parliamentary elections. Soon after taking
office, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader made a series of policy statements
intended to signal a new willingness on the part of the traditionally
nationalistic HDZ to undertake necessary human rights reforms. The
governments limited progress to date, however, has resurrected concerns
among HDZs key interlocutorsincluding the Serb members of
the Parliament who support the HDZ minority government and the
chief prosecutor of the ICTYabout whether it can deliver on its
promises.
Refugee Returns
Between 300,000 and 350,000 Croatian Serbs left their homes during
the 1991-95 war in Croatia, mostly for Serbia and Montenegro, and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. By August 2004, the government had registered
112,162 Serb returnees. The actual number of returns is significantly
lower because many Croatian Serbs leave again for Serbia and
Montenegro or Bosnia after only a short stay in Croatia.
It took almost a decade for most minority refugees and displaced persons
to repossess their houses, which had been occupied after they fled
or were forced out of Croatia. The explanation lies in a pattern of obstruction and discrimination by previous governments and local
authorities. However, the process is now finally nearing completion.
According to government data, the authorities returned 1,800 houses to
their owners in the first seven months of 2004, with only 1,700 occupied
houses still to be vacated.
There has yet to be tangible progress on the issue of lost tenancy rights
in socially-owned property. Croatian authorities terminated the tenancy
rights of tens of thousands of Serb families after they fled their apartments
during and after the war. In June 2003, the Croatian cabinet
adopted a set of measures to enable former tenancy rights holders in
Zagreb and other big cities to rent or purchase government-built apartments
at below-market rates. In August 2004 the government admitted
that the implementation of the scheme had yet to begin.
A July 2004 decision by the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) on tenancy rights in Croatia may limit future progress in
restoring Serb tenancy rights. In the Blecic case, the ECtHR upheld
Croatian court decisions terminating the tenancy rights of a woman
who had left Zadar shortly before the outbreak of hostilities in 1991 and
had not returned to her apartment within the six-month period specified
by Croatian law at the time. The misguided decision by the
ECtHR appears to stand for the propositionat odds with basic tenets
of humanitarian law and refugee lawthat a displaced civilian must
return to a war zone to preserve property rights.
For the second consecutive year, reconstruction of damaged or
destroyed Serb homes in Croatia has continued at a satisfactory pace.
The government announced in 2003 that it would reconstruct 10,800
houses and apartments during 2004-05, most of them owned by ethnic
Serbs. In March 2004, the government also extended, until end-
September, the deadline for submission of reconstruction claims for
those who missed the original 2001 deadline.
Economic opportunities for minority returnees are limited by employment
discrimination in local government and other public sector
employers. A December 2002 constitutional law on minority rights
obliges the state to ensure pre-war levels of minority representation in
local government and in state, county, and municipal courts, but the law
has yet adequately to be implemented in most areas.
Accountability for War Crimes
The governments willingness to provide documentary evidence to the
ICTY and its efforts to persuade ethnic Croat indictees to surrender to
the tribunal were overshadowed by its failure to hand over Ante
Gotovina, a Croatian Army general indicted for 1995 crimes against
Croatian Serbs. On March 11, Croatian generals Ivan Cermak and
Mladen Markac voluntarily traveled to the Hague, ten days after the
government received the ICTY indictment against them. Both are
accused of crimes against humanity and war crimes against Croatian
Serbs in 1995. Similarly, six Bosnian Croat military and political leaders
indicted by the ICTY flew from Zagreb to the Hague on April 5, two
weeks before the European Commission was to issue an opinion on
Croatias bid for E.U. membership. All six are charged with participating
in a joint criminal enterprise to forcibly expel Bosnian Muslims and
Serbs from the self-declared Croat statelet of Herceg-Bosna during the
Bosnian war.
Following the surrenders in March and April, ICTY Chief Prosecutor
Carla Del Ponte stated that Croatia was cooperating fully with the tribunal.
In her November 2004 report to the U.N. Security Council,
however, Del Ponte revised her assessment, indicating that Croatia will
be cooperating fully once Gotovina is handed over to the ICTY.
Accountability efforts in Croatian courts continue to fall short of international
standards. In 2004, Croatian courts tried only two cases involving
war crimes perpetrated against ethnic Serbs. On April 10, the Osijek district court convicted one person and acquitted a second for the
killing of nineteen Serb civilians in December 1991 by ethnic Croat
forces in the village of Paulin Dvor. Despite evidence that others were
involved in the killing, no one else has been indicted. On September 21,
the county court in Karlovac reopened the trial of Mihajlo Hrastov, a
former military police officer accused of killing thirteen Serb prisoners
of war in 1991 and twice acquitted in the past.
While the prosecution of individuals responsible for atrocities against
ethnic Serbs made little progress, trials against ethnic Serbs accused of
war crimes continued throughout the country. Despite clear directives
from Croatias chief prosecutor that lower level prosecutors drop
charges not supported by credible evidence and cease to bring cases in
the absence of the accused, the courts in Zadar and Vukovar continued
with such practices.
Key International Actors
On April 20, 2004, the European Commission issued a positive opinion
on Croatias membership application. The commission found that
Croatia was a functioning democracy that largely respects fundamental
rights. The European Council named Croatia as a candidate country for
E.U. membership on June 18.
The E.U. continues to emphasize, however, that improved policies on
the return of Serb refugees are a precondition for improved relations.
The commissions April opinion stressed the need for additional efforts
on minority rights, refugee return, judiciary reform, regional cooperation,
and the fight against corruption. The European Partnership document,
adopted by the E.U. Council on September 13, 2004, details
short and medium term priorities for Croatias preparations for E.U.
membership. Key human rights prioritiesin addition to those highlighted
in the Commission opinioninclude: implementation of the
Constitutional Law on National Minorities, enhanced freedom of expression and non-interference in the media, improved government
cooperation with the human rights ombudsman, and full cooperation
with the ICTY. The document fails to make reference to shortcomings
in domestic war crimes trials, and the need to ensure justice regardless
of the ethnicity of victims and perpetrators.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
mission to Croatia has continued to develop a dialogue with the government,
while issuing reports critical of its return-related practices,
minority rights record, and progress in domestic war crimes trials. In a
July 2004 periodic report, the OSCE mission acknowledged the new
governments expressed willingness to reconcile with the countrys
minorities, and welcomed progress in property reconstruction assistance
to refugees and property repossession. The report, however, noted the
slow progress in resolution of the issue of tenancy rights, and lingering
problems in developing the rule of law, including the barriers to successful
domestic war crimes prosecutions.
The OSCE mission has systematically monitored and reported on
domestic war crimes prosecutions, identifying several areaslack of
impartiality, pressures on witnesses, weak inter-state cooperation, and
the need for additional training of judges and prosecutors, among others
where further reforms are essential. The mission nevertheless concluded
in June that efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Justice
including training by the ICTY for judges in the Zagreb, Osijek, Split,
and Rijeka County Courtsmade it likely that the Croatian courts
would be adequately able to handle the limited number of cases that are
expected to be transferred from the ICTY.
European Union
In a watershed year for European institutions, 2004 marked the expansion
of the European Union (E.U.) from fifteen to twenty-five member
states and initial agreement on a new Constitutional Treaty. A series of
train bombings in Madrid on March 11, 2004, marked a more sinister
milestone: the worst terrorist attack in modern European history, leaving
191 civilians dead and hundreds wounded. Such defining events
leave Europeans with the challenge of protecting rights in a newly
enlarged union and meeting the threat of terrorism while protecting
Europes long human rights tradition.
European governments and institutions did not rise to these challenges,
instead continuing to scale back rights protectionsin particular, for
asylum seekers and migrants. They also missed the opportunity to distinguish
European practice from the abusive actions of other countries
by employing counterterrorism strategies that also violate fundamental
rights, including the prohibitions against torture and indefinite detention.
Asylum Seekers and Migrants
Migration into the E.U. poses clear challenges for European governments,
and few would question the legitimacy or urgency of policies to
address these concerns. But the exclusive focus on combating illegal
immigration in Europe reflects a disturbing and prevailing attitude that
migrants have no rights. Consequently, regional and national policies
and practices have focused on keeping migrants and asylum seekers out
of Europe. The tragedies of September 11 and March 11 are used to
justify such exclusionary practices. The labeling of migrants and asylum
seekers as terrorists or national security threats has resulted in the
securitization of migration, often to the serious detriment of
migrants rights.
Regional Developments
Five years after the 1999 Tampere European Council, during which
member states decided to establish the E.U. as an area of freedom,
security and justice, the conclusion of the first phase of harmonizing
regional asylum and immigration law in May 2004 reflected the further
erosion of the right to seek asylum and of migrants rights more broadly.
In December 2003, the European Parliament (E.P.) requested that
the European Court of Justice (ECJ) review the legality of the Family
Reunification Directive, adopted in September 2003. Human rights and
childrens rights organizations shared the E.P.s serious concern that the
directive failed to guarantee the protection of family life enshrined in
the European Convention on Human Rights, the E.U. Charter of
Fundamental Rights, and the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
In March 2004, in an unprecedented move, Human Rights Watch
together with other human rights groups called for the withdrawal of
the proposed Asylum Procedures Directive, eventually adopted by the
European Council in April 2004, because it clearly eroded the individual
right to seek asylum. The directive failed to guarantee the right of
asylum seekers to remain in a country of asylum pending an appeal and
provided for a safe country of origin regime. The safe country of origin
regime would result in a common list of safe countries of origin
whose nationals would be tracked into an accelerated asylum procedure,
often so brief as to deny asylum seekers full and fair hearings on their
claims. The most alarming feature of the directive was provision for the
use of the safe third country and super safe third country concepts,
the result of which would prohibit access to asylum procedures for persons
who traveled through a third country deemed safe. A safe third
country would be one that has ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention
and the European Convention on Human Rights, and has a functioning
asylum system.
One positive development came in the form of the Qualification
Directive, adopted in April 2004. The directive duplicates the definition
of what constitutes a refugee provided in the Refugee Convention and
includes an express obligation on E.U. member states to grant asylum
to individuals falling within that definition. The directive also recognizes
that non-state actors are often agents of persecution, and acknowledges
child-specific and gender-specific forms of persecution. Those
persons not recognized as refugees will be eligible for subsidiary protection,
but human rights and refugee organizations have raised concern
that persons granted other forms of protection will not be eligible
for the same social benefits as recognized refugees.
Implications of Enlargement
The ten new member states admitted to the E.U. in May 2004
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,
Poland, Slovakia, and Sloveniawere confronted instantly with the
challenge of becoming countries of final destination for asylum seekers,
without having the means and the experience to deal with increased
numbers of refugees. Long considered refugee-producing and transit
countries (for asylum seekers making their way to the E.U.), the new
member states asylum systems and immigration procedures are woefully
under-developed and under-resourced to meet this challenge. Early
reports indicate that few of the new member states have systems that
can offer full and fair asylum determination procedures; detention
regimes that comport with international standards; and policies in place
to ensure that no person is sent back to a place where her or his life or
freedom is threatened.
Processing Migrants and Asylum Seekers Outside the E.U.
Instead of responding adequately to criticism regarding the absence of
human rights safeguards in the harmonization process or the need for
such safeguards to be in place in the new member states, key E.U. countries resurrected the previously discredited idea of processing
claims for asylum outside the E.U. In August 2004, Rocco Buttiglione,
then European Commissioner-designate of the Directorate-General for
Justice, Freedom and Security voiced enthusiastic support for a German
proposal to establish detention centers in North Africa to process asylum
applications for protection in the newly-expanded European
Union. While Buttigliones nomination was ultimately defeated, proposals
to process asylum seekers and migrants in select off-shore locations
have gained momentum.
That momentum is somewhat counterintuitive given the negative reaction
of Germany and key E.U. institutions to a similar proposal from
the United Kingdom in early 2003. In March 2004, the European
Parliament Committee on Citizens Freedoms and Rights expressed
concern that off-shore centers could violate an individuals right to seek
asylum and could shift responsibility for migrants and asylum seekers to
developing countries with scarce resources and poor human rights
records. The committee stated that processing centers could undermine
the 1951 Refugee Convention, the European Convention on Human
Rights, and the key idea of responsibility-sharing.
The off-shore processing idea is not dead, however. It became apparent
in 2004 that in the face of opposition to the earlier U.K. proposals, the
E.U. had decided to take a more gradual approach aimed at the development
of off-shore centers. In the meantime, the E.U. embarked on a
project of rapprochement with potential host countries, including Libya.
As a result, bilateral agreements were concluded in August 2004. They
focused on combating illegal migration from Libya to Italy and into the
E.U., and the E.U. agreed to lift an eight-year long arms embargo on
Libya in October 2004.
In October, Italy expelled several hundred persons to Libya without a
proper assessment of their asylum claims or any access to fair asylum
procedures. These persons are believed to have been sent to detention camps in Libya. Libya has not ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention,
signed a cooperation agreement for a formal relationship with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), or developed
an asylum system in compliance with international standards. In
addition to Libyas appalling human rights record with respect to its
own citizens, reports regarding its treatment of migrants and asylum
seekers raises special concern about placing processing centers there.
The German Ministry of Interior was also actively involved in supporting
the revival of the idea of developing extraterritorial processing centers
though its concrete proposals were not made available to the public.
Although France, Spain, and Sweden rejected such proposals and
called for absolute caution and respect for human rights of refugees,
in October 2004 the E.U. Informal Justice and Home Affairs Council
considered five pilot projects proposed by the Commission to improve
immigration and asylum regimes in Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco,
and Mauritania.
Role of the International Organization for Migration
The operations of the International Organization for Migration (IOM),
an independent intergovernmental organization with no formal human
rights or refugee protection mandate, came under increasing scrutiny in
2003-2004. The organizations mandate states that it provides assistance
to governments and migrants for only voluntary migrant returns, but
Human Rights Watchs research revealed that some IOM field operations
have placed migrants at risk of return to places where they face
persecution. Human Rights Watch is also concerned about the role of
the IOM as convener of the 5+5 Dialogue of the Western
Mediterranean Forum and the Forums emphasis on combating illegal
migration. In September 2004, the IOM sent a special technical team to
Libya to consult with the government about the management of illegal
migration. The timing of the visit, coming on the heels of proposals to
establish off-shore detention centers for the processing of asylum seekers in North African countries, gives rise to concerns that IOM will be
involved in advising Libya and the E.U. about the establishment and
management of such centers in the future.
National Developments
Asylum policy and practice in the Netherlands and an aggressive program
for the return of failed asylum seekers raised considerable alarm in
2003-2004. Concerns include the use of an accelerated (forty-eight
hour) asylum determination procedure (AC procedure); the inappropriate
treatment of migrant and asylum-seeking children; restrictions on
asylum seekers rights to basic material support, such as food and housing;
and proposals for returning large numbers of failed asylum seekers,
some in violation of international standards. The AC procedure is regularly
used to process and reject some 60 percent of asylum applications.
The brevity of the procedure affords applicants little opportunity to
adequately document their need for protection or to receive meaningful
legal advice, and the right to appeal is severely curtailed. To date, there
has been no measurable change in the AC procedure to ensure that asylum
seekers receive a full and fair hearing.
In light of such restrictive asylum policies, a key concern over the last
year has been the increasing rate of migrant returns to states where
failed asylum seekers would face persecution or a real risk of torture or
ill-treatment. In early 2004, for example, the Dutch government
revealed proposals to deny failed asylum seekers community-based
social assistance and to place them in special centers prior to their voluntary
returnor in detention centers pending their forcible deportation.
Thousands of failed asylum seekers would be threatened with
return over the next few years, including persons from countries where
ongoing conflicts will threaten their safety, such as Chechens, Afghans,
Liberians, some Somalis, and persons from Northern Iraq.
Human Rights Watch publicly challenged the Dutch returns plan in
February 2004, arguing that it represented a further degradation of the
Netherlands commitment to the right to seek asylum and the principle
of nonrefoulement, and signaled a continuing and disturbing trend on the
part of Dutch authorities to depart from international standards in their
treatment of asylum seekers and migrants.
Counterterrorism Measures
The climate of fear generated by the September 11 attacks in the U.S.
and further exacerbated by the March 2004 Madrid bombings resulted
in regional and national counterterrorism laws and policies permitting
the indefinite detention of foreign terrorism suspects; extended periods
of incommunicado detention; and the erosion of the absolute ban on
torture, including the use of evidence extracted by torture and growing
reliance upon so-called diplomatic assurances to return alleged terrorist
suspects to places where they face a real risk of torture or ill-treatment.
Indefinite Detention
In the aftermath of September 11, the U.K. passed the Anti-Terrorism,
Crime and Security Act (ATCSA), which provided for the indefinite
detention of foreign terrorist suspects. In order to establish such a
detention regime, the U.K. had to suspend (derogate from) some of
its human rights obligations under the European Convention on
Human Rigghts and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) by formally declaring a public emergency threatening
the life of the nation. The U.K. is the only Council of Europe and
U.N. member state to declare such an emergency and to determine that
the global threat from terrorism required it to abandon one of its core
human rights obligationsthe prohibition against indefinite detention
without charge or trial.
Under the ATCSA, the Home Secretary can certify a foreign national as
a suspected international terrorist if he has a reasonable belief  that
the person is a threat to national security and a suspicion that the person
is an international terrorist or had links with an international terrorist
group. Certification is based on secret evidence. Detainees can
challenge their detention in the Special Immigration Appeals
Commission (SIAC), a tribunal with limited procedural guarantees and
a low standard of proof. Detainees are assigned a security-cleared barrister
known as a special advocate. Classified evidence is heard during
closed sessions attended by the special advocate. Detainees and their
lawyers of choice are excluded from those sessions, and contact between
the special advocates and detainees is limited.
Seventeen men in total have been detained under the ATCSA regime.
To date, eleven men remain detained indefinitely without charge or
trial. The treatment of detainees under the ATCSA in high security
U.K. prisons also raises concerns that they have been subject to cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment. Detainees have complained of long
periods of isolation; lack of access to health care, religious observance,
and educational services; lack of exercise; obstacles to visits from friends
and family; and psychological trauma associated with not knowing when
they will be released.
The indefinite detention regime has been criticized and challenged in
U.K. courts. Two U.K. parliamentary committeesthe Privy Council
Review Committee (known as the Newton Committee) and the Joint
Human Rights Committeehave called for the urgent repeal of the
measures that allow for indefinite detention. In October 2002, upon a
challenge that the indefinite detention regime discriminates against foreign
nationals, the British Court of Appeal ruled that indefinite detention
was compatible with U.K. and international law. In October 2004,
a specially convened nine-judge panel in the House of Lords heard an
appeal on the lawfulness of the derogation and the compatibility of the legislation with other human rights obligations from which Britain has
not derogated. That decision is pending.
Incommuncado detention
In Spain, the prolonged detention of foreign terrorist suspects has also
given rise to serious concerns about procedural and other violations in
the special detention regime. The Spanish Code of Criminal Procedure
(Ley de Enjuiciamiento Criminal) provides for incommunicado detention
for up to thirteen days, limitations on the right to counsel, pre-trial
detention for up to four years, and secret legal proceedings (causa
secreta). The proceedings governing the detentions of suspected al-
Qaeda operatives apprehended in Spain since September 11, among
others, were declared secret by the Audiencia Nacional, a special court
that supervises terrorist cases. The imposition of secrecy can bar
defense access to the prosecution evidenceexcept for information contained
in the initial detention orderfor the majority of the investigative
phase. Human Rights Watch detailed its concerns with the Spanish
counter-terrorism regime in a December 2004 report titled, Setting An
Example?  Counterterrorism Measures in Spain. Many of those concerns
have been echoed by the European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT),
and the U.N. special rapporteur on torture.
Evidence Extracted under Torture
In August 2004, Britains second highest court ruled that evidence
obtained under torture in third countries could be used in special terrorism
cases. The Court of Appeal held that the British government can
use evidence extracted under torture as long as the U.K. neither procured
the torture nor connived at it. Such evidence can be used to
certify foreign terrorist suspects and during appeals against indefinite
detention in the SIAC. The courts decision undermines the global prohibition
against torture. Article 15 of the Convention against Torture explicitly prohibits the consideration of evidence obtained under torture
in any legal proceedings. The House of Lords has been asked to review
the question of use of evidence obtained under torture on appeal.
Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard against Torture
European governments also contributed to the erosion of the ban on
torture by relying on so-called diplomatic assurances to return terrorist
suspects and foreigners labeled national security threats to countries
where they were at risk of torture or ill-treatment. Diplomatic assurances
are formal guarantees from the receiving government that it will
protect a person from torture upon return. Under international law, the
absolute prohibition against torture includes the obligation not to send
a person to a country where he or she is at risk of torture or ill-treatment.
Human Rights Watchs research, detailed in an April 2004 report
titled, Empty Promises: Diplomatic Assurances No Safeguard Against
Torture, revealed that such assurances provide no guarantee against torture,
which is practiced in secret and often denied by governments in
states where torture is systematic or used to repress and intimidate particular
groups. The report detailed cases where persons returned based
on diplomatic assurances were in fact tortured or ill-treated, and highlighted
cases in several European countries where the courts intervened
and ruled that diplomatic assurances from governments in states where
torture is a serious problem were not reliable. Schemes for post-return
monitoringthat is, an agreement by the two governments involved
that the sending government could deploy its diplomats to monitor a
persons treatment after returndid not provide an additional safeguard
against torture.
Cases in which European governments have relied upon or attempted
to employ assurances to effect a return have been documented in
Sweden, the U.K., Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Georgia, and
Turkey, among others. In Sweden, the cases of two Egyptian asylum
seekers expelled in December 2001 from Stockholm to Cairo based on diplomatic assurances from the Egyptian government were of particular
note. The Swedish authorities determined in 2001 that the men, Ahmed
Agiza and Mohammad al-Zari, had a well-founded fear of persecution if
returned to Egypt. Based on secret evidence never made available to the
men or their lawyers, the Swedish government excluded the men from
protection under the 1951 Refugee Convention and ordered their
expulsions, based on assurances from the Egyptian authorities that the
men would not be subject to the death penalty, subject to torture or illtreatment,
and that they would receive fair trials. The men were
expelled from Sweden on the same day the decision to deny them protection
was made.
It was subsequently revealed that the men were handed over to U.S.
operatives at Bromma Airport in Stockholm; hooded, shackled, and
drugged by these operatives; placed aboard a U.S. government-leased
plane; and transported to Cairo. They were held in incommunicado
detention for a full five weeks before the Swedish ambassador to Egypt
visited them. The men have credibly alleged that they were tortured
and ill-treated in those five weeks and that such treatment continued
even after the Swedish diplomats began monitoring their treatment. A
classified Swedish government monitoring report from January 2002
indicated that the men told the Swedish authorities about this abuse,
but the Swedish government took no action and in fact deleted these
allegations from its public reporting on the cases.
In October 2003, al-Zari was released without charge and he remains
under constant surveillance by Egyptian police. Ahmed Agizas April
2004 re-trial (he had been tried in absentia in Egypt in 1999 and sentenced
to 25 years of hard labor) was conducted in a special military
court. A Human Rights Watch trial monitor, present throughout the
trial, documented numerous serious fair trial violations. In the course of
the trial, Agiza told the court that he had been tortured in prison and
requested an independent medical examination, which the court denied.
The Swedish authorities were denied access to the first two of the four trial hearings, and did not take action on Agizas claims that he was tortured.
Human Rights Watch criticized the Swedish government for violating
its absolute obligation not to return a person to a country where
they are at risk of torture and publicly called for an international, independent
inquiry under the auspices of the United Nations to investigate
all three governments involvement in the mens abuse.
This disquieting trend was further substantiated by recent indications of
the growing use of diplomatic assurances in Germany, the Netherlands,
and the United Kingdom. Thus, although in May 2003 a German court
rejected as insufficient diplomatic assurances offered by the Turkish
government in the extradition case of Metin Kaplan, the leader of the
banned Islamic fundamentalist group, Caliphate State, Mr. Kaplan
was subsequently deported to Turkey in October 2004. Similarly, in
September 2004, the Dutch government decided to extradite Nuriye
Kesbir, a high-level member of the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK),
following diplomatic assurances from Turkey that she would not be tortured
or ill-treated upon return and would receive a fair trial. In a letter
to the Dutch Minister of Justice, Human Rights Watch detailed the real
risk of torture and ill-treatment Kesbir would face upon return and stated
that assurances from Turkey could not be considered reliable given
Turkeys failure to implement adequate monitoring mechanisms to
ensure that torture did not occur. In October 2004, during the House of
Lords appeal on the lawfulness of the indefinite detention regime (see
above), the British government indicated that it is actively seeking
diplomatic assurances from states where there is a risk of torture to
facilitate the removal from the U.K. of men currently subject to indefinite
detention.
A number of international and regional actors have also criticized states
growing reliance on diplomatic assurances. In his October 2004 report
to the U.N. General Assembly, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture
stated that assurances from governments in countries where torture is
systematic cannot be relied upon and should not be employed to circumvent the obligation not to return a person to a country where he or
she risks torture. Similarly, in his April 2004 report, the Council of
Europe Commissioner for Human Rights. Gil Robles expressed concern
that the use of diplomatic assurances in the Agiza/al-Zari cases did
not provide the two men with an adequate safeguard against torture.
The U.N. Human Rights Committee has also expressed concern about
the adequacy of such assurances as an effective safeguard. The Agiza
case is pending before the U.N. Committee against Torture.
At the regional level, the European Court of Human Rights was presented
with the opportunity to reaffirm the absolute nature of the prohibition
against returning any person to a country where she or he
would be at risk of torture or prohibited ill-treatment in Mamatkulov
and Askarov v. Turkey, a case for which Human Rights Watch and the
AIRE Centre submitted an amicus curiae brief. In its brief, Human
Rights Watch documented the systematic practice of torture in
Uzbekistan, a conclusion echoed by a February 2003 report by the U.N.
special rapporteur on torture. Human Rights Watch also questioned the
reliability of the diplomatic assurances proffered by the Uzbek authorities
as well as the follow-up monitoring of the assurances by the Turkish
government, which was limited to one prison visit by Turkish officials
(more than two years after the men were returned) and reliance on
medical certificates from prison doctors employed by the state and
alleged to be implicated in acts of torture. A decision is expected in the
Mamatkulov case before the end of 2004. 
Georgia
Georgias new president, Mikheil Saakashvili, was elected in January
2004, after campaigning on a platform of radical reform. His predecessor,
Eduard Shevadnadze, was ousted in November 2003, as a result of
peaceful mass demonstrations against fraudulent parliamentary elections.
In March 2004, a coalition of parties aligned with Saakashvili won
a landslide victory in repeat parliamentary elections. With this strong
mandate, the new government began a campaign against corruption and
for territorial integrity.
The governments reform agenda is delivering mixed results on human
rights. The environment for religious freedoma long standing concern
has improved. However, torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial
detention remain widespread. Chechen refugees also remain vulnerable
to state discrimination and abuse by Georgian security forces.
Mixed Results on Reform
In February, the new government rushed several constitutional changes
through Parliament. One change empowered the president to appoint
and dismiss judges. This changewhich contravenes international
human rights normsincreases the presidents influence over a judiciary
which already lacked independence. There have been incidents of police
violence towards peaceful demonstrators, creating an environment less
conducive to freedom of assembly than under Shevadnadze. The media
remains relatively free, although media previously aligned to the opposition
now support the government, as does the state owned media,
leaving very few outlets without a pro-government orientation. In a
positive move, the government appointed Sozar Subeliani, a human
rights activist and former journalist, to the Ombuds office on
September 15. The post had been empty for twelve months.
The government is engaged in a highly publicized fight against corruption,
with frequent arrests of high profile figures. Georgian nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and others are concerned that the authorities
are selectively targeting individuals for political reasons, and that
the law is not being applied equally to all. Allegations of due process
violations are common, and some of those detained for corruption
allege torture and ill-treatment.
Georgias Regions
During the first months of 2004, tensions over tax and customs revenues,
political freedoms, and law and order issues, between the central
government and Aslan Abashidze, the autocratic leader of the
autonomous republic of Adjara, escalated almost to the point of armed
conflict. The human rights situation in Ajara deteriorated, with regular
reports of beatings, detentions, and harassment of those critical of
Abashidze and his government. In May, after negotiations led by Russia,
Abashidze backed down and left Ajara. Since then, reports of abuses in
Ajara have declined dramatically, particularly those concerning freedom
of the press and freedom of association. Tension between Georgia and
the breakaway republic of South Ossetia also worsened during 2004,
resulting in sporadic armed clashes. Negotiations in August between
Georgia, South Ossetia, and Russia calmed the situation, at least temporarily.
Both sides accuse the other of torturing members of their security
forces who were taken prisoner. Human Rights Watch has insufficient
information to substantiate the claims.
Religious Freedom
During the last four years of the Shevadnadze government, Georgia
experienced an increase in religious intolerance towards non-traditional
religious groups, including Baptists, Jehovahs Witnesses, and
Evangelists. These groups faced hate speech and violent attacks by
organized groups of Orthodox Christian vigilantes. The state failed to respond adequately, and sometimes even cooperated in the attacks,
which consequently became more frequent and pervasive. The attacks
and hate speech subsided prior to the November 2003 elections, leading
to speculation about how closely the government controlled the violence.
In 2004, there were some reports of intimidation and violence
against religious minorities, although at significantly reduced levels to
previous years. This decrease has improved the environment for freedom
of religion.
In a positive move against impunity, the police arrested Vasili
Mkalavishvili and seven of his followers in March. Mkalavishvili has led
many violent attacks on religious minorities. However, the police used
excessive force during the arrest, which was broadcast on television. At
this writing, Mkalavishvili remained in custody awaiting trial. The new
government has failed to bring to justice the perpetrators of scores of
other attacks, and at times, appears to fuel religious intolerance through
the use of nationalist rhetoric aimed against alien influences, a veiled
reference to non-traditional religious groups.
Torture
Torture in detention and due process violations remain widespread in
Georgia. There are continuing reports of the practice of isolating
detainees in circumstances that amount to incommunicado detention,
and restricting access to defence counsel. Judges sometimes ignore torture
allegations. There were reports of several deaths in custody under
suspicious circumstances, an increase from previous years. Reports of
torture in detention include beatings, cigarette burns, threats of rape,
and the use of electric shock. The authorities prosecute the perpetrators
of torture in some cases. However, in many cases, the perpetrators are
not brought to justice.
In a case that exemplifies the more troubling aspects of the governments
fight against corruption, the former chair of the State Audit Agency, Sulkhan Molashvili, alleged he was subject to torture in pretrial
detention following his arrest in April on corruption charges. An
independent forensic expert confirmed signs of torture on Molashvilis
body after his arrest, including cigarette burns, and injuries consistent
with the use of electric shocks. The Tbilisi city prosecution office
opened an investigation into the torture allegations on July 5, 2004. In
mid-July the Tbilisi city prosecutor stated that the investigation showed
that the wounds had been inflicted either by Molashvili himself or other
prisoners. At the time of writing, the investigation is on-going.
In October, in response to increasing reports of torture, Minister of
Internal Affairs Irakli Okruashvili discussed with NGOs and the
Ombuds office a plan to set up independent monitoring groups to
supervise arrests and detention facilities. At this writing, the plan was
yet to be implemented.
Chechen Refugees
Chechen refugees in Georgia remain vulnerable to abuse. They lack
adequate housing, medical care, and employment opportunities. The
refugees are subject to police harassment and threats of refoulement.
Georgian authorities suspect some refugees of involvement in terrorism,
and abuses take place during counter-terrorism operations. In May,
Chechen refugees in the Pankisi Valley went on a hunger strike for over
a week, protesting police harassment, including unauthorized and
intimidating house searches. In August, following Russias unilateral closure
of the border and pressure from Moscow about the presence of
terrorists in the Pankisi Valley, masked Georgian security forces carried
out raids against homes occupied by refugees and Kists (ethnic
Chechens from Georgia). Up to twelve men were detained and accused
of illegally entering Georgia. All were released within several days without
charge.
In February 2004, two Chechens, Khusein Alkhanov and Bekhan
Mulkoyev, were released from custody after a Georgian Court refused
to extradite them to Russia on terrorism charges, citing the fact that
Alkhanov is a refugee and a dispute about Mulkoyevs identity. The men
went missing soon after their release, and later appeared in Russian custody.
Human rights groups in Georgia suspect that Georgian authorities
aided the Russian security forces detention of these men, in breach of
Georgian law and international standards prohibiting return in cases
where there is a risk of torture.
Key International Actors
The World Bank and European Commission co-sponsored a donors
conference in June 2004. In a move illustrative of the huge international
support enjoyed by Georgia, the international community pledged U.S.
$1billion in aid over the next two years at the meeting. The donors stated
that the aid was to promote economic reform, improve governance,
and combat poverty.
In June, the European Union (E.U.) pledged to double its financial
assistance to Georgia over the next three years and announced the
inclusion of Georgia in its European Neighborhood Policy. The policy
offers financial benefits subject to Georgias compliance with jointly
negotiated political and economic criteria.
In May 2004, the Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of
Torture visited Georgia, completing a trip interrupted by the upheaval
in November 2003. Members of the Committee found that prison conditions
were disastrous and encouraged the authorities to develop a plan
to improve them.
The relationship between the U.S. and Georgia continues to strengthen.
In May 2004, Georgia was deemed eligible to apply for a further
large aid package under the Millennium Challenge Account. In November, Saakashvili stated that as a result of Georgias engagement
in peacekeeping operations, the U.S. would fund a new, large scale military
assistance program. Just prior to this, Georgia agreed to increase
the number of Georgian troops in the coalition forces in Iraq from 159
to 850. The U.S. reconfirmed a commitment to combat terrorism in
Georgia. A State Department spokesperson claimed that past U.S. military
assistance had been successful in reducing a terrorist threat in the
Pankisi Valley, but failed to mention human rights concerns associated
with past operations there. In 2002, the U.S. assisted in training
Georgian security services for counter-terrorism operations in the
Pankisi Valley. That year, Georgian security services carried out operations
there that breached international human rights standards.
In the wake of the Beslan atrocity in North Ossetia, Russia has stepped
up pressure on Georgia over Chechens seeking refuge in the Pankisi
Valley, claiming that they are operating terrorist bases there. In
October, Georgian Minister of Internal Affairs Irakli Okruashvili agreed
to hand over a list of all residents in the Valley to unspecified Russian
officials. Russia remains a key player in the negotiations over the status
of the breakaway republics of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Kazakhstan
Mired in an international corruption scandal and taking a heavy hand to
its political rivals, the government of Kazakhstan has done little to dispel
critics perceptions of its policies as increasingly predatory and
authoritarian.
Corruption is pervasive in Kazakhstan. In 2004 Transparency
International gave Kazakhstan one of its worst ratings, and identified it
as part of a global phenomenon of oil-rich states with excessive levels of
corruption. The Kazakhgate oil funds corruption scandal, which began
in 1999, has tarnished the governments reputation at home and abroad.
President Nursultan Nazarbaev wins international praise for taking
half-steps toward human rights reform and for refraining from further
backtracking, though he has presided over few improvements in practice.
Instead, the government continues its aggressive persecution of
independent media and the political opposition. State antagonism
toward critical media was particularly heated in advance of September
2004parliamentary elections.
Persecution of Independent Media
The government of Kazakhstan has made some preliminary moves to
improve its poor reputation with respect to media freedoms. For
instance, in January 2004 it paroled Sergei Duvanov, an independent
journalist and fierce government critic convicted in 2003 on questionable
rape charges. President Nazarbaev also vetoed a highly restrictive
media law after it was widely criticized abroad and deemed unconstitutional
by the countrys Constitutional Council.
But these moves do not indicate a policy shift. Kazakh television, the
main source of news for the countrys population, remains dominated
either by government or pro-government media. The governments fierce intolerance for critical media reached new heights in the run-up
to parliamentary elections. On July 22, 2004, the president ordered foreign
media to include praise of the government and its policies along
with any criticism, and reportedly said that his lawyers were prepared to
sue foreign media who discredit the country.
Indeed, the government uses politically motivated lawsuits to intimidate
and shut down domestic media that are critical of the government or
cover such sensitive issues as corruption. One such lawsuit resulted in
the closure of a leading opposition newspaper, SolDat (Let Me Speak),
in July 2003. In 2004, a bizarre set of events resulted in the closure of
the Assandi Times. On June 2, 2004, a fake version of the Assandi Times
filled with stories that misrepresented the political opposition was circulated
throughout Almaty. The editorial staff issued a statement that disavowed
the fake edition of the paper and expressed the staffs belief that
the presidential administration orpeople close to it were responsible.
The administration sued for defamation. The court found in favor
of the government, fined the newspaper, and ordered its bank account
and property seized. This effectively closed down the main opposition
newspaper in the country just two months prior to parliamentary elections.
In August, the paper regrouped and began publishing under its
former name, Respublica.
Critical newspapers are also the targets of anonymous violence presumably
aiming to intimidate dissent. In August 2004, the office of an independent
newspaper in southern Kazakhstan was attacked by unidentified
men who threw Molotov cocktails through the windows. The incident,
which did not cause injuries or the destruction of the office, was
nonetheless reminiscent of the firebombing of the Respublica premises
two years earlier. The editor of the paper speculated that the attack may
have been in retaliation for the newspapers coverage of the parliamentary
election campaign or its pieces about local organized crime.
Persecution of Political Opponents
The government harasses members and supporters of Kazakhstans
opposition political parties, including through arbitrary criminal and
misdemeanor charges and threats of job dismissal, often aimed at preventing
the individuals from running for public office.
The continued incarceration of Galimzhan Zhakianov, the leader of the
Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan (DVK), revealed the governments
resistance to genuine political competition. Zhakianov was convicted in
2002, following an unfair trial on charges that have been widely viewed
as politically motivated. In August 2004, authorities transferred him to a
low-security settlement, where he remains under police supervision.
Security officials have repeatedly tried to convince him to drop out of
political life altogether in exchange for his release. In apparent response
to his refusal, authorities are threatening new criminal charges against
Zhakianov. He has also been denied his rights to reside in his home
town and work while under the supervision of the settlement authorities.
DVK co-founder Mukhtar Abliazov was also apparently pressured to
disavow his political affiliation and halt his political activities as a condition
for release from prison in May 2003.
Obstacles to Political Participation
President Nazarbaevs government was rightly applauded for registering
several key opposition parties, including the DVK. However, the government
failed to provide the level playing field necessary for free and
fair parliamentary elections in September 2004.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Council of Europe found that the elections fell short of international standards, citing unbalanced election commissions and media bias
favoring pro-presidential parties.
Local groups also voiced concern about the lack of voter education
regarding the introduction of electronic voting, the disqualification of
the leader of the centrist Ak-Zhol party, and unconfirmed reports that
the pro-presidential Asar party, headed by Nazarbaevs daughter,
coerced people on the government payroll to join the party or risk losing
their jobs.
The OSCE and the Council of Europe criticized the vote count, citing
compromised voter lists, voters turned away at the polling station, and
the significant discrepancy between paper and electronic voter lists. In
many cases domestic observers were reportedly denied full access to
polling station procedures, in spite of new legislation which allows them
access. International observers noted with dissatisfaction that the government
failed to implement a number of positive changes that had
been introduced with the April 2004 election law.
In the end, President Nazarbaevs Otan party swept the elections, claiming
forty-two of seventy-seven possible seats. The pro-presidential
AIST and Asar parties were in second and third place respectively. The
official tally gave the DVK no seats in parliament.
Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs)
In 2003 the government attempted to pass legislation specifying that
NGOs must be found by the government to be engaged in useful
activity in order to obtain registration. President Nazarbaev withdrew
the bill in October 2003 only after it met with almost universal condemnation
from the local and international human rights communities.
But local NGOs report continued government harassment through
intimidating visits and threats by security and law enforcement agencies, arbitrary investigations by the tax police, and surveillance by law
enforcement and security agents.
Fueling the AIDS Epidemic
Human rights abuse against injection drug users and sex workers in
Kazakhstan is fueling one of the fastest-growing AIDS epidemics in the
world and threatening the countrys economic and social development.
Human Rights Watch has documented instances of police brutality, lack
of due process, and harassment and stigmatization that drive drug users
and sex workers underground and impede their access to life-saving
HIV prevention services.
The government of Kazakhstan has failed to review government legislation
regarding HIV/AIDS in order to bring it into compliance with
international standards on HIV/AIDS and human rights. It has not
expanded prevention and treatment services for all persons affected by
HIV/AIDS, nor has it addressed abusive police practices toward drug
users, in particular toward those seeking to access, or who have
accessed, needle exchange services for HIV prevention.
International Cooperation
The government has taken several half-steps toward better compliance
with international standards, but still needs to follow through to make
these steps meaningful. For instance, the government at last signed on
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, but
failed to ratify these instruments.
Similarly, the government extended an invitation to the U.N. Special
Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, who visited
the country in June 2004. Local and international rights groups called
for caution in assessing this move as progress, noting that true progress would be made only if and when the Kazakh government implements
the Special Rapporteurs resulting recommendations.
The government took an important step toward abolition of the death
penalty when it adopted a moratorium on state executions in January
2004.
Key International Actors
The OSCE plays an active role in advocating for improvement in
Kazakhstans rights record. On July 22, 2004, the OSCE representative
for media freedom, Miklos Haraszti, expressed his organizations objections
to the heavy fine against the Assandi Times. My first concern is
that this decision will force Assandi Times, a major opposition news outlet,
out of business, de facto annihilating the newspaper, he said.
Following a July 2004 Cooperation Council meeting between the
European Union and Kazakhstan regarding the parties Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement (PCA), the E.U. cautioned that a positive
assessment of the [September parliamentary] elections would be an
essential consideration in any decision on the bid of the Republic of
Kazakhstan to hold Chairmanship of the OSCE in 2009. The bulk of
the E.U. statement, however, failed to hold Kazakhstan to the standards
set forth in the PCA and instead essentially praised the Nazarbaev government
for its half-measures toward reform.
The U.S. government certified in 2004 that Kazakhstan had complied
with the human rights standards on which military and other assistance
is conditioned. In May 2004, the U.S. State Department announced
that Kazakhstan had made significant improvements in the protection
of human rights in the last six months.
Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan moved further from its reformist past and ever closer to
joining the ranks of the more authoritarian states of Central Asia. Since
the countrys last national elections in 2000, the government has been
closing space for political competition and civil society. President Askar
Akaevs chief political rival, Feliks Kulov, remains imprisoned on arbitrary
grounds, and the government is presiding over the steady erosion
of the independent media, violations of free assembly, and unfair elections.
Independent Media
Almost all of Kyrgyzstans national television stations, the source of
news for most people in the country, are run by the government, the
presidents relatives, or supporters of the president. The lone exception
has been the television station Pyramida, which in the past occasionally
gave airtime to government critics. But even this relative independence
was compromised after new investors obtained a significant interest in
Pyramida in 2004. Rumors that President Akaevs son was behind the
deal increased fears that the station would be unwilling to broadcast
critical content.
The November 2003 opening of a U.S.-funded independent printing
press has helped to bolster the independent print media, but the government
uses heavy-handed lawsuits to intimidate and silence these outlets.
A particularly outrageous example of such tactics was a complaint
filed by the government newspaper Vicherny Bishkek, along with several
other private and pro-government newspapers, against the independent
newspaper MSN, formerly known as Moya Stolitsa-Novosti. The complaint,
filed with the governments antimonopoly agency, said that MSN
was charging too little for its newspaper, thereby undercutting the competition.
The antimonopoly agency ruled that MSN had committed monopolistic actions, ordered the paper to raise its prices, and recommended
that the complainants sue the paper for damages.
Recent years have seen a pattern of physical attacks by unknown
assailants on the children of independent journalists and human rights
activists. The most recent of these was an April 24 attack on Chingiz
Sydykov, the twenty-one-year-old son of Zamira Sydykova, editor-inchief
of the independent newspaper Respublica. Sydykov sustained serious
injuries.
Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs)
Fear spread throughout the Kyrgyz human rights community after
rights defender and political activist Tursunbek Akunov went missing.
As of November 22, 2004 his whereabouts remained unknown. Akunov,
the leader of the Human Rights Movement of Kyrgyzstan and a former
presidential candidate in 2000, was last seen on November 16, 2004,
when he allegedly told his wife he was going out to meet with officers
from the National Security Services (NSS, formerly the KGB).
Following his disappearance, the NSS denied that any meeting took
place or that it had Akunov in custody. In the days before he went missing
Akunov was actively campaigning for President Akaevs resignation
from office.
Government officials use aggressive tactics to disrupt the work of
NGOs. In April 2004 local officials in Issyk-Kul province reportedly
obstructed the convening of several meetings on human rights organized
by NGOs. The Bishkek Helsinki Group was essentially dissolved
after its two leading members were forced to flee the country in 2003
because of government persecution.
In September 2003, the Ministry of Justice stripped the leadership of a
prominent human rights group, the Kyrgyz Committee for Human
Rights (KCHR), of its registration, instead recognizing an alternate executive body using the KCHRs name. On July 3, 2004, unknown
men broke into the home of Ainura Aitbaeva, the daughter of KCHR
chairman Ramazan Dyryldaev, and beat her, rendering her unconscious.
KCHR also reported that a car tried to run over Aitbaeva when she was
walking with her husband on the evening of November 4. The car hit
Aitbaeva lightly, but the couple escaped uninjured.
In October 2003, the government re-registered the Coalition for
Democracy and Civil Society, an election monitoring and civic education
group, following a significant international outcry. The government
had denied the group re-registration three times in September
2003.
Freedom of Assembly
The state failed to resolve contradictions in the law regarding whether
advance written notification and permission are necessary for holding
public assemblies. The vagueness of the law allows for its arbitrary
enforcement. For instance, the authorities allowed a protest against the
Renton group, a company that allegedly defrauded investors, to proceed.
Police also did not intervene when protestors allegedly publicly
burned signs and threw condoms at officials during a demonstration
against a sex-education text.
However, police commonly disband demonstrations in support of the
political opposition. For example, on April 15, 2004, dozens of peaceful
protestors gathered in Bishkek to call for the release of Feliks Kulov.
Participants say they provided the authorities prior notification, but
police intervened before the march could begin, detaining eighteen
people, including leading civil society activists. Ironically, they were
held at the Pervomaiskiy District Police Department, the site of a pilot
project of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to aid and reform the police. One of the departments police
officers punched rights defender Aziza Abdirasulova, who was observing the demonstration as part of a project monitoring the right to free
assembly in Kyrgyzstan. Several protestors were charged with holding
an unsanctioned march and fined before being released.
Political Participation
The government refused to release political prisoner Feliks Kulov, head
of the opposition Ar-Namys party, who was President Akaevs chief rival
in the 2000 presidential election. The Ministry of Justice stated that
Kulov will not be released before November 2005. Presidential elections
are scheduled for October 2005.
Revelations that opposition members of parliament were under surveillance
shocked the country. On January 14, 2004, listening devices were
found in the government offices of several leading opposition parliamentarians.
Such surveillance of citizens is illegal in Kyrgyzstan, except
in cases of ongoing criminal investigation and with the sanction of the
prosecutors office. A parliamentary report accused the NSS of illegally
placing the listening devices; the NSS denied responsibility. The report
revealed that prominent civil society leaders were also the targets of illegal
surveillance operations during past years.
Elections
While dozens and even hundreds of political rivals fought for positions
in local council elections in the cities, many local council seats in villages
went uncontested in the October 10, 2004 election. Rural apathy
may be explained partly by the fact that villages are virtual information-
free zones and receive little or no news. Many village residents
simply may not have been aware that local councils responsibilities
were recently increased to include authority over local budgetary matters
and so did not view them as significant. Potential candidates may
have been dissuaded from running because of the new 1,000 som (about
U.S. $24) fee imposed this year. 
The Coalition for Democracy and Civil Society reported problems with
the composition of the elections commissions and inaccuracies in voter
listssome of which reportedly included the names of people who had
left the country or died. Independent monitors were prevented from
entering at least one polling station, and there were also complaints that
police stationed themselves inside polling places.
Pro-presidential parties swept the elections. The opposition won only a
handful of local council seats.
Parliamentary elections will be held in February 2005, and developments
to date, including the conduct of local council elections, bode
badly for a free and fair vote. The new pro-government party Alga,
Kyrgyzstan! (Forward, Kyrgyzstan!), reportedly run by President
Akaevs daughter, has been accused by numerous and credible sources of
forcing people paid from the state budgetteachers, doctors, government
officials, studentsto become members of the party, under threat
of losing their jobs.
Torture
Police torture is widespread in Kyrgyzstan. The most commonly
reported forms of torture and ill-treatment are beatings, asphyxiation,
threats of sexual violence, and deprivation of food and sleep.
In November 2003, the Criminal Code of Kyrgyzstan was amended to
specifically outlaw torture, creating penalties of three to five years of
imprisonment. However, Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Internal
Affairs (MVD) officials failed to acknowledge the extent and gravity of
Kyrgyzstans torture problem or to formulate a plan to resolve it. The
MVD controls temporary detention facilities in police stations while
other places of pre-trial detention and prisons have been transferred to
Ministry of Justice jurisdiction.
Key International Actors
U.S. officials were rightly proud of the positive contribution made by
the new independent printing press they established in Kyrgyzstan. U.S.
diplomats continued efforts to ensure that Akaev would relinquish the
presidency in 2005.
The U.S. continued to station 1,150 troops at Manas airbase for operations
in Afghanistan. Kyrgyzstan appeared to try to leverage Russia as a
counterweight to U.S. influence, even allowing the Russians to establish
a military base in Kant, outside Bishkek. Economic and political relations
with China also grew closer during the year.
In September 2004 Kyrgyzstan hosted a meeting of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) at which membersRussia, China,
Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistanvowed to make
economic cooperation and counter-terrorism priorities.
The E.U. failed to take serious issue with Kyrgyzstans deteriorating
human rights record during its annual meeting regarding the parties
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA). A statement issued on
July 13, 2004, said only that the E.U. welcomed measures by
Kyrgyzstan toward further democratization and that the parties reaffirmed
their commitment to tackling terrorism in accordance with fundamental
principles of human rights.
There were serious, persistent concerns that the OSCEs project to provide
material support to Kyrgyz police lacked sufficient human rights or
reform focus and might serve only to reinforce an abusive government
agency. The assistance is part of a pilot project meant to be replicated in
other former Soviet countries. 
Macedonia
By the end of 2004, almost all provisions of the August 2001
Framework Peace Agreement (known as the Ohrid Agreement), which
ended the 2001 armed conflict between ethnic Albanian insurgents and
Macedonian government forces, had been implemented. Certain provisions
of the agreement, however, remained controversial and served to
exacerbate tensions among Macedonias ethnic minorities. In general,
discrimination against national minorities, including in particular ethnic
Albanians and Roma, and police violence continue to be problems in
the country.
Implementation of the Ohrid Agreement and Its Implications for
Minority Rights
Although ethnic tensions between the Macedonian majority and
Albanian minority reached a climax during the 2001 armed conflict,
relations remained tense throughout 2004, especially as the redistricting
plans called for by the Ohrid Agreement were under consideration. In
addition, other unresolved concernssuch as the ongoing situation of
displaced persons from the conflict and the absence of a successful disarmament
programcontinue to plague inter-ethnic relations.
On August 11, 2004, the parliament passed a Territorial Organization
Act, the last of a package of legislative initiatives required by the Ohrid
Agreement. By increasing the powers of administrative districts and
decreasing their number from 123 to seventy-six in 2008, the act decentralizes
the country by giving more powers to local government and
increases the representation of ethnic Albanians in local government.
According to the last census held in 2002, ethnic Albanians make up 25
percent of the population in Macedonia. New administrative districts
will be created by joining Albanian rural areas with majority
Macedonian districts, thereby increasing the number of districts in
which the ethnic Albanian population will comprise more than 20 percent of the population (in Kievo and Struga to more than 50 percent).
As a result, Albanian language will become a second official language in
these districts (as stipulated in the Ohrid Agreement), and members of
the Albanian minority will be able to elect a larger number of local government
representatives.
The introduction of the Territorial Organization Act by the government
in August 2004 exacerbated the already existing tensions between
the majority Macedonian and minority Albanian populations. Some ethnic
Macedonian groups feared that the plan would lead to a division of
the country along ethnic lines and ultimately make it easier for ethnic
Albanians to secede and unify with neighboring Kosovo. Many
Macedonians organized demonstrations against the Act, some of which
became violent. For example, the media reported that forty protestors
and police officers were injured during anti-redistricting riots in the
town of Struga on July 22, 2004. Ultimately, charges were filed against
more than fifty people in connection with the disturbances.
Contributing further to inter-ethnic tensions, a referendum was called
by the World Macedonian Congress to overturn the redistricting plan.
However, the referendum, which took place on November 7, 2004,
failed due to low voter turn out.
Three years after the end of the armed conflict, the government has still
not succeeded in fully disarming the ethnic Albanian population, contributing
to a worsening of the security situation in areas populated predominantly
by Albanians.
There are still 1,900 persons who remain internally displaced as a result
of the 2001 conflict. The Macedonian Helsinki Committee reported
that security is no longer the primary obstacle to return. Instead, the
main obstacle appears to be the poor economic situation of the internally
displaced, who need financial assistance in order to replace basic
household items and farming supplies that were destroyed during the
conflict. 
Despite the ethnic tensions discussed above, implementation of the
Ohrid Agreement has contributed to some positive developments
regarding minorities. According to the Macedonian Helsinki
Committee for Human Rights, during the three years since the Ohrid
Agreement was signed, there has been an 80 percent increase in the
employment of minorities. As a result, for example, Albanians have
obtained a level of representation in the state administration that is
closer to their share of the overall population. In addition, after years of
controversy regarding the Albanian-language Tetovo University, it
received legal recognition in February 2004. Furthermore, pursuant to
the Ohrid Agreement, a constitutional amendment was adopted that
requires a double majority for laws related to ethnic minorities: the
majority of all parliamentary deputies and the majority of all deputies
representing ethnic minorities must support such a law in order for it to
be adopted.
Police Abuse
Police abuse and violations of defendants procedural rights continued
to be a serious problem during 2004. From January to September 2004,
the Macedonian Helsinki Committee reported at least nineteen cases of
people who were interrogated by the police without being informed of
their rights or the reason for the interrogation. What is more, in the
course of their detention and/or interrogation, individuals often reported
being ill-treated. Local nongovernmental organizations also reported
widespread impunity for police abuses, with the judiciary often responding
ineffectively and slowly to complaints of ill-treatment.
The Macedonia government has committed its police and military
forces to support the global campaign against terrorism. However, in
one bizarre and troubling case, the former Macedonian interior minister,
Ljube Boskovski, is currently under investigation along with several
others for smuggling an Indian and six Pakistani refugees into the country
and then killing them in 2002. Boskovski and the other suspects are also accused of having altered the scene of the crime in an attempt to
make it appear as if the seven men were armed Islamic militants who
had planned an attack on Western embassies, the aim of which was to
show Macedonias contribution to the global war on terrorism.
Boskovski was arrested in August 2004 and is currently under investigation
in Croatia.
Roma Rights
Roma continue to be the most disadvantaged and marginalized minority
in Macedonia and are often victims of police abuse and other discrimination.
To date, the Macedonian government has failed to adopt affirmative
policies that would improve the situation of Roma and generally
tends to neglect the concerns of the Roma population.
Although police brutality is not limited to ethnic minorities in
Macedonia, reports by human rights groups suggest that Roma are particularly
vulnerable to police abuse. For the most part, Roma have been
unsuccessful in obtaining redress for police brutality.
Key International Actors
The worst cases of human rights violations committed during the 2001
armed conflict between the Albanian National Liberation Army and
Macedonian security forces are being investigated by the Skopje-based
bureau of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. However, to date no indictments on Macedonia have been
issued.
The E.U. and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are
among the most active and influential international actors with regard
to Macedonias human rights policies. Macedonia applied for E.U.
membership on March 22, 2004. Throughout the year, the E.U. and
NATO exerted pressure on Macedonia to pass the Territorial Organization Act discussed above in order to complete the implementation
of the Ohrid Agreement, which the E.U. has set as a condition for
beginning accession negotiations.
NATO monitored the security situation in Macedonia throughout 2004
and concluded that there had been significant progress towards stability
in the country. Specifically, NATO pointed not only to Macedonias
success in showing that ethnic communities can live peacefully together,
but also to improvement in equitable representation of ethnic minorities.
NATO has stressed that respect for international human rights
standards as required by the Ohrid Agreement, as well as reforms of
Macedonias defense structures, are preconditions for it to gain membership
in the NATO alliance.
The activities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in Macedonia focus primarily on police training and
election monitoring. The OSCE monitored the presidential elections
on April 28, 2004, and concluded that they were largely in compliance
with international standards. However, although the OSCE did raise
concern about several electoral irregularities, the Macedonian authorities
failed to condemn these irregularities publicly or take steps to
investigate or remedy them. The OSCE also carried out several studies
on Macedonian local government and encouraged the decentralization
of the state.
In the months leading up to the referendum to overturn the Territorial
Organization Act, the U.S. said that a yes vote would be contrary to
the word and spirit of the Ohrid Agreement. The U.S. urged
Macedonia to complete the implementation of the agreement to
increase its chances for membership in the Euro-Atlantic structures.
Eager to maintain good relations with the United States, Macedonia
signed a Bilateral Immunity Agreement with the U.S. government,
which protects U.S. troops and the troops of its allies from extradition to the International Criminal Court (ICC). With this move, Macedonia
joined the U.S. and a number of other countries in their efforts to
undermine the authority of the ICC and its mandate to prosecute war
crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
Russia
In 2004 Russia endured the worst terrorist attack in its modern history.
The year also saw further erosion of fundamental rights that underpin
the countrys fledgling democracy. Now entering its sixth year, the
bloody war in Chechnya continues unabated with both sides committing
numerous and unpunished human rights abuses. The government
once again failed to take on Russias numerous entrenched human rights
problems, including widespread police torture and violent hazing in the
armed forces.
Political Rights and Freedoms
Throughout his first term in office, Russian President Vladimir Putin
kept Russia experts guessing about the role of democracy and human
rights in his vision for Russias political development. While speaking of
a commitment to democracy, he presided over slow but deliberate
moves to marginalize opposition forces. While Putin expressed support
for the free press, his administration gradually established control over
television channels and other key news sources. By his reelection in
2004, both the political opposition and independent television had been
obliterated. Yet Putin continues to present himself as a believer in
democracy and human rightsand most of the international community
continues to believe him.
In September 2004, a few days after the worst terrorist attack in Russias
history ended in the massacre of hundreds of children, their parents and
teachers at a school in Beslan, North Ossetia, Putin revealed his vision.
In a speech to the nation, he linked terrorism to the collapse of the
Soviet Union and the deficiencies of Russias transition to democracy,
and announced a package of political measures that would take the
Kremlins already overwhelming dominance of Russian politics to a new
level. The proposals would give the president de facto power to appoint
governors, even more sway over the parliament, or State Duma, and increase the executives influence over the judiciary. Though many
Russians were privately unhappy with these proposals, checks and balances
on the presidents power had already eroded so badly there was no
force capable of stopping the proposals.
Russias political institutions may have been flawed and dysfunctional
when Putin came to power in 1999, but public debate of policy issues,
one of the great achievements of glasnost and a basic element of any
democracy, was vigorous. Political parties of different persuasions
clashed regularly in parliament over issues ranging from foreign affairs
to agricultural policy. The electronic and print media, though dominated
by oligarchs who used them as tools to promote their own interests,
presented a wide variety of different opinions. Regional governors were
a force to be reckoned with, and the courts had gained a degree of real,
though limited, independence from the executive. Finally, a sophisticated
and expanding community of nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) had started playing a role in policy-making.
Four years on, this picture is dramatically different. Public debate on
key policy issues has all but disappeared. The pro-presidential United
Russia party controls more than two-thirds of all seats in the State
Duma, enough to adopt any law or even change the constitution.
Opposition parties have been either decimated or eliminated altogether,
partially a result of the deeply flawed elections of December 2003.
During this election campaign and the presidential election that followed,
television media shamelessly promoted United Russia and a few
other Kremlin-favored parties while constantly vilifying the opposition.
After a two-year long assault on the independent electronic media, all
television stations are firmly under Kremlin control, as are most radio
stations. Television news has become monotone, perpetually portraying
the president in a positive light and avoiding criticism of his policies.
Most programs featuring live debate on political issues have been cut. 
Only a small number of newspapers and internet publications provide
some plurality of opinion, but their readership is marginal.
After convincing regional governors to give up their seats in Russias
senate as a concession to Putin early in his presidency, the Kremlin
gradually destroyed them as an independent political force. Through
intensive meddling in gubernatorial election campaigns, using its sway
over television media and its enormous administrative resources, the
Kremlin effectively made the gubernatorial candidates dependent on its
support. By September 2004, the governors power had been reduced to
such an extent that not one of them dared publicly to criticize Putins
proposal to scrap gubernatorial elections.
It is conventional wisdom that the executive has also sought to increase
its influence over the judiciary. Opinion polls show that few Russians
believe that the courts are independent. The Kremlins use of selective
criminal prosecutions against perceived opponents, like Mikhail
Khodorkovskii, and scientists working with foreigners on sensitive topics,
has put considerable pressure on the courts. Indeed, in several of
these cases, like that of arms researcher Igor Sutiagin, the courts have
recently found defendants guilty on highly dubious charges. In another
such case, the Supreme Court overturned scientist Valentin Danilovs
acquittal of espionage charges and ordered a retrial, at which he was
found guilty. After Beslan, Putin proposed establishing executive control
over the nomination of members of a key Supreme Court body that
supervises the hiring and dismissal of judgesanother erosion of the
independence of the judiciary.
Until recently, the NGO community was the only part of civil society
that had not faced any significant meddling by the Kremlin. However,
in May 2004 Putin used his state-of-the-nation speech to launch an
attack on NGOs. He accused them of receiving financing from influential
foreign foundations and serving dubious groups and commercial
interests, and of forgetting about some of the most acute problems of the country and citizens. Just days after the address, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs accused humanitarian organizations in Chechnya of
using their missions as a cover for anti-Russian activities. One of the
central Russian television stations, TVC, devoted an hour-long primetime
program to denouncing the work of human rights groups, accusing
them of what the presenter called their hatred for Russia. Along the
same lines, a political analyst close to the Kremlin, Gleb Pavlovskii,
rebuked rights activists for being engrossed in Western ideals.
The day after President Putins state-of-the-nation address, on May 27,
masked intruders ransacked the office of a major human rights organization
in Tatarstan that provides legal support for victims of torture.
The group continues to face harassment from law enforcement agencies,
as do many other regional human rights NGOs. In October, an
influential member of parliament called for an investigation into the
Committee of Soldiers Mothers, Russias oldest and most widespread
grass roots human rights organizations, which helps victims of violent
hazing in the Russian military.
Chechnya
The Chechnya conflict entered its sixth year, with the Kremlin continuing
to insist that it was successfully restoring peace in the republic.
However, the assassination of pro-Moscow Chechen president Akhmad
Kadyrov in May 2004, and a series of terrorist attacks linked to the conflict,
belied Russias claims of normalization. As in earlier years, Russian
troops committed hundreds of enforced disappearances and extrajudicial
executions, and tortured detainees on a large scale. They did so with
almost complete impunity. Official statistics released in September
reveal that since the beginning of the Chechen war in 1999, a total of
twenty-two servicemen are serving active prison terms for crimes committed
against civilians. Russian troops also stepped up their pattern of
harassment of Chechen applicants to the European Court of Human
Rights.
Chechen rebels were responsible for numerous direct and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, both inside Chechnya and elsewhere in Russia.
They conducted devastating terrorist attacks, including the hostage-taking
and murder of several hundred people at a school in Beslan. They
also assassinated Akhmad Kadyrov and numerous local Chechen leaders
working with the Russian authorities.
Entrenched Problems
The government failed to make use of Russias current economic prosperity
to reform state institutions that have entrenched human rights
problems. Despite his image of a can-do leader, Putins administration
has not devised or implemented sound strategies to deal with systematic
hazing practices in the armed forces, torture and ill-treatment of criminal
suspects by police, poor treatment of children in orphanages, and
inhumane treatment of persons committed to psychiatric institutions.
The administration also failed to take effective steps to fight a rapidly
spreading HIV epidemic that is being fueled by human rights abuses.
The only area where truly significant reform has taken place is in the
prison system, where overcrowding has eased.
Key International Actors
The international community believed for years that Putins lip service
to democratic principles was sincere. Although many Western leaders
expressed concern about Putins plans to abolish gubernatorial elections,
several continued to insist that Russia was on the right track. Neither
the U.S. nor E.U. governments developed a strategy for Russia that
spelled out diplomatic or economic consequences for Russias turn
toward authoritarianism. Although a European Commission document
in early 2004 frankly assessed the situation in Russia and observed that
the E.U. can influence developments in Russia if it is ready to take up
difficult issues... in a clear and forthright manner, for too long the E.U.
did not follow this observation.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe continued to be
one of the few international bodies willing to frankly assess and openly
discuss the situation in Chechnya. It adopted sharply worded resolutions
in October that called for a real accountability process for crimes
committed in the conflict. In October, the European Court of Human
Rights held hearings on the first six applications by Chechens. The
U.N. Commission on Human Rights failed for the third consecutive
time to adopt a resolution expressing concern over the situation in
Chechnya. Despite repeated requests, the U.N. Special Rapporteurs on
torture and extrajudicial executions were not able to visit Chechnya.
Serbia and Montenegro
Serbia and Montenegro is taking some small steps to promote human
rights, however, its progress is limited by continued impunity for those
who committed war crimes. The government is unwilling to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and efforts to prosecute war criminals before domestic courts are inadequate.
Additionally, the government has failed to respond effectively to
attacks against ethnic minorities.
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
Serbia and Montenegros cooperation with the ICTY took a marked
turn for the worse after the December 2003 parliamentary elections and
the establishment of a new Serbian government dominated by the
nationalistic Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS). Serbian Prime Minster
Vojislav Kostunica openly opposes the arrests of suspects indicted by the
ICTY, arguing that they should surrender voluntarily.
On October 9, 2004, former Bosnian Serb army general Ljubisa Beara,
charged with genocide for crimes committed against Bosnian Muslims
in Srebrenica in 1995, was transferred to the ICTY. Serbian officials
insisted that Beara surrendered voluntarily, notwithstanding the claims
by the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor that Beara was arrested. As many
as fifteen ICTY indictees remain at large in Serbia and Montenegro, or
traveling back and forth between Serbia and Montenegro and Republika
Srpska (Bosnia and Herzegovina). They include Ratko Mladic, the former
general of the Bosnian Serb army, and Bosnian Serb wartime leader
Radovan Karadzic.
The government has been particularly obstinate in its refusal to transfer
to ICTY custody three former army and police generalsNebojsa
Pavkovic, Vladimir Lazarevic, and Sreten Lukicindicted for war
crimes in Kosovo in 1999. Prime Minister Kostunica and his cabinet continue to insist that the ICTY should allow them to be tried in
Serbia. The political climate in Serbia and Montenegrowhere the
men are widely regarded as patriotsand the absence of a genuinely
independent judiciary make the chances of a credible prosecution being
mounted against them in Serbia very slim.
Domestic War Crimes Trials
The prosecution of war crimes cases before domestic courts in Serbia is
hampered by a lack of political will on the part of the authorities, and
the unwillingness of the police to provide evidence to the prosecutors
office. The creation of a special war crimes chamber in 2003 appeared
to signal an increased seriousness of purpose. But during 2004 the
chamber heard only one trial, yet to be completed at the time of this
writing, in a case arising from the November 1991 killing of 200
Croats, near Vukovar, Croatia. In addition, Sasa Cvjetan was convicted
in March 2004 by the Belgrade district court for killing fourteen
Kosovo Albanian civilians in March 1999 in Podujevo, Kosovo. Cvjetan
was sentenced to twenty years imprisonment.
Current legislation in Serbia contains only rudimentary witness protection
mechanisms. The government has drafted a new law on protection
of witnesses and other participants in criminal trials, but as of
November 2004 the draft law had yet to be enacted.
The office of the special war crimes prosecutor with five prosecutors,
and the special war crimes unit within the Serbian police, with eight
inspectors working on war crimes investigations, both remain severely
understaffed. The office of the special war crimes prosecutor is reportedly
preparing several cases pertaining to war crimes in Kosovo in 1999.
However, the security situation in Kosovo, coupled with a lack of initiative
on the part of the office of the special war crimes prosecutor, has
prevented it from getting access to ethnic Albanian witnesses in Kosovo.
The office has yet to prepare any cases arising from crimes committed
in Bosnia or in Croatia.
Ethnic and Religious Minorities
The government failed adequately to respond to the explosion of ethnic
and religious violence in Serbia in March 2004. It is similarly failing to
address a year-long wave of low-level violence against non-Serbs in the
Vojvodina region in northern Serbia.
On March 17, mobs burnt down mosques in Serbias biggest towns,
Belgrade and Nis. The violence was sparked by reports from Kosovo of
widespread rioting and attacks on minorities by ethnic Albanians. The
few police officers deployed to protect the mosques were unable to control
the rioters. In a March 17 television interview, Serbian Interior
Minister Vladan Jocic effectively encouraged the rioters, assuring viewers
that the police would not use force against its own people. On the
same evening, the police in Novi Sad stood by as demonstrators
attacked and seriously damaged an Islamic community center, as well as
pastry shops and bakeries belonging to ethnic Albanians and Muslims.
In the following months, prosecutors in Nis and Belgrade charged three
dozens rioters with participation in a violent group, rather than with
ethnically- or religiously-aggravated forms of violence. To date, there
have been no indictments for the violence in Novi Sad.
There have been dozens of incidents against ethnic minorities in
Vojvodina since January 2004. The violence ranges from tombstone
desecration and painting of nationalistic graffiti to confrontations
involving young persons of different ethnicities. The government initially
claimed that the incidents were not ethnically motivated. In the
face of mounting evidence that most of incidents had an ethnic motivation,
and European Union and Council of Europe condemnations of
the violence, the government eventually acknowledged there was a
problem. In September, Serbian Prime Minister Kostunica and the Minister of Serbia and Montenegro for Human and Minorities Rights
Rasim Ljajic visited Vojvodina and vowed to end ethnic intolerance. By
October there had been only one case in which a court charged perpetrators
with ethnically motivated crimes. Most other cases have either
not reached trial, or resulted in minor penalties for disturbing the
peace.
In southern Serbiaa predominantly ethnic Albanian area bordering
eastern Kosovo the school curriculum continues to ignore Albanian
culture and history. There is still no progress on improving educational
opportunities for Roma children in Serbia. Most Roma children drop
out of school altogether at an early stage, or are channeled into the
schools for students with mental disabilities. Thousands of Roma families
many of them displaced from Kosovolive in makeshift settlements
on the outskirts of towns, without electricity, running water, sewers,
or access to public health and education services.
Serbia and Montenegro has seen some progress during the year in the
implementation of the 2002 Law on the Rights and Freedoms of
National Minorities. Most minority groups have completed establishing
national councils under the law. The councils play a consultative role in
minority education and cultural matters.
Key International Actors
The United States government enjoys considerable influence with the
authorities in Serbia. Serbias failure to cooperate with the ICTY is a
growing cause of friction in their relations. The U.S. suspended
U.S.$26 million in economic assistance to Serbia on March 31, 2004,
over its non-cooperation with the ICTY. It is the first time the U.S. has
taken such a step since the fall of Slobodan Milosevic in October 2000.
The U.S. position has been less than principled, however. The Serbian
governments request to try Serbian generals wanted by the ICTY in
Serbia rather than handing them over to the tribunal has met with a sympathetic response from two senior U.S. government officials. Mixed
signals from the U.S. encourage the Serbian officials to persist in noncooperation
with the ICTY.
On March 18, the ICTY sentenced former Yugoslav Navy admiral
Miodrag Jokic to seven years in prison for the 1991 shelling of the
Croatian town of Dubrovnik. In February, the ICTY prosecutor rested
its case against the former President Slobodan Milosevic, who faces
crimes against humanity and genocide charges. The beginning of
Milosevics defense has been frustrated by his refusal to cooperate with
the lawyers assigned to him on September 2. Milosevic continued to
insist on representing himself, which the trial chamber has determined
was not appropriate given the serious deterioration in his health. On
November 1, ICTY Appeals Chamber confirmed the decision on the
assignment of lawyers, but gave Milosevic greater scope to run his case.
The overall perception of the Tribunals work among Serbian public
remains negative, mainly due to the hostility of consecutive Serbian
governments and the media to the work of the tribunal.
The European Union is attempting to make a more effective use of the
association and stabilization process to leverage improvements in
Serbias performance on human rights. The Stabilization and
Association report from April 2004, noted progress in the area of
minority rights, but also the slower than hoped-for reform of the police
and judiciary, and shortcomings in the conduct of domestic war crimes
trials. The European Partnership document, adopted by the E.U.
Council on June 14, details a list of short- and medium-term human
rights priorities for Serbia and Montenegros further integration with
the E.U. On October 11, the European Commission announced that it
would re-launch the Feasibility Report on a Stabilization and
Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia and Montenegro. The report,
due to be finalized by spring 2005, will assess the countrys capacity to
negotiate and implement the far-reaching political and economic obligations
the agreement entails. 
Kosovo
In March 2004, the United Nations-administered province of Kosovo
returned to the international agenda. Two days of widespread riotsthe
worst violence since 1999revealed the precarious situation of the
provinces minority population, the weakness of security structures, and
the frustration of the majority population at the international institutions
that govern Kosovo. Lack of security for minorities, coupled with
a continuing accountability gap and uncertainty regarding the provinces
political status, limit the return of internally displaced and refugee
Kosovars to their homes. The impact of Kosovos inadequately functioning
judicial institutions is felt by majority and minority populations
alike. October elections for Kosovos legislative assembly were free of
violence, but most Serbs did not participate.
Protection of Minorities
The March 17-19 riots shattered the illusion of security for Kosovos
minority communities. At least thirty-three major riots took place
across the province, involving an estimated 51,000 predominantly ethnic
Albanian participants. The violencedirected at international
organisations as well as minoritiesleft twenty-one people dead, more
than 950 wounded, and some 4,100 people displaced, almost all of them
Serbs, Roma, Ashkali, or other non-Albanian minorities. At least 730
minority-owned homesincluding some belonging to recent
returneesand twenty-seven Orthodox churches and monasteries were
burned and looted, together with at least ten public buildings providing
services to minorities, including a hospital, two schools, and a post
office.
During the riots, the security organizations in Kosovothe NATO-led
Kosovo Force (KFOR), U.N. international civilian police, and the local
Kosovo Police Service (KPS)almost completely lost control. In too
many cases, minorities under attack were left entirely unprotected. Poor inter-agency coordination, limitations on deployment in individual
KFOR contingents (so-called caveats), and lack of riot-control training
and equipment for KPS, U.N. police, and KFOR, provide part of
the explanation.
Beyond the destruction of homes, and the displacement of more than
four thousand people, the violence reinforced existing concerns among
minorities about their personal safety, fuelled by routineand frequently
unreportedethnically-motivated harassment and intimidation, verbal
abuse, property defacement, and stone-throwing. Minorities also
face persistent discrimination in the provision of education, social welfare,
and health services, and limited access to administrative offices and
courts. There has been little progress in implementing the new anti-discrimination
law.
Efforts to improve coordination among KFOR and U.N. police have
yet to reassure either minority communities or those agencies working
on their behalf that international security structures would be able
effectively to manage a repeat of March violence. Assurances from the
U.N. Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) that the situation
has stabilizedoften supported by crime statistics considered on
par with many Western European countriesring hollow at a time
when many minorities have little or no freedom of movement, and
remain subject to harassment and intimidation.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Even before the March violence, the overall picture on returns in
Kosovo was bleak. Fewer than 5 percent of the more than 200,000
internally displaced and refugees from minority communities who left
their homes since 1999 have returned. The majority are in Serbia,
Montenegro, and Macedonia. By the end of September 2004, fewer
than 1,500 voluntary minority returns had occurred. (During the twelve
months of 2003, there were 3,801 minority returns). The figures include returns of displaced ethnic Albanians to locations where they
are in the minority. Those returns that did take place were often incomplete
or partial returnswith only part of the family returning, or the
family returning only for part of the year. As of early October 2004,
2,288 of the 4,100 minorities driven from their homes by the March
violence remained displaced.
Even prior to March, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) warned against the forced return of minorities,
including ethnic Albanians from areas where they are in the minority,
and those from mixed families. Forced returns of minorities have continued,
however, together with the return of larger numbers of ethnic
Albanians to majority areas.
Impunity and Access to Justice
While there has been progress toward the establishment of a functioning
and sustainable justice system in Kosovo over the past five years, the
current picture of accountability for crimes is one of rampant impunity.
Ongoing legislative drafting, including the recently enacted criminal
procedure, criminal, gender equality, and anti-discrimination laws,
though an important part of the judicial process, can do little to remedy
many of the practical obstacles to accessing justice in Kosovo.
The current justice system continues to suffer from a significant, and
ever increasing, backlog of cases; a shortage of international and local
judges; virtually non-existent mechanisms for witness protection and
relocation; poorly-trained and inadequately supported investigators and
prosecutors; persistent concerns over the perceived bias of ethnic
Albanian judges; and serious problems in ensuring the right to be tried
within a reasonable time, including securing the attendance of the
accused at trial. The problems affect all communities, undermining confidence
in the criminal justice system and the rule of law.
There have been few prosecutions for war crimes committed in 1998
and 1999 and for post-war inter-ethnic and political violence, especially
during the period of late 1999 and 2000. The second major trial of former
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) members began in October 2004.
All of the alleged victims are ethnic Albanian. Verdicts in the first
domestic war crimes trial, the so-called Llap case, were only rendered
in late 2003. All but one of the victims in that case are ethnic Albanian.
There has also been little progress in resolving the more than three
thousand outstanding cases of missing persons from Kosovo.
In comparison to the dismal rate of prosecutions for offences prior to
Marchwhether for war crimes, inter-ethnic crimes, or ordinary criminal
offencesthe response to the March events has been dramatic.
More than 270 people have been arrested for criminal acts relating to
the violence. The bulk of these arrests, however, have resulted in
charges for fairly minor offences, adjudicated by the local Municipal
and Minor Offences Courts. Despite the minor nature of the offences
charged, and the relative speed at which these cases should be adjudicated,
fewer than half had been resolved by late October 2004. Of the
fifty-seven more serious cases relating to murders, ring-leaders, serious
inter-ethnic crime, and major arson attacks, only about one-third were
in the judicial process by late October 2004, with indictments filed in
little more than half of those cases. Cases involving allegations of police
complicity in violence are still under investigation.
Trafficking of women and girlsa significant problem in Kosovois
another area where there is a serious accountability gap. There have
been few prosecutions for trafficking. Women and girls rounded up in
police raids have been prosecuted for being unlawfully present in
Kosovo or for prostitution. The inclusion in the UNMIK witness protection
program of trafficking victims facing serious threat as of
September 2004 is a welcome development. 
The problems with the criminal justice system are mirrored in Kosovos
civil courts. Case backlogs, access to the courts for ethnic minorities,
and a sometimes chronic failure to implement court decisions, are
among the obstacles.
Key International Actors
The United Nations remains the key international actor in Kosovo.
The appointment of the experienced diplomat Sren Jessen-Petersen as
special representative to the secretary general (SRSG) in August was
broadly welcomed as an opportunity to re-energize the tired U.N. mission
ahead of negotiations on Kosovos political status. The new SRSG
faces a major challenge to reinvigorate the U.N.s work on police and
justice issues, and restore confidence in the mission among Kosovos
communities. In October, the U.N. Human Rights Committee requested
that UNMIK submit a report to it on the situation of civil and political
rights in Kosovo.
The first trial of former KLA members at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia began on November 15. Fatmir
Limaj, Haradin Bala, and Isak Musliu are charged with crimes against
humanity for their alleged role in the torture and murder of Serb and
ethnic Albanian civilians at a KLA prison camp in 1998. The three men
have pleaded not guilty to all charges.
The Contact GroupFrance, Germany, Italy, Russia, the United
Kingdom, and the United Statesrenewed their focus on Kosovo in
the wake of the March violence. The group has emphasized that
progress on minority protection and other human rights standards
remain a precondition for a viable political settlement in Kosovo.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Mission in Kosovo is increasingly emphasizing the capacity-building
elements of its mandate, including training for judicial officials and officers from the Kosovo Police Service. It continues to monitor the courts
and produce periodic reports on minority rights together with
UNHCR.
NATO has been working at a diplomatic level to remove national
restrictions (caveats) on the deployment of NATO contingents in
Kosovowidely seen as a barrier to a coordinated and effective KFOR
response to security incidents.
The European Union remains the key international player with regard
to economic development, including Kosovos vexed privatization
process. The E.U. is assuming a growing importance in the political
spherea role suggested in the June 2004 U.N.-commissioned report
by Norwegian NATO Ambassador Kai Eide. New envoys from the
E.U. High Representative on Common Security and Foreign Policy
and the European Commission were dispatched to Pristina/Prishtina in
the wake of the March violence.
Tajikistan\
The human rights situation in Tajikistan is fragile. Despite reforms on
paperincluding a new election law and a moratorium on capital punishment
the government continues to put pressure on political opposition,
independent media, and independent religious groups. The political
climate has deteriorated as President Emomali Rakhmonov attempts
to consolidate power in advance of 2005 parliamentary and presidential
elections.
Political Opposition
Hizbi Demokrati-Khalkii Tojikston (the Peoples Democratic Party of
Tajikistan), led by President Rakhmonov, dominates political life. Under
1997s power-sharing arrangement, opposition parties are guaranteed 30
percent of top government posts. In January 2004, Rakhmonov replaced
senior government officials from other political parties with members of
his own party, reducing the other parties share of top posts to 5 percent.
Rakhmonovs opponents are vulnerable to prosecution on politicallymotivated
charges. In January 2004, the Supreme Court sentenced
Shamsuddin Shamsuddinov, deputy chairman of Nahzati Islomi
Tojikiston (the Islamic Renaissance Party, IRP)which participates in
the power-sharing governmentto sixteen years in prison on charges of
polygamy, organizing an armed criminal group during the civil war, and
illegally crossing the border. Three other IRP members were given
lengthy prison terms for alleged complicity in Shamsuddinovs armed
group. Shamsuddinov, who has maintained his innocence since his
arrest in May 2003, alleges he was beaten and tortured with electric
shocks while awaiting trial.
Other opposition parties enjoy limited resources and popular support.
In principle, they are allowed to exist. In practice, the parties face significant obstacles in registering with the Ministry of Justice. In early
2004, the ministry refused to register the charter of the Taraqqiyot
(Tajikistan Development) party, citing violations of the Law on Political
Parties. In March, four party members went on a six-day hunger strike
in protest. The Vakhdat (Unity) party also encountered difficulties registering.
Electoral Reform
Tajikistan has a history of flawed elections. Neither the 1999 presidential
vote nor the 2000 parliamentary elections met international standards.
The June 2003 presidential referendum (allowing Rakhmonov to
stand for another two seven-year terms as president) was also marred by
allegations of vote fraud.
The government has come under increasing pressure to reform the
electoral system. In November 2003, the Socialist and Socialist
Democratic parties organized the Coalition for Fair and Transparent
Elections. The IRP and the Democratic Party joined the coalition in
calling for an overhaul of national election law. The Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and United Nations also
advocated electoral reform. In July 2004, the president signed a new
election law. The amended law has drawn criticism from the United
States, European Union, and opposition parties, however. The introduction
of a U.S.$500 registration fee for each election candidate is particularly
troubling. Critics fear it will prevent opposition politicians
from running in upcoming parliamentary elections.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression remains under threat in Tajikistan, despite the
growing popularity of independent newspapers. While independent
newspapers and magazines are technically legal, state-run publishing
houses refuse to print them, making production difficult or impossible.
The state-controlled printing house Sharq-i-Ozod in Dushanbe decided
in November 2003 to stop publishing Ruzi Nav (New Day), a major
independent newspaper. No explanation was given.
The independent printing house Jiyonkhon continued to print Ruzi Nav
and other independent newspapers in Dushanbe, including Nerui
Sukhan (Power of the Word), Odamu Olam (People and the Word), and
Najot (Salvation), a publication of the IRP. In August 2004, authorities
closed the Jiyonkhon printing house for alleged tax violations. Other
independent and state-owned printing houses have refused to take on
publication of the four papers. A printing press in neighboring
Kyrgyzstan offered to carry Ruzi Nav, and it issued one print run in
November. However, the papers were confiscated by Tajik transportation
tax police upon arrival in Dushanbe. Ruzi Nav is filing charges.
Obtaining official registration is the main obstacle for independent television
and radio stations. In September 2003, the State Radio and
Television Committee refused to grant the Asia Plus news agency a television
broadcast license, stating that the agency lacked the necessary
technical equipment and qualified personnel. Asia Plus claims that the
committee never examined its equipment or personnel.
Harassment of independent and opposition journalists is a serious concern,
although physical attacks on journalists have declined. There have
been at least twelve cases of harassment of journalists since January
2004, according to the National Association of Independent Media in
Tajikistan. Mavluda Sultonzoda, a reporter for Ruzi Nav, received
numerous anonymous telephone calls threatening her and her family
with violence unless she stopped writing articles critical of President
Rakhmonov. Turko Dikayev, an Asia Plus correspondent, reported
receiving similar calls. In July 2004, unidentified assailants attacked
Rajab Mirzo, an editor for Ruzi Nav.
Capital Punishment
Tajikistans use of the death penalty has long been of international concern.
In 2003, four menRachabmurod Chumayev, Umed Idiyev,
Akbar Radzhabov, and Mukharam Fatkhulloyevwere sentenced to
death for membership in a criminal gang. The cases of Mr. Chumayev
and Mr. Idiyev were considered by the U.N. Human Rights Committee
as potential breaches of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. Despite the requests by the Committee to the Tajik
government issued on January 22, 2004, and on April 13, 2004, to stay
the mens executions while it examined their claims, all four were executed
in April 2004. On April 30, 2004, President Rakhmonov introduced
a proposal to outlaw the death penalty. As of November, the
resulting bill has been approved by both houses of Parliament, but
awaited Rakhmonovs signature.
Religious Freedom
The Tajik Constitution guarantees freedom of religion. In practice, government
officials monitor, and interfere with, the activities of religious
groups. All religious organizations must register with the State
Committee on Religious Affairs. Independent religious groups considered
extremist or politicizedincluding the banned group Hizb ut-
Tahrir, or Party of Liberationface government scrutiny and harassment.
During 2003, approximately 160 suspected Hizb ut-Tahrir members
were arrested and thirty-four were convicted on subversion
charges. In 2004, more than seventy alleged members of Hizb ut-Tahrir
were arrested. In September, twenty suspected members were convicted:
nine received prison sentences from thirteen to fifteen years for
crimes including: organizing a criminal group, inciting national, racial,
religious and ethnic strife. The rest were given short prison terms.
Some of those detained on suspicion of involvement in Hizb ut-Tahrir
allege beatings, sexual violence, and electric shocks in police custody.
Human Trafficking
Human trafficking is a significant problem in Tajikistan. According to
the International Organization for Migration, Tajikistan is a major
country of origin for trafficked women and children. Tajik authorities
have undertaken some positive steps to curb trafficking, including the
creation of new anti-trafficking department in the Ministry of Internal
Affairs. In August 2003, Parliament adopted a bill criminalizing human
trafficking, with sentences from five to fifteen years. In December 2003,
a Tajik woman was sentenced to fourteen years in prison, and her property
confiscated, following conviction for trafficking women into the sex
industry in the United Arab Emirates. Four members of a trafficking
group were convicted in April 2004, and another fourteen cases have
been opened by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Key International Actors
Russia has been a dominant influence on Tajikistans economy and military
since the countrys independence in 1991. Tajikistan continues to
host Russian soldiers under Moscows direct control. During 2004,
Presidents Putin and Rakhmonov negotiated the partial withdrawal of
Russian troops by 2006. Tajikistan owes approximately U.S. $300 million
to Russia, and its fragile economy is dependent upon remittances
sent home by Tajik migrant workers in Russia. Russia has promised to
forgive a large portion of Tajikistans debt in return for permanent
rights to maintain a military base on Tajik soil.
Tajikistan has assumed a heightened importance for the United States
government since the 2001 military operation in Afghanistan. The U.S.
military provides technical assistance and training to Tajik armed forces.
The U.S. contributed $50.7 million in assistance during 2004. While
the majority of U.S. non-military economic assistance to Tajikistan is in
the form of humanitarian aid, it increasingly funds democratization, law
enforcement, and market development efforts. The February 2004 State Department country practices report is critical of the Rakhmonov
administrations record of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, its suppression
of political opposition, and violations of free speech.
On October 11, 2004, Tajikistan became the final Central Asian state to
sign a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with the
European Union. While the PCA contains human rights conditionality,
E.U. policy toward Tajikistan continues to be defined primarily by security
and terrorism concerns. Tajikistan receives more E.U. aid per capita
than any other Central Asian country. During 2003, the E.U. provided
?10 million in humanitarian aid. In 2004, it scaled down its aid projects
to about ?8 million, while focusing more on reconstruction loans.
In August 2004, OSCE voiced concern over the closure of the
Jiyonkhon printing press and the attack on newspaper editor Rajab
Mirzo, and called on the Tajik authorities to respect media freedom in
the run-up to elections. The OSCE advised the government on the
conditions necessary for free and fair elections and campaign finance
regulations. The widely criticized final version of the election law did
not reflect its recommendations.
Turkey
Turkeys human rights record continued to improve during 2004, albeit
slowly and unevenly, as the country attempted to recover from the legacy
of gross violations committed by state forces and armed opposition
groups fighting in the countryside and cities in the early 1990s. The
reduction in political violence since 1999 has encouraged reform. It was
therefore disappointing when Kongra-Gel (Kurdistan Peoples
Congress, formerly known as the Kurdistan Workers Party [PKK])
resumed attacks in the mountainous southeast of the country, and state
forces responded with heavy-handed security operations affecting civilians
in rural areas.
Reform has taken one step back for every two steps forward as police,
governors, prosecutors, and government institutions tend to interpret
legislation as restrictively as possible. Nevertheless, there have been significant
turning points: on June 9, 2004, for example, four Kurdish former
deputies imprisoned for their non-violent activities since 1994 were
released, and the state broadcasting channel gave its first program in the
Kurdish language.
Progress in extending basic freedoms has been frustratingly slow, but
continues a consistent trend of improvement as over previous years.
Achievements in combatting torture remaine fragile, with a risk of backsliding
into old habits as anti-terror operations resume. The government
has once again failed to established an effective framework for the
return of the hundreds of thousands of Kurds forcibly displaced from
the southeast during the early 1990s.
Events reflect the interplay of four strong forces: pressure for reform
coming from Turkish civil society, impatient with longstanding restrictions
and ingrained institutional abuses; the incentive provided by the
European Union through Turkeys candidacy for membership; resistance
to change presented by the powerful sectors within the military, security forces and the state apparatus; and the destructive effects of
political violence.
Freedom of Expression
These tensions have produced a very mixed picture for freedom of
expression. Journalists and politicians who in earlier years would have
received prison sentences for their statements have been acquitted, but
prosecutors continue to indict people for their non-violent expression,
and several writers served prison sentences during 2004. For example,
in May, Hakan Albayrak (Milli Gazete) began a fifteen-month sentence
at Kalecik prison near Ankara under the Law on Crimes against Atatrk
for writing that prayers were not said at the funeral of Mustafa Kemal
Atatrk, the founder of the Turkish Republic. Nevin Berktafl is now
serving a three and a half year sentence under article 169 (supporting an
armed organization) of the Turkish criminal code for writing a book
critical of isolation in F-type prisons.
State security courts, commonly used to prosecute and imprison people
for their non-violent opinions, were abolished in June 2004, but laws
used to stifle free speech such as articles 159 of the criminal code
(insulting state institutions) and 312 (incitement to racial hatred) remain
in place, and were copied into the new criminal code that was adopted
in October.
In June 2004 Turkeys longest-standing prisoners of opinion, the four
Kurdish former deputies Leyla Zana, Orhan Doan, Hatip Dicle, and
Selim Sadak, were released pending retrial, after ten years at Ankara
Central Closed Prison. They had been convicted in 1994 for their nonviolent
activities as parliamentary deputies in an unfair trial under the
Anti-Terror Law.
In June 2004 state television began broadcasts in Kurdish, Bosnak,
Circassian, Arabic, and Zaza. The programs were short with uninspiring content, but represented a significant change in official attitudes to
minority languages. Private radio stations in southeastern Turkey
applied to the High Council for Radio and Television for permission to
broadcast in Kurdish, but had not received permission by the end of
2004.
Torture and IIl-treatment
There were fewer cases of torture and ill-treatment in 2004, largely due
to safeguards imposed in recent years, and by the governments frequent
assertions of zero-tolerance for such abuses. Nevertheless, detainees
from all parts of the country report that police and gendarmes beat
them in police custody. In some cases, detainees still complain that they
have been subjected to electric shocks, sexual assault, hosing with cold
water, and death threats. The persistence of these violations is a consequence
of poor supervision of police stations, which permits security
forces to ignore detainees rights  and most importantly, the right to
legal counsel. Human Rights Watch has urged the government to
impose measures to improve internal monitoring of police stations by
provincial governors and prosecutors, to permit independent monitoring
by members of bar and medical associations, and to launch ministry-
level investigations of all allegations of torture.
Internal Displacement
More than a quarter of a million villagers, mainly Kurdish, remain
unable to return to their homes in the southeast, after having been
forced out of their homes by security forces in brutal operations accompanied
by torture and disappearance during the conflict between
security forces and the PKK during the 1990s. In most cases, communities
were forcibly evacuated if they refused to join the paramilitary village
guards, a brutal and corrupt force that was armed and paid by the
government to fight the PKK.
Government projects for return did not provide the displaced with adequate
resources to re-establish their lives in their former homes or
establish conditions which would enable them to return in safety. Those
villagers who attempted to return were in some cases turned back by
local gendarmes because they refused to join the village guards, or were
at risk of attack by village guards. In September a village guard allegedly
shot and killed Mustafa Koyun and wounded Mehmet Kaya in the village
of Tellikaya of Diyarbakir. The villagers who were attacked had
been forced to leave Tellikaya in the early 1990s after they refused to
join the village guard
Those who attempted to draw attention to the plight of the displaced
risk official persecution. In January 2004, fiefika Grbz, president of
the Migrants Association for Social Cooperation and Culture (G-
Der), was convicted of incitement to racial hatred for preparing a
study of the difficulties faced by displaced Kurds. Grbz received a
ten-month prison sentence converted to a fine.
Key International Actors
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), which
had imposed human rights monitoring on Turkey in 1996, lifted the
mechanism in June 2004. This was an appropriate move, in view of the
general improvement in the intervening nine years, but it is crucial that
Turkey and the Assembly do not lose site of the wide-ranging recommendations
that accompanied the decision. Other Council of Europe
bodies continued their long-standing and close engagement with
Turkey. In June the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT)
published a report on its September 2003 visit to Turkey. The CPT
noted a general improvement, with lawyers, human rights organizations,
and even detainees themselves noting a sharp decline in heavy
torture. On the other hand, there were consistent reports of electric
shocks used in one custody unit, and medical evidence consistent with
beatings in three others. The CPT found that in southeastern Turkey the great majority of those detained by the police or gendarmerie
were unable to gain access to a lawyer, and that there were major deficiencies
in the system for medical examinations.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) issued further judgements
against the Turkish government on issues ranging from freedom
of expression to torture and extrajudicial execution. In February 2004
the court found the Turkish government responsible for the deaths of
Ikram and Servet Ipek, who disappeared after being taken into custody
by soldiers who were destroying houses in southeastern Turkey in
1994.
The ECtHR ruled in June 2004 that the ban on wearing the headscarf
in universities was not a breach of the right to freedom of religion.
Leyla Sahin had been denied access to university because she wore a
headscarf. The court echoed the Turkish governments arguments that
the ban is justified in order to preserve the secular public order and to
protect the rights of other non-Muslim students and students who
choose not to wear the headscarf. Human Rights Watch believes that
the ban is discriminatory and breaches the rights to freedom of religion
and expression.
International and domestic attention has been firmly fixed on the E.U.s
dealings with Turkey. 2004 was the fifth year of close monitoring to
establish whether or not Turkey had met the Copenhagen Criteria: the
stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human
rights and respect for and protection of minorities. This was seen as a
make-or-break moment, since a decision in December to open negotiations
for membership would strengthen the government and those
within the government who have pushed for reform, while a refusal or
postponement was likely to be regarded as a sign that the E.U. intended
to pull out of the process unilaterally in spite of the substantial human
rights improvements. 
In October 2004 Hina Jilani, the special representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders visited Turkey
to examine the pressures still faced by civil society. In a statement at the
end of her visit she noted genuine steps toward change but urged that
the growing human rights movement should no longer be treated with
suspicion by security forces. In November the government issued a circular
recognizing the legitimate role of human rights defenders and
requiring security forces to treat them accordingly.
Also in October 2004, the European Commission recommended that
Turkeys candidacy should move forward to the next step, with the
opening of membership negotiations in 2005. The recommendation
included extra monitoring measures, including a brake clause that
would suspend the candidacy process if respect for human rights are put
under threat. In December the Brussels European Council will give a
final decision on the opening of negotiations.
Turkmenistan
The regime of president-for-life Saparmurat Niazov is one of the most
repressive in the world. It crushes independent thought, controls virtually
all aspects of civic life, and actively isolates the country from the
outside world. The perverse cult of personality around President
Niazov dominates public life and the education system. Civil society,
already on the brink of extinction, this year took another blow with a
new law criminalizing involvement in unregistered nongovernmental or
religious groups. Although 2004 saw the abolition of exit visas and a
slight mitigation of the laws on religious freedom and nongovernmental
organizations (NGOS), in practice the rights to freedom of movement
and conscience are severely restricted. Indeed, the human rights situation
in Turkmenistan today is noticeably worse than it was a few years
ago.
Freedom of Expression
Turkmen law bans criticism of any policies initiated by President
Niazov and equates it with treason. Therefore, the open expression of
alternative points of view is practically impossible. A dramatic example
of the harsh consequences for seeking to express alternative views
occurred in February, when a dissident from the city of Balkanabad,
Gurbandury Durdykuliyev, was forcibly taken to a psychiatric hospital
after he submitted a request to the president to conduct a peaceful
protest.
All national and local media outlets in Turkmenistan belong to the government,
cable television and access to the Internet are tightly controlled,
and foreign press in practice is forbidden. In July the authorities
cut off the transmitting signal inside the country for the Russian radio
station Mayak (Beacon) after it broadcast an interview with the leader of
a foreign-based Turkmen opposition party.
The authorities persecute the few scattered individuals associated with
foreign media, in particular Radio Liberty. In 2004, Rakhim Esenov and
Ashirkuli Bairiyev, who worked regularly for the Turkmen service of
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, were detained on false charges of
smuggling into Turkmenistan Esenovs novel about medieval India.
Several of Esenovs and Bairievs relatives were fired from their jobs following
the detention. Former film director Khalmurad Gylychdurdyev
was also detained and questioned about his work for Radio Liberty. The
Ashgabat correspondent of Radio Liberty, Saparmurad Ovezberdyev,
was forced into exile in July.
On April 30 a Turkmen political migr, Mukhamedgeldy Berdiev, who
was working at Radio Liberty, was brutally beaten in Moscow by
unknown assailants. The attack is presumed to be linked to Berdievs
work criticizing President Niazov on an opposition website.
Civil Society
In November 2003, a new law on nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) came into force criminalizing the activities of unregistered
NGOs. Shortly after its passage, activists from dozens of unregistered
groups received warnings that they may be subject to criminal charges
for their work. Court cases initiated on arbitrary pretexts led to the liquidation
of even well-known, registered NGOs. The government
relented on including the criminalization language in the criminal code,
though work by unregistered NGOs remains banned. The shrinking
community of independent NGOs received a fatal blow in April 2004,
when the Ashgabat environmental group Catena was closed. Security
agents put pressure on activists of unregistered NGOs, in some cases
preventing their contact with foreigners and limiting their ability to
travel outside of and within the country.
The educational system continues to deteriorate. Compulsory education
is limited to nine years. Niazovs books of poetry and spiritual guidance, the Rukhnama, and hagiographic propaganda about the president are
replacing all other curricular materials. The authorities have almost
entirely expunged grade-school instruction in the languages of ethnic
minorities. Most people who received higher education abroad after
1993 must have their diplomas confirmed by Turkmen authorities in
order to hold jobs in certain sectors, including law, medicine, education,
and many other jobs in public service. Authorities require these individuals
to take exams in Rukhnama.
Until recently, The Russian Orthodox church and the Sunni Islam were
the only permitted religious confessions in Turkmenistan. In early 2004,
the draconian law on religious organizations that had been adopted several
months before was softened, after which several groups of so-called
nontraditional faiths (Baptists, Adventists, Bahai, and Hare Krishna)
were allowed to register. Seven Jehovahs Witnesses, who earlier had
been sentenced to jail as conscientious objectors to military service,
were released. Two other Jehovahs Witnesses, however, were sentenced
to prison terms in May and June on the same charges, and in August
the secret police obstructed the group meetings of Adventists and
Baptists who had registered under the new law.
Freedom of Movement
Freedom of movement and choice of place of residence are strictly limited.
Visiting two of the countrys five velayaty (provinces) and the border
regions requires prior police permission. In some large cities the
sale of property to residents of other provinces is restricted. Despite the
fact that exit visas were abolished in January, thousands of people are on
black lists and are denied the right to leave the country. Several relatives
of so-called enemies of the people (see below) were arrested in
mid 2004 on charges of planning to cross the border illegally.
By presidential decree, some quarters of Ashgabat and villages in other
provinces were razed to the ground, and residents in many cases were
subjected to forced resettlement.
The authorities continue to use internal exile as a method of punishment.
A clear example of this is Sazak Begmedov, who has been in
internal exile since he was forced to leave Ashgabat in September 2003.
The Battle with Internal Enemies
The government continues its search for numerous internal enemies
within its ranks, which began after the November 25, 2002, attack on
Niazov. In 2004 President Niazov sanctioned the arrests and secret trials
of a number of former ministers, heads of provincial administrations,
and other former officials suspected of disloyalty. They were formally
charged with corruption, abuse of office, and similar offenses. Several
secretly went abroad or were detained upon attempting to flee the
country. In many cases, officials confiscated their property or harassed
their relatives.
In March, the former mufti (or leading Muslim cleric) of Turkmenistan,
Nasrulla ibn Ibadulla, was sentenced to twenty-two years in prison on
charges of anti-government activities. No official information is available
about his arrest and trial, though some observers believe the
authorities convicted him on charges related to the 2002 attack on
President Niazov. Significantly, Ibadulla is implicated in the attack in a
book ascribed to the former foreign minister, now imprisoned on
charges of leading the attack. The book was published after the former
ministers incarceration, and should be considered a quasi-official source
of information.
The authorities also put pressure on the relatives of well-known political
migrs. These people are denied their rights to work and to leave
the country.
The fate of more than fifty prisoners, convicted for the 2002 attack on
Niazov, remains unknown. It is, however, unofficially related that they
are being held in strict isolation in the new secret prison Ovadan-Depe
(near Ashgabat). Visits by relatives are forbidden. There are unconfirmed
reports of cruel treatment and the deaths of several of the convicted.
While the government has no official policy of ethnic discrimination,
some analysts believe the government is suspicious of the political reliability
of the countrys ethnic Uzbek population. The Turkmen government
accused the Uzbek government of involvement in the November
2002 attack on Niazov, by association casting suspicion on the countrys
Uzbek minority. At the end of 2003 and beginning of 2004, dozens of
ethnic Uzbeks were removed from positions of leadership in Dashoguz
and Lebap provinces, which are located on Turmenistans border with
Uzbekistan; several of them were arrested.
Key International Actors
In the current climate of political isolationism and contempt for the
international community, third party governments and international
organizations have had little success in improving the human rights situation
in Turkmenistan.
After the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution on
human rights in Turkmenistan in December 2003, the Turkmen authorities
began to assert their intentions of strengthening their relationship
with international institutions; however, these assertions in many cases
proved to be without substance.
In April 2004, at its 60th session, the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights adopted a resolution on the situation of human rights in
Turkmenistan acknowledging the liberalization of laws on religious
freedom, but also noting the lack of progress in other key areas that had been highlighted in the General Assemblys resolution of the previous
year.
The relationship between Turkmenistan and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) remains tense. The
Turkmen authorities continued to ignore the recommendations made in
last years report, which had been prepared within the framework of the
OSCEs Moscow mission, and they used their veto power to block the
reappointment of the head of the OSCEs Turkmenistan mission, P.
Badescu. In October 2004 it was announced that Turkmenistan will not
invite OSCE observers to oversee parliamentary elections at the end of
the year.
The U.S. leveraged its influence by tying benefits to freedom of religion
and freedom of movement, which has led to partial improvements
in both areas. The United States resisted seeking other improvements,
perhaps due to an unwillingness to jeopardize the corridor to
Afghanistan and flyover rights granted by Turkmenistan.
In contrast, Russia, which enjoys a great deal of influence over
Turkmenistan through economic leverage, softened its criticism of
Niazovs regime and took a passive position even in disagreements over
the status of people with dual Russian-Turkmen citizenship. 
Ukraine
A November presidential election that was neither free nor fair plummeted
Ukraine into its deepest political crisis since gaining independence
in 1991. At this writing the two leading candidates, Prime Minister
Viktor Yanukovich and opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko, had
both claimed victory. Hundreds of thousands of protesters had occupied
the streets of Kiev, and parliament had adopted a vote of no confidence
in Yanukovich. Initiatives in several regions in eastern Ukraine to seek
autonomy should the opposition candidate win the presidency had
raised concern of a possible break-up of the country. While the
Ukrainian political elite, together with foreign mediators, were looking
hard for a way out of the crisis, the danger of the situation turning violent
remained very real. To their credit, the authorities had to date not
cracked down on demonstrators.
On December 3, 2004, the Supreme Court, citing allegations of widespread
fraud in the vote, ruled that new elections had to be held by
December 26.
The crisis, however, was entirely preventable. Its roots lay in the governments
persistent violations of basic human rights norms, and political
freedoms in particular. For years, under the leadership of President
Kuchma, the government imposed ever stricter controls on media coverage,
repeatedly sought to manipulate electoral processes, and ignored
widespread popular discontent. By doing so, it has undermined legitimate
avenues for people to express their grievances in a meaningful way.
The governments blatant attempts to manipulate the presidential vote
in favor of Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovichnotwithstanding a clear
popular preference for opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenkoserved
to convince many Ukrainians that mass street protests are their only
hope of being heard.
The Ukrainian government has a poor track record on press freedom.
The government or individuals close to the president own most major
media outlets, including almost all television stations. It blatantly uses
its sway over these media to influence their coverage of the news, in
part by issuing instructions to news editors, sometimes in writing,
detailing what news stories should be covered and how. As a result, the
government has received a disproportionate amount of positive coverage
in most media, while opposition parties and figures have struggled
to have their voices heard. Under international pressure, the authorities
have taken some steps to address press freedom problemsmost
notably by adopting a law defining censorship and criminalizing government
interference with the press. But the governments continued
manipulation of the media strongly suggests that these were not genuine
attempts to ensure a free press.
The independentand often opposition mindedmedia consists primarily
of newspapers and internet publication that have a small readership.
Yet, attacks on independent journalists have been frequent and
President Kuchma was personally implicated in the worst one: the disappearance
and murder of opposition journalist Georgiy Gongadze. In
2000, a former presidential body guard made public hours of secretly
taped conversations between Kuchma and his inner circle. On one of
the tapes, Kuchma appeared to order Gongadzes murder. The president
has denied involvement in the murder but to date his administration
has hindered a full investigation. In 2004, there were repeated
attacks on opposition journalists. In June, Ichvan Kotsanik, a cameraman
for an opposition-linked television station, was beaten into a coma
and died several days later. It remains unclear who was behind the
attack.
In the run-up to the presidential elections, the authorities made extensive
use of their administrative resources and the media under their
control to promote their favored candidate, Viktor Yanukovich. In
August, the Committee of Voters of Ukraine, a nongovernmental watchdog group, stated in a report that government funds were being
used to support Yanukovichs candidacy, and that local officials had
forced state employees, such as teachers, to take part in pro-Yanukovich
rallies. As in previous elections, political opponents have faced harassment
and intimidation. Several months prior to the elections, Viktor
Yushchenko suddenly fell ill after what he called an attempt by the
authorities to poison him. The authorities have denied the charge and
the hospital that treated Yushchenko has not confirmed that he was poisoned.
Entrenched Human Rights Problems
Ukraine has been plagued by numerous human rights problems that
require a structural approach on the part of the government. While it
has begun to act on some of these issues, many remain unaddressed.
Torture and ill-treatment continues to be a significant problem in police
detention and prisons in Ukraine. Ukraines human rights ombudsman
receives numerous complaints of torture from criminal suspects and
estimates that 30 percent of all detainees may become victims of torture
or ill-treatment by law enforcement agents. Ill-treatment has resulted in
permanent physical damage to many victims, and in the most severe
cases, resulted in death. In the vast majority of cases, the perpetrators of
torture are not investigated or prosecuted for their crimes. Prison conditions
in Ukraine continue to be poor. Prisons are overcrowded, and
prisoners have insufficient access to food and health care. As in many
other former-Soviet nations, tuberculosis is widespread in prisons.
Ukraine has one of the fastest growing HIV/AIDS epidemics in the
world, and human rights violations are fueling its growth. Widespread
discrimination against members of high risk groupsinjection drug
users, sex workers, and men who have sex with menprevents people
from seeking preventative health services and thus increases their risk of
contracting HIV. There is also a history of discrimination against people infected with HIV. Although the government has made a commitment
to fighting the spread of HIV/AIDS and plans to distribute generic
antiretroviral drugs, these steps alone are insufficient to stem the epidemic.
Ukraine has recently legalized the use of methadone, widely regarded as
the single most effective means of treating opiate dependency. Although
the medical and public health establishment has been generally supportive,
resistance to methadone by Ukrainian law enforcement bodies have
so far prevented its use. One critically important outcome of this situation
is that many drug users living with HIV will not benefit from
expanding access to antiretroviral (ARV) therapy, as they will be barred
from receiving the major tool necessary to support treatment adherence.
Women face severe discrimination in Ukraines workforce. Men hold a
disproportionate number of managerial positions and receive better pay
than women in comparable jobs. Discrimination is especially prevalent
in the job market, where womens access to high paying or high prestige
jobs is limited in both the public and private sectors due to discriminatory
recruitment processes. Many women are forced into lower paying
jobs or remain joblesswomen make up 80 percent of the unemployed
in Ukraine. Some women, frustrated by the lack of opportunities at
home, seek employment outside Ukraine and become victims of trafficking
into forced labor abroad, including forced sex work. Women are
also victims of widespread domestic abuse.
Ukraine is both a transit point and a point of origin for human trafficking.
Ukrainian women and girls are sent to the Middle East and other
European countries and forced to be sex workers, while Ukrainian men
are sent to other parts of Europe and North America for forced labor.
Many victims of human trafficking from Moldova and Asian nations
travel through Ukraine, on their way to countries where they will be
exploited. The past year has seen an increase in the number of trafficked children, many of them orphans. The government of Ukraine has
recently taken steps to reduce human trafficking using increased prosecution
of suspected traffickers and programs to help victims. Despite
this progress, however, Ukraine still does not meet international standards
meant to fight trafficking, and the problem persists.
Key International Actors
The international community has closely monitored the presidential
elections. With the exception of the monitors from the Commonwealth
of Independent States, which is made up of twelve former Soviet States,
international monitors found that the presidential vote had fallen short
of international standards. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe stated that the second round did not meet a
considerable number of [international] commitments for democratic
elections. The E.U., U.S., Council of Europe, and NATO have all
expressed concern over widespread fraud and have urged a peaceful
solution to the political crisis. The E.U. has strongly endorsed a new
vote as the best way forward. 
Uzbekistan
Uzbekistans disastrous human rights record is long-standing and
changed little in 2004, with major violations of the rights to freedom of
religion, expression, association, and assembly. Uzbekistan has no independent
judiciary and torture is widespread in its pre-trial and post-conviction
facilities. In response to international pressure the government
has introduced, but not implemented, incremental reform, resulting in
no fundamental improvement. The government continues its practice of
controlling, intimidating, and arbitrarily suspending or interfering with
the work of civil society groups, the media, human rights activists and
opposition political parties.
In 2004 Uzbekistan was shaken by two episodes of violencebombings,
and shootings in Tashkent and Bukhara in late March and early April,
and bombings of the U.S. and Israeli embassies and the General
Prosecutors office in Tashkent on July 30.
Uzbekistan is a key ally of the United States in the global campaign
against terrorism, but undermines that campaign by using it to justify
gross human rights abuses. Unfair trials of terror suspects in Uzbekistan
that result from gross abuses further undermine counterterrorism
efforts by producing unreliable convictions which damage rather than
promote the rule of law.
Religious Persecution
For years, the government has imprisoned on fundamentalism
charges individuals whose peaceful Islamic beliefs, practices, and affiliations
fell outside of strict government controls. An accumulated total of
about 7,000 people are believed to have been imprisoned since the governments
campaign against independent Islam began in the mid-1990s.
The government justifies this campaign by referring to the war on terror,
failing to distinguish between those who advocate violence and those who peacefully express their religious beliefs; it used the March-
April attacks to give new validation to the campaign.
By November 1, 2004, Human Rights Watch documented 241 convictions;
the true numbers are believed to be much higher. Police use torture
and other illegal means to coerce statements and confessions from
these detainees. Courts fail to investigate torture allegations made by
defendants at trial, despite an instruction by the Supreme Court to
judges to exclude any evidence obtained under illegal means, and routinely
sentence defendants to long prison terms based solely or predominantly
on such testimony.
Conditions in Uzbekistans prisons are poor, and religious and political
prisoners suffer particularly harsh treatment. According to testimony by
relatives, prisoners are forced to sign statements begging President
Islam Karimov for forgiveness, renouncing their faith, and incriminating
themselves as terrorists. Prisoners who refuse are punished with
beatings, time in punishment cells, and even new criminal prosecutions.
Terrorism Trials
Approximately one hundred people were tried on terrorism, murder,
and other charges relating to the March-April 2004 violence. Trials
monitored by Human Rights Watch and other observers failed to meet
international fair trial standards. Many defendants denied any knowledge
of or involvement in the violence and alleged that police had held
them incommunicado and used torture, threats, and other pressure to
coerce confessions during the investigation. Bakhtior Muminov, tried in
October along with four others for alleged participation in the March-
April violence and alleged membership Hizb ut-Tahrir (a non-violent
religious organization that is banned in Uzbekistan) had been held
incommunicado from his arrest in late March to August. At trial he testified
that he had been tortured with beatings and electric shocks to
coerce a confession. The judge failed to launch any inquiry into Muminovs or other defendants torture allegations and sentenced him
to sixteen years imprisonment.
Torture
The government has made no visible progress on ending the use of torture
in practice and only minimal progress on implementing the recommendations
made by the United Nations (U.N.) Special Rapporteur on
Torture after his visit to Uzbekistan in 2002. The Supreme Court issued
an instruction to judges to exclude defendants testimony and confessions
extracted under torture. In practice, however, judges do not
implement this instruction. Although the government states that it has
prosecuted law enforcement officers for torture and other illegal methods,
Human Rights Watch has received no response to its request for
further information about theses cases. Judges routinely accept as evidence
testimony and confessions in cases where torture is alleged as well
as base convictions solely on confessions made by defendants during the
investigation. Human Rights Watch continued to receive credible allegations
of torture in investigations and pre-trial custody as well as in
prisons.
Crackdown on Civil Society
The government tightened its grip on civil society in 2004 by extending
to international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) many of the
repressive tactics it has used against local NGOs. In 2004 it introduced
burdensome new registration and reporting procedures requiring international
NGOs to obtain agreement from the Ministry of Justice
(MOJ) on the content, agenda, timing and place of any activity, and to
invite MOJ officials to attend. The government closed the Open
Society Institute, which provided vital support for civil society groups,
and suspended the activities of the local affiliate of the media-support
organization Internews for six-months for alleged minor administrative violations. It also forced all womens NGOs to undergo re-registration
procedures.
The government refused to register any independent human rights
organizations in 2004. Throughout the year, the government harassed,
threatened, and detained human rights defenders in an attempt to
restrict information on human rights abuses. At least two activists were
severely beaten by unknown assailants after receiving threats from the
government to stop their activities. On February 16, authorities arrested
defender Muidinjon Kurbanov and held him incommunicado for three
days, during which they threatened and forced him to sign a dictated
confession. He was tried and sentenced to three years imprisonment on
fabricated charges of weapons possession in an unfair trial that focused
on his human rights work. The sentence was reduced to a fine on
appeal and after international outcry.
Uzbek authorities continue to harass, detain, and hold under effective
house arrest activists who attempted to stage demonstrations. For example,
in June authorities prevented Bahodir Choriev, a farmer trying to
prevent government confiscation of his farm, from holding a demonstration
by holding him and his relatives in their apartment. Police
forced Choriev and eighteen of his relatives onto a bus and drove them
outside Tashkent where they interrogated them and confiscated their
passports.
Elections
There are no genuine opposition parties registered in Uzbekistan. The
government refused to register opposition political parties in advance of
the December 26 parliamentary elections. The Birlik (Unity) party
applied for registration several times, each time denied by the MOJ,
most recently in January 2004, when the MOJ claimed that the partys
signature lists were flawed. On appeal, the Supreme Court ruled that
the court had no jurisdiction to review registration decisions. Although the law allows unaffiliated candidates to run through initiative groups,
in practice, independent candidates faced intimidation, harassment, and
other serious obstacles obtaining registration and few ultimately ran.
The government also refused to allow independent observers to observe
at polling stations. Citing serious flaws in Uzbekistans election laws, the
lack of registered opposition parties and restrictions on freedom of the
press, the Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR) of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) refused to send a full election observation mission to
Uzbekistan.
Key International Actors
In July, the U.S. State Department determined that Uzbekistan had
failed to make sufficient progress on its human rights commitments as
outlined in the U.S.-Uzbek Bilateral Agreement and therefore did not
qualify for direct government assistance, cutting U.S. $18 million in aid.
However, in August, the Department of Defense undermined the principled
message this decision sent by pledging U.S. $21 million in new
military aid. The U.S. continues to regard Uzbekistan as an important
partner in the war on terror.
The E.U.-Uzbekistan Partnership and Cooperation Council met in
January 2004 to discuss implementation of the Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement (PCA). The PCA requires that partner states
guarantee basic civil and political rights. The E.U. missed the opportunity
to obtain a commitment from the Uzbek government to implement
specific reforms and prematurely gave the Uzbek government credit for
progress on torture and civil society liberalization, when such progress
had not been made.
In March 2004, following the expiration of the one-year deadline it had
set for the Uzbek government to meet specific human rights benchmarks
as a condition for further engagement, the Board of Directors of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) took
the unprecedented decision to suspend direct assistance to the government
of Uzbekistan, citing the governments failure to make progress
on the benchmarks. It decided to limit investment to the private sector
and stay involved in public sector projects only to the extent that they
directly affect the well-being of the general population, or involve
neighboring countries.
The benchmarks had been set in the banks March 2003 country strategy
for Uzbekistan, issued less than two months before it held its annual
meeting in Tashkent. They pertain specifically to human rights: greater
political openness and freedom of the media; registration and free functioning
of independent civil society groups; and implementation of the
recommendations issued by the U.N. Special Rapporteur on torture.
The U.N. Human Rights Commission voted to impose a confidential
monitoring mechanism on Uzbekistan due to persistent lack of
improvement in its human rights record. In October 2004, an independent
expert appointed by the Commission visited Uzbekistan to
conduct a human rights assessment. He will present his findings in a
confidential report at the next meeting of the Commission.
Egypt
Egypts human rights record showed little improvement during 2004.
The government set up a National Council for Human Rights and
appointed several respected independent activists to its board, but serious
issues like routine torture of persons in detention and suppression
of non-violent political dissent remain unaddressed. Emergency rule
continues, providing the basis for arbitrary detention and trials before
military and state security courts. Victims of torture and ill-treatment
include not just political dissenters but also persons detained in ordinary
criminal inquiries, men suspected of engaging in consensual homosexual
conduct, and street children. Nongovernmental organizations are subjected
to stringent controls under the new law on associations, and the
authorities arbitrarily reject the applications of several organizations to
register as NGOs, as required by the law. Women and girls face systematic
discrimination under personal status and other laws, and violence
directed at women and girls frequently goes unpunished.
Emergency Rule
In February 2003, the government extended twenty-two years of continuous
emergency rule for another three years. The Emergency Law,
Law No. 162 of 1958, allows arbitrary arrest and indefinite detention
without trial, and creates an atmosphere of impunity in which torture
and ill-treatment flourish. The government has used the emergency
rule to criminalize political dissent at will, and to refer civilian defendants
to military courts or to exceptional state security courts in which
trials do not meet international fair trial standards. Some seven hundred
alleged Islamist militants who had never been tried or convicted of a
crime were reportedly released during 2004. The Cairo-based Human
Rights Association for Assistance to Prisoners in early 2004 estimated
that the total number of persons then detained without charge for prolonged
periods was around fifteen thousand. The group released a list of sixty-five attorneys who have been held without charge or trial under
the provisions of the emergency law, some for as long as sixteen years.
Torture
Security forces and police routinely torture and mistreat detainees, particularly
during interrogations. Torture in the past was used primarily
against political dissidents, especially Islamists, but in recent years it has
become rife in ordinary police stations as well, affecting citizens who
find themselves in custody as suspects or in connection with criminal
investigations. Torture and ill-treatment are known or suspected to be
the cause of at least seventeen deaths in detention in 2002 and 2003,
including at least three cases at the hands of the State Security
Investigations (SSI) branch of the Ministry of Interior, and additional
cases of deaths in detention were reported in 2004. Ministry of Interior
officials confirmed to Human Rights Watch in February 2004 that there
had not been a single criminal investigation of SSI officials for torture
or ill-treatment in the past eighteen years, and no internal disciplinary
measures were imposed, despite numerous credible allegations of serious
abuse.
Restrictions on Freedom of Association
Egypts new law governing associations, Law 84 (2002), severely compromises
the right to freedom of association, giving the government
unwarranted control over the governance and operations of NGOs.
The law, which took effect in June 2003, provides criminal penalties for
unauthorized activities, including engaging in political or union
activities, reserved for political parties and syndicates (Article 11). The
law also provides for up to six months in prison for receiving donations
on behalf of an NGO without prior ministry approval. Persons carrying
out NGO activities prior to the organizations formal registration are
liable to a three-month prison term.
NGOs whose applications for registration were initially rejected include
the New Woman Research Center, which raises public awareness of
womens rights issues, including female genital mutilation and domestic
violence, and the Land Center for Human Rights, which works on economic
and social rights issues in rural areas. The authorities in both
cases said that security agencies did not approve the applications. The
government rejected the application of the Egyptian Association
Against Torture because it listed among its goals to change Egyptian
legislation in accordance with human rights conventions. The Ministry
of Social Affairs wrote that civil associations had no legal right to be
concerned with legislation and that such activities were unconstitutional.
Egypt also maintains strict controls over political associations. The official
Political Parties Affairs Committee, composed almost entirely of
government officials and currently headed by the chairman of the ruling
National Democratic Party, routinely rejects applications to form new
political parties, based on broadly worded criteria such as whether the
partys program constitutes an addition to public life. On October 27,
2004, the committee, for only the third time since 1977, approved a
new party. Al Ghad (Tomorrow) is headed by independent member of
parliament Ayman Nur. The committee however continued to reject
other applications.
Arrests and Torture of Men for Consensual Homosexual Conduct
Since early 2001, the Cairo vice squad has spearheaded a campaign of
entrapment and harassment that has resulted in the arrest, prosecution,
and conviction of hundreds of men alleged to have had sex with other
men. Officials claim that they are targeting promiscuity and prostitution
(debauchery), but the authorities routinely raid private apartments,
wiretap phones, and employ extensive surveillance of and entrapment
via the Internet to round up individuals whose only offence is their
alleged homosexual conduct. Many of those detained endure routine torture and ill-treatment at the hands of security officials. Doctors participate
in torturing these detainees under the guise of collecting forensic
evidence to support the charge of habitual debauchery.
Ill-treatment of Street Children
The government periodically conducts mass arrest campaigns of street
children. Typically, the children are homeless, beggars, or truants from
school but have committed no crime. In custody, they often face beatings,
sexual abuse, and extortion by police and adult suspects, and police
routinely deny them access to food, bedding, and medical care. The
authorities do not routinely monitor conditions of detention for children,
investigate cases of arbitrary arrest or abuse in custody, or appropriately
discipline those responsible. In many cases, children are
detained illegally for days before going before the public prosecutor on
charges of being vulnerable to delinquency. Police often do not notify
parents about arrests, and children who have fled parental abuse or who
lack guardians have no recourse for assistance.
Womens Rights
Egypts family and nationality laws have seen some reforms in recent
years. However, additional steps are required to amend laws that discriminate
against women and girls, to prosecute gender-based violence,
and to grant women and girls full and equal citizenship rights.
Discriminatory personal status laws governing marriage, divorce, custody,
and inheritance have institutionalized the second class status of
women in the private realm and undermined their legal standing.
Discriminatory divorce laws and policies, for instance, undermine the
ability of many women, including those in abusive relationships, from
ever attempting to seek a divorce and leave others languishing in legal
limbo for years. The penal code does not effectively deter or punish
domestic violence, and police are routinely unsympathetic to the concerns
of battered women and girls. Current governmental policy also denies women the opportunity to become judges. This exclusion of
women from the judiciary is not codified in law but is a matter of practice
that violates Egypts constitution and its international obligations
not to discriminate on the basis of gender.
Religious Intolerance and Discrimination against Religious
Minorities
Although Egypts constitution provides for equal rights without regard
to religion, discrimination against Egyptian Christians and intolerance
of Bahais and minority or unorthodox Muslim sects remains a problem.
Egyptian law recognizes conversions to Islam but not from Islam to
other religions. There are credible reports that Muslims who convert to
Christianity sometimes face harassment. Difficulties in getting new
identity papers have resulted in the arrest of converts to Christianity for
allegedly forging such documents. Bahai institutions and community
activities are prohibited by law. The authorities have detained and prosecuted
individuals adhering to or promoting non-orthodox Islamic sects
on grounds of insulting one of the heavenly religionsIslam,
Christianity, and Judaism.
Key International Actors
The United States has long been Egypts largest provider of foreign
military and economic assistance, amounting to $1.3 billion in military
aid and $600 million in economic assistance in Fiscal Year 2004. Egypt
hosts the bi-annual Bright Star multilateral military exercises with U.S.
forces, the largest military exercise in the region. The U.S. considers
Egypt to be an active partner in the global war against terror: Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State David Satterfield told a Congressional committee
in June 2004 that the two governments cooperate closely on a
broad range of counter-terrorism and law enforcement issue.
The Association Agreement between Egypt and the European Union,
signed in June 2001, came into force on June 1, 2004. Although the
agreement is premised on respect for human rights and democratic
principles, Egypts serious human rights problems do not seem to have
affected its operation. The E.U. is Egypts biggest trading partner, currently
taking 40 percent of its exports and providing 34 percent of its
imports.
Iran
Respect for basic human rights in Iran, especially freedom of expression
and opinion, deteriorated in 2004. Torture and ill-treatment in detention,
including indefinite solitary confinement, are used routinely to
punish dissidents. The judiciary, which is accountable to Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei rather than the elected president, Mohammad
Khatami, has been at the center of many serious human rights violations.
Abuses are carried out by what Iranians call parallel institutions:
plainclothes intelligence agents, paramilitary groups that violently attack
peaceful protests, and illegal and secret prisons and interrogation centers
run by intelligence services.
Freedom of Expression and Opinion
The Iranian authorities systematically suppress freedom of expression
and opinion. After President Mohammad Khatamis election in 1997,
reformist newspapers multiplied and took on increasingly sensitive topics
in their pages and editorial columns. Prominent Iranian intellectuals
began to challenge foundational concepts of Islamic governance. In
April 2000, the government launched a protracted campaign to silence
critics: closing down newspapers, imprisoning journalists and editors,
and regularly calling editors and publishers before what became known
as the Press Court. Today, very few independent dailies remain, and
those that do self-censor heavily. Many writers and intellectuals have
left the country, are in prison, or have ceased to be critical. Days after
the visit of the Special Rapporteur for freedom of opinion and expression,
Ambeyi Ligabo, in late 2003, one of the student activists with
whom he spoke was re-arrested. In 2004 the authorities also moved to
block Internet websites that provide independent news and analysis, and
to arrest writers using this medium to disseminate information and
analysis critical of the government.
Torture and Ill-treatment in Detention
With the closure of independent newspapers and journals, treatment of
detainees has worsened in Evin prison as well as in detention centers
operated clandestinely by the judiciary and the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps. Torture and ill-treatment in detention has been used particularly
against those imprisoned for peaceful expression of their political
views. In violation of international law and Irans constitution, judges
often accept coerced confessions. The use of prolonged solitary confinement,
often in small basement cells, has been designed to break the
will of those detained in order to coerce confessions and provide information
regarding associates. This systematic use of solitary confinement
rises to the level of cruel and inhuman treatment. Combined with denial
of access to counsel and videotaped confessions, prolonged solitary confinement
creates an environment in which prisoners have nowhere to
turn in order to seek redress for their treatment in detention. Severe
physical torture is also used, especially against student activists and others
who do not enjoy the high public profile of older dissident intellectuals
and writers. The judiciary chief, Ayatollah Mahmud Hashemi
Shahrudi, issued an internal directive in April 2004 banning torture and
inhumane treatment of detainees, but as of yet no enforcement mechanisms
have been established.
Parallel Institutions
Parallel institutions (nahad-e movazi) is how Iranians refer to the
quasi-official organs of repression that have become increasingly open
in crushing student protests, detaining activists, writers, and journalists
in secret prisons, and threatening pro-democracy speakers and audiences
at public events. These groups have carried out brutal assaults
against students, writers, and reformist politicians, and have set up arbitrary
checkpoints around Tehran. Groups such as Ansar-e Hizbollah and
the Basij work under the control of the Office of the Supreme Leader,
and there are many reports that the uniformed police are often afraid to directly confront these plainclothes agents. Illegal prisons, which are
outside of the oversight of the National Prisons Office, are sites where
political prisoners are abused, intimidated, and tortured with impunity.
Over the past year politically active individuals have been summoned to
a detention center controlled by the Department of Public Places
(Edareh Amaken Umumi) for questioning by parallel intelligence services.
According to journalists and student activists who have undergone
such interrogations but not been arrested or detained, these sessions are
intended to intimidate and threaten students and others.
Impunity
There is no mechanism for monitoring and investigating human rights
violations perpetrated by agents of the government. The closure of
independent media in Iran has helped to perpetuate an atmosphere of
impunity. In recent years, the Parliaments Article 90 Commission
(mandated by the constitution to address complaints of violations of the
constitution by the three branches of government) has made an
admirable effort to investigate and report on the many complaints it has
received, the Commission lacks any power to enforce its findings and
recommendations. The Commission repeatedly called for a thorough
investigation of the judiciarys violations of the law, but thus far this has
not happened. In October 2003 the Article 90 Commission presented a
public report on the death in custody several months earlier of Iranian-
Canadian photojournalist Zahra Kazemi. The report placed responsibility
for her death squarely on agents of the judiciary. In a bizarre development,
the judiciary accused a low ranking official of the Intelligence
Ministry, Reza Ahmadi, of killing Kazemi. Despite a strong rebuke from
the Intelligence Ministry, the judiciary proceeded with a hastily organized
trial held in May 2004 in which Reza Ahmadi was cleared of the
charges. The judiciary has taken no further steps to identify or prosecute
those responsible for Kazemis death.
The Guardian Council
Irans Guardian Council is a body of twelve religious jurists: six are
appointed by the Supreme Leader and the remaining six nominated by
the judiciary and confirmed by Parliament. The Council has the
unchecked power to veto legislation approved by the Parliament. In
recent years, for instance, the Council has repeatedly rejected parliamentary
bills in such areas as womens rights, family law, the prohibition
of torture, and electoral reform. The Council also vetoed parliamentary
bills assenting to ratification of international human rights treaties such
as the Convention against Torture and the Convention on the
Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women.
The Council also has the power to vet candidates for elected political
posts, including the presidency and the national parliament, based on
vague criteria and subject only to the review of the Supreme Leader.
The Council wielded its arbitrary powers in a blatantly partisan manner
during the parliamentary elections of February 2004 when it disqualified
more than 3,600 reformist and independent candidates, allowing
conservative candidates to dominate the ballot. The Councils actions
produced widespread voter apathy and many boycotted the polls. Many
Iranians regarded the move as a silent coup on behalf of conservatives
who had performed poorly during previous elections in 2000. The
Council also disqualified many sitting parliamentarians whose candidacy
had been approved by the same Council in 2000.
Minorities
Irans ethnic and religious minorities remain subject to discrimination
and, in some cases, persecution. The Bahai community continues to be
denied permission to worship or engage in communal affairs in a public
manner. In a rare public protest, eighteen Sunni parliamentarians wrote
to the authorities in July 2003 to criticize the treatment of the Sunni
Muslim community and the refusal to allow construction of a mosque in Tehran that would serve that community. The Baluchi minority, who
are mostly Sunni and live in the border province of Sistan and
Baluchistan, continue to suffer from lack of representation in local government
and have experienced a heavy military presence in the region.
In December 2003, tensions between the local population and the
Revolutionary Guards led to large demonstrations in Saravan, in
Baluchistan province. In the ensuing clashes between demonstrators and
the police at least five people were killed.
Key International Actors
The European Union has increased both economic and diplomatic ties
with Iran. The E.U. has pledged to tie human rights standards to this
process, but so far with little impact. Australia and Switzerland have also
initiated human rights dialogues with Iran, but benchmarks have not
been made public, making it unlikely that these will have any greater
impact than the dialogue conducted by the E.U.
Iran issued a standing invitation to thematic mechanisms of the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights in 2002. Since then, the
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression have visited the country and issued reports critical of government
practices in these areas. The government, however, has failed to
implement the recommendations of the U.N. experts, and there were
reprisals, such as re-arrest, against witnesses who testified to the
experts. Since then, Iran has not responded to requests by the U.N.
Special Rapporteurs on Torture and on Extra-Judicial Executions to
visit the country.
Relations between the United States and Iran remain poor. The Bush
administration has publicly labeled Iran as part of an axis of evil.
Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage, in October 2003, said that
the U.S. was not pursuing a policy of regime change towards Iran, but persistent reports from Washington indicate that the administration
remains divided on this point. The U.S. continues to oppose loans to
Iran from international financial institutions.
Iraq
The human rights situation in Iraq remained grave in 2004, aggravated
by increased armed attacks by insurgents and counterinsurgency attacks
by U.S.-led international and Iraqi forces. Both U.S. forces and insurgents
have been implicated in serious violations of the laws of armed
conflict, including war crimes.
The level of violent attacks on civilians by insurgents, including suicide
bombings and the deliberate killing of Iraqi civilians working with U.S.
and other foreign forces, remained high in 2004. There was also a
marked increase in the number of abductions, and in some cases
killings, of both Iraqi and foreign nationals. This high level of insecurity
had a particularly negative impact on the ability of women and girls to
go to jobs, attend school, or otherwise move outside the home.
U.S. forces have also been responsible for violations of the laws of war.
The photographs from Abu Ghraib prison of torture and other mistreatment
of detainees, made public in April 2004, provided the most
graphic evidence of abuse; further investigations revealed that abuses
against detainees were not limited to Abu Ghraib. Security considerations
have limited monitoring of U.S. military operations against insurgent
strongholds, but reports have emerged of U.S. soldiers killing incapacitated
Iraqi combatants, forcing civilians back into battle zones, and
using unnecessary force against civilians at checkpoints. U.S. forces
continue to detain hundreds of Iraqis on the basis of Security Council
authorization but in accordance with no evident law.
In the aftermath of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq and the overthrow of
the Baathist government in April 2003, the occupying power and interim
government have worked to dismantle the repressive apparatus
erected under Saddam Hussein. The U.S.-led coalitions failure to provide
adequate security following the invasion, the expansion of the insurgency, and insurgent attacks on humanitarian agencies have seriously
impeded this process and efforts at economic reconstruction.
Iraq continues to face the legacy of nearly three decades of authoritarian
rule by Saddam Hussein and his Baathist government. The legacy
includes crimes against humanity, war crimes, and genocide that have
long gone unpunished; and a criminal justice system atrophied due to its
subordination to the state security apparatus and corrupted by revolutionary
courts that made extensive use of the death penalty, torture,
and arbitrary detention. Many of the victims of the former government
were Kurds, an ethnic minority, and Shi`a, the religion of the Iraqi
majority. Government policies and comprehensive economic sanctions
imposed by the United Nations Security Council left the countrys
infrastructure and economy devastated.
The Governing Authority in Iraq
Following the declared end of occupation by U.S.-led coalition forces
and the dissolution of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) on
June 28, 2004, the U.S.-led coalition transferred sovereignty to the
Interim Iraqi Government. U.S.-led forces have remained in Iraq under
the authority of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1546, adopted on
June 8, 2004, creating the Multi-National Force-Iraq (MNF-I). The
resolution gives the MNF-I the authority to take all necessary measures
to contribute to the maintenance of security and stability in Iraq,
working with the interim government.
With the transfer of sovereignty, the Law of Administration for the
State of Iraq for the Transitional Period (TAL) came into effect. The
TAL was promulgated by the CPA on March 8, 2004, and is due to
remain in effect until the formation of an elected Iraqi government
pursuant to a permanent constitution, envisaged for the end of 2005
following general elections. The TAL contains a bill of rights for Iraqi
citizens, including the right to freedom of expression and association, religious beliefs, and freedom from discrimination on ethnic, religious
or other grounds. The law also stipulates that all citizens are equal
before the law, and enjoy freedom from arbitrary arrest and unlawful
detention, unfair trials and torture.
Internal Security and Emergency Law
In June 2004, Prime Minister Ayad Allawi announced a major reorganization
of Iraqi security forces, including the creation of new agencies
with responsibility for intelligence gathering and for law enforcement.
An Iraqi National Intelligence Service had already been set up under
CPA authority in April 2004, initially reporting to CPA Administrator
L. Paul Bremer and subsequently to the prime minister. Several
Ministry of Interior agencies were also reorganized and expanded under
the CPA with responsibility for investigating serious criminal offenses
such as money laundering, abductions, and organized crimeas well as
gathering intelligence on criminal activity.
On July 3, 2004, the interim government passed the Order for
Safeguarding National Security (Number 1 of 2004), introducing emergency
legislation to the statute books and enabling the prime minister
to declare martial law for up to sixty days (renewable with the approval
of the Presidency Council). The Order provides for the imposition of
curfews; the closure of roads, sea lanes, and airspace; restrictions or bans
on public gatherings; surveillance of electronic and other communications;
and wide powers to search property and to detain suspects.
Under the Public Safety Law, a state of emergency may be declared
upon the exposure of the people of Iraq to a danger of grave proportions,
threatening the lives of individuals and emanating from an ongoing
campaign of violence by any number of people, for the purpose of
preventing the establishment of a broad based government in Iraq, or to
hinder the peaceful participation of all Iraqis in the political process, or
for any other purpose (Article 1.) 
In announcing the Order, Iraqi officials pointed to provisions requiring
that persons may not be arrested except upon the issuance of arrest warrants
from the judicial authorities, and would be brought before an
investigative judge within twenty-four hours. The law, however, does
provide for such arrests or searches without warrant in extreme exigent
circumstances, which are not defined. On November 7, 2004, the
Prime Minister declared a state of emergency for a period of sixty days
on the eve of a U.S.-led military offensive on the town of al-Falluja, targeting
suspected insurgents believed to be based there.
As part of the declared intention to crack down on violent crime, the
interim government reintroduced the death penalty, which had been
suspended by CPA authorities. Order 3 of 2004, passed on August 8,
provides capital punishment for certain crimes affecting internal state
security, public safety, attacks on means of transportation, premeditated
murder, drug trafficking, and abduction.
Several days prior to the reintroduction of the death penalty, Prime
Minister `Allawi announced an amnesty for a range of offenses connected
with the possession of weapons and explosive devices, the failure to
inform authorities about the planning or financing of terrorism or other
acts of violence, participation with terrorist groups in acts intended to
undermine internal state security or public welfare and property, and
the giving of refuge to persons sought by the judicial authorities for terrorist
or violent crimes or in connection with crimes perpetrated by the
former Iraqi government. Order No. 2/2004 excludes from the terms of
the amnesty those found guilty of murder, abduction, rape, robbery, and
harming or destroying public or private assets. It also limited those benefiting
from its terms to Iraqi nationals who committed the said crimes
between May 1, 2003, and the date of the law coming into force. The
amnesty, initially valid for a thirty-day period, was extended for an additional
month in mid-September 2004. It is not known how many people
have benefited. 
The Criminal Justice System
Following the fall of the Saddam Hussein government, Iraqs criminal
courts began functioning again around June 2003, but have had to rely
on an outdated and deeply flawed legal framework pending comprehensive
reform of Iraqs judicial system and criminal laws.
Human Rights Watch observed numerous trials and investigative hearings
during 2003 and 2004 involving suspects charged with various
offenses under the Penal Code of 1969 before the ordinary criminal
courts in Baghdad as well as the Central Criminal Court of Iraq
(CCCI). The latter court was set up in July 2003 under CPA authority
to hear cases involving serious felonies such as terrorism, organized
crime, governmental corruption, acts intended to destabilize democratic
institutions or processes, and violence based on race, nationality, ethnicity,
or religion. Defendants brought before the CCCI include those
charged with attacks against U.S.-led coalition forces and those who
currently remain in MNF-I custody. The court also has jurisdiction
over future cases involving suspects arrested and charged in accordance
with July 3, 2004 national security order described above.
In the vast majority of cases observed by Human Rights Watch, defendants
had been detained without judicial warrants and were brought
before the criminal courts without having had prior access to defense
counsel. Many of them had been held for weeks or months in pre-trial
detention, and in some cases had been tortured or ill-treated to extract
confessions from them. Where defendants were unable or unwilling to
engage lawyers to act on their behalf, the courts appointed lawyers for
them. However, such lawyers did not have prior access to the defendants
nor to the evidence against them, and in some cases, lawyers were
not present at investigative hearings. Trials before the criminal courts
were summary, lasting less than thirty minutes in the majority of cases. 
Accountability for Past Crimes
The Statute of the Iraq Special Tribunal, promulgated under the CPA
by the Iraqi Governing Council in December 2003, contains serious
substantive and procedural shortcomings that, independent of questions
of how the tribunal was established and other factors, could undermine
the legitimacy of the tribunal and the fairness of future trials.
Among other problems, the tribunal law contains no prohibition on
using confessions extracted by torture, no right of access to a lawyer in
the early stages of investigation, and no requirement that guilt be
proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Those convicted can face the death
penalty. And while justice efforts worldwide have created a cadre of
judges and prosecutors with invaluable experience prosecuting genocide
and crimes against humanity, the tribunal has been structured to almost
entirely exclude their participation. Instead, the tribunal is to be run by
lawyers and judges who have acknowledged their own lack of experience
in complex prosecutions of this kind.
Human Rights Watch has raised these matters with Iraqi and U.S. officials
and called for key amendments to be introduced to the law to
bring it into line with international fair trial standards. To date the tribunal
law has not been amended.
Since the end of June 2004, the MNF-I has retained physical custody of
high value detainees, among them members of the former Iraqi government
who will eventually be tried before the Iraq Special Tribunal.
At this writing, over ninety such persons remained in detention and
most are believed to be held at Camp Cropper in the vicinity of
Baghdad International Airport. To date, only twelve of the defendants
have been arraigned, among them former president Saddam Hussein,
under the jurisdiction of the Central Criminal Court of Iraq, for crimes
punishable under Iraqs Penal Code.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The Statute of the Iraq Special Tribunal, promulgated under the CPA
by the Iraqi Governing Council in December 2003, contains serious
substantive and procedural shortcomings that, independent of questions
of how the tribunal was established and other factors, could undermine
the legitimacy of the tribunal and the fairness of future trials.
Among other problems, the tribunal law contains no prohibition on
using confessions extracted by torture, no right of access to a lawyer in
the early stages of investigation, and no requirement that guilt be
proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Those convicted can face the death
penalty. And while justice efforts worldwide have created a cadre of
judges and prosecutors with invaluable experience prosecuting genocide
and crimes against humanity, the tribunal has been structured to almost
entirely exclude their participation. Instead, the tribunal is to be run by
lawyers and judges who have acknowledged their own lack of experience
in complex prosecutions of this kind.
Human Rights Watch has raised these matters with Iraqi and U.S. officials
and called for key amendments to be introduced to the law to
bring it into line with international fair trial standards. To date the tribunal
law has not been amended.
Since the end of June 2004, the MNF-I has retained physical custody of
high value detainees, among them members of the former Iraqi government
who will eventually be tried before the Iraq Special Tribunal.
At this writing, over ninety such persons remained in detention and
most are believed to be held at Camp Cropper in the vicinity of
Baghdad International Airport. To date, only twelve of the defendants
have been arraigned, among them former president Saddam Hussein,
under the jurisdiction of the Central Criminal Court of Iraq, for crimes
punishable under Iraqs Penal Code. 
Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories
The human rights situation in Israel and the occupied West Bank and
Gaza Strip remained grave throughout 2004, as armed clashes continued
to exact a high price from civilians. While many see the period after
Arafats death on November 11 as the beginning of a new era in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, few changes have occurred on the ground
where the wall regime Israel is building inside the West Bank and the
illegal Israeli settlements continue to expand. On December 3 a top
Hamas leader said that the group would accept the establishment of a
Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and a long-term truce
with Israel. It remains to be seen whether Israel will make reciprocal
declarations and whether words will be translated into action.
In 2004, the Israeli army and security forces made frequent and, in the
Gaza Strip, large-scale military incursions into densely-populated
Palestinian areas, often taking heavy tolls in terms of Palestinian deaths
and injuries as well as property destruction. Palestinian armed groups
fired rockets from areas of the Gaza Strip at Israeli civilian settlements
and populated areas in Israel close to the border, and carried out seven
suicide bombings inside Israel and four around Israeli army checkpoints
in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT). Armed attacks and
clashes in the course of the year brought casualties since September
2000 to well over three thousand Palestinians and nearly one thousand
Israelis killed, and more than 34,000 Palestinians and six thousand
Israelis injured. Most of those killed and injured were civilians.
The Israeli authorities continue a policy of closure, imposing severe and
frequently arbitrary restrictions on freedom of movement in the West
Bank, Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem, contributing to a serious humanitarian
crisis marked by extreme poverty, unemployment, and food insecurity.
The movement restrictions have also severely compromised
Palestinian residents access to health care, education, and other services.
Over the past two years these restrictions have become more acute, and
in many places more permanent, with the construction of a separation
barrier inside the West Bank. While the stated Israeli security rationale
for the barrier is to prevent Palestinian armed groups from carrying out
attacks in Israel, 85 percent of its route extends into the West Bank,
effectively annexing to Israel most of the large illegal Jewish settlements
constructed over the past several decades as well as confiscating some of
the most productive Palestinian farmlands and key water resources.
In October 2004 the Knesset approved Prime Minister Ariel Sharons
plan to disengage from the Gaza Strip in 2005 by withdrawing its
military forces and Jewish settlements, although the plan will leave
Israel in control of Gazas borders, coastline, and airspace. This move
will not end Israels occupation of Gaza or its responsibility for the wellbeing
of its inhabitants.
The control of the Palestinian Authority (P.A.) over Palestinian population
centers is frequently nominal at best, and conditions of lawlessness
prevail in some areas of the Gaza Strip and the northern West Bank.
Palestinian gunmen carried out lethal attacks against persons alleged to
have collaborated with Israeli security forces, and political rivalries
sometimes erupted into clashes between armed factions and attacks on
PA officials and offices.
Unlawful Use of Force
The Israeli army and security forces carried out numerous attacks in
Palestinian areas over the course of 2004. These were most intense and
extensive in the Gaza Strip, and were often carried out in a manner that
failed to demonstrate that the attackers had used all feasible measures to
avoid or minimize harm to civilians and their property. Human Rights
Watch documented serious violations of international humanitarian law
in the course of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) May 2004 assault in
the southern Gaza town and refugee camp of Rafah, in which over two  hundred homes, along with cultivated fields, roads, and other infrastructure,
were razed without regard to military necessity. Israeli forces also
continued to use lethal force in an excessive or indiscriminate manner.
On May 19, 2004, for instance, during the Rafah incursions, an Israeli
tank and helicopter gunship fired on a crowd of demonstrators, killing
nine persons, including three children. In late September 2004, Israel
launched a massive incursion into the northern Gaza Strip. Around 130
Palestinians were killed, more than a quarter of them children. One
thirteen-year-old girl, Imam al-Hams, was shot twenty times by an
Israeli officer. Several children were killed in their classrooms in other
incidents.
There were also numerous instances in the West Bank of civilians killed
by indiscriminate Israeli gunfire, such as the deaths in Nablus in June
2004 of Dr. Khaled Salah, a lecturer at Najah University, and his sixteen-
year-old son. Israel has failed to investigate suspicious killings and
serious injuries by its security forces, including killings of children, thus
continuing to foster an atmosphere of impunity.
While in 2004 the number of Palestinian suicide bombings and similar
attacks targeting civilians inside Israel dropped considerably compared
to immediately preceding years, neither the Palestinian Authority nor
the armed groups responsible have taken any serious steps to act against
those who ordered or organized such attacks. Palestinian armed groups
in the Gaza Strip on numerous occasions fired so-called Qassam rockets,
an inherently indiscriminate home-made weapon, at illegal Jewish
settlements in the Gaza Strip as well as at communities on the Israeli
side of the border. Qassam rockets killed a man and a small child in the
border town of Sderot in June, and in a separate incident killed two
small children in the same town in September. In August 2004 gunmen
apparently affiliated with the Hamas movement threw one or more
grenades into a cellblock in a P.A.-run prison that housed alleged collaborators,
and subsequently entered a Gaza City hospital to kill two of
those who had been seriously wounded in the grenade attack. In July 2004 gunmen attempted to assassinate Palestine Legislative Council
member Nabil Amr after he criticized PA President Yasir Arafat in a television
appearance; Amr was gravely wounded and doctors had to
amputate his leg.
Separation Barrier and Restrictions on Freedom of Movement
The government of Israel cites the significant decrease in suicide bombing
attacks in 2004 to buttress its claim that the separation barrier performs
a valid security function, but it fails to make the case that a barrier
constructed entirely on the Israeli side of the Green Line would
not have been at least as effective. The actual route, instead, is designed
to capture some 80 percent of the Jewish population now living in
illegal West Bank settlements, and the land and resources they control,
while government policy continues to support the expansion of settlements.
In the case of many Palestinian villages like Jayyous and Isla, the
barrier separates farmers from their agricultural land, greenhouses, olive
and citrus trees, and even water. Other Palestinians who find themselves
on the Israeli side of the barrier must have special permits to reside in
their own homes. By making movement and in some cases residence so
difficult, the barrier seems intended to encourage Palestinians to leave
for other areas of the West Bank, or even other countries.
In June 2004, Israels High Court of Justice ruled on a petition challenging
a forty-kilometer portion of the separation barrier, finding that
the route in this case violated the principle of proportionality because
the hardship and severe injury caused to the affected Palestinian population,
by separating them from the agricultural lands on which their
livelihoods depended, was excessive compared to the purported security
benefit. The injury caused by the barrier, the court wrote, is not limited
to the immediate inhabitants: The injury is of far wider scope. It is the
fabric of life of the entire population. The government responded that
it would revise thirty kilometers of the route in that area to meet the
objections of the court, but neither the court nor the government addressed the issue of proportionality as it pertained to other areas of
the barrier.
The following month, the International Court of Justice (ICJ), in an
advisory opinion responding to a request from the U.N. General
Assembly, held that the barrier is in violation of international humanitarian
law. The court wrote that Israel should cease construction of the
barrier on Palestinian territory, dismantle those portions already constructed
on Palestinian territory, and pay reparations for damage caused
by its construction there. However the construction of the barrier has
continued since the ICJ decision.
Israeli restrictions on freedom of movement in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip are so extensive as to constitute collective punishment, a serious
violation of international humanitarian law. These restrictions are the
result of the barrier, government-sponsored illegal settlements, the network
of Jewish-only roads that support them, and the more than 700
checkpoints that are frequently operated in an arbitrary manner. This
system of collective punishment is also in direct violation of Israels
obligation, as the occupying power, to provide to the extent possible for
the welfare of the population it controls.
Gaza Disengagement
The Israeli Cabinet adopted Prime Minister Sharons Gaza disengagement
plan on June 6, 2004, and the full Knesset gave its approval on
October 26. The plan calls for the withdrawal of Jewish settlers and the
redeployment of Israeli troops to posts on the Israeli side of the border
with Gaza, while Israel will retain control of Gazas borders, coastline,
and airspace. Israel is reserving the right to launch incursions into Gaza,
and will continue to control Gazas economy and trade, telecommunications,
water, electricity, and sewage networks. The plan explicitly envisions
the demolition of hundreds more homes along the Gaza-Egypt
border in order to expand the buffer zone there. The plan states that the disengagement will serve to dispel the claims regarding Israels
responsibility for the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. In fact, under
international humanitarian law, the steps envisioned will not end Israels
occupation of the territory, and Israel will retain responsibility for the
welfare of Gazas civilian population.
Key International Actors
Israel remains the largest bilateral recipient of United States military
and economic assistance, amounting to about U.S. $2.7 billion in Fiscal
Year 2004. The IDF continues to use U.S.-supplied weaponry in military
operations in the OPT, including Apache and Cobra helicopters, F-
16 fighter aircraft, and M-16 automatic weapons. Through the Foreign
Military Sales Program, Caterpillar Corporation supplies to Israel bulldozers
built to military specification which have been used to demolish
Palestinian homes and other civilian property in violation of international
humanitarian law. Public reactions by Bush administration officials
to reported Israeli violations of international humanitarian law
continued to emphasize Israels right of self-defense without clear reference
to international humanitarian law standards, and the U.S. took no
public steps to pressure Israel to meet its obligations under those standards.
In April 2004, during a visit of Prime Minster Sharon to
Washington, President Bush endorsed the Gaza disengagement plan
and voiced support for a West Bank final status in which Israel would
continue to control many of the illegal settlements constructed there.
Although the U.S. calls for a freeze on construction of illegal settlements,
in 2004 the administration declined to deduct from the U.S. $9
billion in loan guarantees awarded in 2003 any amount corresponding
to Israeli expenditures on settlements, as it had the previous year. There
were Israeli press reports in 2004 that some U.S. army units were training
at a special anti-terror school at an IDF base near Modiin.
In early May 2004, representatives of the QuartetUnited Nations
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Irish Foreign Minister Brian Cowen representing the presidency of the European Union, Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov, and U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powellmet
at the U.N. and issued a communiqu that, among other things, called
on Israel to exercise its legitimate right to self-defense within the
parameters of international humanitarian law and on the P.A. to take
immediate action against terrorist groups and individuals who plan and
execute such attacks.
Saudi Arabia
Human rights violations are pervasive in Saudi Arabia, an absolute
monarchy. Despite international and domestic pressures to implement
reforms, improvements have been halting and inadequate.
Many basic rights are not protected under Saudi law, political parties
are not allowed, and freedom of expression remains extremely limited.
In recent years, the government has carried out a campaign of harassment
and intimidation of Saudi Arabian human rights defenders and has
stifled all efforts to establish independent groups to monitor and report
on abuses.
Arbitrary detention, mistreatment and torture of detainees, restrictions
on freedom of movement, and lack of official accountability remain
serious concerns. The kingdom carried out some fifty executions in
2003; as of mid-November about fifteen executions had been carried
out so far in 2004. Saudi women continue to face serious obstacles to
their participation in the economy, politics, media, and society. Many
foreign workers face exploitative working conditions; migrant women
working as domestics often are subjected to round-the-clock confinement
by their employers, making them vulnerable to sexual abuse and
other mistreatment.
Media attention to political reform and government proclamations
regarding human rights have not led to changes in practices or
enhanced public access to information about rights violations. The
Saudi government established a national human rights commission in
2004, but it lacks independence.
Terror and Internal Security
Saudi Arabias internal security situation worsened in 2004. On May 12,
2003, nine suicide bombers killed themselves and twenty-six other people using car bombs when they attacked three compounds housing foreign
workers, mainly from other Arab countries. Since then, suicide
bombings, attacks with automatic weapons, and hostage-taking, mostly
directed against Western expatriate workers, have plagued the country.
The authorities claim to have killed or captured at least thirteen of the
twenty-six people they have identified as leading suspects in the attacks.
In March 2004 Deputy Interior Minister Prince Ahmad bin Abd al-Aziz
said that some security detainees had been convicted and are serving
prison sentences, while others remained under interrogation. The
prince declined to comment on the trials, or on why they were not public.
At this writing, authorities had released no additional information
about any trials of security detainees or alleged terrorists.
The Reform Movement and Arrests of Activists
2003 and 2004 saw a number of public petitions calling for reforms and
enhanced rights protections. In late January 2003, 104 Saudi Arabian
citizens sent a charter entitled Vision for the Present and the Future of
the Homeland to Crown Prince Abdullah, the countrys de facto ruler,
and other high-ranking officials. The charter urged comprehensive
reforms including guarantees of freedom of expression, association, and
assembly, and requested release or fair trials for political prisoners. The
crown prince received a group of the signatories, and in June 2003 convened
a national dialogue conference that invited religious scholars
from the countrys Muslim communities, including Shi`a and non-
Wahhabi Sunnis. A subsequent petition, in September 2003, criticized
the slow pace of reform and the absence of popular participation in
decision-making. Signed by 306 academics, writers, and businesspeople,
including fifty women, it advocated popular election of the 120-member
Consultative Council (members currently are appointed by the government)
and observed that lack of freedom of expression fosters the
growth of intolerance and extremism.
Crown Prince Abdullahs favorable disposition toward the reformers,
however, was not shared by others in the royal family. Minister of
Interior Prince Nayif in October 2003 dismissed calls for reform as
useless barking. When Saudi citizens, in an unprecedented initiative,
took to the streets on the October 14, 2003, during the opening of an
officially-sponsored human rights conference, security forces arrested
hundreds of demonstrators and forcibly dispersed the rest. About eighty
people were kept in detention for several months afterwards without
charge or trial, while others were sentenced to jail terms and floggings;
as of November 2004 most had reportedly been released.
On March 9, 2004, the government announced the establishment of a
National Human Rights Commission, comprised mainly of government
officials. In November members of the commission announced that
they had visited prison facilities, and were preparing a report for the
Interior Ministry. They were quoted in the Saudi media as saying that
in general conditions were good but that the prisons were badly overcrowded
and that approximately 80 percent of the inmate population
was non-Saudi.
March 2004 also saw the arrest of thirteen reformers who attempted to
circulate a petition calling for Saudi Arabia to become a constitutional
monarchy with an elected parliament. They also indicated their intent
to establish a human rights group independent of the government. All
but three were released within several weeks, evidently after agreeing to
halt their public petition efforts. The trial of the remaining three, who
declined to agree to those terms, began with a first public session on
August 9, 2004. The official Saudi Press Agency had earlier quoted an
unnamed interior ministry official as saying that the three had issued
statements which do not serve national unity or the cohesion of society
based on shari`a law. The official National Human Rights Commission
has not publicly commented on the case.
The government has twice postponed elections for half the members of
178 municipal councils around the country, at this writing scheduled for
February 2005. The remaining council members are to be appointed by
the government. Although the elections law states that all citizens twenty-
one and older are eligible to vote, and several women announced
their intention to stand for election, on October 10, 2004 Prince Nayif
bin Sultan, the minister of interior, ruled that out, saying, I dont think
that womens participation is possible.
On September 13, 2004, the Council of Ministers announced that the
government planned to enforce existing laws prohibiting all public
employees from participating, directly or indirectly, in the preparation
of any document, speech or petition, engaging in dialogue with local
and foreign media, or participating in any meetings intended to oppose
the states policies. Public employees, including academics, have been
among the signatories to recent reform petitions.
Womens Rights
Women in the kingdom suffer from severe discrimination and restrictions
in their freedom. The Committee for the Promotion of Virtue
and the Prevention of Vice, or the religious police, enforces strict
gender segregation and obliges women and girls to wear long black
cloaks and head coverings in public. Although some women hold professional
jobs at hospitals, schools, banks, offices, and elsewhere, they
still need written permission from a male relative to travel.
When women are mistreated or suffer violence at the hands of male relatives,
they often have no means for redress. Rania al-Baz, a presenter
on state-run Channel One television, raised the issue of domestic violence
in an unprecedentedly public way in April 2004 when she gave
press interviews from her hospital bed and released photos of her badly
bruised face after her husband had savagely beaten her. Her case galvanized public opinion and stimulated considerable debate about the
problem of spousal abuse.
Migrant Workers
Foreign workers in Saudi Arabia are estimated to number 8.8 million,
or a third of the countrys population, according to Minister of Labor
Ghazi al-Gosaibi. The majority comes from South and Southeast Asian
countries, such as India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Indonesia,
and the Philippines, but significant numbers of migrants also come
from countries such as Sudan and Egypt. They often face exploitative
working conditions, including twelve- to sixteen-hour workdays, often
without breaks or access to food and drink, lack of pay for months at a
time, and confinement to locked dormitories during their time off.
Many women migrants are employed as household domestic workers,
and are especially at risk for human rights abuses due to their isolation
in private homes and their exclusion from many employment protections.
Migrant workers NGOs in many Asian countries have documented
hundreds of cases in which such workers have suffered physical,
psychological, and sexual abuse, including rape, with little or no redress.
Foreign workers who are detained by the police face torture, prolonged
incommunicado detention, and forced confession. About two thirds of
the approximately fifty persons executed in Saudi Arabia in 2003 were
foreign nationals.
Key International Actors
The United States is a key ally of Saudi Arabia and a major trading
partner, although relations have been somewhat strained in the aftermath
of the September 11, 2001 attacks on New York and Washington,
D.C.. The presence of thousands of active duty U.S. military personnel
stationed in Saudi Arabia has been a major source of domestic opposition to the government, and the numbers have been reduced from
about 5,000 in early 2003 to around 500 by late 2004, although thousands
of U.S. personnel servicing military sales contracts remain in the
kingdom. In September 2004, for the first time, the State Departments
annual International Religious Freedom Report designated Saudi Arabia
as a country of particular concern. U.S. non-military merchandise
exports to Saudi Arabia were U.S. $4.6 billion in 2003, the last year for
which figures are available; exports of military and other services have
averaged U.S. $2 billion per year recently. Saudi Arabia is a major supplier
of oil to the United States and its allies. Saudi Arabian investments
in the U.S. were estimated to be around U.S. $250 billion in early 2003.
Saudi Arabia also maintains military ties with Britain and France.
Syria
A prominent businessman in Aleppo has characterized Syria as a society
in custody. Emergency rule imposed in 1963 remains in effect, and
the authorities continue to harass and imprison human rights defenders
and other non-violent critics of government policies. The government
strictly limits freedom of expression, association, and assembly, and
treats ethnic minority Kurds as second-class citizens. Women face legal
as well as societal discrimination and have little means for redress when
they become victims of rape or domestic violence.
In a positive development, the government released more than one
hundred long-time political prisoners in 2004, bringing to more than
seven hundred the number of such prisoners freed by President Bashar
al-Asad since he came to power in June 2000. Thousands of political
prisoners, however, reportedly still languish in Syrias prisons.
Arbitrary Arrest and Detention, Torture, and Disappearances
Syria has a long record of arbitrary arrests, systematic torture, prolonged
detention of suspects, and grossly unfair trials. Thousands of
political prisoners, many of them members of the banned Muslim
Brotherhood and the Communist Party, remain in detention. In recent
years, dozens of people suspected of being connected to the Muslin
Brotherhood have been arrested upon their voluntary or forced return
home from exile.
The London-based Syrian Human Rights Committee (SHRC) has
alleged that several political prisoners died in custody in 2004 as a result
of torture. While hundreds of long-term political prisoners have been
released in recent years, many remain in detention even after serving
their full prison sentences. The SHRC estimates that about four thousand
political prisoners remain in detention in Syria today. The authorities have refused to divulge information regarding numbers or names of
people in detention on political or security-related charges.
The government has never acknowledged responsibility for an estimated
17,000 personsLebanese citizens and stateless Palestinianswho
were disappeared in Lebanon in the early 1990s and are known or
believed to be imprisoned in Syria.
Arrests of Human Rights Activists and Political Critics
Human rights activists continue to be a frequent target of the government.
In April 2004 the authorities arrested Aktham Nuaisse, the fiftythree-
year old head of the Committees for the Defense of Democratic
Liberties and Human Rights in Syria after he organized a peaceful
demonstration outside the parliament building calling for an end to
emergency rule. He was released on bail in mid-August and permitted
to travel abroad, but at this writing still faces charges under Syrias
emergency law, including opposing the objectives of the revolution.
Dr. Arif Dalila, a prominent economics professor and one of many
imprisoned critics of the government, continues to serve a ten-year
prison term imposed in July 2002 for his non-violent criticism of government
policies. Mamoun al-Homsi, a democracy activist and former
member of parliament, is currently serving a five-year jail term for
attempting to change the constitution. Five men remained in detention
in late 2004 after being arrested more than a year earlier for downloading
material critical of the government from a banned Web site and
e-mailing it to others.
Discrimination and Violence Against Kurds
On March 12, 2004, a clash between supporters of rival Kurd and Arab
soccer teams in Qamishli, a largely Kurdish city near the border with
Turkey, left several dead and many injured. The following day, Kurds vandalized shops and offices during a funeral for the riot victims, and
the violence spread to nearby areas. Police responded with live ammunition,
killing at least two dozen people, injuring hundreds, and arresting
many hundreds more. Human Rights Watch has received credible
information that some of those detained were tortured in custody, and
at least two of them reportedly died in detention.
Kurds are the largest non-Arab ethnic minority in Syria, comprising
about 10 percent of Syrias population of 18.5 million, and have long
called for reforms to address systematic discrimination, including the
arbitrary denial of citizenship to an estimated 120,000 Syria-born
Kurds. In June 2004 the authorities reportedly warned leaders of two
unrecognized Kurdish political parties that no independent political
activities would be tolerated.
Discrimination against Women
Syrias constitution guarantees equality for men and women, and many
women are active in public life, but personal status laws as well as the
penal code contain provisions that discriminate against women. The
penal code allows for the suspension of legal punishment for a rapist if
he chooses to marry his victim, and provides leniency for so-called
honor crimes, such as assault or killing of women by male relatives for
alleged sexual misconduct. Punishment for adultery for women is twice
that for men. A husband also has a right to request that his wife be
banned from traveling abroad, and divorce laws are discriminatory.
The government keeps no statistics regarding gender-based crimes such
as domestic violence and sexual assault against women, although nongovernmental
organizations say that domestic violence is common and
that the government does not do enough to combat it or provide for
victims. 
Key International Actors
In May 2004, following U.S. Congressional passage of the Syria
Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty Act, President Bush banned
exports of goods to Syria and Syrian commercial flights to the United
States, and froze assets of certain Syrian individuals and government
entities. The law, in authorizing such sanctions, cited Syrias hosting of
Palestinian militant groups, its support for Lebanons Hizballah organization,
its military presence in Lebanon, its purported efforts to develop
chemical and biological weapons, and its alleged support for anti-U.S.
forces in Iraq.
In September 2002, the United States forcibly transferred Maher Arar,
a dual Canadian-Syrian national whom the U.S. government alleges to
have ties with al-Qaeda to Syria, despite Syrias long record of torturing
detainees to extract confessions. Arar was arrested in September 2002
while traveling from Tunisia to Canada through New Yorks Kennedy
Airport. U.S. immigration authorities flew Arar to Jordan, where he was
handed over to Syrian authorities, despite his repeated statements to
U.S. officials that he would be tortured in Syria. After he was released
without charge ten months later and allowed to return to Canada, Arar
alleged that he had been tortured repeatedly with cables and electrical
cords by Syrian interrogators. In January 2004, Arar filed suit in U.S.
federal court alleging violations of the Torture Victim Protection Act.
A Syrian-born German national, Muhammad Haydar Zammar, was
arrested in Morocco in November 2001 and secretly transferred to
Syria, reportedly with the assistance of the United States. He is said to
be in solitary confinement in a tiny underground cell in the Palestine
Branch of Military Intelligence headquarters in Damascus, where torture
and ill-treatment are reportedly common.
The European Commission and Syria initialed an Association
Agreement in October 2004 which will be signed in early 2005 and then sent to the parliaments of all European Union member states and the
European Parliament for ratification. The text stipulates that Syria must
implement all international non-proliferation accords and that respect
for human rights and democratic principles constitutes an essential
element of the agreement. No E.U. member state appeared at this
writing to have called attention to the discrepancy between Syrias practices
and the human rights provision of the agreement.
In September 2004, France joined the U.S. to co-sponsor U.N. Security
Council Resolution 1559, which demands that outside powersi.e.,
Syriawithdraw their military forces from Lebanon.
Tunisia
Tunisias intolerance for political dissent continued in 2004. The ruling
party, the Constitutional Democratic Assembly, dominates political life,
and the government continues to use the threat of terrorism and religious
extremism as a pretext to crack down on peaceful dissent. The
rights of freedom of expression and freedom of association are severely
restricted. Critics of the government are frequently harassed or imprisoned
on trumped-up charges after unfair trials. Following the conditional
release of some eighty political prisoners in early November,
about four hundred remained incarcerated, nearly all suspected
Islamists. There are constant and credible reports of torture and illtreatment
used to obtain statements from suspects in custody.
Sentenced prisoners also face deliberate ill-treatment. During 2004, as
many as forty political prisoners were held in prolonged and arbitrary
solitary confinement; some had spent most of the past decade in isolation.
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali won re-election for a fourth five-year
term on October 24 by 94.5 percent of the vote, having gotten the constitution
amended in April 2002 in order to remove the previous threeterm
limit. The same amendment also granted permanent immunity to
the head of state for any acts connected with official duties. Two of Ben
Alis three opponents endorsed the incumbent. Authorities prevented
the only genuine opposition candidate, Mohamed Halouani, from printing
and distributing his electoral platform. Halouanis supporters were
permitted to hold a protest march in Tunis on October 21, 2004 the
first such public opposition rally in recent memory. Halouani received
less than 1 percent of the vote, according to the official tally. Several
other parties boycotted the elections as unfair. The ruling party captured
all of the 152 district seats in parliament  thirty-seven additional
seats are reserved for members of other parties  ensuring the continuation
of a rubber-stamp legislature.
Human Rights Defenders
Tunisias two leading human right organizations operate in a legal
limbo. The Tunisian Human Rights League (Ligue Tunisienne des
droits de lHomme, LTDH), founded in 1977, remains under a court
decision nullifying the 2000 election of an outspoken executive committee.
In the case of the six-year-old National Council on Liberties in
Tunisia (Conseil National pour les Liberts en Tunisie, CNLT), the
government rejected its application for legal recognition. Other, newer
human rights organizations have applied but failed so far to get legal
approval, including the International Association for Solidarity with
Political Prisoners, the Center for the Independence of Judges and
Lawyers, and the Association to Fight Torture in Tunisia.
Human rights defenders, like dissidents generally, are subject to heavy
police surveillance, sporadic travel bans, dismissals from work, interruptions
in phone service, and police harassment of spouses and family
members. Human rights lawyers and activists have been assaulted on
the street by plainclothes security personnel acting with complete
impunity. Sihem Ben Sedrine, a founder of the CNLT and editor of the
dissident magazine Kalima, was assaulted and punched by unidentified
men outside her home in downtown Tunis on January 5, 2004. On
October 11, former political prisoner Hamma Hammami, whose party
urged the boycott of the October 24 presidential elections, reported
being assaulted in Ben Arous by men in plainclothes who punched him
and broke his glasses. The property of human rights activists and dissidents
has been subject to vandalism, and their homes, offices, and cars
to suspicious break-ins.
The Justice System
The Tunisian judiciary lacks independence. Judges frequently turn a
blind eye to torture allegations and procedural irregularities, convicting
defendants solely or predominantly on the basis of confessions secured under duress. For example, a Tunis court on April 6, 2004, sentenced
six men from Zarzis in the south of the country to nineteen-year prison
terms for plotting terrorist attacks. The defendants claimed they had
been tortured into confessing and into implicating each other and that
the police had falsified the place and date of their arrest. The judge
refused to investigate these allegations, even though these confessions
constituted the main piece of evidence in the file. On July 6, an appeals
court reduced the sentences to thirteen years.
The government uses the courts to convict and imprison non-violent
critics of its policies. Jalal Zoghlami, editor of the unauthorized leftist
magazine Kaws el-Karama, and his brother Nejib, were jailed on
September 22, 2004, after a disturbance in a Tunis caf that they claim
was staged by police agents. They were sentenced on November 4 to
eight months actual time in prison for damaging property. Former
political prisoner Abdullah Zouari served out a nine-month prison term
imposed in August 2003, after a rushed and politically motivated prosecution.
Zouari had earlier that month helped a Human Rights Watch
researcher to meet families in southern Tunisia.
Tunisians residing outside of the country have been arrested while visiting
Tunisia and imprisoned for political activities that were not crimes
in the countries where they took place. Salem Zirda, whom a Tunisian
court convicted in 1992 in absentia for nonviolent political offenses, was
arrested upon his return to Tunisia in 2002. On June 29, 2004, a Tunis
military court sentenced him to seven years in prison. The evidence
presented at the trial suggests he was prosecuted solely for nonviolent
association while abroad with Nahdha party members.
Tunisias policy of placing some political prisoners in strict, long-term
solitary confinement is one of the harshest holdovers from the severe
prison regime of the 1990s. Authorities generally provide no official
explanation to prisoners why they are being segregated, for how long,
or how they may appeal the decision. The isolation policy as it is practiced violates Tunisian law as well as international penal standards, and
in some instances may rise to the level of torture.
The government has not allowed independent observers to inspect prisons
since 1991. An April 20, 2004 statement by Minister of Justice and
Human Rights Bchir Tekkari hinted that Tunisia might accept prison
visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), but as
of late November 2004 no accord with the ICRC had been announced.
Media Freedom
Tunisias press remains largely controlled by the authorities. None of
the print and broadcast media offer critical coverage of government
policies, apart from a few low-circulation independent magazines that
face occasional confiscation of their issues or problems at the printers.
During the campaign for presidential and legislative elections in
October 2004, all of the major media accorded disproportionate and
highly favorable coverage to Ben Ali and the ruling party candidates,
while giving limited space to candidates of other parties.
The governments rhetoric promotes electronic communication as a
vehicle of modernization, yet it blocks certain political or human rights
websites. In 2002, the authorities arrested Zouheir Yahiaoui, editor of a
webzine that ridiculed President Ben Alis rule. He was released in
November 2003 after serving most of his two-year sentence on
trumped-up charges. Given Tunisias systematic suppression of a free
media, and limits on the Internet in particular, human rights organizations
have criticized Tunisias designation as host to the World Summit
on the Information Society in November 2005.
Counterterrorism Measures
Following the attacks in the United States on September 11, 2001,
Tunisian authorities claimed that they had long been in the forefront of combating terrorism and extremism, alluding to their long-running
crackdown against the once-tolerated Islamist Nahdha movement.
Since 1991, the one deadly terrorist attack to occur in Tunisia was the
April 2002 truck bomb that targeted a synagogue on the island of
Djerba. The suicide bomber was Tunisian, and al-Qaida claimed
responsibility for the attack.
In December 2003, Tunisia adopted an anti-terror law containing a
broad definition of terrorism that could be used abusively to prosecute
persons for peaceful exercise of their right to dissent. The law provides
harsh penalties and allows for the referral of civilian suspects to military
courts.
Key International Actors
The United States actively monitors human rights conditions in
Tunisia, but its criticism of those conditions has been undercut somewhat
by Washingtons persistent praise for President Ben Alis counterterrorism
conduct. Still, Secretary of State Colin Powell, after he met
with President Ben Ali in December 2003, spoke publicly about the
need for for more political pluralism and openness and a standard of
openness that deals with journalists being able to do their work. In
February 2004, when President Ben Ali visited Washington, President
Bush publicly expressed the desire to see in Tunisia a press corps that
is vibrant and free, as well as an open political process. However, the
administrations public expression of disappointment with the lack of
genuine contestation in the October 24 elections was exceedingly mild.
Tunisias Association Agreement with the European Union continued in
force, despite the countrys poor human rights record. While E.U. officials
have conveyed concern about Tunisias human rights conditions,
they have yet to suggest that violations would jeopardize the agreement.
President Jacques Chirac of France remained Europes staunchest supporter
of President Ben Ali. On a visit in December 2003, he deflected
concerns over political and civil rights by declaring that the first
rights were food, medical care, housing, and education, and praising
Tunisias achievements in this regard. President Chirac sent his Tunisian
counterpart a message of congratulations immediately after his victory
in the patently unfair elections of October 24.
United States
The United States has long been proud of its commitment to the rule
of law, its constitutional system of checks and balances, the independence
of its judiciary, and its democratic political culture. The picture has
never been perfectthe legacy of institutionalized discrimination that
followed in slaverys wake is the most obvious example of flawsbut the
United States has long seen itself to be, and in many places has been
perceived to be, an effective advocate for human rights worldwide and
one that practices much of what it preaches.
Its record at home and overseas in 2004most notably the governments
use of coercive interrogation and disregard for the Geneva
Conventions in its treatment of detainees in Afghanistan, Iraq, and
Guantanamo Bay, exemplified by the images of torture from Abu
Ghraib prisonhave undermined that reputation. The Bush administrations
efforts to expand executive power at the expense of judicial and
legislative oversight in its approach to counterterrorism also continue to
jeopardize long-established civil and political rights in the United
States.
A vibrant and diverse group of nongovernmental organizations work in
the United States on a wide range of domestic human rights concerns.
As reflected in the summary below, Human Rights Watchs work on
domestic U.S. rights practices currently focuses on the human rights
implications of the Bush administrations counterterrorism measures
and continuing rights violations in the U.S. criminal justice system.
Counterterrorism and Human Rights
The Bush administration still refuses to apply fundamental rights protections
found in U.S. and international law to persons apprehended in
its global campaign against terrorism. It refuses to apply either laws of
war or human rights standards to the more than five hundred men at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, who have been held, many since 2002, in longterm
indefinite and largely incommunicado detention; it has begun proceedings
to try terrorist suspects before military commissions that do
not meet fair trial standards; it has sought to block the most basic due
process protections to U.S. citizens detained on presidential order as
enemy combatants; and it has sent or assisted in the return of individuals
to countries where they face torture.
Guantanamo Bay and Enemy Combatant Detentions
Some 550 men remain detained at Guantanamo Bay, many held since
2002, in long-term indefinite and largely incommunicado detention.
The United States had insisted that detained enemy combatants had
no right to judicial review of their detention. In June, 2004, however,
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that U.S. courts had jurisdiction to hear
cases by the Guantanamo detainees and that those held by the United
States must be afforded a meaningful opportunity to contest their
detention before a neutral decision maker.
In response to the Supreme Court rulings, the Pentagon quickly instituted
Combatant Status Review Tribunals (CSRTs) to assess whether
each Guantanamo detainee is an enemy combatant. This one-time
administrative review has no basis in U.S. or international law, and is
being used by the administration to justify the detention of persons
who, absent evidence of criminal wrongdoing or violation of the laws of
war, should have been released at the conclusion of active hostilities
between the United States and the Taliban government in 2002.
Detainees who have sought to contest their status before the CSRTs
have not been able to bring in outside witnesses (other than other
Guantanamo detainees) or be represented by counsel, and the process
does not guarantee that they can see all of the evidence against them. As
of late November 2004, CRSTs had reviewed 401 cases; final action was
announced in 144 cases and only one detainee was deemed to be a nonenemy
combatant and released.
During 2004, former Guantanamo detainees (some 150 have been
released since the first prisoners were brought from Afghanistan in
January 2002) alleged that interrogation methods included prolonged
periods of painful stress positions, exposure to extreme cold and loud
music, and threats of torture and death. They said they had been subjected
to weeks and even months in solitary confinementat times
either suffocatingly hot or cold from excessive air conditioningas
punishment for failure to cooperate during interrogations or for violations
of prison rules.
U.S. officials have publicly acknowledged that interrogation techniques
at Guantanamo have included the use of stress positions, isolation, and
removal of clothing, but have refused to allow human rights organizations
that report publicly, including Human Rights Watch, to examine
conditions at Guantanamo or interview detainees. According to press
reports in November, the International Committee of the Red Cross
told the U.S. government in confidential reports that its treatment of
detainees has involved psychological and physical coercion that is tantamount
to torture.
During 2004, three menincluding two U.S. citizenscontinued to be
held incommunicado and without charges, having been designated
enemy combatants by President Bush. After the Supreme Court ruled
that one, Yasser Hamdi,was entitled to his day in court, the U.S. government
and his attorneys negotiated his release and return to Saudia
Arabia (he had joint U.S. and Saudi citizenship). The United States
continues to insist in court that it has the authority to detain indefinitely
without charges the two others, Jose Padilla and Ali-Saleh Kahlah al-
Marri.
The U.S. also has disappeared at least eleven high-level al-Qaeda suspects,
holding them in undisclosed locations worldwide; some reportedly
have been tortured. It has also facilitated or participated directly in
the transfer of an unknown number of people to countries in the Middle East where torture is routine. (See Darfur and Abu Ghraib, in
this volume.)
Military Commissions
In August 2004, the military began legal proceedings before newly created
military commissions against four Guantanamo detainees, the first
to be charged with crimes. The commissions, authorized by a
November 2001 order by President Bush, are fatally flawed in design
and practice. They permit the executive branch broad powers as prosecutor,
judge, and jury without any civilian judicial oversight. They
sharply limit a defendants rights to present a defense, including by
allowing the use of evidence that the accused may not see nor confront.
And they do not require that those sitting in judgment have any legal
training: in the initial hearings, the panel members, only one of whom
was a lawyer, were not familiar with basic concepts of criminal law, let
alone the complex international law issues at stake. Poor translations by
U.S. government interpreters made a mockery of hearings and raised
further fair trial concerns.
In November 2004, a federal district court ordered a halt in proceedings
in one of the commission cases. The court ruled the case was
improperly before a military commission because of the militarys failure
to determine the defendants legal status under the Geneva
Conventions and because commission rules of evidence violated fair
trial standards.
Material Witness Detentions
The U.S. government continues to misuse a federal material witness law
to secretly arrest and detain Muslim men in the U.S. indefinitely without
charge. This law was enacted to enable authorities to temporarily
detain a witness when his or her testimony is critical to a criminal proceeding
and the individual is likely to flee if not detained. Since September 11, the government has used the law to incarcerate terrorism
suspects while investigations into their activities continue. The Justice
Department still refuses to disclose the number of material witnesses it
has held in connection with the war on terror or any details about them,
citing national security concerns and grand jury rules.
On May 12, 2004, the government detained as a material witness U.S.
citizen Brandon Mayfield, an Oregon attorney and Muslim convert who
the government believed was linked to the March 11 Madrid bombing.
A month later, authorities released Mayfield when they learned that the
allegations against him were based on a faulty match of fingerprints
recovered from the bombing site. In November, an international panel
of scientists, commissioned by the FBI and led by the chief of the FBIs
Quality Control unit to review the Mayfield case, strongly criticized the
FBI for an institutional culture that discouraged fingerprint examiners
from disagreeing with their superiors, blaming the faulty match on such
pressures rather than technological failures, the explanation originally
given by the FBI.
Immigration
Congressional and executive efforts to curtail the rights of immigrants
through new legislation and administrative policies continued unabated
throughout 2004. Non-citizens face violations of their right to seek asylum,
to be free from arbitrary detention, to defend against their deportation
when it will result in separation from their U.S. citizen children
or other close family members, and to be afforded full and fair deportation
hearings.
The United States has for many years used a unique preliminary asylum
screening process for Haitians fleeing their country who have been
interdicted at sea. This rudimentary policy fails to guarantee fair access
to screening for Haitians who fear being returned to a place where their
lives or freedom are threatened. Haitians fleeing their country following the exile of Haitian President Aristide on February 29, 2004 were sent
back in record numbers. By October 2004, 3229 had been interdicted at
sea. Only ten were found to be refugees. As of this writing, they are
confined to the U.S. Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, contrary to
international standards limiting restrictions on the free movement of
refugees. The U.S. government is searching for other countries that will
take them in.
In December 2003, the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of
Justice issued a report on the treatment in detention of non-citizens
arrested after the September 11 attacks because of suspected links to
terrorism. The report confirmed Human Rights Watchs findings in
2002 that some of the detainees had been physically abused. According
to the Inspector General, guards in the federal Metropolitan Detention
Center in Brooklyn maliciously slammed detainees against walls, twisted
their fingers and wrists, and jerked their restraints to make the detainees
fall. None of the detainees were indicted for crimes related to the
September 11 attacks. Most were eventually deported for ordinary visa
violations.
The U.S. has continued to adopt new immigration policies based on an
assumed link between non-citizens and terrorism. In June 2004, the
Department of Homeland Security announced that it would begin subjecting
every undocumented non-citizen within 160 miles of the
Mexican or Canadian border to expedited procedures to determine
whether they are legally present. If not, they are immediately deported
without a hearing.
The new policy has raised concerns about the training and capacity of
border agents to assess the legal status of non-citizens and the viability
of their asylum claims. A U.N. report leaked to the New York Times in
August 2004 revealed that similar expedited procedures, in place at U.S.
airports since 1996, have resulted in some non-citizens being harassed and intimidated, discouraged from seeking asylum, and interviewed
without translators by airport inspectors ignorant of asylum law.
Criminal Justice
Despite steadily dropping crime rates, harsh sentencing policies continue
to fuel the expansion of the nations jail and prison population, which
reached a new high of 2.2 million in 2003. The United Stateswhich
has less than 5 percent of the worlds populationholds nearly 23 percent
of the worlds prisoners. Racial disparities in the criminal justice
system remain pronounced and minor drug offenses continue to constitute
a significant number of total arrests.
In response to escalating prison costs, some states have begun instituting
sentencing reforms to reduce prison populations, but there is still
considerable resistance. In California, for example, voters in November
2004 rejected an initiative to reform the states infamous three strikes
law, which imposes a mandatory life sentence on anyone who commits
a third criminal offense, even a minor one such as petty theft.
Prisons generally fail to provide safe and humane conditions of confinement
or adequate rehabilitative services and programs for prisoners.
Prison rape remains a serious problem. The congressionally authorized
National Prison Rape Reduction Commission began working in 2004 to
document the problem and establish standards to eliminate it. Its work
complements other new federal efforts to develop reliable statistics on
the prevalence of prison rape, and to provide anti-rape grants and training
to prison authorities.
Some 16 percent of prisoners are mentally ill, and prison mental health
services are woefully deficient. In October 2004, Congress passed legislation
that will provide federal funds to help divert the mentally ill from
the criminal justice system and to improve their treatment when incarcerated.
Medical treatment of prisoners is substandard in many prisons. 
After several prisoners with HIV/AIDS died due to appalling living
conditions and negligent or incompetent medical care, the Alabama
Department of Corrections in June 2004 settled a lawsuit against it by
agreeing to improve the care and treatment of prisoners with
HIV/AIDS.
In his 2004 State of the Union address, President Bush declared:
America is the land of the second chanceand when the gates of the
prison open, the path ahead should lead to a better life. He proposed a
reentry initiative for the nearly 650,000 men and women returning each
year from state and federal prisons. Congress has introduced legislation
that would fund expanded access to treatment, transitional housing, and
other services to ease the transition from prison to home.
Federal and local public housing policies, however, exclude hundreds of
thousands of needy Americans because they have criminal records,
denying them the opportunity to obtain decent, stable, and affordable
housing. While such exclusions ostensibly protect existing tenants, the
policies are so arbitrary, overbroad, and harsh that they exclude persons
arrested for minor offenses and people who have turned their lives
around and remain law-abiding.
Close to 30 percent of HIV infections in the U.S. result from the sharing
of syringes by injection drug users. In every state, possession of
syringes for the purposes of injecting illegal drugs can be a crime,
restricting effective sterile syringe programs, such as needle exchange,
that reduce the spread of HIV. In 2004, needle exchange program volunteers
distributing clean syringes were arrested in at least two states
Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.
In the U.S. as well as internationally, the U.S. government continues to
promote HIV prevention programs that promote sexual abstinence and
marital fidelity, while censoring lifesaving information about condoms
as a means of HIV prevention. Funding for abstinence only programs has greatly increased during the Bush administration. A growing body
of evidence indicates these programs may actually increase HIV risk
among teens by discouraging use of condoms and other safe-sex measures.
Death Penalty
By mid-October, the U.S. had carried out forty-eight executions during
2004. Over 3,400 men and women were on death row at the end of the
year, including almost eighty juvenile offenders. The Supreme Court
heard arguments in October in a case that will decide the constitutionality
of the death penalty for juvenile offenders. Nineteen states and the
federal government have already set eighteen as the minimum age for
the death penalty. The Courts decision will determine whether the U.S.
will leave the company of Iran and China, which are among the few
states in the world that sentence juvenile offenders to death.
Five death row inmates were exonerated in 2004, bringing to 117 the
number of men released from death row since 1973 because of evidence
of their innocence. In August, a Louisiana death row inmate, Ryan
Matthews, convicted of murder in 1999, was cleared of all charges after
new DNA evidence exonerated him. Matthews is the fourteenth and
most recent death row inmate freed with the help of DNA evidence.
In October 2004, the Congress passed the Innocence Protection Act
(IPA) as part of a larger anti-crime bill. The IPA seeks to prevent
wrongful executions by raising the standards for adequate representation
in death penalty cases, providing greater access to post-conviction
DNA testing, and ensuring that those exonerated through DNA evidence
in federal cases receive compensation.
In March 2004, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled that the
U.S. had violated the rights of fifty-four Mexican nationals on death
row because they had not been informed of their right to talk to their consular officials after they were arrested, as required by the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations. The court rejected the U.S. argument
that the clemency process offered an adequate remedy and insisted
that the courts had to provide effective review of the convictions to
determine whether the violations caused actual prejudice to any of the
fifty-four men. The ICJ ruling did not affect other foreign nationals on
death row; Hung Thanh Le, a Vietnamese national, was executed in
Oklahoma despite his denial of consular notification. More than 120
foreign nationals from twenty-nine countries remain on death row in
the United States.
