Lea dership requires more than a big stick and a thick wallet. It also requires a
positive vision shared by others and conduct consistent with that vision.
The campaign against terrorism is no exception to this rule. The United States, as
a major target, has taken the lead in combating terrorism. But the global outpouring
of sympathy that followed the attacks of September 11, 2001 has given way to
growing reluctance to join the fight and even resentment toward the government
leading it.
How was this goodwill depleted so quickly? In part the cause is traditional
resentment of America and its role in the world—resentment which was softened
only temporarily by the tragedy of September 11. In part it is opposition to U.S.
policy in the Middle East. And in part it is growing disquiet that the means used to
fight terrorism are often in conflict with the values of freedom and law that most
people uphold and that U.S. President George W. Bush has said the United States
is defending.
Despite its declared policy of supporting human rights, Washington in fighting
terrorism has refused to be bound by human rights standards. Despite its tradition
at home of a government under law, Washington has rejected legal constraints
when acting abroad. Despite a constitutional order that is premised on the need to
impose checks and balances, Washington seems to want an international order that
places no limits on a nation’s use of power save its own avowed good intentions.
These attitudes jeopardize the campaign against terrorism. They also put at risk the
human rights ideal.
This is hardly to say that Washington is among the worst human rights offenders.
But because of the U.S. government’s extraordinary influence, its willingness to
compromise human rights to fight terrorism sets a dangerous precedent. Because
of the leadership role it so often has played in promoting human rights, the weakening
of its voice weighs heavily, particularly in some of the front-line countries in
the war against terrorism where the need for a vigorous defense of human rights is
great. For this reason, Human Rights Watch devotes much of the introduction to
this year’s World Report to highlighting this unfortunate trend in U.S. policy.
The European Union might have been expected to fill this leadership void.
Instead, its excessive preoccupation with achieving consensus, and other concerns,
frequently left it paralyzed. At a moment when Europe’s growing unity might have
enhanced its influence on human rights, the opposite occurred. Other voices, such
as the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, were also compromised by governments’
failure to require at least a modicum of interest in promoting human rights as a condition of membership. On many human rights issues, the burden of moving
forward fell on a handful of principled but less powerful governments acting
alone or in small groups, such as Mexico, Canada, and Senegal.
Despite these troubling trends, there were some positive developments in 2002.
The treaty to establish the International Criminal Court (ICC) went into effect,
launching a tribunal with global scope to prosecute anyone responsible for genocide,
war crimes, or crimes against humanity. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia began the long-awaited trial of former Yugoslav President
Slobodan Milosevic. After an intense campaign, a new treaty entered into force
banning the forced recruitment of children under the age of eighteen or their use
as combatants.
The people of East Timor gained their independence under an elected government,
a fitting retort to the severe repression they had faced under Indonesian rule.
Devastating civil wars ended in Angola (after twenty-seven years) and Sierra Leone
(after a decade). In Sierra Leone, a special court and a truth commission were established
to address atrocities of the recent past. Steps were also taken toward ending
vicious civil wars in Sri Lanka and Sudan, where cease-fires were in place after some
two decades of armed conflict.
African leaders made significant new commitments to transparent and
accountable government and respect for human rights with the creation of the
African Union and its adoption of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD). The Organization of American States applied the newly created Inter-
American Democratic Charter to thwart a coup attempt against a freely elected
government in Venezuela.
In the Middle East and North Africa, Egypt’s domestic courts convicted police
officers of torturing detainees to death, and the Court of Cassation for a second
time rebuffed a security court’s conviction of democracy activist Saadeddin Ibrahim.
In Algeria and Tunisia, activists and torture victims bypassed compromised
local courts to seek justice in France. In Bahrain, women voted and stood for office
in national assembly elections, a first in the Arabian Peninsula, and two local independent
human rights organizations were allowed to register. Saudi Arabia adopted
a criminal procedure code that prohibited torture and other ill-treatment and
provided for oversight of prisons to ensure against unlawful detentions. Turkey,
bidding to enter the European Union, abolished the death penalty and removed
restrictions on the use of the Kurdish language; despite past interventions, its
staunchly secular military accepted the electoral victory of a moderate political
party with Islamist roots.
Yet serious problems remained in many parts of the world, from the continued
killing of civilians in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to a surge of communal violence
in Gujarat, India; from the eruption of full-scale civil war in Nepal to continuing
atrocities during wars in Colombia, Chechnya, and the Democratic Republic
of Congo. There was a surge in large-scale deliberate attacks on civilians elsewhere
as well, including Russians in Moscow, Australians and others in Bali, Germans in
Tunisia, Israelis and Kenyans in Kenya, and French in Pakistan. Repressive dictatorships
remained in such places as Burma, China, Iraq, North Korea, Saudi Arabia,
and Vietnam. Industrialized governments continued to tighten their restrictions
on refugees while doing far too little to provide treatment and care for the fifty-five million Africans who are predicted to die prematurely of AIDS between 2000 and
2020.
U.S. POLICY AND THE CHALLENGE OF TERRORISM
Terrorism is antithetical to human rights. Its continuing spread in 2002 was
a major challenge. Because targeting civilians for violent attack is repugnant to
human rights values, the human rights movement has a direct interest in the
success of the anti-terrorism effort. Yet, Washington’s tendency to ignore human
rights in fighting terrorism is not only disturbing in its own right; it is dangerously
counter-productive. The smoldering resentment it breeds risks generating terrorist
recruits, puts off potential anti-terrorism allies, and weakens efforts to curb terrorist
atrocities.
Terrorism cannot be defeated from afar. Curbing terrorism requires the support
of people in the countries where terrorists reside. They are the people who
must cooperate with police inquiries rather than shield terrorist activity. They are
the people who must take the lead in dissuading would-be terrorists. But if they
see Washington embracing the governments that repress them, they will hardly be
inclined to help. Their reluctance only increases if their entire community is viewed
as suspect, as many people from the Middle East and North Africa now feel.
Clearly, Washington needs to take extra security measures. But the U.S. government
must also pay attention to the pathology of terrorism—the set of beliefs
that leads some people to join in attacking civilians, to believe that the ends justify
the means. A strong human rights culture is an antidote to this pathology, but in
too many places Washington sees human rights mainly as an obstacle to its goals.
Human rights and security are mutually reinforcing, but too often Washington
treats them as a zero-sum game.
Even at the height of the Cold War, the U.S. government understood the need
for a positive vision. It understood that the United States could not only be against
communism. It had to stand for democracy, even if at times that support was solely
rhetorical. Similarly, it will not work for the U.S. government today to be only
against terrorism. It will have to be in favor of the values that explain what is wrong
with attacking civilians—the values of human rights.
There have been hints of such a positive vision—in prominent parts of a speech
that President Bush gave at West Point, in June; in part of his administration’s new
National Security Strategy, released in September; and in the conditions for disbursing
increased international assistance (the Millennium Challenge Account),
announced in November. But this rhetorical embrace of human rights has translated
only inconsistently into U.S. conduct and foreign policy.
The sad irony is that for much of the past half century, the United States has
often been a driving force behind the expansion of the human rights ideal. It took
the lead in drafting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and building the
international human rights system, and it has lent its voice and influence on behalf
of human rights in many parts of the world. Even in 2002, the Bush administration
tried to advance human rights in places where the war on terrorism was not implicated,
such as Burma, Belarus, and Zimbabwe. It also recognized the connection between repression and terrorism, and to a limited extent tried to promote human
rights in some places that were more directly involved in the fight against terrorism,
such as Egypt and Uzbekistan.
Yet this long engagement on human rights has been compromised in three
important respects. First, in several key countries involved in the campaign against
terrorism, such as Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, even rhetorical U.S. support for
human rights has been rare—often nothing more than the State Department’s
once-a-year pronouncements in its global human rights report. Washington has
also shown little inclination to confront such influential governments as Russia,
China, and Israel that are using the fight against terrorism to cloak or intensify
repression aimed at separatist, dissident, or nationalist movements that are themselves
often abusive.
Second, even when the U.S. government does try to promote human rights, its
authority is undermined by its refusal to be bound by the standards it preaches to
others. From its rejection of the Geneva Conventions to its misuse of the “enemy
combatant” designation, from its threatened use of substandard military commissions
to its misuse of immigration laws to deny criminal suspects their rights,
Washington has waged war on terrorism as if human rights were not a constraint.
Third, Washington has intensely opposed the broader enforcement of international
human rights law, from the International Criminal Court to more modest
efforts to affirm or reinforce human rights norms. (Similar exceptionalism can
be seen in such matters as the administration’s rejection of the Kyoto Protocol on
global warming or its blocking of efforts to strengthen the Biological Weapons
Convention.) This opposition suggests a radical vision of world order. Certain
influential elements in the administration seem to view international law as an
unnecessary impediment—a set of rules that in the future might constrain the
United States in unforeseeable and inconvenient ways. Given America’s overwhelming
economic and military strength, they reasoned, U.S. interests are better
served by case-by-case negotiations.
But even American might has limits. Shared norms—of commerce, peace, or
human rights—are needed so that most governments voluntarily abide by them.
Pressure may still be needed to rein in recalcitrant governments, but an effective
global order depends on most governments living voluntarily by agreed-upon
rules. Even if the result is disappointing in a particular case, most governments
recognize that a system of law is in their interest over the long run. But that logic
breaks down if the superpower routinely exempts itself from the enforcement of
international law. If shared norms give way to relations built on power alone, the
world will revert to a pre-modern, Hobbesian order. That can hardly be in the longterm
interest of the United States or anyone else.
In 2002, Washington’s neglect of human rights was seen in its behavior in international
fora, its bilateral relations with other governments, and its own treatment
of terrorist suspects.
INTERNATIONAL FORA
At the multilateral level, the U.S. government consistently opposed any effort to enforce human rights standards. This posture was not entirely new. Both Democratic
and Republican administrations have always kept human rights treaties at
arm’s length. The U.S. government has never ratified half of the six leading human
rights treaties (including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women) as well as the leading treaty governing modern armed
conflict (the First Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949).
Even when the U.S. government has ratified a human rights treaty, it has done so in
a way that denies Americans the ability to enforce the treaty in any court, whether
international or domestic. Yet in 2002, this resistance to enforceable human rights
standards intensified.
It was on display at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the leading U.N.
human rights body. Mexico proposed a resolution that stressed the importance
of fighting terrorism consistently with human rights. The resolution did not
condemn any nation; it simply reaffirmed an essential principle. Yet Washington
opposed even this seemingly uncontroversial statement. It was joined by Algeria,
India, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia—hardly committed supporters of human rights.
Ultimately, Mexico withdrew the resolution. The U.N. General Assembly later
adopted a similar resolution by consensus after Washington failed to derail it.
The U.S. government similarly opposed efforts to strengthen the prohibition
against torture. It objected to a proposed new Optional Protocol to the Convention
Against Torture, which establishes a system for inspecting detention facilities where
torture is suspected—an important preventive measure. Yet, as a matter of policy,
the United States opposes torture and has even ratified the Torture Convention. If
Washington wants to avoid scrutiny under this new inspection procedure, it could
simply decide not to ratify the protocol, which, as its name suggests, is optional.
Its decision, instead, to try to deprive other nations of this added human rights
protection stems from an evident desire to avoid strengthening any international
human rights law that might even remotely be used to criticize its own conduct.
The torture protocol came to a vote before the U.N. General Assembly in December,
where the United States was one of only four governments to oppose it, against 127
supporters.
At the U.N. General Assembly Special Session on Children, in May, the U.S.
government sought to prevent any reference to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. The United States is the only country in the world not to have ratified
the treaty (other than Somalia, which has no recognized national government). The
special session—the highest level U.N. summit on children in a decade—presented
an important opportunity to reaffirm the rights contained in the convention. But
Washington objected to any mention of the concrete rights of children, preferring
vaguer reference to their “well-being.”
U.S. opposition to the enforcement of human rights standards was most extreme
in the case of the International Criminal Court. The court has numerous safeguards
to address Washington’s legitimate concern about politicized prosecutions. These
include narrowly defined crimes, extensive oversight by several independent panels
of judges, provision for impeachment of an abusive prosecutor by a mere majority
of the states party (most of which are democracies and close U.S. allies), and the
ability of a national government to avoid ICC prosecution altogether by conducting its own good-faith investigation and, if appropriate, prosecution. Moreover,
the ICC does not purport to exert jurisdiction over a suspect unless the suspect’s
government has ratified the court’s treaty or the suspect is alleged to have committed
a crime on the territory of a government that has ratified the treaty—both
long-accepted bases of jurisdiction.
Yet, the Bush administration declared a virtual war on the court. It repudiated
former U.S. President Bill Clinton’s signature on the ICC treaty. It threatened to
shut down U.N. peacekeeping unless U.S. participants in U.N.-authorized operations
were exempted from ICC jurisdiction. It threatened to cut off military aid to
governments unless they agreed never to deliver American suspects to the court.
And President Bush signed legislation authorizing military intervention to free
any American suspect held by the ICC—dubbed the “Hague Invasion Act.” With
occasional exceptions, the administration did not discourage governments from
ratifying the ICC treaty, and as of mid-December, eighty-seven governments had
joined the court—well above the sixty needed for the treaty to take effect. But the
U.S. government’s efforts to exempt Americans from investigation and prosecution
advanced a double standard that threatened to undermine the court’s legitimacy.
By these multilateral interventions, across a wide range of issues, the U.S. government
signaled that human rights standards are at best window-dressing. They
are fine, grand pronouncements, but their universal enforcement—enforcement
that might even indirectly affect the United States—is to be avoided. Such hypocrisy
only undermines these norms. It also undermines the credibility of the United
States as a proponent of human rights, whether in fighting terrorism or in combating
more traditional repression and abuse.
BILATERAL RELATIONS
In its bilateral relations, the U.S. government did make some efforts to promote
human rights while fighting terrorism. After September 11, for example, many
assumed that Washington’s already muted engagement on human rights issues in
the front line states of Central Asia would end; in fact, in some ways it intensified.
The U.S. military presence in Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan associated the
United States with these countries’ repressive policies—as did frequent presidential
summits and enhanced aid packages. And Washington consistently exaggerated
their progress toward reform to justify continued aid. But more often than in the
past, U.S. officials pressed the region’s leaders to release prisoners, respect media
freedoms, and allow civil society to function, in part due to more frequent interaction
at all levels between U.S. officials and governments in the region. The United
States also took its first limited steps to use its leverage with these countries to
promote human rights, canceling a high-level meeting with the Kazakh foreign
minister with the aim of freeing a Turkmen dissident detained on Kazakh soil, and
suspending a trade mission to Kyrgyzstan over its refusal to a allow an independent
printing press.
In Colombia, linked by Secretary of State Colin Powell to the global war on terrorism,
Washington also took several positive new steps—indicting top leaders of
Colombia’s paramilitary and guerrilla organizations who were implicated in grave human rights abuses as well as drug trafficking, canceling the U.S. visa of a senior
Colombian admiral linked to gross abuses, and suspending assistance to a Colombian
air force unit implicated in a serious violation of the laws of war. Once again,
the U.S. government exaggerated Colombia’s progress in meeting human rights
conditions attached to U.S. military aid, which continued to send mixed signals to
the Colombian military. Nevertheless, Washington’s actions sent a stronger message
than in the past that Colombia must break remaining ties between its armed
forces and abusive paramilitary groups.
Despite these positive examples, however, Washington’s support for human
rights in countries that were critical to the fight against terrorism was at best
inconsistent and at worst completely muted. Afghanistan, the primary focus of
anti-terrorism efforts in 2002, illustrated the problem. The removal of the highly
abusive Taliban raised the prospect of greater freedom for the Afghan people.
And if one judged by Kabul, the Afghan capital where international peacekeepers
patrolled, life had improved dramatically. But the U.S. government sought security
for the rest of the country on the cheap. It offered at best lukewarm support to the
deployment of international troops outside of Kabul (European governments were
equally reluctant) and took few meaningful steps to demobilize factional forces
or establish a professional Afghan army. Instead, it delegated security to resurgent
warlords and provided them with money and arms.
In some parts of the country, the consequences looked much like life under
the Taliban—a far cry from President Bush’s vow, reiterated in October, to help
Afghanistan “claim its democratic future.” For example, Ismail Khan, the Heratbased
warlord in western Afghanistan, stamped out all dissent, muzzled the press,
and bundled women back into their burqas. Those who resisted faced death threats,
detention, and sometimes even torture. Afghans who had taken refuge in Iran during
Taliban rule complained that they had been freer there than under Khan. Yet
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, during a visit to Herat in April, called
Khan an “appealing person.” Under growing pressure to address the violence and
insecurity outside of Kabul, the Bush administration announced in November that
it would send a small number of soldiers and civil affairs officers to Afghan regional
centers. This was a positive step, but one too small to end warlord abuses.
In Pakistan, General Pervez Musharraf pushed through constitutional amendments
that extended his presidential term by five years, arrogated to himself
the power to dissolve the elected parliament, and created a military-dominated
National Security Council to oversee civilian government. But when asked about
this disturbing trend, President Bush said in August, “My reaction about President
Musharraf, he’s still tight with us on the war against terror, and that’s what I
appreciate.” Only as an afterthought did President Bush also mention the importance
of democracy. With Washington supporting Pakistan’s military ruler and
the repressive warlords next door in Afghanistan, it should have been no surprise
that anti-American political parties were the big winners in October’s parliamentary
elections. Their victory as well in parallel local elections in the two provinces
bordering Afghanistan will particularly complicate U.S. efforts to apprehend any
residual Taliban and al-Qaeda forces in the area.
In Indonesia, an abusive military and allied militia have been major factors in
separatist and communal strife. The government’s inability to hold abusive military figures accountable has been a major cause of popular discontent. Military-sponsored
atrocities in East Timor in 1999 had led the United States to cut off some
military assistance. But with Indonesia seen as a major front in the battle against
terrorism, the Bush administration tried to resume military training, even though
little if any progress had been made in subjecting the military to the rule of law. The
administration also sought dismissal of a lawsuit brought in U.S. courts by victims
of military atrocities in Aceh who sought compensation from ExxonMobil for its
alleged complicity in the abuse. The administration justified its opposition to this
effort to enforce human rights in part out of its fear that Indonesia would retaliate
by stopping its cooperation in the war on terrorism.
Other U.S. allies in the war on terrorism received soft treatment for their human
rights abuses. Russian President Vladimir Putin faced only mild criticism of his
troops’ brutal behavior in Chechnya. Despite the Bush administration’s occasional
criticism of China’s conduct in its western Xinjiang province, where China has
long cracked down on the Turkic-speaking Uighur majority, the administration’s
decision to designate the small East Turkistan Islamic Movement as a terrorist organization
provided cover for Beijing’s repression of the country’s largest Muslim
minority. Despite ongoing abuses by the Israeli military in fighting armed Palestinian
groups and their suicide bombings, Washington frequently shielded Israel from
international pressure and continued to supply it unconditionally with weapons
and military assistance. Because Malaysian Prime Minister Mahatir bin Mohamad
was outspoken in support of the campaign against terrorism, Washington also
muted its criticism of his government, whether for its use of administrative detention
or its continued detention on trumped-up charges of former Deputy Prime
Minister Anwar Ibrahim.
The overriding message sent by these U.S. bilateral actions is that human rights
are dispensable in the name of fighting terrorism. That policy may provide greater
leeway for short-term security measures. But if an important aim is to build a culture
of human rights in place of the pathology of terrorism, it sent a terrible signal
to replace the values of respect for the life of every person with the view that the
ends justify the means.
U.S. TREATMENT OF TERRORIST SUSPECTS
Washington’s disregard for human rights standards could be found in its own
conduct as well. Historically, the United States has complied with the requirements
of international humanitarian law (the laws of war) with regard to belligerents
captured in the course of an armed conflict. The United States upheld international
standards in part out of recognition that they ultimately benefited U.S. soldiers
as well. But the Bush administration’s unjustifiably narrow reading of the 1949
Geneva Conventions effectively placed those captured abroad and detained at
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba in a type of legal black hole—a form of long-term arbitrary
detention at odds with international requirements. For instance, the Third Geneva
Convention provides that captured combatants are to be treated as prisonersof-
war until a “competent tribunal” determines otherwise. Under the standards
set out in the convention, the detainees who were former Taliban soldiers would almost certainly qualify as POWs, while most of the detainees who were members
of al-Qaeda probably would not. But the Bush administration refused to bring any
of the detainees before a tribunal and unilaterally asserted that none qualified as
POWs. By contrast, during the Gulf War, the United States convened more than one
thousand tribunals for captured combatants.
The administration’s flouting of international humanitarian law could not be
explained by the exigencies of fighting terrorism. Treating the detainees as POWs
would not have precluded the United States from interrogating them or prosecuting
them for committing terrorist acts or other atrocities. And POWs, like other
detained combatants, can be held without charge or trial until the end of the relevant
armed conflict.
The administration’s refusal to apply the Geneva Conventions seemed to stem in
part from its desire to minimize public scrutiny of its conduct. For instance, in the
absence of criminal prosecutions, the Geneva Conventions require that all detainees,
regardless of their status, be repatriated once “active hostilities” have ended. In
the case of at least the Taliban detainees, that would seem to require repatriation as
soon as the war with the Afghan government was over—that is, presumably, upon
the installation of Hamid Karzai as president. But by refusing to apply the Geneva
Conventions, the administration avoided making such a determination.
The U.S. government took custody of some detainees in suspect circumstances.
In October 2001, it sought the surrender of six Algerian men in Bosnia suspected
of planning attacks on Americans. After a three-month investigation, Bosnia’s
Supreme Court ordered the men’s release from custody for lack of evidence. When
rumors spread of U.S. efforts to seize the suspects anyway, Bosnia’s Human Rights
Chamber—which was established under the U.S.-sponsored Dayton peace accord
and includes six local and eight international members—issued an injunction
against their removal. Yet in January 2002, under pressure from Washington, the
Bosnian government ignored this legal ruling and delivered the men to U.S. forces,
who whisked them out of the country, reportedly to Guantánamo.
The line between war and law enforcement gained importance as the U.S.
government extended its military efforts against terrorism outside of Afghanistan
and Pakistan. In November, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency used a missile
to kill Qaid Salim Sinan al-Harethi, an alleged senior al-Qaeda official, and five
companions as they were driving in a remote and lawless area of Yemen controlled
by tribal chiefs. Washington accused al-Harethi of masterminding the October
2000 bombing of the U.S.S. Cole which had killed seventeen sailors. Based on the
limited information available, Human Rights Watch did not criticize the attack on
al-Harethi as an extra-judicial execution because his alleged al-Qaeda role arguably
made him a combatant, the government apparently lacked control over the area
in question, and there evidently was no reasonable law enforcement alternative.
Indeed, eighteen Yemeni soldiers had reportedly been killed in a prior attempt to
arrest al-Harethi. However, the U.S. government made no public effort to justify
this use of its war powers or to articulate the legal limits to such powers. It is Human
Rights Watch’s position that even someone who might be classified as an enemy
combatant should not be subject to military attack when reasonable law enforcement
means are available. The failure to respect this principle would risk creating a
huge loophole in due process protections worldwide. It would leave everyone open almost certainly qualify as POWs, while most of the detainees who were members
of al-Qaeda probably would not. But the Bush administration refused to bring any
of the detainees before a tribunal and unilaterally asserted that none qualified as
POWs. By contrast, during the Gulf War, the United States convened more than one
thousand tribunals for captured combatants.
The administration’s flouting of international humanitarian law could not be
explained by the exigencies of fighting terrorism. Treating the detainees as POWs
would not have precluded the United States from interrogating them or prosecuting
them for committing terrorist acts or other atrocities. And POWs, like other
detained combatants, can be held without charge or trial until the end of the relevant
armed conflict.
The administration’s refusal to apply the Geneva Conventions seemed to stem in
part from its desire to minimize public scrutiny of its conduct. For instance, in the
absence of criminal prosecutions, the Geneva Conventions require that all detainees,
regardless of their status, be repatriated once “active hostilities” have ended. In
the case of at least the Taliban detainees, that would seem to require repatriation as
soon as the war with the Afghan government was over—that is, presumably, upon
the installation of Hamid Karzai as president. But by refusing to apply the Geneva
Conventions, the administration avoided making such a determination.
The U.S. government took custody of some detainees in suspect circumstances.
In October 2001, it sought the surrender of six Algerian men in Bosnia suspected
of planning attacks on Americans. After a three-month investigation, Bosnia’s
Supreme Court ordered the men’s release from custody for lack of evidence. When
rumors spread of U.S. efforts to seize the suspects anyway, Bosnia’s Human Rights
Chamber—which was established under the U.S.-sponsored Dayton peace accord
and includes six local and eight international members—issued an injunction
against their removal. Yet in January 2002, under pressure from Washington, the
Bosnian government ignored this legal ruling and delivered the men to U.S. forces,
who whisked them out of the country, reportedly to Guantánamo.
The line between war and law enforcement gained importance as the U.S.
government extended its military efforts against terrorism outside of Afghanistan
and Pakistan. In November, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency used a missile
to kill Qaid Salim Sinan al-Harethi, an alleged senior al-Qaeda official, and five
companions as they were driving in a remote and lawless area of Yemen controlled
by tribal chiefs. Washington accused al-Harethi of masterminding the October
2000 bombing of the U.S.S. Cole which had killed seventeen sailors. Based on the
limited information available, Human Rights Watch did not criticize the attack on
al-Harethi as an extra-judicial execution because his alleged al-Qaeda role arguably
made him a combatant, the government apparently lacked control over the area
in question, and there evidently was no reasonable law enforcement alternative.
Indeed, eighteen Yemeni soldiers had reportedly been killed in a prior attempt to
arrest al-Harethi. However, the U.S. government made no public effort to justify
this use of its war powers or to articulate the legal limits to such powers. It is Human
Rights Watch’s position that even someone who might be classified as an enemy
combatant should not be subject to military attack when reasonable law enforcement
means are available. The failure to respect this principle would risk creating a
huge loophole in due process protections worldwide. It would leave everyone open to being summarily killed anyplace in the world upon the unilateral determination
by the United States (or, as the approach is inevitably emulated, by any other government)
that he or she is an enemy combatant.
The appropriate line between war and law enforcement was crossed in the case
of Jose Padilla, a U.S. citizen who the Bush administration claimed had flown from
Pakistan to the United States to investigate creating a radiological bomb. The Bush
administration arrested him as he arrived in the United States, but instead of charging
him with this serious criminal offense and bringing him to trial, it unilaterally
declared him an “enemy combatant.” That designation, it claimed, permitted it to
hold him without access to counsel and without charge or trial until the end of the
war against terrorism, which may never come. With no link to a discernible battlefield,
that assertion of power, again, threatens to create a giant exception to the most
basic criminal justice guarantees. Anyone could be picked up and detained forever
as an “enemy combatant” upon the unverified claim of the Bush administration
or any other government. As the year ended, the U.S. courts were considering this
radical claim.
Due process shortcuts also plagued the Bush administration’s detention of
some 1,200 non-U.S. citizens whom the government sought to question regarding
their links to or knowledge of the September 11 attacks. Of this group, whose
number has never been fully disclosed, 752 were detained on immigration charges
but treated like criminals. Rather than grant them the rights of criminal suspects,
the administration used immigration law to detain and interrogate them secretly,
without their usual right to be charged promptly with a criminal offense and (in
case of economic need) to government-appointed counsel. Immigration detainees
would ordinarily be deported, allowed to leave the country voluntarily, or released
on bond pending a hearing on their case. But these “special interest” detainees
were kept in jail until “cleared”—that is, until proven innocent of terrorist connections—
often for many months. By mid-December, none of them had been charged
with a crime related to September 11.
President Bush’s November 2001 order authorizing the creation of military
commissions to try non-American suspects lacked the most basic due process guarantees
and raised the prospect of trials that would have been a travesty of justice. In
March 2002, the Defense Department issued regulations for the new commissions
that corrected many of the due process problems of the original order. However,
the commissions are still to operate without even the fair-trial standards applicable
in U.S. courts-martial. Defendants in such courts-martial are entitled to appeal to
the United States Court of Appeal for the Armed Forces—a civilian court outside
the control of the executive branch—and ultimately to petition the U.S. Supreme
Court. But the commission regulations permit appeal only to another military
panel of people who must answer to the president. That makes the president,
through his surrogates, both prosecutor and judge. Especially as applied away from
the exigencies of the battlefield, these compromised commissions violate the minimum
legal requirement of “an impartial and regularly constituted court respecting
the generally recognized principles of regular judicial procedure” (Geneva
Conventions, Protocol I, art. 75, reflecting customary international law). If these
commissions are used to try detainees who should be considered prisoners-of-war, and thus are entitled to the more protective procedures of a court-martial, the Bush
administration would open itself to war crimes charges.
CONSEQUENCES FOR
THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST TERRORISM
The U.S. government’s willingness to sidestep human rights as it fights terrorism
has potentially profound and dangerous consequences. At the very least, it means
that the United States is a party to serious abuse. If Washington provides assistance
to abusive warlords in Afghanistan or a military dictatorship such as Pakistan’s, it
becomes complicit in the abuses that they foreseeably commit.
In addition, as noted, Washington’s neglect of human rights threatens to impede
its campaign against terrorism. As President Bush himself has observed, repression
fuels terrorism, by closing off avenues for peaceful dissent. Yet if the U.S. campaign
against terrorism reinforces that repression, it risks breeding more terrorists as it
alienates would-be allies in the fight against terrorism.
Washington’s subordination of human rights to the campaign against terrorism
has also bred a copycat phenomenon. By waving the anti-terrorism banner, governments
such as Uzbekistan seemed to feel that they had license to persecute religious
dissenters, while governments such as Russia, Israel, and China seemed to feel freer
to intensify repression in Chechnya, the West Bank, and Xinjiang. Tunisia stepped
up trying civilians on terrorism charges before military courts that flagrantly
disregard due-process rights. Claiming that asylum-seekers can be a “pipeline for
terrorists” entering the country, Australia imposed some of the tightest restrictions
on asylum in the industrialized world. Facing forces on the right and left that have
been designated terrorists, Colombia’s new president, Álvaro Uribe, tried to permit
warrantless searches and wiretaps and to restrict the movement of journalists (until
the country’s highest court ruled these measures unconstitutional).
In sub-Saharan Africa, some of the mimicry took on absurd proportions. Ugandan
President Yoweri Museveni shut down the leading independent newspaper for
a week in October because it was allegedly promoting terrorism (it had reported a
military defeat by the government in its battle against the Lord’s Resistance Army
rebel group). In June, Liberian President Charles Taylor declared three of his critics—
the editor of a local newspaper and two others—to be “illegal combatants”
who would be tried for terrorism in a military court. Eritrea justified its lengthy
detention of the founder of the country’s leading newspaper by citing Washington’s
widespread detentions. Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe justified the
November 2001 arrest of six journalists as terrorists because they wrote stories
about political violence in the country. Elsewhere, even former Yugoslav President
Slobodan Milosevic defended himself against war-crimes charges by contending
that abusive troops under his command had merely been combating terrorism.
The inconsistency of Washington’s attention to human rights abroad has also
weakened an important voice for human rights when it does speak out. The most
dramatic example occurred in the case of Saadeddin Ibrahim, the Egyptian democracy
activist who was sentenced in July to seven years in prison for his peaceful
political activities. To its credit, the Bush administration not only protested but also said it would withhold an incremental increase in aid that might have gone to
Egypt. This was a dramatic step—the first time in the Middle East that the United
States had conditioned aid on the positive resolution of a human rights case. But in
light of Washington’s long history of closing its eyes to human rights abuses in the
Middle East, and the its failure to protest Egypt’s similar persecution of Islamists
for non-violent political activity, many Egyptians distrusted its motives, and even
some Egyptian human rights groups denounced the action. In early December,
Egypt’s highest appeals court—with a long tradition of independence from the
government—reversed Ibrahim’s conviction and ordered a new trial. But Washington’s
voice was clearly shown to have been compromised as a means to build broad
public support for human rights.
EUROPEAN UNION
As Washington forsakes its traditional role as a strong if not always consistent
proponent of human rights, one would have hoped that the European Union, with
its own tradition of promoting human rights, would fill the void. But Europe’s
leadership was hampered by its own failure of political will, its undue deference to
Washington, and the premium it puts on consensus at any cost.
The year did not begin auspiciously. At the annual session of the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights in March and April, the absence of the United States—the
first time in the history of the commission that Washington had not been voted a
member—presented Europe with a test of its leadership. It failed. Without Washington
to take the lead, the European Union did not even table a resolution on
China’s continuing abysmal record on human rights. Instead, it pursued a proforma
dialogue on human rights with Beijing. Europe did act on Chechnya, but
half-heartedly. It engaged in long and futile efforts to negotiate with the Russian
government a watered-down, consensus-based chairman’s statement instead of a
critical resolution. That approach was inappropriate to begin with in light of Russian
security forces’ persistent atrocities and Russian authorities’ utter failure to
bring abusive forces to justice. When the negotiations ended in stalemate, the E.U.
belatedly tabled a critical resolution, but it lost by a single vote—the first defeat of
a Chechnya resolution in three years.
In the case of China, key European governments have shown far more interest
in building economic ties than in promoting human rights—even though the one
need not preclude the other. The E.U. has thus left it to the United States, which
also places a higher value on economic relations with China, to take the lead in
condemning Beijing’s closed political system.
European deference to Washington was most visible in conflicts over the International
Criminal Court. The E.U. deserves credit for being among the court’s
leading defenders in the face of the Bush administration’s intense opposition. But
European governments were too quick to compromise on matters of principle,
largely because the United Kingdom was determined to bridge the gap between
Europe and the United States. For instance, in June and July, as noted, Washington
threatened to use its veto on the U.N. Security Council to end various peacekeeping
missions unless the council exempted American participants in U.N.-authorized operations from ICC jurisdiction. Washington’s threat was unsustainable, since it
would have required, for example, removing the U.N. forces that keep Sierra Leone
from descending back into vicious conflict and that serve as a buffer between Hezbollah
and Israel’s northern border. Yet rather than stand on principle, France and
especially Britain endorsed a “compromise” that exempted American troops for
one year. Whether this is a reasonable compromise or a face-saving step toward
American impunity will depend on whether these countries acquiesce in extending
this agreement when the year’s exemption expires in July 2003.
Similarly, largely at Britain’s insistence, the European Union failed to agree on a
common rejection of Washington’s attempt to enter into bilateral immunity agreements
under article 98 of the ICC treaty. Article 98 permits bilateral agreements to
determine which of two interested governments has the prior claim to investigate
and, if appropriate, prosecute a suspect. But article 98 must be read in light of the
treaty’s overriding purpose—to empower the ICC to oversee any such prosecutorial
effort and ensure that it is carried out in good faith. Several European governments
suggested that it would be enough if Washington simply vowed to pursue
any suspect sent its way under an article 98 agreement. But the entire purpose of
the ICC is never to trust unverified pledges of prosecution. That is the system that
allowed such tyrants as Augusto Pinochet, Idi Amin, and Pol Pot to escape with
impunity. European nations (and other ICC supporters) must recognize that no
agreement is valid under article 98 unless both parties recognize the oversight
authority of the ICC. As of mid-December, E.U. governments had not done so.
However, only fifteen governments worldwide had entered into these bilateral
immunity agreements.
Part of the explanation for the European Union’s weak record on human rights
is the premium it places on consensus no matter the consequences. A consensus
rule reflects a preference for inaction unless there is unanimous support for action.
Its purpose is to guard against undue intrusions on the interests of a single member
state. On certain internal E.U. matters, this rule may be a reasonable concession to
national sovereignty. It can even be useful in holding prospective member states to
higher human rights expectations. But when it comes to promoting human rights
outside the arena of would-be E.U. members, it has proved harmful, as shown by
the E.U.’s record on Chechyna, China, and the ICC.
To succeed, the promotion of human rights must be consistent and vigorous.
But the E.U.’s consensus rule produces the lowest common denominator. Any
single member can water down or stop common action to protect human rights.
Inaction becomes the default position.
As the U.S. voice for human rights fades, the cost of E.U. inaction increases. Its
effect will only compound as the number of E.U. members grows from fifteen to
twenty-five. At least when it comes to promoting human rights, it is time for Europe
to adopt a different decision-making threshold. One alternative would be to allow
a supermajority to speak for the E.U., perhaps with a right for dissenting governments
to opt out.
The difficulty of achieving a strong consensus could be mitigated somewhat if
individual E.U. governments saw themselves as free to promote human rights more
vigorously than the E.U. common foreign policy—that is, if the common policy
were seen as a floor rather than a ceiling. Historically, this occurred. For example, in 1997, Denmark alone sponsored a critical resolution on China at the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights. Similarly, Germany has traditionally taken a stronger
stand than the E.U. as a whole in support of the ICC. The Nordic countries have
done the same for the Great Lakes region of Africa and, together with the United
Kingdom, for Burma. Individual interventions do not have the power of collective
action, but they are better than nothing.
Increasingly, however, E.U. members seem to be denying themselves this latitude,
or at least using the preference for common action as an excuse not to act
beyond the consensus. This problem was particularly acute in 2002 with regard to
China and Chechnya. Delegates at the U.N. commission repeatedly cited the E.U.
common policy as a reason why they could not push harder (or at all) for a critical
resolution.
This trend should be resisted. The presumption that no one acts unless everyone
does may make sense for internal matters, where a premium is placed on regularity
across borders. But it is an unnecessary restraint when it comes to the external
promotion of human rights. The E.U. common foreign policy should be seen as the
minimum that all members must support, not a constraint on those willing to do
more for human rights.
Adding to the problem is the lack of transparency in E.U. decision-making.
Simply learning that a proposed policy is even on the table usually requires intensive
detective work. The public typically is not informed of a policy debate until
a decision has been made, and the positions taken by individual member states
during the debate are generally not revealed. The democracy deficit produced by
this secrecy is particularly pernicious in the case of human rights, where popular
pressure is often needed to overcome the reluctance of many governments to promote
human rights in the face of countervailing political or economic interests. As
is increasingly heard in the corridors of the U.N. and other multilateral fora, this
secrecy also alienates potential allies. They hardly appreciate being expected to wait
for and then follow an E.U. pronouncement when they have little knowledge of or
opportunity to influence the debate.
Consensus, uniformity, secrecy—all at times have their purpose. But the E.U.’s
voice on human rights is too important to allow these procedural values to stand in
its way. As the E.U. expands, it should also ensure that its essential role in promoting
human rights around the world is preserved.
U.N. COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
An alternative voice for human rights might have come from the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights. But in addition to Europe’s disappointing role, the commission
has been hampered by a perverse incentive system that encourages abusive
governments to flock to it for the purpose of weakening it and sparing themselves
condemnation.
It is hardly surprising that there are more governments vying for membership
on U.N. bodies than there are positions to go around. Particularly in the developing
world, most rights-respecting governments seek membership on one of the U.N.
bodies that address development issues, hoping to steer additional development funds their way. But for abusive governments, their top priority is avoiding U.N.
condemnation. They tend to congregate on the human rights commission. The
result is that some two dozen of the commission’s fifty-three members are governments
with records of indifference if not hostility to human rights.
There is an urgent need to counteract this perverse set of incentives by adopting
criteria for commission membership. If governments seek to join the leading U.N.
body for promoting human rights, they should be required to show some basic
commitment to human rights. That should include, at least, an open invitation for
U.N. human rights investigators to enter their country, ratification of the six leading
human rights treaties and compliance with their reporting requirements, and a
record of not having recently been condemned by the commission. Adopting such
criteria should be the top priority of any government interested in enhancing the
effectiveness of the commission. It should also be a focus of efforts by the new U.N.
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello, in addition to his
essential role as a high-profile public critic of abusive governments.
OTHER VOICES FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
Several governments have stepped forward to try to fill this leadership void on
human rights. They cannot replace the power and influence of Europe and the
United States but they can still play a helpful role.
Mexico under President Vicente Fox continued to be a consistent supporter of
international human rights initiatives. It played a lead role in trying to fend off U.S.
attacks on the International Criminal Court at the U.N. Security Council. It was
joined by Canada, which though not a member of the council was outspoken in
rejecting the Bush administration’s vision of impunity for American suspects.
Senegal, South Africa, and Nigeria joined in creating the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD), which commits its members to democratization
and the rule of law in return for foreign investment and international assistance.
The initiative was formally adopted in July at the first summit of the African
Union, a new incarnation of the Organization of African Unity whose constitutive
act also included language on respect for human rights, democratic principles, and
good governance as a condition for membership. A key innovation in NEPAD is
the promise of “peer review”—a pledge that African governments will be jointly
responsible for democratic development and respect for human rights, not only in
their own countries but in neighboring countries as well.
However, African governments’ conduct under NEPAD was disappointing.
According to the U.N.’s usual rotation system, it was the turn of the African caucus
to nominate the chair of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights for the session
beginning in March 2003. In one of their first acts after the launching of NEPAD,
African governments proposed Libya—a major funder of the African Union.
To endorse such a long-time abuser of human rights to lead the U.N.’s foremost
human rights body does not bode well for compliance with the NEPAD-related
vows of meaningful peer review. Moreover, Nigeria, a key player in NEPAD, was
one of the few countries to vote against creating the above-mentioned inspection
regime to stop torture and, at home, failed to take meaningful steps to discipline or prosecute soldiers responsible for massacring hundreds of civilians in two serious
incidents in 1999 and 2001. South Africa, praised for its effective chairing of
the 1998 session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, played a significantly
more troubling role in 2002. South African President Thebo Mbeki offered only
muted criticism of Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, despite his persistent
violations of civil and political liberties and disturbing reports of politically motivated
diversion of food in time of famine.
Norway and Canada—two major Western governments not burdened by the
E.U. preoccupation with consensus—frequently played a positive leadership role
on human rights. As noted, Canada was outspoken in defending the ICC from U.S.
attack, although its advocacy of human rights in China was weak. Both Norway and
Canada, drawing from their experience with the campaigns to ban landmines and
end the use of child soldiers, continued to build a like-minded group of nations to
address other serious human rights and humanitarian concerns. New Zealand also
played a notably positive role in defending the ICC, although its traditional partner—
Australia—supported Washington in its obstructionist efforts on the ICC
and, as described above, set a disturbing precedent on the treatment of refugees.
POSSIBLE WAR IN IRAQ
At this writing, war in Iraq is threatening. Human Rights Watch takes no position
on whether war should be launched. But in the interest of saving the lives of
noncombatants, we are concerned about the way a war might proceed.
In human rights terms, Saddam Hussein is as bad as they come. In 1988, in the
notorious Anfal campaign, he committed genocide against the Kurds. After using
chemical weapons on at least forty occasions to drive Kurds from their highland
villages, his forces rounded up and executed some one hundred thousand, mostly
men and boys. In suppressing the 1991 uprisings, his forces killed an estimated
thirty thousand Iraqis, mostly Kurds in the north and Shi’a in the south. In the following
years, untold atrocities were committed against the Marsh Arabs. On a dayto-
day basis, the Iraqi government uses arbitrary detention, torture, and execution
to maintain power.
But the threatened war on Iraq is not a humanitarian intervention in the sense
that it would be waged primarily for the purpose of benefiting the Iraqi people.
If Saddam Hussein were overthrown in a palace coup and replaced by an equally
repressive dictator who nonetheless was willing to cooperate in ridding the country
of alleged weapons of mass destruction, there clearly would be no invasion. That
said, Human Rights Watch does not discount the importance of stopping the possible
use of weapons of mass destruction when there is a credible threat of their
use. If this war is fought, however, it is essential that the attackers take into account
the potential risks facing the Iraqi people, particularly in light of the atrocities that
Saddam Hussein is obviously capable of committing.
First, the attackers should do everything feasible to avoid civilian casualties by
their own forces. This means, at minimum, avoiding such controversial practices
as using cluster bombs near populated areas (as occurred during the Gulf War
of 1991, the Yugoslav war of 1999, and the Afghan war of 2001-02). It means not using military force to undermine civilian morale or to attack political supporters
of a regime who are not directly contributing to the military effort (as occurred in
Yugoslavia). And it means taking all feasible precautions to avoid misidentifying
targets, especially in the case of “targets of opportunity” when the review system is
necessarily abbreviated (as occurred in all three above-noted wars but particularly
in Afghanistan, where special operations forces in the field were used extensively
to identify targets).
Second, the U.S. and its allies must take into account the history of abuse already
suffered by the Iraqi people and make serious attempts to prevent its recurrence.
As noted, on numerous occasions as part of the 1988 Anfal genocide, Saddam Hussein
used chemical weapons against Iraqi Kurds. Now, if he sees that the end of his
rule is near, he is perfectly capable of resuming the slaughter by using chemical
or biological weapons he might retain against his own people, perhaps even in
an effort to embarrass his attackers. During the 1991 uprising, Iraqi rebel forces,
both Kurdish and Shi’a, demonstrated that they are capable of summarily executing
government officials, Baath Party members, and their perceived supporters.
Unless restrained during a possible new war, there is every reason to believe that
they will pick up where they left off, but this time as possible U.S. proxies. Also in
1991, some neighboring countries closed their borders to people fleeing the war in
Iraq. Turkey, in particular, left Kurds to die of exposure to the winter cold on the
mountains along its border. In the event of renewed war, it has publicly threatened
to close its borders again.
Washington has taken some steps to prevent repetition of these abuses should
it go to war. It has warned Iraqi troops that they will be prosecuted if they use
weapons of mass destruction. And it has cautioned the relatively organized Kurdish
forces against committing atrocities, although that message is difficult to deliver to
less organized Shi’a forces. But more clearly must be done to avoid repetition of
the Kosovo tragedy, when unprepared U.S. troops were forced to watch from the
sidelines as the forces of Slobodan Milosevic escalated their attacks on Kosovar
Albanian civilians in response to the NATO bombing campaign. Vigilance is particularly
urgent because the possible availability of weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq could produce killing on a much larger scale. In addition, neighboring governments
must be pressured to respect the right of Iraqis to flee violence and take
refuge elsewhere, especially given the substantial dangers they might face.
There is also the difficult issue of combatants who are taken prisoner. During
the Afghan war, the United States took insufficient steps to prevent allied Northern
Alliance forces from committing atrocities against prisoners. During the Gulf War,
Iraq severely mistreated coalition prisoners-of-war. Steps must be taken to prevent
a repetition of those abuses, although the Bush administration’s degrading of the
Geneva Conventions at Guantánamo will make some arguments in defense of captured
combatants more difficult to advance.
Washington has also been reticent about its post-war strategy. Will the Bush
administration commit to rebuilding the rule of law in Iraq, in contrast to the “warlord
strategy” it has pursued in Afghanistan? It has spoken about bringing senior
Iraqi officials to justice, but will it ensure fair trials and independent tribunals? Will
it subject to international scrutiny its own conduct and that of its allies or will it
impose only victor’s justice? The answers to these and similar questions will determine whether, even with Saddam Hussein gone, possible war with Iraq would hold
much promise of improving the Iraqi people’s plight.
CONCLUSION
The security threat posed by terrorism should not obscure the importance of
human rights. Military or police action can be seductive. It leaves the impression
that the problem is being addressed firmly, head-on. Concern with human rights,
by contrast, may seem peripheral—of long-term utility, undoubtedly, but not a
high immediate priority.
That view is profoundly mistaken. An anti-terrorism policy that ignores human
rights is a gift to the terrorists. It reaffirms the violent instrumentalism that breeds
terrorism as it undermines the public support needed to defeat terrorism. A strong
human rights policy cannot replace the actions of security forces, but it is an essential
complement. A successful anti-terrorism policy must endeavor to build strong
international norms and institutions on human rights, not provide a new rationale
for avoiding and undermining them.
THIS REPORT
This report is Human Rights Watch’s thirteenth annual review of human rights
practices around the globe. It addresses developments in fifty-eight countries,
covering the period from November 2001 through November 2002. Most chapters
examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the
response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the
United Nations, and various regional and international organizations and institutions;
and the freedom of local human rights defenders to conduct their work.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2002 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human rights
activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of the Human Rights
Watch advocacy team, which monitors the policies of governments and international
institutions that have influence to curb human rights abuses. Human Rights
Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain more detailed accounts of
many of the issues addressed in the brief summaries collected in this volume. They
can be found on the Human Rights Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The
failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing
limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the problem.
There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights Watch
simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2002 (and
hence the content of this volume) included the severity of abuses, access to the
country and the availability of information about it, the susceptibility of abusive
forces to influence, and the importance of addressing certain thematic concerns
and of reinforcing the work of local rights organizations.
Unlike previous World Reports, this year’s does not have separate chapters
addressing Human Rights Watch’s thematic work. Instead, this year’s report incorporates
such material directly into the report’s regional overviews, country chapters,
and a new chapter on “Global Issues.” The change was made in the interests of
streamlining the volume and mainstreaming developments in thematic areas into
our country descriptions and analyses. The Human Rights Watch website can be
consulted for more detailed treatment of our work on children’s rights, women’s
rights, arms, academic freedom, business and human rights, HIV/AIDS and human
rights, international justice, refugees and displaced, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender rights, and for information on our international film festival.
NEW LIFE FOR AFRICAN MULTILATERALISM
The outlook for human rights in Africa at the close of 2002 was more hopeful
than it had been for several years. During the year, there were significant moves
towards resolving longstanding conflicts in Angola, Sudan, and the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC).At the same time,African leaders made significant commitments
to transparent and accountable governance and respect for human rights
with the creation of the African Union (A.U.), and its adoption of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), a comprehensive economic and political
reform program. Yet, African leaders had promised reform on many previous
occasions while continuing to embezzle national funds and to violate human
rights. In addition, new or ongoing crises in the Central African Republic, Côte
d’Ivoire,Madagascar, and Zimbabwe; continued war in Liberia, Burundi, and the
DRC; as well as longstanding repression in countries such as Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Gabon, Sudan, Swaziland, and Togo continued to undermine progress
towards respect for human rights and the rule of law across the continent.
The African Union officially replaced the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
at the July summit of African heads of state in Durban, South Africa. The creation
of the A.U. was the culmination of a process that began with an extraordinary OAU
summit in 1999. The Constitutive Act of the A.U. proposed future institutional
reforms that would make the A.U. less a loose collection of states that meet once a
year and more akin to the European Union (E.U.). The Constitutive Act of the A.U.
also included significant new language for the promotion of human rights, democratic
principles and good governance. Further, the Act empowered the A.U. to
“intervene in a Member State pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of
grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.”
In addition, noncompliance with A.U. decisions and policies might lead to sanctions.
At the Durban summit, the A.U. formally adopted NEPAD and the related
African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) and Declaration on Democracy, Political,
Economic, and Corporate Governance. NEPAD—the final incarnation of
reform proposals put forward over several years by South Africa and Senegal, with
the support of Algeria, Egypt and Nigeria—put forth a comprehensive,multi-sectoral
development program, outlining a partnership between Africa and the West,
Africa’s leaders and the African people, and among the leaders themselves. It proposed that the industrialized world provide financial, political and strategic support
for Africa as its leaders embraced responsibility for Africa’s development,
political as well as economic. NEPAD included a significant commitment to good
governance, peace, security, and democracy, as prerequisites for effective economic
development, although its main emphasis was on economics and infrastructure.
Despite the welcome commitments to political and economic reform and
respect for human rights, the NEPAD document failed to acknowledge the particular
needs of Africa’s most marginalized and vulnerable people—women, children,
refugees, the internally displaced, and those affected by HIV/AIDS. According to
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),African countries
hosted 3.3 million refugees at the beginning of 2002, almost 30 percent of the
world’s refugee population; a Norwegian Refugee Council survey commissioned by
the United Nations (U.N.) and published in June found that around 13.5 million or
more than half of the world’s twenty-five million internally displaced persons were
in Africa (concentrated in Angola, the DRC, and Sudan). NEPAD was silent on the
protection and other needs of these uprooted people.NEPAD spoke of “promoting
the role of women in social and economic development” and “assuring their participation
in political and economic life,” but failed to address issues of systemic
violence, including rape and harmful traditional practices, and discrimination
against women. NEPAD made a welcome reaffirmation of the Millennium Development
Goals with respect to children, including in the areas of infant and child
mortality and primary schooling. But it offered few concrete strategies to ensure
children’s rights are a priority focus for development.
NEPAD and the A.U.would also be challenged to deal with the HIV/AIDS crisis
that continued to engulf the continent. In June, the U.N. projected that between
2000 and 2020, some fifty-five million Africans would die prematurely because of
AIDS, underlining the continuing catastrophic impact of the epidemic on the continent.
Sexual abuse of women and girls, often those orphaned by AIDS, contributed
significantly to the spread of HIV among women across Africa, especially
in conflict zones where rape was systematically used as a weapon of war.During the
year, Human Rights Watch investigated appalling reports of extreme sexual violence—
gang rape, violent abduction followed by repeated rapes, amputation of
breasts and sexual organs—in several conflicts, including in the ongoing war in the
DRC and during the past civil war in Sierra Leone. The horror that confronted victims
of these attacks was often compounded by their contracting HIV/AIDS from
their attackers, leading to even greater discrimination and ostracism.
In several countries, including South Africa where sexual violence remained at
levels constituting a crisis for all women, the police force and justice system provided
little protection or redress against violent sexual crimes. In addition, increasing
poverty, including the food crisis in southern Africa, led to a high rate of school
drop out among girls in many countries. Once out of school, girls were pressured
to work, often becoming prostitutes or domestic laborers subject to sexual harassment
and abuse and thus at high risk of HIV/AIDS.Research in Zambia conducted
by Human Rights Watch found that this kind of abuse was particularly widespread
among the rapidly growing population of children orphaned by AIDS. Numerous
girl orphans reported that their male guardians had sexually abused them. In some cases, the abuser suggested that they could not refuse sexual advances because no
one else would take care of them.
NEPAD’s peer review mechanism was generally viewed as the lynchpin for
NEPAD’s success.The mechanism would function on a voluntary basis: submission
to peer review would be an additional step to membership in NEPAD, itself a separate
commitment to membership in the A.U. Those countries that chose to participate
would be expected to reform their governance to meet the standards
specified by the Declaration on Democracy, Political, Economic, and Corporate
Governance.Their progress towards and commitment to political reform would be
evaluated through regular investigations of governance practices and policies by an
appointed team of reviewers. These evaluations would be presented to and discussed
by the APRM members and subsequently made public. No sanctions were
specified for noncompliance.
The APRM was pivotal to NEPAD’s success because NEPAD’s programs would
be largely dependant on an inflow of funds from foreign “partners.”These partners,
individually and collectively,made it clear that their support would come only with
a demonstrated commitment from Africa to political and economic reform.
Though the proof of the initiative would come in future practice, the APRM in concept
broke new ground for African multilateralism. Unlike other regional African
organizations and OAU programs, the APRM asked its members to surrender a
certain degree of political sovereignty and to subject themselves to collective governance;
sub-regional bodies such as the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
were conceived to encourage economic cooperation and did not seek to hold each
other accountable. At a November 2002 meeting in Abuja, Nigeria, twelve states
signed a declaration of intent to accede to the APRM: Algeria, Republic of Congo,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda
and South Africa.
Despite the enormous potential of the APRM and the optimism it embodied, it
was not clear that the mechanism, as it stood, would successfully instigate political
reform. There would be little reason for oppressive, non-declaration-compliant
governments to join the APRM and submit themselves to review. States such as
Algeria, Angola or Nigeria whose revenue was derived almost entirely from oil or
other natural resources, would have little additional incentive to submit to standards
designed in large part to attract foreign aid, foreign investment, and debt
relief. Further, the APRM would evaluate compliance with Declaration standards
against a country’s overall level of development. This decision created an opening
for subjective and politically motivated evaluations.
NEPAD was also heavily criticized as a top-down—or even top-top—initiative.
African and international civil society organizations (CSOs) repeatedly stated that
information about NEPAD was not readily accessible and was poorly distributed.
CSOs charged that NEPAD’s designers had placed greater importance on addressing
the priorities of NEPAD’s Western partners than those of African actors and
stakeholders. The poor efforts that were made to actively involve civil society were
especially concerning given that NEPAD’s governance programs would depend
heavily on strong nongovernmental voices: NEPAD would not undertake direct implementation of its initiatives; rather, it would rely on national governments.
The nongovernmental community would, therefore, play a key role in holding governments
accountable.
Events in Madagascar raised additional questions about the A.U.’s capacity to
influence its members and African governments’ ability—individually and collectively—
to oppose international pressures. For much of the year, disputes over the
December 2001 presidential elections kept Madagascar on the brink of civil war
between supporters of incumbent President Didier Ratsiraka and challenger Marc
Ravalomanana. In April, Zambian President Levy Patrick Mwanawasa, the outgoing
OAU chairman, and Senegal’s President Abdoulaye Wade, as well as other heads
of state, sought to facilitate a resolution of the ongoing conflict; these efforts were
ultimately unsuccessful though Ravalomanana was subsequently inaugurated.
A.U. leaders initially refused to recognize Ravalomanana, saying the election had
not been legally constituted. But, the larger international community did not follow
the A.U., and Senegal’s President Wade soon broke with the A.U. decision. The
A.U. was essentially forced to reconsider its position in September when the U.N.
invited Ravalomanana to the World Summit on Sustainable Development and thus
cemented Ravalomanana’s authority.
AMBIGUITY AND DUPLICITY ON HUMAN RIGHTS
African leaders’ efforts throughout 2002 demonstrated a commitment to peace
and stability but sent ambiguous messages as to the primacy of human rights. The
A.U. successfully pressured Rwanda and Uganda to reach an agreement with President
Joseph Kabila’s government to move towards an end to the war in the DRC;
as of this writing both Rwanda and Uganda had for the most part disengaged from
the war in the DRC. However, the A.U. gave no indication of what, if anything,
would be done to hold Rwandan and Ugandan forces and other parties accountable
for human rights violations and war crimes committed in the DRC.
Even more disconcerting was the A.U. decision to select Libya, with its long
record of human rights abuse, as chair for the 2003 session of the U.N.Commission
on Human Rights (UNCHR). Libya had a long record of detaining government
opponents without charge or trial, prohibiting the formation of political parties or
independent nongovernmental groups, and muzzling its press.The Libyan government
had also been responsible for torture,“disappearances” and the assassination
of political opponents abroad. In selecting Libya to chair the UNCHR,African leaders
demonstrated disrespect for the commission and for human rights in general.
Meanwhile, oppressive governments continued to deny basic freedoms and new
or renewed conflicts led to greater repression, increased human rights abuse, and
large numbers of refugees and displaced persons, without any effective African
response. In the context of the strong NEPAD and A.U. commitments to promoting
and protecting human rights, African leaders’ customary silence on many of
these developments was all the more discouraging. One commonly cited example
of this silence was African endorsement of the election in Zimbabwe. The election
was strongly criticized within and outside Africa for not being free and fair. It took place amidst widespread, politically motivated violence by supporters of President
Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe African National Union Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF)
against supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), the main
opposition party. These abuses were highly publicized in the international and
African press. Yet, SADC’s official monitors—though not, significantly, the SADC
parliamentarians’ delegation—determined that the elections were legitimate.
African leaders, including South Africa’s President Thabo Mbeki and Nigeria’s
President Olusegun Obasanjo, two of NEPAD’s architects and champions, failed to
speak out against the violence inflicted on MDC supporters. However, in the end,
both Mbeki and Obasanjo voted to suspend Zimbabwe from the Commonwealth
in the “troika” set up by that intergovernmental body to consider irregularities during
the elections.
African leaders may have been justified in criticizing Western governments for
placing undue emphasis on events in Zimbabwe when they had overlooked so
many other oppressive situations in Africa, including the simultaneous election crisis
in Madagascar. But African leaders also said little as across the continent, in
country after country, endemic human rights abuse continued, and daily violations
of civil and political liberties persisted. There were several nations in sub-Saharan
Africa that were all but invisible to public attention and scrutiny where severe
human rights abuse went unabated in 2002, including Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Gabon, Swaziland, and Togo. In Swaziland and Eritrea, political pluralism was
banned.The only party allowed to operate in Eritrea was the government-affiliated
People’s Front for Democracy and Justice. In both countries, civil liberties were
basically nonexistent and civil society was severely restricted. Labor unions were
the only CSOs allowed in Swaziland, and they were allowed only in the interest of
maintaining trade relations with the United States (U.S.). The Swaziland government
maintained tight control of the media; in Eritrea the government completely
silenced the private press and arrested all the editors and publishers except those
who managed to flee abroad. In June, the Swazi nongovernmental organization
Lawyers for Human Rights filed a complaint with the OAU’s African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights against King Mswati for consistent human rights
abuses despite Swaziland’s 1995 ratification of the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights.
The hostile environment often faced by civil society in sub-Saharan Africa was
yet another example of the ambiguity that characterized African leaders’ statements
in support of human rights. In general, nongovernmental organizations, human
rights defenders and other CSOs operated in highly limiting political environments
and faced serious security risks. Research and advocacy efforts were significantly
constricted and even entirely shut down in many countries, among them
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, the DRC, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Liberia,Mauritania, Sudan,
and Togo. Nevertheless, human rights advocates and defenders managed to
increase the pressure on their governments to address human rights abuses and
hold accountable those who committed human rights violations.And, a handful of
countries, including Botswana, Kenya, Mauritius, Malawi, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, and Tanzania, enabled civil society to operate in an environment
of relative freedom and openness.
SOUTH AFRICA AND NIGERIA: REGIONAL LEADERS
South Africa was a key political force throughout the year. President Thabo
Mbeki was one of the five principal NEPAD architects and was the de facto point
person for dealings with the Group of Eight (G8) industrialized countries in the
run-up to the June Kananaskis G8 Summit—at which he presented the NEPAD
program. Mbeki was elected inaugural A.U. chair at the Durban summit. South
Africa’s leaders were active participants in the many controversies and challenges
that faced the region during the year. Recognizing that the international “face-off”
surrounding Zimbabwe’s presidential election threatened NEPAD’s future, Mbeki
balanced competing pressures to preserve relations between Africa and the West.
Western leaders looked to Mbeki as a spokesperson for all of Africa,pressuring him,
as a symbol of the new African commitment to good governance, to denounce
Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe and reject the election results. Meanwhile,
many Africans judged such pressure to be based on concerns for the white farmers
in Zimbabwe—an assessment ably played upon by Mugabe himself—and judged
Mbeki’s words and actions as indicators of whether NEPAD truly meant African
leadership or was simply pandering to Western interests for foreign aid. Others
were simply appalled at this politicization of the African response to the precipitate
descent of a relatively prosperous and stable country into a self-reinforcing cycle of
ever-worsening disrespect for the rule of law, economic chaos and hunger.
Mbeki was the principal mediator in the DRC peace process.He was a constant
voice for peace and compromise from the initial Inter-Congolese Dialogue in Sun
City, through the conversations between DRC President Joseph Kabila and Rwandan
President Paul Kagame during the A.U. Summit, and into the talks in Pretoria
that led to the signing of a “memorandum of understanding” on the withdrawal of
Rwandan troops from the DRC and the disarming and disbanding of the ex-FAR
(former Rwandan armed forces) and the Interhamwe (Rwandan Hutu militia)
forces in the DRC. In the last week of October, Mbeki again hosted the Congolese
factions in Pretoria to reach an agreement on an interim power-sharing government.
South Africa also played a key role in bringing Burundi closer to peace.Without
incident, South African troops, deployed late in 2001, protected the interim powersharing
government. The interim government had been agreed to in 2001 during
talks mediated by former South African President Nelson Mandela. South African
Deputy President Jacob Zuma made numerous attempts to bring all fighting parties
to the negotiating table for a peace based on the 2000 Arusha Accord. On October
7, the transitional government signed a cease-fire with two rebel factions at the
Great Lakes summit convened by regional African leaders. The leaders gave two
hard-line factions thirty days to begin talks for a cease-fire agreement.
President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, like Mbeki, was outspoken about the
need for change in Africa and the importance of good governance and human
rights.Yet his actions cast serious doubts on the veracity of his words.At this writing,
Obasanjo was under impeachment by the National Assembly: he was charged
with violating the constitution by not implementing the approved national budget, abetting corruption, and ordering army forces to attack civilians in two incidents
in 1999 and 2001.
Since Obasanjo took office in 1999, inter-communal violence and ethnic tensions
escalated in Nigeria and threatened to undermine elections scheduled for
2003. The authorities made little effort to prevent conflicts or limit the escalation
of political violence.Human rights abuses by the Nigerian police forces abounded
in 2002. This pattern of abuse, coupled with the general failure of Nigerian authorities
to provide security, spurred vigilante activity. In some instances, state governments
supported these vigilante groups as they committed brutal executions,
systematic torture and unlawful arrests. In August and September, efforts were
made to crack down on vigilante activity in the southeast but little was done to
address the underlying conditions that had led to its proliferation. Further, the
efforts of the Independent National Electoral Commission to register voters were
marked by significant irregularities, and in a closed decision process, the commission
approved only three new parties. Given Obasanjo’s leading role in NEPAD and
the A.U., the significant level of ongoing human rights abuse in Nigeria did not
reflect well on the degree of reform to be expected from other African leaders.
TOWARDS PEACE IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA?
Moves towards peace were not limited to the Great Lakes. Fighting in Angola
came to an end in 2002, prompted by the February 22 death of Jonas Savimbi,
leader of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). In
March,President José Eduardo dos Santos,under considerable pressure from Western
and African leaders, as well as Angolan civil society, announced that the government
and the UNITA rebels had agreed to a truce.The cease-fire went into effect
on April 4. Shortly thereafter, the UNITA soldiers were quickly demobilized and the
various UNITA factions began unity talks, which were successfully completed in
early October. Lasting peace would depend largely on the Angolan government’s
ability to rehabilitate and reintegrate demilitarized UNITA combatants and
Angola’s displaced—4.1 million internally displaced persons and 430,000 refugees,
according to UN sources.
Sierra Leone moved closer to ongoing stability after January 18 when President
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah declared that the decade-long civil war had ended. Kabbah
lifted the four-year state of emergency on March 1. Then in May, presidential elections
were successfully completed with little violence. The successful disarmament
of combatants by the U.N.Mission in Sierra Leone and their subsequent rehabilitation
through British-led efforts contributed significantly to prospects for continued
and ongoing peace and stability. Major steps were made towards justice and
accountability with the establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. However, the poor performance of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) cast serious doubts over the
Special Court. In addition, concerns for Sierra Leone’s peace rose as the year progressed
and the civil war in neighboring Liberia intensified. (See below.)
Peace was, for the first time in at least twenty years, a possibility in Sudan due to the joint efforts of the U.S., the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Norway. U.S. Special
Presidential Envoy for Peace in Sudan John Danforth brokered four significant
agreements between the Sudan government and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in early 2002, all of which specifically highlighted the
importance of human rights. In particular, the government and the SPLA agreed to
end attacks on civilians and civilian objects in the south, with independent international
monitoring.
Subsequently, the Sudan government and the SPLM entered peace negotiations,
which were sponsored by the Kenya-led Inter-Government Authority on Development.
The parties signed a peace protocol in Kenya on July 20, agreeing that after
an interim period of six and a half years, a self-determination referendum would be
held to determine whether the south wished to secede. The interim period would
begin after a final peace agreement had been signed. They also agreed that shari’a
(Islamic law) would not apply in the south for the interim period. Although, during
negotiations, the government continued to deny humanitarian access in the
south and to bomb oil-rich areas despite the presence of civilians, on October 15
the parties agreed to a military standstill until December 31 and later agreed to full
humanitarian access during that period.
Elsewhere on the continent, these positive trends were contradicted. In mid-
September, Côte d’Ivoire erupted in conflict when roughly 750 soldiers mutinied
out of anger over their imminent dismissal, returning the country to the instability
that took hold following a 1999 military coup. The incident provoked rapid international
support of the government,with Nigeria and Ghana committing military
support to government efforts to suppress the rebellion. ECOWAS dispatched a
mediation team of high-level delegates to Bouaké, the rebel stronghold, in early
October, and on October 21 the rebels conceded to sign a cease-fire agreement.
Multinational ECOWAS troops under Nigerian leadership were dispatched to
monitor the peace. However, concerns arose over Côte d’Ivoire’s long-term
prospects for stability as violence caused by reignited ethnic, religious and political
tensions spread independently of rebel activity. It was uncertain that this violence
would subside once the rebels and the government had come to terms.
While concerted regional efforts seemed to prevent the Côte d’Ivoire rebellion
from escalating into civil war, internal conflicts continued in Liberia and Uganda,
and abuses in these countries received little attention. Fighting between the Liberian
government and Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD)
threatened stability in the Mano River Union area (Liberia, Sierra Leone, and
Guinea) as Liberians sought refuge in neighboring countries such as Guinea,where
serious violations of their human rights were documented. While abuses inside
Liberia were generally worse in areas under government control, both government
and LURD forces committed serious human rights violations against civilians,
including killing, torture, rape, forced labor and forced recruitment. Liberia’s President
Charles Taylor declared a state of emergency for a large portion of the year,
enabling the government to harass all perceived opponents or rebel supporters.
Civilians in northern Uganda and southern Sudan were subjected to similar
abuses due to fighting between the government and the rebel Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA). LRA forces in particular targeted civilians, though the Ugandan army also committed abuses. The LRA raided and looted villages and refugee camps and
abducted children, forcing them to fight as child soldiers. It also attacked humanitarian
aid workers and camps. As in Liberia, the Ugandan government arbitrarily
arrested and detained those suspected of being rebel sympathizers or political
opponents. In addition, the already limited political activity permitted under
Uganda’s no-party “Movement” system was further constrained when the parliament
passed the Political Organizations Law.
DE FACTO INTERNATIONAL DISENGAGEMENT
At the Kananaskis summit, the G8 pledged its support for NEPAD and highlighted
the centrality of embracing good governance and human rights.Previously,
Western governments had denounced Africa’s leaders for continued “cronyism”
when they failed to reject President Robert Mugabe’s victory in Zimbabwe’s March
election.Yet, the international community’s actions in 2002 suggested that Africa—
despite its many conflicts and human rights crises—generally remained a low priority.
When Africa did receive international attention, human rights took a back
seat to geopolitical interests.
Throughout 2002, the international community emphasized the importance of
peace in the DRC.The U.N. and the E.U.both condemned any violations of the tentative
truce that had been reached in 2001.U.S. President George W. Bush met with
presidents Kagame and Kabila, and the U.K. also played a key role in brokering the
eventual agreement between Rwanda and the DRC, which Uganda subsequently
joined. But, amidst these concerted international efforts, the U.N. mission in the
DRC (MONUC) did little to address the ongoing fighting between DRC rebel
groups, whether home-grown or sponsored from outside by the same powers that
had nominally withdrawn. Granted insufficient troops and resources by the U.N.
Security Council, MONUC also failed to protect civilians. Once Rwanda, Uganda
and Zimbabwe had signed a peace agreement with the DRC, international interests
turned to monitoring the withdrawal of foreign troops, with little concern for
issues of international justice and accountability for war crimes. Calls for an international
tribunal by Kabila and other Congolese were essentially brushed aside. In
mid-October, the U.N. Security Council was presented with a report detailing how
Rwandan, Ugandan and Zimbabwean officers, as well as Congolese authorities,
manipulated internal conflicts to facilitate the looting of natural resources. The
report also stated that the withdrawal of foreign troops would not end this exploitation.
At this writing, there had been no indication that the Security Council
intended to take further steps to end the plundering of the DRC’s resources.
International commitment to justice was also lacking vis-à-vis the ICTR.
Encouragingly, several important genocidaires were arrested and rendered to the
ICTR during the year, including Augustin Bizimungu, chief of staff of the former
Rwandan army, but the ICTR was understaffed and under-funded.However, these
were not the most significant problems: Kagame’s government effectively refused
to cooperate if the ICTR prosecutor insisted on indicting soldiers from the current
Rwandan government (the Rwandan Patriotic Front, RPF) for war crimes. In response, both the U.S. and the U.N. pressured Kagame not to disrupt the prosecution
of Hutu genocidaires but did not insist on prosecuting RPF members. If the
RPF were granted this de facto immunity, the legitimacy of the entire justice
process would be undermined.
With respect to Angola, the U.N. and the E.U. pledged support for the demobilization
and reintegration of UNITA combatants, giving reason to be cautiously
hopeful of sustained peace. However, the cease-fire revealed a humanitarian crisis
of widespread malnutrition and medical neglect,which received insufficient international
attention.Humanitarian agencies repeatedly stressed the need for greater
U.N. commitment to the dire conditions facing the internally displaced but the
international community did little in 2002 to address these concerns. In August, the
United Nations Mission in Angola (UNMA) was established and mandated to assist
the Angolan government in protecting human rights. However, little material
improvement resulted for the internally displaced; they continued to be physically
harassed and abused by the security forces. They were also subjected to violations
of their freedom of movement and forced removal from camps.
France responded rapidly to the rebellion in Côte d’Ivoire, focusing on providing
safety for French nationals (roughly twenty thousand inhabitants) and evacuating
those in highly unstable areas. As of October, significant numbers of French
nationals were still trapped in the rebel-controlled northern city of Bouaké. France
also deployed reinforcements for the standing force of six hundred troops it maintained
in Côte d’Ivoire: by late October, a total of seven hundred French troops were
securing the areas between rebel-controlled and government-controlled territory.
It was proposed that an ECOWAS peacekeeping force would take over from the
French.
The primacy of the “war on terrorism”for the Bush administration affected U.S.
policies towards Africa in two ways: The U.S. gave even less attention to much of
the continent than might otherwise have been expected, and, in those few African
countries with a strategically valuable role to play, particularly in the Horn of
Africa, the U.S. de-emphasized human rights issues. The E.U. and the U.N. both
denounced the Eritrean government’s continued human rights abuses and the E.U.
largely limited aid to humanitarian aid. In October, the U.S. State Department
publicly rebuked Eritrea for human rights abuses. In contrast, the U.S., considering
Ethiopia to be a well-positioned potential ally, continued non-humanitarian
aid to Ethiopia and was markedly quiet about ongoing human rights violations.
Also in October,U.S. defense officials confirmed that they were planning to establish
a military headquarters in the Horn of Africa to help in the hunt for suspected
terrorists.
Sudan, governed by an Islamist party, received significant attention from the
Bush administration and the U.S. Congress as well as from a grassroots movement
concerned in part about the treatment of Christians in Sudan. U.S. attention contributed
to the year’s substantial progress towards peace in Sudan, as it did in the
DRC. Like the E.U. and the U.K., the U.S. administration and Congress also focused
on the deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe, calling for President Mugabe to respect
the rule of law, denouncing irregularities in the elections, and urging President
Mbeki of South Africa to take the lead in an African response to the situation.
Energy security was a key concern for the Bush administration in 2002. The
administration specifically highlighted its interest in pursuing African oil resources
as substitutes for oil from the Middle East.Although the U.S. periodically raised the
issue of transparency and good governance in countries like Angola, it appeared to
place a greater priority on solidifying relationships with major and emerging
African oil producers. For example, during a July visit to Nigeria, Assistant Secretary
of State for Africa Walter Kansteiner focused his public statements almost
entirely on the importance of Nigerian oil to the U.S. (Nigeria was its fifth largest
supplier). No mention was made of the extrajudicial killings and other abuses by
Nigerian security forces in the Niger Delta oil region or elsewhere. In contrast,
international nongovernmental voices continued to pressure oil companies about
human rights abuses. In fact, an international human rights campaign may have
been partially responsible for the decision by Talisman Energy Inc., a Canadian oil
company, to sell its Sudan assets.
ANGOLA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Angola’s twenty-seven-year civil war formally ended in August. The death in
February of Jonas Savimbi, leader of the rebel National Union for the Total Independence
of Angola (UNITA), was the final event that forced his greatly weakened
and fragmented forces to agree to a ceasefire. On April 4, the Angolan armed forces
(FAA) and UNITA signed a memorandum of understanding halting the fighting,
and peace was formally declared on August 2.
Although the ceasefire meant a reduction in conflict-related abuses, a new
humanitarian crisis emerged. Some eighty-five thousand demobilized and impoverished
UNITA soldiers and their 340,000 family members became dependent on
government or international aid, joining more than half a million civilians living in
previously UNITA-controlled areas who had not been able to access humanitarian
relief since 1998. The total number of people requiring food assistance reached 1.8
million by October 2002.
UNITA abuses against civilians continued during the last months of the war. In
UNITA-controlled areas, inhabitants were regularly subjected to violence including
extrajudicial killings and mutilations, and looting. A fragmented UNITA carried
out hit-and-run attacks and also reprisals against civilians believed to support
the government, causing massive displacement: villagers fled their homes and often
spent days hiding in the surrounding bush, foraging for food.At times,UNITA also
displaced entire villages, forbidding people to leave with their belongings and forcing
them to survive in new locations, without clothes, food, or medicines. Fleeing
civilians sometimes traveled for weeks and over hundreds of kilometers before
reaching relative safety in government-controlled areas,where some assistance was available. Some died along the way, or only narrowly survived lack of food, landmine
injuries, or disease.
Civilians who could not escape UNITA-controlled areas were often made to
supply the rebels with food, or were forcibly conscripted or abducted by UNITA as
forced laborers to carry arms, cut firewood, or loot.UNITA fighters sexually abused
women and girls, including by using them as sexual slaves, as well as forcing them
to wash uniforms, prepare campsites, and cook.
The Angolan National Police (PNA) and the FAA also contributed to the
immense displacement of civilians. FAA “cleansing”operations in areas taken from
UNITA involved clearing out the entire population in the name of securing the
countryside, as well as rooting out possible UNITA supporters and recruiting ablebodied
men for civilian militia groups to assist in fighting UNITA.With the FAA
suspecting villagers in the conquered areas of generally having supported or collaborated
with UNITA, harsh and abusive treatment including harassment, indiscriminate
beatings, and sexual abuse were routine during such operations. Looting
by FAA troops was also widespread. The FAA sent people cleared from the secured
areas to the nearest municipality, which they were then forbidden to leave. These
operations led to overcrowded municipalities where the health and welfare of the
displaced deteriorated rapidly. In some cases, soldiers—themselves poorly supplied—
rounded up the displaced to assist them in foraging expeditions for food,
and the civilians were killed after they became trapped in skirmishes with UNITA.
When a municipality could no longer contain the growing numbers of people,
the displaced were moved to camps in provincial capitals or in their surrounding
areas by military trucks and sometimes helicopters. Often this was done without
sufficient consultation with those affected, or adequate preparation. Some camps
were located in insecure areas or adjacent to active minefields. Some displaced were
subsequently forcibly moved again to more distant provincial capitals or to
Luanda, the national capital.
After the ceasefire, the gathering of UNITA troops in cantonment camps was the
government’s immediate priority. As an incentive, on April 2 the National Assembly
approved a general amnesty law for all infractions of military discipline and
crimes against the state security forces committed during the conflict. United
Nations (U.N.) Under-Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Africa Ibrahim
Gambari reported to the U.N. Security Council on April 23 that, in signing the
memorandum relating to the amnesty, he had entered a reservation that the U.N.
did not recognize any amnesty as applicable to genocide, crimes against humanity,
and war crimes. The demobilization of UNITA military forces was successfully
completed on July 30. Some five thousand former UNITA soldiers were then incorporated
into the FAA and national police.The remainder and their families were in
October still gathered in forty-two camps distributed around the country.
The process of “reintegrating” the internally displaced—their return or resettlement
to rural communities and establishing sustainable livelihoods—represented
a major challenge for the government, even though more than half a million displaced
made their way home without formal assistance. Destroyed infrastructure
such as broken bridges, mined areas, and houses destroyed and fields burnt under
a scorched earth policy applied by both sides during the conflict were serious obstacles to the reintegration of displaced persons. Officials estimated that, out of 4.6
million internally displaced persons, the reintegration process would involve some
1.75 million. Despite a law adopted in January 2001—the Norms for the Resettlement
of the Internally Displaced—and training given to provincial officials on its
implementation, there were many reports of abuses associated with the reintegration
process. In May 2002 the entire population of Trumba, in Bié province, was
forced back to its area of origin by the local authorities without proper assistance.
Forced return and restrictions to freedom of movement were also recorded in
Huambo, Lunda Sul, and Kuando Kubango provinces.
Even after the ceasefire, there were frequent reports of widespread indiscipline
within the army and the national police in the provinces of Bié, Huambo, Lunda
Sul, Moxico, Uige and Zaire. Harassment of displaced people and extortion were
common practices at checkpoints, as well as violence including rape of women.
Unidentified armed groups were reportedly engaged in banditry and operating
unofficial checkpoints in southern Bié in July, while in August unidentified individuals
in uniform ambushed and killed civilians in Cuango, Xa-Muteba and
Caungula municipalities, Lunda Norte province.
Moreover, there were suspicions about the genuineness of UNITA’s disarmament,
given that by October 2002 only some twenty-six thousand light weapons
(and little ammunition) were handed over to the FAA—equivalent to one weapon
for every three UNITA soldiers.
There were no reports of new use of antipersonnel mines after the April ceasefire.
The government created a new Inter-Sectoral Commission on Demining and
Humanitarian Assistance to be responsible for policy-making, coordination of
mine action and victim assistance, and the design of a new National Mine Action
Plan. According to mine action organizations operating in Angola, 6.8 million
square meters of land were cleared during 2001. A total of 339 mine and unexploded
ordinance accidents, resulting in 660 casualties,were reported in 2001, a significant
decline from the previous year; 75 percent of the victims were displaced
people.Angola ratified the Mine Ban Treaty on July 5, 2002.
Unaffected by the August peace declaration was continuing fighting in Cabinda,
an Angolan enclave separated by Congolese territory. In September the FAA
launched an offensive against separatist groups linked to the Front for the Liberation
of the Cabinda Enclave/State (FLEC).Widespread abuses against the civilian
population were reported, including killings and forced displacement.
Freedom of expression improved, albeit outside Luanda and some of the main
coastal cities it was difficult to access sources of information other than the statecontrolled
media. In July a technical committee was created to draft a new press law
to regulate press activities in the country. The committee included members from
the Bar Association of Angola, the Presidency, representatives of the Union of
Angolan Journalists and the independent Media Institute of Southern Africa.There
were fewer restrictions on journalists than in previous years, but there were still
cases of government intimidation and harassment. On May 31 Manuel Vieira, a
correspondent in Lubango of Rádio Ecclesia, a station owned by the Roman
Catholic Church, was summoned by the Office of Criminal Investigation (DNIC)
after he reported on high death rates in a demobilization camp for UNITA soldiers.
Vieira had quoted a spokesperson from the Military Joint Commission (CMM),
who said that forty-five deaths occurred in the camps in one two-day period.After
being interrogated by the DNIC,Vieira was summoned by the police on June 3, and
had to hand over his recording of the CMM spokesman’s statement
Conditions of detention in prison continued to be of great concern, with overcrowding,
poor hygiene, and lack of basic facilities.More than 60 percent of people
in prison were held without any formal charge beyond the legal limit of pretrial
detention, albeit civil society organizations succeeded in obtaining the release of a
number of these.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The space for free public debate on human rights and reconciliation issues
expanded with the end of the war.
In February, the Open Society Institute (OSI) organized a conference—broadcast
countrywide by Rádio Ecclesia—on the role of the international community
and civil society in the resolution of the Angolan conflict. In a unique effort to
expand to the interior of the country the debate regarding the role of the churches
and civil society in the search for peace, the Inter-Ecclesiastical Committee for
Peace in Angola (COIEPA) organized in March a forum in the provincial capital of
Huambo, in the central plateau region.
In September, a conference on “The Agenda of Peace and Reconciliation in
Angola” was held in Luanda, under the auspices of OSI and the civil society coalition
Reconciliation, Transparency and Citizenship. The conference called for an
immediate ceasefire in Cabinda.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In March 2002, in an “Arria Formula” oral briefing to the members of the U.N.
Security Council, four international nongovernmental organizations—including
Human Rights Watch—urged the Angolan government, the U.N., and the international
community to address the humanitarian crisis and pay more attention to the
protection needs of the internally displaced.They also argued that lack of good governance,
transparency, and accountability was impeding greater respect for human
rights.
In Resolution 1433 adopted on August 15, the U.N. Security Council authorized
the establishment of the United Nations Mission in Angola (UNMA) as a followon
mission to the United Nations Office in Angola (UNOA). A resident special representative
of the secretary-general was appointed to complete the outstanding
tasks under the 1994 Lusaka Peace Agreement (also in August the “troika”monitors
of the 1994 Lusaka Peace Agreement—Portugal, Russia, and the United States—
confirmed their observer function under the Lusaka process in August 2002, albeit did not pay particular attention to human rights issues). UNMA was requested to
assist the Angolan government in ensuring the promotion and protection of
human rights. Until the establishment of the new mission, UNOA continued to
support capacity-building projects, including human rights training of army and
police, facilitating access to the judicial system, monitoring prison conditions, and
supporting media programs.
U.N. Secretary-General KofiAnnan visited Angola shortly after Resolution 1433
was adopted, to assist with winding up the work on the peace agreement and with
coordination of the humanitarian and development efforts of the ten U.N. operational
agencies working in the country.
The U.N. ban on senior UNITA officials traveling outside Angola was temporarily
suspended twice, in May and August, in order to allow the participation of
UNITA in the revitalized peace process, and the travel ban was finally ended in
November.Arms and petroleum embargos, a prohibition on diamond trading, and
a freeze on UNITA’s financial assets remained in place.The U.N.monitoring mechanism
that verified compliance was, at this writing, to run until December 19.
In July, the U.N. emergency relief coordinator visited Angola. The increasing
numbers of people to be assisted forced the U.N. to twice revise its appeals to the
donor community, reaching an overall request of U.S.$290 million.
On September 28,Angola was elected to the U.N. Security Council for two years
from January 2003.
International Financial Institutions
The Angolan government’s relationship with the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) remained strained throughout 2002, primarily because of the government’s
refusal to comply with the terms of the expired Staff Monitored Program (SMP),
and in particular the government’s failure to publicly account for its oil revenues
and actual expenditures. On February 19, the IMF reaffirmed that in order to qualify
for a formal program, the government would have to “record and transfer to the
treasury all revenues, including the total amount of signature oil bonuses” and
“publish data on oil and other government revenues and expenditures, as well as on
external debt; and conduct independent financial audits of the 2001 accounts of
Sonangol [the state oil company] and of the central bank” as part of the key steps
that would need to be completed before a program could commence.
In a positive government step, responding to parliamentary inquiries on June 5
Oil Minister José Bothelho de Vaconcelos told parliament that the government
received a U.S.$30 million signature bonus payment from the consortium partners
in Block 16. Although the amount was relatively small compared to other bonus
payments, it was believed to be the first time that the government disclosed this
type of information publicly and suggested that there would be greater scrutiny of
the government’s activities.
Nevertheless, serious problems remained with corruption scandals involving oil
revenues, and the limited positive steps the government took were overshadowed
by more hostility towards allegations of corruption. Swiss authorities investigated
allegedly irregular transactions involving oil for arms deals during the course of the year.The investigation involved the renegotiation of Angola’s approximately U.S.$5
billion debt to Russia. Swiss authorities reportedly froze more than U.S.$700 million
held in Swiss bank accounts that were part of a complex debt repayment deal
after Swiss authorities alleged that hundreds of millions of dollars were paid to
“Russian and Angolan dignitaries” as part of this deal. After these investigations
became public, the Angolan state media reported in June that the government
planned to “take legal action” against the Swiss investigating magistrate for
“defamation of the image and prestige of Angolan authorities, particularly of the
Head of State, José Eduardo dos Santos.”President dos Santos also reportedly wrote
to Swiss President Kaspar Villiger to protest the investigation, and the government
withdrew its ambassador to Switzerland in June.
The World Bank funded a project resettling twenty thousand displaced people
in Huambo province, and in October allocated funds over the next three years to
support resettlement in other areas of the country. In October, it confirmed support
for a program of vocational training and small business microcredits for excombatants
and their families.
European Union
The E.U.’s 2002 contribution to humanitarian relief and development totalled
Û125 million (U.S.$122 million), double the amount in the previous year.
Both the European Parliament and the Joint Parliamentary Assembly of E.U.
and African-Caribbean-Pacific countries endorsed the military and political steps
taken by the Angolan government and UNITA to consolidate the ceasefire and
urged development of an inclusive peace and reconciliation process.
United States
The end of the war, coupled with the strategic importance of Angolan oil to the
United States, led to increased U.S. government attention to developments in the
country. Soon after the death of Savimbi, President dos Santos visited the U.S.,
meeting with President George W. Bush and Vice-President Dick Cheney.
Assistant Secretary of State for Africa Walter Kansteiner visited Angola in July,
and in his public statements focused on the important role that the private sector—
foreign and domestic—would play in the new phase begun with the end of the war,
and on the importance of the country’s oil exports to the U.S.Angola, not a member
of the oil producers’ cartel OPEC, supplied 5 percent of U.S. oil needs in 2002,
a figure that was projected to triple within ten years. In August, U.S. Secretary of
State Colin Powell stopped briefly in Luanda on his way to Gabon, and spoke,
among other things, on the need to reduce corruption within the Angolan government.
The U.S. was the largest bilateral donor to Angola providing more than $122
million in emergency assistance in fiscal year 2002, and began implementing a new
strategy covering the period 2001-05, based on a mix of emergency, transitional,
and development assistance. The total amount earmarked for the five-year period
was $73 million.
The U.S. House of Representatives held hearings on Angola in June, showing
interest in the consolidation of Angolan civil society and the role of church groups
in reconciliation work. Among those who addressed the House Subcommittee on
Africa was Reverend Daniel Ntoni-Nzinga, executive director of COIEPA.
BURUNDI
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In the year following the November 2001 installation of a transitional government
comprising seventeen political parties, hopes that the nine-year-old civil war
might end remained unfulfilled. Government leaders, both Hutu and Tutsi,
pledged serious negotiations with the two largely Hutu rebel groups that had
refused to sign the Arusha Accord of 2000, the Forces for the Defense of Democracy
(Forces pour la défense de la démocratie, FDD) and the National Forces of Liberation
(Forces nationales de libération, FNL). But as of mid-November 2002 the war
dragged on with widespread suffering for the population.
Both government and rebel forces killed, raped, or otherwise injured hundreds
of civilians and pillaged or destroyed their property. Rebel forces ambushed civilian
vehicles and killed and robbed the passengers.As in the past, government military
and rebel groups alike coerced men, women, and children into transporting
goods, a practice that sometimes placed the civilians in the direct line of fire. The
government continued a program of “civilian self-defense” and did little to curb or
punish human rights abuses committed by its participants. Courts continued to
function badly. In early 2002 an international commission recommended prison
reforms and the freeing of political prisoners, but such measures were not taken
and prisoners remained in inhumane conditions in overcrowded jails: at 8,400, the
prison population declined slightly from the previous year.
The transitional government set up under the terms of the Arusha Accord of
August 2000 incorporated various political tendencies as well as a careful balance
between Hutu and Tutsi. For the first eighteen months of the transition, beginning
in November 2001, the Tutsi Pierre Buyoya was to be president and the Hutu Domitien
Ndayizeye vice-president, then Buyoya was to step down and Ndayizeye was to
become president. Only once before had a Hutu been president: in 1993 Melchior
Ndadaye served a brief term in office and then was assassinated by Tutsi soldiers,
setting off the current instability and violence.
The hopes raised by the November 2001 government soon faded as the FDD and
FNL at first refused negotiations, then both sides stepped up military activities.
Efforts to broker a cease-fire, including those by Tanzanian and South African
mediators, foundered on divisions in the rebel movements,personal and policy differences
among mediators, and a reluctance by some in the army and the government
to share power. The FDD split in late 2001, and its stronger wing negotiated directly with the government for the first time in September 2002 but without
reaching an agreement. The FNL split in August 2002, with the weaker group
expressing a willingness to negotiate for the first time, although by late in the year
there had been no real progress. Regional leaders gathered to discuss Burundi at a
summit in October, but also found no way to end the war.
Under the terms of the accord, the government undertook to uphold human
rights, end impunity, protect civilians and the displaced, and improve the justice
system. It failed to make significant progress in any of these areas, with divisions
among political leaders, pressures of the war, and severe economic difficulties all
contributing to the failure. In September the government jailed Charles Mukasi,
head of a branch of the National Unity and Progress Party (Parti de l’unité et du
progrès national, UPRONA) opposed to peace negotiations, and on November 1 it
placed former President Jean-Baptiste Bagaza under house arrest and suspended
his political party, the Party for National Renewal (Parti pour le Redressement
National, PARENA). Eleven supposed PARENA supporters were jailed in early
November after they tried to close down parts of Bujumbura, the capital, as a political
protest. The national legislature failed to ratify critical legislation on genocide,
on provisional amnesty for persons accused of politically-motivated crimes, and on
the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission. Nor did it establish a
national commission to reintegrate refugees and internally displaced persons.Disagreement
between the Ministry of Justice and judicial personnel blocked promised
and much needed improvements in the judicial and penal systems.Authorities
undertook few investigations or prosecutions of the war-related killing, rape and
injury of civilians occurring during the year.
The civil war spilled over Burundi’s borders into the neighboring Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) and Tanzania, further complicating peace prospects in
Burundi. The FDD used bases in the DRC to launch attacks against Burundi. The
Burundian military operated its own bases in the DRC province of South Kivu
along Lake Tanganyika, supporting the Rwandan government army and Congolese
groups opposed to the DRC government. Both the FDD and the Burundian military
committed human rights abuses in Congo, killing, raping, and robbing civilians.
Perhaps in exchange for Burundian support in the DRC, soldiers of the
Rwandan Patriotic Army supported the Burundian military fighting the FDD and
the FNL in Burundi’s northern provinces. Burundian rebels also operated from
bases in Tanzania, crossing into Burundi to raid communities and launch offensives
against the military. Burundian officials repeatedly asked the Tanzanian government
to halt such attacks and in July called for an international force to police the
border.
During the year both the army and the rebels launched major offensives often
with little regard for civilian lives.When rebels increased their attacks in July, the
military responded with harsh attacks on civilians. They killed some thirty persons
in one commune in Muramvya in July and some fifty more in another commune in
the same province in August.Dozens more were killed in Bujumbura-rural in September
and October. In the worst single incident of civilian casualties, Burundian
army soldiers slaughtered at least 173 civilians in Itaba commune, Gitega province,
during combat with FDD fighters in September. At first, military officials blamed the rebels, but then—in a rare admission of responsibility—said that there had
been “an error of judgment” and arrested two officers. In late 2001 soldiers killed at
least forty-two civilians in Bujumbura-rural, and scores more in early 2002 as they
drove the FNL from bases in Tenga forest near Bujumbura and in the nearby hills.
Victims included eight civilians (among them four children) killed by soldiers on
March 3 in Mutambu commune, and at least thirteen civilians killed and several
others wounded in an attack in Nyabibondo commune on March 19. On April 6,
the military killed more than twenty civilians and burnt eight houses to the ground
in a surprise attack in Gihanga, Bubanza province.
In November 2001, FDD rebels attacked the village ofMunini, Bururi province,
killing a local government official and eighteen civilians including women and children.
In February 2002, the FDD killed a local official and his wife in Minyare,
Cankuzo province. On April 18, FDD combatants killed three civilians and burned
forty-five homes in the Biniganyi camp for displaced persons in Makamba
province. Rebels, apparently of the FDD, shelled Bujumbura in early June and
destroyed homes and property in residential neighborhoods.The FDD also shelled
residential areas in Makamba and Ruyigi towns in July, wounding one man, and
damaging homes and a public school. They shelled civilian areas of Gitega town in
early November 2002.
FNL fighters were less active in 2002 than in years past, in part because of successful
military operations against their bases near Bujumbura, and in part because
of divisions among their leaders. In January, members of the FNL killed a twentyfour-
year-old student in Bujumbura-rural for having allegedly collaborated with
the military. The FNL shelled Bujumbura in April, wounding four civilians, two of
them children. The FNL was apparently responsible for shelling Bujumbura again
at the end of July, killing and wounding several civilians and damaging property.
FNL fighters killed ten civilians in Nyabiraba commune, Bujumbura-rural, in May
for allegedly supporting the military. Two FNL fighters killed the zone chief of
Kamenge, Bujumbura, in a local bar one evening in early September.
During the year rebel groups ambushed vehicles throughout the country, killing
and looting from passengers.On November 5, 2001,FDD fighters in Ruyigi held up
three vehicles coming from Cankuzo province and robbed and killed eleven people.
On January 2, 2002, nine people were killed in three separate ambushes orchestrated
by the FDD and the FNL on roads from Cibitoke to Bujumbura. FNL fighters
ambushed a minibus in May killing Senator Jean Bosco Rutagenwa and ten
others. On June 24, FDD fighters attacked a convoy of vehicles waiting for the road
to open near Bugarama, Muramvya. They killed eight passengers and robbed the
others; several wounded persons later died at a local hospital.
The new government continued a paramilitary program known as Guardians of
the Peace, justifying it as a form of civilian self-defense. These militias, sometimes
including boys as well as young men, were armed, trained, and controlled by the
military but they received no pay and no regular benefits. Some of the guardians
committed killings, rapes, robberies and torture against the population they were
meant to protect. Several dozen were arrested in 2002 for their crimes, but many
more went unpunished. In December 2001, seventeen guards from Kayanza
province were arrested and charged with murder and theft. Tortured in detention, they were still awaiting trial at this writing. Guardians working in Bubanza
province killed three civilians and wounded several others in January 2002.
Many women and girls were raped by men in uniform, particularly in urban
areas.Victims were often unable to identify their attackers. In cases where they did
recognize the perpetrators, victims were too afraid to bring action against them. In
one such instance, a young mother of three children was raped by a soldier and a
civilian charged with local security in mid-February, but she refused to press
charges against them.Even when women reported the crime, they rarely got justice.
One displaced woman was raped by a soldier in early March.When she complained
to a captain at a nearby military position, he told her that the criminal was likely a
rebel. Also in March three Guardians of the Peace raped a woman. They were
arrested the following day but were subsequently released without charge. In
Kayanza province local people accused Guardians of taking advantage of their
firearms to rape women. In a number of cases FDD rebels abducted women and
then forced them to serve as “wives” for weeks or longer at their bases in the bush.
Both the FDD and the FNL abducted hundreds of civilians during operations to
transport looted goods, carry wounded combatants, or serve as guides. They often
obliged civilians to provide such services during military operations and sometimes
put them at risk of enemy fire by making them march at the head of the column.
In November 2001, FDD fighters kidnapped three hundred primary and
secondary school students in Ruyigi and Kayanza provinces and forced them to
carry supplies. Most of the students escaped in the following days, but only after
having been caught in combat and after having endured long marches and abuse by
their captors. The FDD kidnapped the bishop of Ruyigi in May and held him for
several days. Burundian soldiers obliged residents of displaced persons camps and
others living near military positions to supply water and firewood and to provide
other services without pay.
During repeated fighting in 2002, tens of thousands fled their homes, particularly
around Bujumbura and in the east and center of the country.Most took shelter
with neighbors and friends and received little or no humanitarian assistance.
When FDD rebels stepped up attacks in the east in April and May, the government
reinstated its regroupment or forced displacement practice. Soldiers obliged some
thirty thousand residents to leave their homes and move near military positions.
Authorities provided no shelter, food, or water at the camps and, for five weeks, did
not allow humanitarian agencies access to them. The camps were closed in June.
Meanwhile, over three hundred thousand Burundians previously displaced by
combat were living in semi-permanent camps throughout the countryside.
By October approximately forty-five thousand Burundian refugees who lived in
Tanzania had returned home in a program of voluntary repatriation, albeit in
August and September there was also reverse movement as hundreds of Burundians
fled to Tanzania to escape renewed combat.
In December 2001 and January 2002, the Burundian military joined soldiers of
the rebel Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD) and of the Rwandan army in
forcibly repatriating over three hundred Burundians from Congo, apparently
believing that they offered support for Burundian rebels operating there. Some of
the Burundians had been refugees in Congo for years and others had been born there. In January gendarmes in Burundi assisted Rwandan and RCD officials in
rounding up thirteen Congolese nationals suspected of opposing the RCD. They
were taken back to Congo, where eleven remained in a military prison at the time
of writing. Burundian officials arbitrarily detained other Congolese in Bujumbura
in March,April and July.
Disagreements among political leaders over how to restructure the judicial system,
lack of resources, and problems of transport and communication hampered
the performance of the justice system. Officials largely ignored procedural rules
meant to protect the accused and to limit time in detention without charge.Torture
and beating of detainees to obtain confessions was widespread. An international
commission on political prisoners recommended the release of hundreds of prisoners
and improvements in prison facilities, but little progress was made on these
measures. In two high profile cases—the December 2000 shooting at a Belgian passenger
airplane approaching Bujumbura airport, and a massacre committed in
Teza—Hutu defendants assisted by international attorneys were found not guilty.
These two decisions enhanced the credibility of courts often seen as prejudiced
against Hutu.
As the war continued, economic conditions worsened. Promised international
aid was not delivered, the currency was devalued, and the prices of basic commodities
rose.Primary and secondary school teachers went on strike for better conditions
from May through July, returning to work with the promise of salary
increases in 2003. Two students, aged fourteen and sixteen, were killed during student
demonstrations to support their teachers.
Independent radio and news organizations operated in Burundi, but authorities
occasionally harassed or arrested journalists. They imprisoned the director of Net
Press, a web-based information service in December 2001, and accused him of publishing
information which undermined national unity. Authorities closed down
Net Press for two months in early 2002 on similar accusations. A journalist of the
Studio Ijambo radio station was briefly detained and beaten in March as he was
gathering information on a meeting of PA-Amasekanya, a Tutsi extremist group.
Journalists from the African Public Radio (RPA) were arrested and detained for trying
to report on regroupment in Ruyigi in May.RPA was also threatened with being
closed down if it continued investigating the November 2001 murder of the World
Health Organization Burundi country director. (See below.) Military authorities
repeatedly warned journalists to limit their contact with rebel leaders and banned
the broadcast of interviews with them. In July, journalists were banned from
reporting on the death of soldiers killed in the war.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Local and international human rights organizations functioned with relative
freedom in 2002.The government became increasingly vocal in responding to their
criticism. The Ligue Iteka, the principal human rights organization in the country,
published reports and press releases, and maintained a web site.Military and governmental
officials occasionally threatened Iteka observers in the provinces in connection with their work. The Burundian Association for the Defense of Prisoners
(ABDP) monitored conditions in the prisons, provided judicial assistance, and
released a report on pretrial detention. The Association for the Promotion of
Human Rights (APRODH) was established in 2002 and produced press releases on
prison conditions and the displaced. All three groups organized workshops and
conferences on international justice, the fight against torture, and freedom of
expression.
The national human rights commission, composed of government officials
from several ministries and the offices of the president and vice-president,operated
but in October had not yet produced the annual report due under its mandate.The
parliamentary human rights commission was more active than in years past, with
members speaking out against human rights abuses. Its president played an important
role in drawing attention to the Itaba massacre.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The international community invested considerable time and money in promoting
negotiations between the government and rebel groups. Members of the
Security Council, the European Union (E.U.) and other governments repeatedly
urged the rebels to negotiate and called on all parties to halt human rights abuses.
Donors pledged some U.S.$830 million in aid at a November 2001 meeting but
delivered little of it because they were awaiting a cease-fire. The World Bank
approved a U.S.$54 million credit to Burundi in September in the fields of health,
education and justice. This followed another World Bank approved credit in April
for U.S.$36 million.
The E.U. promised U.S.$17.5 million in humanitarian aid to Burundi in March.
Belgium promised an additional grant of U.S.$4.2 million to cover teachers’
salary arrears in September. The United States provided $12.9 million in humanitarian
assistance to Burundi for fiscal year 2002, funding health and nutritional
programs and refugee assistance.
South African troops sent to Burundi at the installation of the transitional government
provided security for politicians. Troops pledged by Senegal,Nigeria and
Ghana to provide additional security did not arrive. A planned Burundian protection
force to replace the South Africans and to be composed half of Tutsi, half of
Hutu, was not established.
In November 2001, the head of the World Health Organization in Burundi, Dr
Kassi Manlan, was murdered in the capital. A government committee created to
investigate his death moved slowly and published no findings; a new commission
was created in September 2002.
The field office of the United Nations (U.N.) high commissioner for human
rights provided legal assistance, monitored prison conditions, and worked closely
with the national human rights commission. It published no reports but raised
abuses with authorities privately. The U.N. special rapporteur for Burundi,Marie-
Therese Keita Boucom, continued to denounce human rights violations through
press conferences and reports.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
To Protect the People: The Government-Sponsored “Self-Defense” Program in
Burundi, 12/01
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO (DRC)
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The catastrophic five-year war pitting the Congolese government against eversplintering
rebel groups continued through most of the year with belligerents
killing, raping and otherwise injuring thousands of civilians.After intensified international
efforts to end the war,Angola and Zimbabwe withdrew most of the troops
they had deployed to support the Congolese government. Rwanda returned home
most of its soldiers backing the Goma branch of the rebel Congolese Rally for Democracy
(RCD-Goma),while Burundi, also a supporter of RCD-Goma, and Uganda,
backer of three other RCD factions, also announced troop withdrawal plans, albeit
in October Rwandan and Burundian forces were reported once more to be in
action alongside RCD-Goma as eastern Congo descended further into inter-factional
and inter-ethnic conflict. In return for the Rwandan military withdrawal, the
Congolese government banned Rwandan rebel groups based in eastern Congo and
expelled the leaders of one of them,the Democratic Forces for Rwandan Liberation
(FDLR). The government also agreed to facilitate the disarmament and repatriation
of Rwandan rebels, but initial efforts at persuading them to return home were
largely futile.
In the year or so up to their withdrawal the major foreign actors generally
observed a truce, but local forces, some of which received support from the Congolese
government or from one of the foreign actors, continued combat behind the
front lines in eastern Congo through much of 2002. According to a report by a
United Nations (U.N.) Security Council investigating commission released in
October, Rwandan, Ugandan, and Zimbabwean army officers and Congolese
authorities spurred these local conflicts in order to more easily plunder Congolese
resources. It said these high-ranking officials collaborated with “criminal groups”
in stealing Congolese wealth, and warned that the withdrawal of foreign troops
would not end this exploitation.
Various parties to the conflict met in February 2002 in the inter-Congolese dialogue
called for by the Lusaka Peace Accord of 1999, but they reached only a fragile
power-sharing agreement that left undecided important questions about national
reunification and the political transition. RCD-Goma refused to sign the agreement,
as did veteran opposition leaders like Etienne Tshisekedi of the Union for
Democracy and Social Progress. RCD-Goma boycotted a scheduled renewal of
negotiations in late October.
The government became a state party to the Rome Convention for the International
Criminal Court and also called for the establishment of an international
criminal tribunal to try crimes against humanity committed in Congo before the
date when the ICC came into being. Other actors, too, called for an international
tribunal in the agreement reached as a conclusion to the inter-Congolese dialogue,
but the international community showed little interest in this.
In May some RCD-Goma troops mutinied in Kisangani. In putting down that
uprising, RCD-Goma soldiers, apparently backed by Rwandans, massacred civilians
and military personnel: According to a report presented to the U.N. Security
Council, more than 160 persons were slain.
In August and September hundreds of civilians were killed in the northeastern
province of Ituri, where Ugandan army troops that were supposed to be keeping
order there instead gave backing to one side in a conflict between competing rebel
factions and ethnic militias. In August the Union of Patriotic Congolese (UPC), a
faction predominantly of Hema ethnicity and supported by Ugandan troops, drove
forces of the RCD-Liberation Movement (RCD-ML), led by Mbusa Nyamwisi,
from the provincial capital, Bunia, and killed members of the Lendu and Ngiti ethnic
groups, seen as RCD-ML supporters.RCD-ML forces and predominantly Ngiti
militia then attacked the town of Nyankunde and killed hundreds of civilians,
including hospital staff and patients, the latter slaughtered in their beds.
In Orientale province Nyamwisi’s RCD-ML also lost territory in October to the
Movement for the Liberation of the Congo (MLC) led by Jean-Pierre Bemba.
Advancing eastwards out of Equateur province and reinforced by another RCD
splinter, the RCD-National (RCD-N) led by Roger Lumbala, Bemba’s forces captured
Epulu and Mambasa, driving thousands of frightened civilians before them,
and at this writing were bearing down on Beni in North Kivu.
As Rwandan troops left North and South Kivu provinces in October, local forces
including groups of Mai-Mai and Banyamulenge (Congolese people of Rwandan
ancestry) drove RCD-Goma soldiers from Uvira and surrounding areas, but then
yielded before a new RCD-Goma thrust, reportedly reinforced by Burundian and
Rwandan forces.RCD-Goma troops and Mai-Mai all reportedly killed civilians and
plundered their property during this combat.
Many Banyamulenge originally supported RCD-Goma, but in early 2002 an
important group followed former RCD-Goma officer Patrick Mazunzu in rejecting
the rebel movement’s authority. RCD-Goma troops tried unsuccessfully to suppress
Masunzu’s group. Rwandan government soldiers then joined in attacking the
Banyamulenge, a people whose security had once been a pretext for the Rwandan
army presence in Congo. Rwandan and RCD-Goma troops killed scores of civilians,
including some shot from helicopter gunships, and forced thousands from
their homes.
Combatants from all sides raped and otherwise sexually assaulted women and
girls in the October fighting, as throughout the year. In some cases, victims were
abducted and held for weeks or months to provide sexual and other services.
According to U.N. figures, some two million persons had been displaced by the
conflict in eastern Congo by late October. Humanitarian agencies could meet the
needs of relatively few of them and had to reduce even this limited assistance with October’s intensified fighting. Combatants sometimes hindered humanitarian
work:Mai-Mai took staff of the Merlin nongovernmental organization hostage for
three days in January, and UPC authorities prevented humanitarian flights from
landing at Bunia airport in October.
On taking power in 2001,President Joseph Kabila had pledged to honor civil and
political rights, but throughout 2002 he continued to exercise autocratic powers
inherited from his late father and predecessor, Laurent-Desiré Kabila.According to
decree-law number 3 of 1997, all executive, legislative and judicial powers are vested
in the president.Authorities carried out many abuses under the guise of delivering
justice through the Court of Military Order. In October the prosecutor demanded
the death penalty for 115 of 135 persons accused of having participated in plotting
the late President Kabila’s assassination. Shortly before, the government had
announced the end to a moratorium on the death penalty in place since March
2001.
In December 2001 authorities beat and otherwise injured hundreds of Kinshasa
university students whom they arrested after they had protested against tuition fee
increases. According to the government, three policemen were killed during the
protests. Leaders accused of organizing the protests were arbitrarily detained for
three months, during which time they were severely beaten to induce them to confess
to supposed links with political opposition leaders.
During the year authorities arrested fifteen journalists for publishing articles of
which they disapproved. The publication director of the daily Alerte Plus reported
that he was tortured in detention to force him to reveal sources of a news story published
by the paper. The reporter who wrote the story was also arrested. In the East
Kasai provincial capital, Mbuji-Mayi, the director of the National Intelligence
Agency reportedly ordered three local radio and television stations not to cover
news concerning opposition leader Tshisekedi.
In the zone controlled by RCD-Goma, authorities often detained civilians in
unofficial places of detention, brought no charges against them, and refused them
outside contact. Such detainees included a dozen Banyamulenge whom RCDGoma
agents arrested in Burundi in January with the help of Burundian authorities.
They were reportedly transferred to a container located a short distance from
Goma; at this writing their whereabouts were unknown.
In August and September, RCD-Goma authorities cooperated with Rwandan
officials in forcibly repatriating thousands of Congolese refugees who had sought
safety in Rwanda several years earlier. They made no provision for those who
returned and initially refused to allow humanitarian workers access to them.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights activists faced harassment, abduction, beatings, and arbitrary
arrest in the course of their efforts to work in an extremely hostile environment in
both government-held and rebel-controlled areas of Congo.
In April government agents detained N’sii Luanda Shandwe, head of the Committee
for the Observation of Human Rights, and charged him with treason and sheltering criminals. N’sii faces trial before the Court of Military Order and a possible
death sentence if found guilty.Human Rights Watch and other local and international
advocates asked President Kabila to release N’sii or transfer his case to a
civilian court to be tried in accordance with international fair trial standards, but at
this writing N’sii—who fell ill in prison—remained under military jurisdiction.
Willy Wenga Ilombe, a lawyer and member of the nongovernmental Center for
Peace,Democracy and Human Rights, detained in February for criticizing the government,
was still held at this writing. Golden Misabiko, chairman in Katanga
province of the leading national organization the African Association for the
Defense ofHuman Rights (ASADHO), was detained for eight months and tortured
in 2001, and in March 2002 was forced to flee the country after the prosecutor of
the Court of Military Order ordered his arrest for having criticized government
policy in a radio interview.
In the zone controlled by the Ugandan-backed MLC, authorities detained a local
correspondent of the U.N.-supported Radio Okapi for a week because he had interviewed
child soldiers. In Bunia in early September, agents of RCD-ML, also backed
by Uganda, detained Honore Musoko, founding member of the association Justice
Plus, because he had criticized the human rights record of the faction during an
interview with Voice of America. In late 2001 and early 2002, RCD-ML agents
repeatedly detained Hangi Bin Talent, the representative in Beni of ASADHO. By
mid-year, he had fled Congo.
Human rights defenders were harassed and arrested also by RCD-Goma authorities.
On March 15 agents detained and severely beat Richard Bayunda of the
Research Center for Environment, Development and Human Rights (CREDDHO).
They were apparently reacting to his efforts to protect detainees whose
rights were being abused.After the May mutiny in Kisangani, RCD-Goma authorities
threatened several human rights activists. They detained Dunia Ruyenzi, a
lawyer, in late May when he sought information about the whereabouts of some
detainees. They held Djento Mahundu Bwenge for over a week at the Direction
Générale de Migration (DGM) because he gave an interview to Radio France International.
Also in May RCD-Goma soldiers raided the office of the Study and Action
Group for a Well-Defined Development (GEAD). They seized documents and
equipment and, at the time of this writing,were still prohibiting access to the office.
Soldiers later attempted to intimidate Delphine Itongwa, a leading member of
GEAD, by making a menacing nighttime visit to her house.
In the RCD-Goma-held city of Bukavu, a civil society leader and teacher at the
Catholic University, Professor Byamungu, was assassinated by uniformed soldiers
in July.As of this writing, no one had been arrested for this crime.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Having spent much effort trying to end the war in the DRC, and satisfied with
the withdrawal of foreign troops and Congo’s disavowal of Rwandan rebels, the
international community appeared willing to mute its calls for accountability in
hopes of ensuring the hard-won semblance of stability.
United Nations
Ambassadors of the U.N. Security Council traveled to countries involved in the
Congo war in May, the third such visit in as many years,underlining the importance
they gave to ending the conflict. On several occasions the council deplored efforts
by belligerents to increase their territory in violation of the truce, condemned the
resurgence of violence, and encouraged steps such as the withdrawal of foreign
troops.
The United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUC) monitored observance of the truce by the primary belligerents
effectively, but did nothing to halt combat among local parties behind the lines.
With some 5,500 troops, most of them stationed far from the eastern region where
local conflicts were most prevalent, MONUC was ill-equipped to carry out the part
of its mandate calling for the protection of civilians at “imminent risk of physical
violence.” This failure was evident during the Kisangani massacre in May. On the
first day of violence no MONUC personnel went out on patrol to deter killing,
although there were dozens of military observers in the city and some one thousand
troops there to defend U.N.personnel. On the second day,MONUC officers did call
for calm, obtained the release of two detained priests, and protected seven other
civilians. Officers of the force subsequently joined representatives of the U.N.High
Commissioner for Human Rights Field Office in Congo in conducting a detailed
investigation of the events. As a number of international actors were calling for
increased resources for MONUC in October, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan
proposed increasing the force to 8,700 troops and stationing two strong mobile
units near the zones of conflict in the east.
Following critical comments by U.N. personnel about the conduct of RDCGoma
soldiers, the rebel authorities expelled two U.N. staff members from the
town of Goma and a third from Kisangani. It also declared the secretary-general’s
special representative persona non grata after MONUC reported on the Kisangani
killings as “unjustifiable.” On June 5, the Security Council condemned “in the
strongest terms” acts of intimidation by RCD-Goma against U.N. officials and
called on Rwanda to use its influence to ensure that RCD-Goma obey Security
Council resolutions without delay.
On several occasions during the year, such as on September 30 after combat had
intensified in the east, the Security Council called for an end to human rights abuses
committed by all sides during the war. It issued a particularly strong presidential
statement on July 23 condemning the Kisangani massacres and demanding that
RCD-Goma bring the officers responsible to justice. It also said that Rwanda had a
duty to use its influence over RCD-Goma to see that no further war crimes were
committed.
The special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions went
to Kisangani to investigate the massacre and gathered information that formed the
basis of a report presented by the high commissioner for human rights to the Security
Council in July. This marked the first time that the high commissioner had
addressed the council on the human rights situation in a single country.At its 2002
meeting, the Commission on Human Rights extended the mandate of the special
rapporteur for the DRC.
The Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms ofWealth of the Democratic Republic of Congo presented its final report to
the Security Council in mid-October.Drawing on extensive documentary evidence
and witness statements, the panel described the networks through which Rwandan,
Ugandan, Zimbabwean, and Congolese authorities had been growing rich at the
expense of the Congolese people. The report explained that various foreign actors
worked to keep local authorities weak and local peoples in conflict in order to make
it easier for them to extract wealth from the area. It also concluded that Rwanda was
not in Congo to protect its security, as it frequently claimed, but rather to “secure
property.” It named not just individual officers but also various corporations—
some international, some national—involved in illegally exploiting the DRC’s
wealth. It called for sanctions against the individuals and corporations if they
failed, after a brief grace period, to halt their activities.
European Union
The E.U. sought to encourage peace by combining incentives and pressures on
all parties to the conflict. The United Kingdom (U.K.) foreign secretary and his
French counterpart visited Central Africa together in January. They were followed
soon after by the Belgian foreign minister and a joint delegation of the U.K.,
Netherlands, and Norwegian ministers for international development.
The E.U. condemned violations of the truce, such as when RCD-Goma forces
took Moliro and Pweto in March. In demanding that these forces retreat, the E.U.
called upon Rwanda to use its influence to see that this was accomplished.On October
22 the E.U. deplored the resurgence of violence in the east and expressed concern
about human rights violations, particularly in Ituri. It endorsed an expansion
of MONUC forces. Shortly after the Kisangani massacre, the E.U. Presidency and
the European Parliament condemned the killings and “the repression of the Congolese
people by RCD-Goma members and Rwandan troops.”The U.K., known to
favor Rwanda, nonetheless played a key role in brokering the agreement between
the Congolese government and Rwanda in July.
As the year-long Congolese program of economic reform yielded some
improvements, various donors rewarded this success and promised further support
if efforts at peace, reconciliation, and democratization continued. In January,
the E.U. approved a National Indicative Program of Û120 million (U.S.$118 million)
for a five-year effort to alleviate poverty and strengthen institutions. This
resumption of development assistance signaled a departure from previous years
when the E.U. denied Congo funds for development while delivering extremely
generous assistance to Rwanda and Uganda, notwithstanding condemnation of
both these governments for their military presence in Congo.
International financial institutions joined in offering new support to Congo.
The donors grouped in the Paris club wrote off more than half of U.S.$9 billion in
debt and agreed to reschedule the rest and to seek similar relief for Congo from
other donors. The World Bank proposed canceling more than 80 percent of outstanding
Congolese debt (to be finally decided on in early 2003). In June, the World
Bank resumed cooperation with Congo by giving a loan of $450 million and a grant of $44 million to help finance part of a $1.7 billion emergency and reconstruction
program.
United States
Like others in the international community, the U.S. focused on ending the war,
a message that President George W. Bush himself delivered to the Congolese and
Rwandan presidents in September. The U.S. condemned the Kisangani massacre,
and its ambassador for war crimes issues traveled to the scene in October. The
ambassador also pushed Congolese authorities to surrender important suspects
sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, an effort that netted
one important suspect by October. The U.S. State Department Country Report on
Human Rights Practices for 2001 detailed abuses by government and rebel authorities,
but recognition of the abuses had only limited impact on policy.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
War Crimes in Kisangani: The Response of Rwandan-backed Rebels to the May
2002 Mutiny, 8/02
The War Within the War: Sexual Violence Against Women and Girls in Eastern
Congo, 6/02
ERITREA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Despite a Pyrrhic victory in the 1997-2000 border war with Ethiopia, Eritrea
remained a country under siege—from its own government. In April 2002, a
boundary commission established under the cease-fire agreement between the two
countries gave a ruling favorable to Eritrea.Although the exact boundary between
the two countries was still to be demarcated,many of the most intensively disputed
areas would fall on the Eritrean side of the border. The government continued to
use the war as an excuse for not implementing a constitution ratified in a 1997 referendum
and for not holding elections. Nine years after Eritrea obtained its independence,
no institutions existed to restrain government abuses, and presidential
rule by decree continued unfettered. The ruling People’s Front for Democracy and
Justice (PFDJ) was the sole political party allowed to operate.
Ignoring penal code requirements, the government continued to detain without
charge eleven members of the so-called Group of 15 (G-15), prominent critics in
the PFDJ central council arrested in September 2001 after publishing an open letter
to President Isayas Afeworki requesting democratic reforms. In response to criticism by the European Parliament, the government asserted that the eleven had
participated in a “conspiracy to oust the president illegally,”had attempted to negotiate
independently with the Ethiopian government during the war, and had
engaged in “sedition” by infiltrating government offices and the military through
the creation of “clandestine cells.”
In April eleven editors and reporters arrested in a September 2001 clampdown
on the independent media, and since held at a police station in the capital,Asmara,
began a hunger strike to demand their release. After three days, the government
moved them to secret locations and cut off all contact by the detainees with the outside
world (they had previously been allowed family visits). One of the journalists,
Dawit Isaac, was briefly hospitalized, reportedly as a result of torture while in police
custody. None of the journalists were charged with a crime as of October 2002.
Three other journalists, one of whom had been arrested in July 2000, remained
unaccounted for.
All private newspapers remained closed. The government controlled all sources
of information within the country. It operated the sole radio and television stations
and news agency and published all remaining newspapers and magazines. There
were unconfirmed reports that the government used its control over the only local
internet server to read e-mail traffic to and from Eritrea.
The government arrested dozens of others it deemed sympathetic to its critics,
including a former consul general, journalists working for the government press,
businessmen, the solicitor-general, local government administrators, and members
of the families of people previously arrested. Also in detention were two local
employees of the United States embassy,who had been arrested in September 2001,
reportedly for trying to arrange political asylum for G-15 members. Their whereabouts,
at an Asmara police station, were not kept secret; but they, too, were not
charged or allowed visitors.
In January 2002, the government reconvened an interim “National Assembly”
that had not met since September 2000. The assembly consisted of seventy-five
PFDJ central committee members and seventy-five party members selected by the
leadership in 1993.The assembly approved the government’s arrests and press closings.
It accused those arrested of having committed “grave crimes.” A resolution
claimed that the closed newspapers had been “foreign-funded” and had “engaged
in defamation and rumor-mongering.”
The assembly approved an election law designed to preserve the PFDJ’s monopoly
on power. Under the law, no political party other than the PFDJ would be
allowed to operate. The assembly resolution criticized previous attempts to permit
political pluralism. The election law disenfranchised anyone who commits treason
or “crimes against the nation.” It permitted members of the armed forces to be candidates
for office.Although President Isayas appointed a five-person electoral commission
at the end of January 2002, no elections had been scheduled as of October.
As government repression intensified, several government officials resigned;
they included the ambassador to Sudan and the chargé d’affaires in Djibouti, both
of whom left their posts in September. In mid-2002, the government extended
mandatory national service obligations for another two years, providing cheap
labor for government projects.Widespread enforcement round-ups were carried out around the country, and as a result hundreds of Eritreans fled to neighboring
countries and beyond. In October, Malta deported over two hundred recent
refugees. They were arrested upon arrival in Asmara, taken to a military camp, and
held incommunicado. Eritreans caught attempting to flee the country were reportedly
beaten and tortured.
One of the more notable escapes was that by University ofAsmara student union
president Semere Kesete.He had been arrested in July 2001 after protesting the university’s
management of a forced labor national service program for university students.
Semere had been imprisoned in an Asmara police station but was never
charged with a crime. In July 2002 he managed to escape to Ethiopia with the assistance
of one of his guards.
In 2002, the government ordered all houses of worship other than those affiliated
with the Eritrean Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Lutheran Christian faiths
and Moslem mosques to close. The ban affected Jehovah’s Witnesses, Seventh Day
Adventists, and Pentecostal adherents from practicing their religions. Jehovah’s
Witnesses were especially harshly treated because of their religious practices and
beliefs. Four Jehovah’s Witnesses were still imprisoned after more than five years
without charge or trial for refusing to participate in the national service program,
even though the maximum penalty for refusal to serve is three years. Jehovah’s Witnesses
were denied national identity cards, making them ineligible for government
employment and government permits, such as passports and driver’s licenses.
In a positive development, Eritrea acceded to the Mine Ban Treaty on August 27,
2001. Mine survey, clearance and mine risk education activities increased greatly.
The United Nations (U.N.) Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) Mine Action
Coordination Center reported that from November 2000 through December 2001
over 10 million square meters of land and 989 kilometers of roads were cleared.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Only one human rights organization has been allowed to exist in Eritrea, Citizens
for Peace. It limited its advocacy to the rights of war victims. It was not
reported as active in 2002.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The European Union remained critical of Eritrea, but the United States muted
its criticism in light of Eritrea’s potential importance as a military ally in the region.
Speaking at Eritrea’s eleventh independence anniversary celebration, President
Isayas repudiated widespread international criticism: “To those few who intervene
in our internal political matters and who pretend to be our mentors of democracy,
. . .we have this simple message.We shall not choose slavery to get their assistance.”
United Nations
The U.N. expected to provide U.S.$120 million in assistance in 2002, primarily
in food aid. Forty-two hundred peacekeeping troops assigned to UNMEE patrolled
a twenty-five kilometer-wide buffer zone between Eritrea and Ethiopia. (See also
Ethiopia.) The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) concluded that
by the end of 2002 Eritreans in Sudan would no longer automatically be entitled to
refugee status but could apply individually if they feared persecution on return to
Eritrea. UNHCR reported that it had voluntarily repatriated fifty thousand Eritreans
from Sudan between May 2001 and mid-October 2002. Even so, well over one
hundred thousand Eritreans remained in refugee camps in Sudan as of October
2002.
African Commission
The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights wrote to President
Isayas asking for the release of political prisoners. The letter stated that incommunicado
detentions without trial and violated the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights.
European Union
The E.U. and its member states frequently voiced complaints about the government’s
human rights record; the European Commission limited its financial assistance
largely to humanitarian aid. A total of Û23.775 million (U.S.$23.47 million)
was newly allocated to projects including refugee support and resettlement assistance;
food aid and food security; demining and border demarcation; and emergency
assistance. In September 2002, the commission committed Û27 million
($26.49 million) to support military demobilization, a program the Eritrean government
frequently proclaimed in 2001 and 2002 but rarely implemented. Denmark,
which provided about 40 percent of the Ministry of Agriculture budget,
announced that it would end financial assistance to Eritrea by 2005 because it did
not “want to maintain dictators in power.” In September Eritrea and Italy named
new ambassadors, healing the diplomatic rift created by Eritrea’s 2001 expulsion of
the Italian ambassador—who was also the European Union’s representative—after
he delivered a demarche expressing concern for about deteriorating human rights
conditions. In response, Italy had cut off further assistance and had expelled the
Eritrean ambassador.
United States
Although U.S. aid to Eritrea remained small, U.S. Defense Department officials
saw Eritrea as a strategic ally. The commander of the U.S. central command visited
Asmara in March and was reported to have expressed interest in creation of a naval
bombardment and gunnery range along Eritrea’s coast with the southern Red Sea.
The Defense Department’s African affairs director told the Voice of America that a “military-to-military” relationship with Eritrea would provide “a lot of benefits”
but that the American government had not yet decided to proceed. One stumbling
block to a closer relationship was the continued incarceration of the two U.S.
embassy employees.
In mid-October 2002, the State Department issued a press statement demanding
release of the two employees or a fair and open trial for them. Referring to the
detention of government critics and journalists, the shut-down of the private press,
and restrictions on religious affiliation, the statement also called on the Eritrean
government to “return to the basic values of democracy and human rights, as it has
repeatedly committed itself to do.” Eritrea labeled the statement “unacceptable”
and accused the CIA of unlawfully having attempted “to change the government”
during the war with Ethiopia by conspiring with “some senior [Eritrean government]
officials,” presumably those arrested in 2001.
ETHIOPIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Human rights conditions in Ethiopia did not perceptibly improve in 2002. In
southern Ethiopia they significantly worsened: Police shot into groups of civilians
and conducted mass arrests. Arbitrary arrests, however, were not confined to the
south. Those who were arrested were subjected to prison conditions that did not
meet international standards and some prisoners, particularly in Oromiya regional
state, were tortured. Courts rarely intervened to stop human rights abuses, parliament
not at all. The print media was allowed to publish but was frequently
harassed. The ruling coalition Ethiopian Peoples’Revolutionary Democratic Front
(EPRDF) led by Prime Minister Meles Zenawi maintained a firm grip over the federal
and state governments. Local elections were subject to intimidation and fraud.
The EPRDF also continued to exert control over the judiciary.
Police violence in Tepi and Awassa, in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and
Peoples (SNNP) regional state, resulted in the deaths of more than one hundred
civilians and the arrest of hundreds. In Tepi, members of two minority ethnic
groups, the Sheko and Majenger, clashed in March with local officials and police
over political rights. Some civilians were reported to have been armed with
machetes. At least eighteen civilians and one local official died. In the following
days, more than one hundred were killed and villages razed on the order of local
authorities, leaving some 5,800 homeless. Nearly one thousand civilians were
arrested after the disturbance, and 269 remained in detention when a diplomatic
delegation visited in June.
In the city of Awassa on May 24, soldiers using machine guns mounted on
armored cars shot into a crowd of farmers protesting a change in the administrative
status of the city. The government acknowledged seventeen deaths but independent reports said that twenty-five civilians were killed and twenty-six injured.
Police also shot at crowds of unarmed students in March and April in Oromiya,
Ethiopia’s most populous state. State officials acknowledged that five high school
students were killed and over a dozen wounded when police shot into groups
protesting government educational and economic policies.The Oromiya state parliament
justified the police tactics by asserting that the police had no funds to purchase
non-lethal crowd control equipment.
Police subsequently arrested several hundred students, teachers, and others
whom it accused of being members or sympathizers of the Oromo Liberation Front
(OLF), an armed movement that the government claimed had instigated the student
protests. In June, over three hundred people were incarcerated in Dembi Dolo,
including some seventy school children. Some of those detained there and in Ambo
town, about 130 kilometers west of Addis Ababa (the capital), were tortured.Most
of the prisoners were released on bail two months after their arrests. The government
suspended teachers and civil servants from their jobs.
The government failed to bring police accused of killing civilians to justice in the
above-mentioned incidents, or similar previous incidents, including the killing of
forty students during a strike at Addis Ababa University in April 2001. The federal
government arrested ten officials in August 2002 for their involvement in the
Awassa or Tepi violence. It was not clear, however, whether those arrested were
accused of using excessive force to put down the protests or of having encouraged
civilians to demonstrate in the first place.
Human rights violations continued to be particularly egregious in Oromiya.
Since the government banned the OLF a decade before, thousands of alleged OLF
members or sympathizers had been arrested, and this trend continued in 2002.
(Oromos constitute the largest single ethnic group in Ethiopia, some 40 percent of
the population.) As ofMarch more than 1,700 such prisoners were reportedly held
at the Ghimbi central prison, half of them arrested recently and the rest having been
there for five to ten years, some without charge. Hundreds more were detained in
prisons and police jails across Oromiya state. Prisoners who were released or
escaped from incarceration reported severe torture while imprisoned. The
Oromiya state minister for capacity building, who fled the country in May,
denounced the state government for indiscriminately accusing the Oromo people
of supporting the OLF.
The government continued to crack down on teachers who criticized changes in
education policy and supported the banned Ethiopian Teachers’ Association
(ETA). Dr. Taye Wolde Semayat, president of ETA, was released in May 2002 after
an appeals court reduced his sentence to less time than he had already served. He
had been placed in a fetid cell and shackled while in solitary confinement during
part of his six-year incarceration (Taye had been convicted of plotting to overthrow
the government, though independent observers believed the charges were fabricated).
ETA continued to work to protect teachers’ rights despite the fact that the
government had created a puppet organization with the same name, seized the
original organization’s funds, and sealed parts of its offices. Seven teachers who
supported ETA were arrested in May in Sendafa and held for two months on
trumped-up charges, and more than forty teachers who attended a February ETA conference on education for all and teaching about HIV/AIDS were arrested and
held for two weeks when they returned home. Between August and October
authorities refused permission for and police interrupted and dispersed ETA meetings.
Government officials threatened teachers with dismissal or withholding of
salary if they failed to disassociate themselves from ETA.
Prison conditions were harsh in the provinces and in Addis Ababa.Medical care
was rudimentary and rationed to a handful of prisoners per day. Prisoners with
AIDS reportedly received no treatment, and former prisoners reported having witnessed
deaths of prisoners with serious diseases such as tuberculosis. Prisoners
were denied access to bathing facilities, mattresses, and blankets. Some released in
2002 told of being detained in such crowded confinement that they had had to take
turns sleeping. Food was meager but adequate. Prisoners who had family living
nearby were normally allowed to receive food from family members. In May the
International Committee of the Red Cross reported it had access to 4,800 security
detainees in 150 places of detention.
The judiciary remained unable or unwilling to stop human rights violations. In
May, the federal minister for capacity building acknowledged that the justice system
was generally backward and incapable of enforcing constitutional guarantees.
Often judges refused to release prisoners on bail even when the police or prosecutor
had no proper grounds for their detention. Instead, hearings were adjourned for
two weeks at a time to allow police to investigate. Occasionally, a court would order
the release of a prisoner only for the prisoner to be rearrested and jailed within a
day or two outside that court’s geographical jurisdiction. For example, police
arrested an Addis Ababa businesswoman,Dinkinesh Deressa Kitila, in early June on
accusations she had transported OLF documents in her car. She appeared in court
several times over two months before the local court ordered her released for lack
of evidence.Two days after her release on bail, she was rearrested in another district.
As of October, she remained imprisoned.
Prisoners held for non-bailable offenses were incarcerated for years while their
cases were investigated. In 2001, parliament enacted legislation to prevent anyone
accused of corruption from being released on bail. The law was immediately
applied to the former Defense Minister Siye Abraha, who was also Prime Minister
Meles’ chief political adversary. The former minister and several alleged co-conspirators
had not been brought to trial by October 2002,well over a year after their
arrests. In July the presiding court ordered the prosecution to revise its charges,
assuring further delay. Businesspeople arrested in 2001 on corruption charges also
continued to languish in jail without trial.
The largest single group of long-term prisoners were members of the previous
government, the Derg, accused of genocide, crimes against humanity, and other
serious offenses. Several dozen former Derg officials were brought to trial in 2002,
about a third of whom were acquitted.Hundreds more who had been in prison for
a decade or more still awaited trial, but the Federal High Court claimed to be able
to complete their trials by September 2003.
In some cases, the police and courts began to enforce laws protecting women and
children more seriously than in the past, in particular by making greater efforts to
arrest men who raped children and, when convictions were secured, by imposing prison sentences on some rapists. In Addis Ababa two policewomen were assigned
to each district.However, women’s groups claimed that police often did not investigate
reports of adult rape,while prosecutors took over a year to bring charges and
then only for infractions with the lowest possible penalty. Outside the major cities,
customary law continued to govern intra-family relations including inheritance.
The private print media was allowed to operate but was periodically harassed.
The prime minister called the newspapers organs of illegal political parties and the
minister of information accused them of practicing hate politics. In July, the former
editor of a weekly newspaper was sentenced to two years of imprisonment for
defamation and disseminating false information. Early in 2002, the government
released another journalist on U.S.$2,000 bail after ten months of incarceration.He
had been accused of inciting violence after he had written articles about mismanagement
at a government-owned tannery and about a former general’s prediction
of the government’s imminent overthrow. Other journalists were also briefly
detained and then released on bail for articles they had written. In March, one was
fined U.S.$1,400 for a 1997 article quoting a speech given in the United States in
which the American speaker asserted that the present Ethiopian government was as
bad as the Derg. In each case, the government invoked a Derg-era press law making
defamation, the publication of false information, and incitement criminal offenses.
The government was drafting a new press law and code of ethics, but advocates for
an independent press feared it would be even more restrictive and intrusive than
existing law.
The editor of the only newspaper in Tigray state was arrested in December 2001.
After a state court ordered her release and dismissed the criminal charges she closed
the newspaper and fled the country. The Addis Ababa private print media had no
circulation outside the capital, partly as a result of transportation problems but also
partly because of intimidation by local authorities who regarded the possession of
nongovernment newspapers with suspicion. The government owned the only television
and all radio stations except for one FM station owned by the Tigray Peoples’
Liberation Front (TPLF), the lead political party in the government coalition.
Although the government periodically stated that it would permit others to enter
broadcasting, implementing legislation remained stalled.
Political parties were permitted to exist but their activities were sometimes hindered,
especially at local levels. In December 2001, opposition groups in the SNNP
state boycotted zonal elections, claiming that their candidates had been denied
access to the ballot and had been molested by government party supporters. The
chairman of the South Ethiopian Peoples’Democratic Coalition (SEPDC), Beyene
Petros, one of a handful of opposition members of the federal parliament, accused
the National Elections Board of having assigned government officials and government
party members as election judges. The chairman of the commission deemed
the charge without merit and threatened to sue Beyene. In March 2002, people
known to be government party functionaries disrupted a meeting of the Ethiopian
Democratic Party (EDP) in Awassa at which members were protesting government
acquiescence to revision of the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea. (See below.)
Police present at the meeting failed to intervene.
Issues remaining from the border war Ethiopia fought with Eritrea between 1998 and 2000 continued to fester. In late August 2002, Eritrea repatriated 279
Ethiopian prisoners of war (POWs), stating that it had thereby returned all POWs,
but the Ethiopian government accused Eritrea of still holding prisoners in undisclosed
locations. It demanded information about seventy-three police and militia
members who remained unaccounted for, and about a pilot who had been paraded
through the streets of the Eritrean capital after his plane was shot down in 1998.As
of October 2002, the Ethiopian government continued to hold about 1,300 Eritrean
POWs despite its pledge to release them. Persons of Ethiopian descent who were
deported from Eritrea continued to live under difficult circumstances in fourteen
camps around the country. The Ethiopian government abruptly closed three of the
camps, forcing inhabitants to leave, and announced plans to do the same with the
remaining eleven.
Reliable sources reported that the Eritrean government was giving logistical
support, training, and weapons to OLF guerillas attempting to infiltrate Ethiopia
from Sudan, and to armed Tigrean groups opposed to the current Ethiopian government.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCO), the most prominent human
rights group, issued a number of reports on human rights violations in 2002,
including on the shootings and arrests in Tepi, Awassa, and Oromiya; on forced
roundups of street children who were then dumped in a remote forest; and on
abuses against deportees from Eritrea. Two leading members of EHRCO who had
been arrested and bailed in 2001, charged with inciting university students to riot,
appeared in court periodically in 2002 but a trial on the merits had not begun at this
writing. The Ethiopian Women Lawyers Association, which like EHRCO had been
temporarily shut down by the government in 2001, faced no overt government
interference in 2002. The government continued to refuse to register the Human
Rights League.
The constitution and legislation empower parliament to establish a human
rights commission and ombudsman to investigate government abuses. A parliamentary
committee solicited nominations to these bodies in 2002 but, as of October,
neither organization had been established.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Following the end of the war with Eritrea in 2000, international donors began to
provide Ethiopia with more generous aid packages. The United States, European
Union, and United Nations were preparing to respond to a looming humanitarian
crisis due to severe drought.Most international donors remained silent in the face
of human rights violations, preferring to support Ethiopia’s fragile, relative peace
in a troubled region and not wishing to jeopardize Ethiopia’s cooperation in fighting
terrorism.
United Nations and World Bank
An independent boundary commission established as part of the December
1999 cease-fire agreement released a report with preliminary findings in April. The
report generally rejected Ethiopian claims including (without mentioning it by
name) the claim to the village of Badme,where the war had started. Both countries
initially announced that they accepted the commission’s decision, but in June the
Ethiopian government defied the ruling by voluntarily resettling 210 people from
central Tigray to Badme. Actual demarcation of the border in accordance with the
commission’s directions had not begun as of October.
The U.N. Security Council extended until March 15, 2003 the mandate of the
United Nations Mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) to monitor the ceasefire
agreement. The border remained calm but for occasional tense confrontations
by local civilians and militia with UNMEE peacekeepers. In April 2002, the
Ethiopian government accused the UNMEE force commander of bias after he
drove foreign journalists into Badme from Eritrea, and refused to meet with him
thereafter. The U.N. replaced him in October.
The U.N. Emergencies Unit reported in February that some areas, notably in
eastern Tigray,were still uninhabitable due to the presence of landmines.While no
demining had started in Ethiopia, two demining companies were trained, and some
survey work had started. In April, after many months of prodding, Ethiopia provided
detailed maps of mines its forces had laid in Eritrea to UNMEE. There was a
significant decrease in deaths and injuries from landmines and unexploded ordinance
from the previous year. Nevertheless, from June to August alone, twelve
people were injured and four killed in eleven incidents.
Ethiopia obtained a measure of debt relief in 2002 from the World Bank and
Western countries in 2002, enough to save it U.S.$96 million in annual debt service
until 2021 if fully implemented. As part of the arrangement, Ethiopia would be
required to revise its tax structure, carry out privatization, cut defense spending,
and reorganize the banking sector.The promised debt relief represented only about
10 percent of Ethiopia’s estimated external debt burden of U.S.$10.3 billion.
United States
Ethiopia’s international standing grew during the year as its strategic location,
bordering Sudan and Somalia, made it a “frontline state” in the U.S.-led “war
against terrorism.” The U.S. provided substantial military assistance to Ethiopia
within this context.Yet the U.S. failed to press for accountability of Ethiopian security
forces accused of human rights violations, including the shooting of civilian
protestors. A senior state department official claimed that the U.S.wielded virtually
no leverage over Ethiopia because it was dependent on the country’s assistance in
rooting out al-Qaeda. U.S. economic and humanitarian assistance amounted to
about U.S.$170 million,one third of which represented funds for education, health,
and governance, and the remainder food and emergency aid.
European Union
The E.U. issued a statement in June condemning the violence in Tepi and Awassa
and demanding an inquiry into these events. The E.U. declined to provide police
assistance to the Ethiopian government to improve its ability to manage disturbances
with less than lethal force because it could not guarantee Ethiopia would use
such assistance responsibly (in the past, Ethiopia has misused assistance provided
to the police actually to commit human rights violations, including using a British
government-donated vehicle in the 1997 assassination of ETA leader Assefa Maru).
The E.U. and its member states provided about Û60 million (U.S.$59.1 million) in
humanitarian assistance during 2002.
KENYA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
After twenty-four years of autocratic rule by President Daniel arap Moi, Kenya
looked forward to a general (presidential and parliamentary) election scheduled
for December 2002.Kenyans also awaited a new constitution, after two years of procedural
wrangles. Widespread corruption and lawlessness eroded the country’s
social and economic fabric, as living standards hovered at their lowest level in
decades, but pressure also mounted to hold officials accountable for past crimes.
There were continuing concerns over police brutality, judicial wrongdoing, and
attacks on freedom of expression.
In October 2001, quelling rumors that he would run for another term, President
Moi agreed to step down in January 2003.However, his public promotion of Uhuru
Kenyatta, son of Kenya’s founding president, Jomo Kenyatta, as his hand-picked
successor outraged civil society groups and opposition politicians. Kenyatta, an
inexperienced legislator appointed by the president in October 2001, was viewed as
beholden to Moi. This interference in the process of choosing a new leader divided
the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU), which nevertheless voted to
grant Moi sweeping powers within the party upon retirement as president. Bolstering
KANU’s chances going into the election was its March merger with the
largest opposition party, the National Development Party, but deepening divisions
within the new KANU threatened to offset that advantage. In September, a coalition
of opponents, the National Alliance Party of Kenya (NAK), sought to capitalize
on the KANU divisions by uniting to field its own presidential candidate, Mwai
Kibaki, a former vice-president who had unsuccessfully run for president twice
before. The next month, NAK and a KANU faction known as the Rainbow Coalition
joined forces in a “super alliance” called the National Rainbow Coalition that
posed the first serious challenge to the ruling party in Kenya’s history.
The Constitution of Kenya Review Commission, made up of government appointees and civil society representatives, originally planned to produce a draft
constitution by September 2002.However, riven by internal bickering and dogged
by government attempts to delay and disband it, ahead of the deadline the commission
requested and won an extension until January 2003 to complete its work.
It conducted civic education countrywide to gather views about a new constitution.
KANU attempted to link the commission’s extension with an extension of the life
of Parliament by as many months,but, after a public outcry,President Moi told Parliament
to end its term in February 2003, as required in law.The commission issued
its draft constitution in September after all, despite Moi’s efforts to block it through
the courts. The document outlined radical recommendations to reduce the power
of the executive by creating the posts of prime minister and two deputy prime ministers,
adding a second parliamentary chamber, and providing for presidential
impeachment. It also recommended a complete judicial overhaul and replacing
appointed local authorities with locally elected officials. In October, just as delegates
to a national constitutional conference were preparing to debate the draft,
Moi dissolved Parliament, effectively halting the constitutional review because the
conference by law had to include members of parliament (MPs). Three days later,
Moi moved to disband the constitutional review team and had the conference
venue sealed off by armed police. Bolstered by a mounting campaign by lawyers
and civil society representatives against Moi’s heavy-handed tactics, the review
commission refused to disband, although it was forced to adjourn the national constitutional
conference until a new Parliament was in place.
With a leadership turnover imminent, the issue of official accountability escalated
into a debate over amnesty for economic crimes and government-sponsored
violence. In defiance of a July court order, President Moi refused to release a threeyear-
old report by the presidential Commission on the Ethnic Clashes (known as
the Akiwumi Commission) on politically motivated ethnic violence that occurred
throughout the country between 1991 and 1998. In October, Moi released the
report, which implicated several high government officials. At a function marking
the 1997 attacks in Likoni, near Mombasa in Coast Province, which had sparked
armed ethnic attacks in Mombasa in the run-up to the last general election, human
rights activists urged presidential candidates to promise to investigate and prosecute
these and other political killings.Human Rights Watch published a report on
the 1997 Coast Province violence in May, documenting the role of the ruling party
in the violence and emphasizing the dangerous nexus between arms availability
and politically motivated ethnic violence in Kenya. Perpetrators of the Likoni
attacks told Human Rights Watch they had been backed by ruling party officials.
The arms flow from neighboring war zones continued to undermine Kenya’s
security, increasing the death toll from inter-ethnic violence, especially in Tana
River and North Rift regions.The spread of small arms, combined with the manipulation
of ethnic tensions by politicians, presented particular risks in an election
year. Kenya’s two previous general elections had been marked by bloodshed.
In Nairobi, the capital, violence erupted in two slums, Kibera in late 2001 and
Kariobangi in March 2002. At least twenty-five people died in Kariobangi at the
hands of vigilante gangs allied to certain ethnic groups and politicians, and while
the police—who had ignored warnings of impending violence—made thirty-one arrests, they had not followed through with prosecutions as of this writing. In Kibera
police went on their own rampage, raping, beating, looting and destroying
property, and thousands of residents fled. The government ignored charges of
political incitement in Kibera and ordered no independent inquiry. Although the
police commissioner banned eighteen vigilante groups and private armies tied to
prominent politicians in March, little enforcement took place. In fact, in August the
armed Mungiki faction, the main vigilante group involved in the Kariobangi massacre,
staged a massive demonstration in Nairobi in support of Uhuru Kenyatta,
with no police interference.
Police violently broke up or canceled numerous opposition party rallies, denying
freedom of assembly to thousands of Kenyans whose main source of information
about candidates was such gatherings. For example, in August, an opposition
MP, James Orengo, was jailed for a few days for trying to hold a meeting.With political
opposition higher in cities than in the countryside, the ruling party used youth
gangs and local civic authorities in the run-up to the election to conduct sweeps of
certain urban populations perceived to traditionally vote against the government.
Repeated sweeps in Mombasa by police and gangs acting with public encouragement
by a local KANU MP displaced eight thousand street hawkers belonging to
Kikuyu and other ethnic groups thought to be anti-KANU.Hundreds of families in
the slums of Nairobi and four other cities were also evicted.
Women’s rights groups focused on the December election as an opportunity to
boost their low numbers in elected office and win passage in a new Parliament of
legislation on domestic violence,property rights, and other issues affecting women.
Kenya hosted close to 250,000 refugees at the beginning of 2002, principally
from Somalia, Sudan and Ethiopia. In two new waves, ten thousand Somali
refugees fled fighting in southwest Somalia in the spring. Nearly half of the new
arrivals returned to Somalia after at least four refugees were killed by gunfire from
the Somali side of the border, and amid reports of intimidation by the Kenyan
police. Kenya’s two major refugee camp complexes, Kakuma and Dadaab, were
plagued with insecurity, incidents of rape and other violent crimes, and a serious
reduction in food distribution because of inadequate supplies and donations.
Refugees living in Nairobi also suffered from rights abuses, many of which were
linked to the Kenyan government’s insistence that they reside in camps and not in
urban areas.While no accurate numbers existed, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) estimated that as many as sixty thousand
refugees were living in Nairobi in 2002. Two young refugee children from Rwanda
were murdered, and their mother seriously injured, during a nighttime knife attack
in a UNHCR-run residence on April 17. In another incident in May, police conducted
raids against “foreigners,” arresting approximately eight hundred individuals
who were held for several days in dismal conditions in an outdoor pen next to
the Kasarani police station.At least 145 of the detainees were documented refugees
who were charged with failing to register with the government—a statutory provision
that was enforced for the first time, and with which no refugee could comply
since government registration stopped in 1991. Similar group arrests took place in
October 2001 and February 2002. Foreigners, including refugees, were often
blamed for crime and insecurity and targeted for arbitrary arrest and detention.
Despite mounting public outrage over police brutality, incidents of killings and
beatings in jail, rape, unlawful confinement, and excessive force continued. The
government had yet to reflect the United Nations (U.N) Convention Against Torture
in domestic law, despite having ratified it in 1997, and reports of torture persisted,
especially of jailed opposition supporters in rural areas. In January,President
Moi ordered authorities to build confidence in the jail system, commenting, in reference
to torture and HIV/AIDS, “Currently, the public believes that once you are
jailed, you will be lucky to come out alive.”Prison conditions nevertheless remained
harsh, although accountability improved somewhat under new leadership, as symbolized
by the arrest of four wardens accused of the September 2000 killing of six
prisoners; the four were charged in July 2002 with murder.
The judicial system was described in July by Yash Pal Ghai, chairman of the constitutional
review commission, as “incompetent and lethargic.” Echoing an advisory
panel of Commonwealth judicial experts, Professor Ghai said the judiciary
had watched as the country’s human rights record deteriorated, and that without
urgent court reforms, a new constitution by itself could not fully guarantee
Kenyans’ rights. In a rare show of independence, a Kenyan court in May ordered the
electoral commission to correct the imbalance whereby some constituencies had
far fewer voters than others, yet had equal representation in Parliament.
Freedom of expression lost ground when courts awarded a series of record damages
to establishment figures bringing libel suits against the media over unflattering
stories. Although the press published freely, Parliament passed a law aimed at
government control of newspapers: An amendment to the Books and Newspapers
Act, the new law imposed exorbitant publishing fees that could handicap newspapers
economically and silence new voices. Both these developments appeared
designed to mute public criticism in an election year.
The government also continued harassing journalists. For example, in August, a
magazine publisher and opposition MP, Njehu Gatabaki, was sentenced to six
months’ imprisonment for his magazine’s coverage of politically instigated ethnic
killings in Rift Valley before the 1997 general election. President Moi ordered his
release a week later following public criticism. Some radio stations, especially those
in rural areas, faced long delays before they could air programs,while the state-run
Kenya Broadcasting Corporation enjoyed nationwide broadcast. In a potentially
positive development, however, the government announced that both radio
licenses and frequencies would now be issued from the Communication Commission
of Kenya, rather than separately from the commission and the government—
a move that could speed up the issuing of licenses.
As regards children’s rights, the year began positively with a new children’s law
guaranteeing free primary school education and criminalizing forced marriages
and female genital cutting.But reports of high rates of child labor and teenage girls’
recruitment into the sex trade, as well as the caning death of a thirteen-year-old
pupil, highlighted serious abuses perpetrated against children.Kenya had the third
highest number of AIDS orphans in the world, according to a U.N. report.
Kenya is a party to the Mine Ban Treaty, and in December 2001 declared it had a
total of 38,774 antipersonnel mines, some three thousand of which would be
retained for training. In September 2001,Kenya was chosen as co-rapporteur of the Standing Committee on Mine Clearance.Kenya’s military was involved in the U.N.
demining operation along the Eritrea/Ethiopia border.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
After years of inaction on human rights, Parliament passed a bill creating an
autonomous Kenya National Commission on Human Rights, to replace a standing
committee appointed by President Moi several years ago. The president had not
signed the bill as of this writing. The traditionally weak standing committee grew
more aggressive in the last few years, even prodding the government to produce a
long-overdue National Action Plan on the Protection and Promotion of Human
Rights. A new national steering committee of standing committee members and
civil society groups was to submit a draft plan to the government for endorsement
and forwarding to the U.N.
Sporadic government harassment of human rights activists occurred, for
instance in August, when police broke up a Mombasa meeting to elect officials for
the Coast Civil Society Forum.Other human rights groups—pressing for an end to
police brutality, curbs on freedom of assembly, government corruption and violations
of the right to life and property—routinely faced similar harassment by police
and local authorities when they attempted to hold civic education meetings.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Kenya’s importance as a strategic ally in the war against terrorism prompted
Western governments to be muted on human rights, albeit their focus on government
mismanagement and corruption remained strong. The United States in particular
increased support for Kenya. International donors continued to withhold
funding until anti-corruption conditions set by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and World Bank in January 2000 were met. While Kenya made some
progress on conditions, it still had to pass anti-corruption legislation, prosecute
significant graft cases, and speed up privatization. The donors also insisted on a
code of ethics for public servants, repeal of a law controlling interest rates, and
strengthening of a new anti-corruption police unit.President Moi and government
officials accused lenders of coercion and “shifting goalposts.”
Kenya’s endemic corruption reached inside the World Bank itself: in May its officer
in charge of Kenya’s roads program pleaded guilty to bribery. Earlier in the year,
three Nairobi employees of UNHCR were charged with taking bribes from people
seeking resettlement to third countries.
European Union
A gap deepened between E.U. donors and Kenya’s ruling party, as donors stood
firm with the IMF on aid conditions. The United Kingdom (U.K.), once a staunch
supporter of Moi’s regime, toughened its stance. In a January visit to Nairobi, the foreign affairs minister Baroness Valerie Amos said there would be no softening of
U.K. policy on aid to Kenya as a result of Kenyan support for British and American
anti-terrorism efforts. The U.K. also warned KANU against delaying the election.
The British government withheld half its aid after Kenya failed to pass anti-corruption
legislation, but continued to give support in other areas, such as the war on
HIV/AIDS, reproductive health, and education. Citing mismanagement, Belgium
ended aid to Kenya, while the Netherlands scaled back its assistance. Despite cooling
relations, Kenya allowed the U.K., along with Germany, to fly reconnaissance
missions along the coast in search of al-Qaeda elements in the region.
United States
Despite a stinging State Department report cataloguing widespread human
rights abuses, and the Bush administration’s concerns over poor governance, the
U.S. maintained strong support for Kenya, its strategic ally in East Africa. The war
on terrorism dominated relations. In December, U.S. anti-terror teams advised
Kenyan officials on security and money-laundering issues, and Walter Kansteiner,
assistant secretary of state for Africa, met with President Moi to discuss terrorism.
Soon after, three thousand U.S. troops held joint military exercises with Kenyan soldiers
on the coast. In March, General Tommy Franks, head of the U.S. military’s
Central Command, included Kenya in a tour of Horn nations as he sought support
for anti-terrorism.
The U.S. provided support for constitutional review and anti-graft police training
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.Overall, assistance to Kenya in fiscal year
2002 was $53.1 million, primarily for fighting HIV/AIDS, but also for food and
rural development. A supplemental request to Congress for $7 million in economic
support and $15 million for military aid (up from $1 million the previous year) targeted
border security in the northern and eastern regions, reflecting U.S.-Kenyan
cooperation in the war on terrorism. Trade between the two countries rose. In the
first visit ever to sub-Saharan Africa by a U.S. trade representative, Robert Zoellick
met with President Moi and his cabinet to discuss economic growth, investment,
trade and terrorism.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Hidden in Plain View: Refugees Living Without Protection in Nairobi and Kampala,
11/02
Playing with Fire: Weapons Proliferation, Political Violence, and Human Rights in
Kenya, 5/02
LIBERIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Only five years after Liberia began a shaky transition to peace following elections
in 1997, the country continued its re-descent into war. Fighting between Liberian
government forces and rebels from Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD) continued in the northwest of the country, where the rebel incursion
began in July 2000, with both sides committing war crimes and other serious
human rights abuses. Tens of thousands of Liberians fled their homes, and hundreds
if not thousands of civilians were killed, either deliberately or in crossfire. For
eight months of 2002, a state of emergency in government-held areas led to a crackdown
on perceived opponents of President Charles Taylor’s government.
In the northwest of the country, government troops and pro-government militias
were responsible for summarily killing, torturing and abusing civilians, raping
women and girls, and abducting civilians for forced labor and combat. They systematically
looted and burned towns, and in some cases government troops at
checkpoints blocked displaced civilians from moving to safety. Government soldiers
systematically extorted money and other goods from those seeking refuge.
Citing the rebel threat, the Liberian government continued to remilitarize society
including by remobilizing ex-combatants, and permitting the proliferation of militia
groups. Hundreds of civilians, including children, were forcibly conscripted by
the government and sent to the battlefront in an arbitrary manner,without advance
notice or any set procedures, and often with little or no military training. In the
course of combat, they were often ordered to commit human rights violations.
LURD rebel forces also carried out serious abuses, although to a lesser extent
than government forces, including summary executions of alleged government collaborators,
rape, and the forced recruitment of civilians, including child soldiers.
LURD forces subjected hundreds of civilians to forced labor, restricted those wanting
to flee the country, and abducted refugees who had recently crossed into
Guinea. On June 20, LURD abducted five nurses from the Liberian humanitarian
organization,Merci, and held them for almost three months.
The conflict kept its ethnic dimension, with the Taylor government indiscriminately
accusing ethnic Mandingo, Krahn, and Gbandi citizens of Liberia of supporting
the rebel incursion. Members of these groups faced growing
discrimination, arbitrary arrests, and violence at the hands of the government and
its supporters, based solely on their ethnicity.Many LURD fighters were Mandingo
or Krahn who had fought with the two former factions of the United Liberation
Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO) during the pre-1997 civil war. For
their part, LURD forces committed some of their worst abuses against ethnic Kissi
civilians, perhaps because the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebel group in
Sierra Leone, which had a longstanding alliance with the Taylor government, formerly
had its stronghold in an ethnic Kissi area in Sierra Leone.
After five years in office, President Taylor’s government continued to function
without accountability, exacerbating the divisions and resentments fueled by the
civil war. Taylor continued to consolidate and centralize power by rewarding loyalists
and intimidating critics. State power continued to be misused by high-ranking
officials to further the political objectives of the executive branch, to avoid accountability,
and for personal enrichment. State institutions that could provide an independent
check on the Taylor administration, such as the judiciary, the legislature,
and the human rights commission, remained weak and cowed. Independent voices
in the media and the human rights community were steadily silenced.
Rebel attacks close to the capital Monrovia in early 2002 caused new outflows of
refugees and internal displacement. By September, the United States (U.S.) Committee
for Refugees estimated that there were some 250,000 new and long-term
refugees in neighboring countries, and some two hundred thousand Liberians
internally displaced. Liberian refugees fleeing into Guinea were often prevented
from crossing by the Guinean authorities, in violation of international refugee law.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) issued a
U.S.$10.4 million funding request in July for West Africa, to address the growing
numbers of Liberian refugees.However, UNHCR protection staff in areas adjacent
to Liberia and the broader sub-region remained insufficient. In September, fighting
in Côte d’Ivoire between the government and rebels affected Liberian refugees
who were forced to flee yet again.
The intensification of the rebel attacks prompted President Taylor to declare a
state of emergency on February 8, 2002, and precipitated a crackdown. Frequent
raids occurred in crowded markets, in Krahn and Mandingo neighbourhoods, and
in camps for the internally displaced around Monrovia, resulting in the arrest of
hundreds of young men and boys, many of Krahn and Mandingo ethnic origin.
Many of these were sent to the front. The state of emergency was lifted on September
14.
Members of civil society groups, legitimate political opposition, and the independent
media were also targeted. On March 20, Henry Cooper, the Bong county
chairman for the opposition Unity party was reportedly taken into police custody
and later found dead in Totota, fifty miles north of Monrovia.Witnesses reported
that he appeared to have been shot numerous times. On March 27,Nipla Wiaplah,
chair of the New Deal Movement party, was held for several days in police custody
without charge as police determined whether an article in the News that he had
authored on the war posed a national security threat. The News editor-in-chief
Jerome Dalieh and acting news editor Bill Jarkloh were also held briefly without
charge for publishing the article. Journalists Stanley Seekor, J. James, and Ellis
Togba from the Analyst were threatened and briefly detained after their newspaper
published an article discussing the state of emergency.
Several newspapers were temporarily closed, and conflict between the authorities
and privately-owned radio stations over the use of radio frequencies continued.
One week after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, a talk
show radio journalist was arrested because a caller had made “anti-American
remarks” during the show.
The most worrying case was the incommunicado detention and severe ill-treatment of Hassan Bility, the editor of the Analyst, one of Liberia’s most independent
newspapers. Bility was arrested on June 24, together with three other Mandingo
men. Suffering from malaria, he was reportedly locked in a filled sewage tank.At the
time, Minister of Information Reginald Goodridge issued a public statement
announcing that Bility and the others were being held on suspicion of operating a
rebel terrorist cell in Monrovia.Copying both the U.S. administration’s vocabulary
and its disregard for the rule of law, the Liberian government announced that Bility
was part of a terrorist cell and therefore an “unlawful combatant,” refusing to
produce him in court and stating that he would be brought before a military court.
However, as of October, the government had not convened this military court, and
he remained in incommunicado detention. Hassan Bility had been previously
detained and interrogated twice, and the Analyst twice closed down, as the result of
publishing articles deemed critical of the government. The Analyst was closed
down the second time in 2002, after reporting a speech by human rights lawyer
Tiawan Gongloe on the role of civil society groups. (See also below.)
Despite a United Nations (U.N.) arms embargo, illegal arms shipments to
Liberia continued. Evidence strongly suggested that a plane that crashed outside
Monrovia in February carried illegal military cargo for the Taylor government.The
flight was one of three suspicious flights from Chad, using planes fraudulently registered
in Moldova and filing false flight plans. U.N. investigators were blocked
from investigating the crash. However, international pressure and U.N. sanctions
played a role in severing Liberian government support to the RUF rebels in Sierra
Leone.
The renewal of war in Liberia further undermined prospects for sustainable
peace in the Mano River Union, encompassing Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia.
As efforts continued to consolidate peace in Sierra Leone, hundreds of former
fighters in Sierra Leone’s civil war, both former rebel and government combatants,
crossed into Liberia to fight as mercenaries either for the Liberian government or
for LURD.Many former fighters from the RUF,which received direct support from
Charles Taylor for years, were integrated into the Liberian government forces and
were implicated in atrocities against Liberian civilians. Since at least January 2001,
hundreds of former fighters from the Sierra Leonean government-affiliated civil
defense militias (such as the ethnic Mende militia known as the Kamajors), from
the former members of the Sierra Leonean army who rebelled to form the West Side
Boys militia, and even from the RUF,were recruited as mercenaries for LURD.As a
result, the border area between Liberia and Sierra Leone became more unstable.
The government of Guinea continued to play a destabilizing role by providing
considerable logistical and some military support to LURD rebels who operated
from Guinean territory. It also allowed LURD to use refugee camps in Guinea as a
base from which to recruit.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
It was a particularly bad year for Liberian human rights activists. In the face of
renewed rebel action, the Taylor government became increasingly intolerant of dissent, and civil society groups were among those against which harassment and
intimidation intensified under the state of emergency. Several human rights
activists left the country during the year and applied for political asylum.
In February, the authorities detained Frances Johnson Morris, director of
Liberia's Catholic Justice and Peace Commission, for several hours among male
inmates at the prison at the Police Headquarters in Monrovia ostensibly on
grounds of “mistaken identity,” only days after she had made a public presentation
questioning the state of emergency.
After the National Human Rights Center of Liberia, an umbrella organization
comprising nine nongovernmental human rights groups, issued several press
releases protesting government abuses, five of its members—Aloysius Toe, Tunny
Zeogar, Peter Nickoson, John Okai, and Sam Nimely—were arrested on March 28
and held without charge for several days.Although they were released after a court
order was filed, they were rearrested shortly after, and charged with “criminal
malevolence” and “preventing arrest and discharge of other duties.” The case was
still pending as of early November.Meanwhile,Aloysius Toe was arrested again on
November 4 and charged with treason, a non-bailable offense. Secretary general of
the Liberia Coalition of Human Rights Defenders and executive director of the
Movement for the Defence of Human Rights (MODHAR),Toe had been extremely
active in speaking out against rights violations in Liberia. On October 29, his house
had been ransacked by police, and not finding him home, the police arrested his
wife Vivian Toe, releasing her later the same day. Another National Human Rights
Center activist, Mike Gaydh, was interrogated for several hours on July 13 by the
Anti-Terrorist Unit security forces after he accompanied a delegation from the
Brussels-based International Crisis Group to the airport. He was then released
without charge. Blamoh Sieh, a leading member of the National Human Rights
Center, and Peter Nicholson, research and security officer at the National Human
Rights Center, were arrested on October 29 along with Dempster Brown, lawyer
and chair of the Liberia Coalition of Human Rights Defenders. All were released
without charge by November 1.
As of early November, Sheikh K.M. Sackor, executive director of Humanist
Watch, a nongovernmental group, remained in incommunicado detention following
his arrest on July 25. In denying a habeas corpus application filed by lawyers acting
on Sackor’s behalf, the judge said that the matter was under military jurisdiction
since the government was accusing Sackor of being affiliated to LURD. The arrests
of human rights defenders in October and November followed a campaign
launched on October 25 by the Liberia Coalition of Human Rights Defenders to
secure the release of Sheikh Sackor and the journalist Hassan Bility.
On April 24, human rights lawyer Tiawan Gongloe was arrested without charge
by the police, and beaten so severely that he was unable to stand and required hospitalization.
He had been speaking out against security force abuses and other
human rights violations. Gongloe was released after spending a week under armed
guard in hospital, and later left the country.
On July 29 Dixon Gblah, the executive director of Liberia Prison Watch, was
detained and interrogated by the Liberia National Police who accused him of being
a LURD operative.After being released, he left the country.
The state National Human Rights Commission, created by the government in
1997, remained inactive, hampered by a lack of qualified personnel, inadequate
funding, and a flawed mandate.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The U.N. Security Council continued to play an active role in attempting to end
the arms-for-diamonds trade in Liberia and the sub-region.On May 6, the Security
Council renewed sanctions against Liberia for a second year, including a ban on
Liberian diamond exports (believed in fact mostly to originate in Sierra Leone), an
arms embargo, and a ban on foreign travel by President Taylor and more than 130
senior government officials and their spouses. The Security Council also called for
an audit of Liberia’s shipping and timber revenue since Liberia’s arms purchases
were often financed through payments not accounted for in the state budget. The
Security Council held a workshop on July 18 on the situation in the Mano River
Union.
Just prior to the renewal of sanctions, the U.N. Panel of Experts—appointed by
the U.N. secretary-general to conduct an independent audit of the Liberian government’s
compliance with the sanctions—submitted its second report in April
and its third report in October. The panel recommended renewal of the arms sanctions
and continued monitoring due to “credible evidence” that the government
continued to violate the embargo: the third report found that Liberia had illegally
imported over two hundred tons of military equipment in violation of the sanctions.
The panel also recommended that all arms-producing and exporting countries
abstain from supplying weapons to all the Mano River Union countries, and
that an immediate embargo be imposed on all non-state actors in the Mano River
Union, including LURD. In its April report, however, the panel recommended
review of the other sanctions against Liberia in light of the positive peace process in
Sierra Leone and the diminishing support for the RUF.
The U.N. Peace-building Support Office in Liberia (UNOL) played no active
role in addressing the growing repression and abuses in Liberia. In April, the secretary-
general issued his third report regarding Liberia, based on information provided
by UNOL. The report was weak in raising human rights concerns and
unquestioningly reiterated Liberian government denials in its discussion of sanctions
compliance.
Felix Downes-Thomas, the secretary-general’s representative in Liberia since
February 1998, ended his term in February 2002, leaving UNOL virtually nonfunctional
for most of the year. However, even during Downes-Thomas’ tenure,
human rights concerns remained marginal to UNOL’s work. Efforts to appoint a
more rights-concerned representative were blocked by the Taylor government.
Finally, in September,Abou Moussa, former UNHCR West Africa regional director,
was appointed as representative and UNOL head.
The U.N. was conspicuously silent in condemning Guinea’s role in supporting LURD. The closest it came was in May, when the secretary-general expressed concern
about the deteriorating humanitarian crisis in Liberia, condemning LURD for
attempting to take power through force, and called on neighboring states not to
allow their territory to be used for such actions.
Economic Community of West African States
Given its extensive military and diplomatic intervention in the pre-1997 Liberian
civil war, Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) remained
engaged in diplomatic efforts to address the Liberian crisis. Several meetings were
organized by ECOWAS during the year to discuss the growing conflict in Liberia.
The ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council held their eighth meeting in Dakar,
Senegal, on March 29, 2002, to discuss ways to end the LURD incursion against the
Liberian government. Also in March ECOWAS hosted a peace meeting in Abuja
that was attended by representatives of the Liberian government, political opposition
groups and civil society actors, although LURD was not officially present. At
their twenty-fifth summit held in Dakar in December 2001, the Heads of State
condemned LURD and called for sanctions against armed dissident groups. In September
2002 ECOWAS played a role in convening a meeting of African ambassadors
during the U.N. General Assembly meetings in New York to discuss ways of
resolving the Liberian crisis.
Other regional efforts to broker peace in Liberia and the sub-region were undertaken
independently by Moroccan King Mohammed VI. In February, the presidents
of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone met at a summit sponsored by the King
in Rabat, where they promised to enhance border security and control dissident
activities in their three countries. In March and April, there were three follow-up
meetings in Freetown, Conakry, and Rabat, during which the Mano River Union’s
Joint Security Commission, as well as justice and interior ministers met to discuss
ways to enhance security and border security, as well as plan a follow-up meeting of
heads of state. Following a LURD offensive in May on key Liberian towns no further
meetings were held until September, when security ministers from the Mano
River Union countries met in Freetown to renew efforts.
European Union
Consultations since July 2001 with the Liberian government about the worsening
respect for human rights, democratic principles, and the rule of law continued
in 2002. The E.U. remained in negotiations over a number of specific conditions
required for renewal of aid suspended in 2000 following concerns about the deteriorating
situation within Liberia and the Taylor government’s links with the Sierra
Leonean rebels.
Specific conditions for E.U. aid renewal included tangible positive developments
in respect for the rule of law; strengthening of the judiciary and judicial independence;
human rights training of security personnel; a strengthened government
human rights commission; respect for freedoms of association and expression; the
creation of an independent elections commission in consultation with the political opposition; good governance and anti-corruption measures; and compliance with
U.N. requests. The E.U. relied on articles 96 and 97 of the June 2000 Cotonou
Agreement governing trade relations between the E.U. and the African, Caribbean
and Pacific (ACP) states, which committed members to ensure improved respect
for human rights.
The E.U. also made a number of statements during the year expressing concern
about the intensification of fighting and the harassment of civil society activists.
The E.U. also condemned LURD’s efforts to take power through armed force and
called on neighboring countries not to support them.
In January, the European Commission pledged Û17 million (U.S.$16.75 million)
in humanitarian assistance for victims of the crisis affecting the Mano River Union
countries.
United States
Although U.S. pressure on the Liberian government to address human rights
abuses remained strong, the U.S. failed publicly to condemn both abuses by LURD
rebels and the government of Guinea for providing logistical and some military
support to LURD.The closest it came to doing so was in a March 1 statement by the
U.S. ambassador in Monrovia condemning the renewed fighting in Liberia, and
calling on the Liberian government to take steps to respect human rights and the
rule of law.Although the statement stopped short of naming Guinea, the statement
did call on “all parties in the region to cease supporting any group that seeks political
change through violence and to respect their neighbor’s borders.”
The U.S. government’s silence on LURD abuses and Guinea’s support for LURD
was particularly notable given that the U.S. government began a U.S.$3 million
program to provide training and non-lethal equipment to the Guinean military in
May 2002. The long-delayed program had originally been put in place to assist the
Guinean government in defending its borders against the destabilizing activities of
the RUF and Charles Taylor and his supporters in Liberia. The program had been
delayed due in part to the deployment of U.S. Special Forces trainers to Afghanistan
and the imposition of additional reporting and monitoring requirements by the
U.S. Congress. The training was designed in four six-week segments for four companies,
with a mid-term and a final review. However, there were no clear mechanisms
to monitor the conduct of the troops after their deployment. The troops
would not be deployed in the border area.
In October, eligible Liberians living in the U.S. were granted temporary protected
status for one year, which allowed them to remain and work in the U.S. This
order replaced the expired presidential directive authorizing Deferred Enforced
Departure (DED), a similar measure.
U.S. assistance to Liberia remained limited and targeted. In fiscal year 2002, the
U.S. government provided U.S.$800,000 for support to independent media projects,
and $650,000 in election support funds to promote political party development
and the creation of an election support center with communications
resources. In June, the U.S. ambassador declared Liberia a humanitarian emergency,
opening the way for emergency humanitarian funding. In September, the U.S. pledged U.S.$6.6 million in emergency funding for refugee crises in West
Africa, including to shore up programs for Liberian refugees.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Back to the Brink: War Crimes by Liberian Government and Rebels: A Call for
Greater International Attention to Liberia and the Sub Region, 5/02
No Questions Asked: The Eastern Europe Arms Pipeline to Liberia, 11/01
NIGERIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
2002 was marked by political tension as Nigeria headed towards elections scheduled
for 2003. A sharp increase in political violence worsened an already poor
human rights situation, characterized by a lack of resolve on the part of the federal
government to bring perpetrators of human rights abuses to justice or to enforce
accountability at the level of state government authorities in Nigeria’s thirty-six
states. Little effective action was taken to stem killings in the context of localized
disputes between different ethnic groups fighting for political control, or to bring
to account members of the security forces (police, military, and the paramilitary
mobile police) responsible for numerous extrajudicial executions and other abuses.
President Olusegun Obasanjo faced increasingly vocal criticism from his opponents,
culminating in impeachment proceedings initiated against him by the
National Assembly in September. The impeachment motion was based on seventeen
charges of breaching the constitution, including the massacre of hundreds of
unarmed civilians by the Nigerian military in Odi, Bayelsa State, in November
1999, and in Benue State in October 2001 (see below); most of the other charges
related to allegations of financial corruption and mismanagement of government
funds.
Local elections initially scheduled for May were postponed until August, then
postponed again indefinitely, due in part to a lack of preparation, including the
absence of an up-to-date voters’ register. A voter registration exercise was eventually
launched in September but was marred by widespread fraud and rigging, and
interference by political party officials. Controversy also surrounded applications
for registration by several new political parties. In addition to the three parties
already recognized—the ruling People’s Democratic Party (PDP), the All Nigeria
People’s Party (ANPP) and the Alliance for Democracy (AD)—applications from a
further three were accepted by the Independent National Electoral Commission
(INEC), bringing to six the total to contest the elections. There was a lack of transparency
as to the criteria for excluding other parties that had applied, several of
which challenged INEC’s decision through the courts.
There were a number of assassinations of high-profile politicians. The most
prominent was Minister of Justice and Attorney General Bola Ige, shot dead in his
home in Ibadan in December 2001. The exact motive for his assassination was not
confirmed, but there was overall consensus that it was of a political nature. Some
observers believed that his death was linked to a political dispute between the governor
and deputy governor of Osun State, Bola Ige’s home state; Bola Ige had been
perceived as a supporter of the governor. The police launched an investigation and
arrested several people. In October 2002, thirteen people were formally charged
with murder and conspiracy to murder, and the trial was about to begin.
The prospect of local government, state, legislative, and presidential elections in
2003 created a climate of intense competition and rivalry at all levels, between current
political office-holders, their opponents, their respective sponsors, and other
would-be candidates.Many resorted to physical violence, threats, and intimidation
to deter their opponents.Local and state government officials, as well as their opponents,
made widespread use of political thugs, militia and other armed groups,
leading to scores of politically-motivated killings. Some of the worst violence took
place within the ruling PDP during its primaries, especially in the south: for example,
dozens of people were killed in Nembe, Bayelsa State, in July 2002, and in other
areas in the Niger Delta. Plateau State, in central Nigeria, also experienced a high
level of violence. Several politicians in other states were also killed for apparently
political motives, such as the chairman of the PDP in Kwara State, killed in August
2002, and the vice-chairman of the United Nigeria People’s Party (UNPP), killed in
Kano in September. Neither a draft bill outlawing political violence, nor federal
government statements condemning political violence, seemed to produce any
effect.
In the southeastern state of Anambra, the chairman of the Onitsha branch of the
National Bar Association, Barnabas Igwe, and his wife were killed in September;
there was strong, credible evidence that they were targeted for political reasons,
because of Igwe’s outspoken criticisms of the state governor.He and other critics of
the governor had received explicit death threats from Anambra State government
officials following public statements in which they had denounced the state government’s
failure to pay the salaries of government workers and had given the governor
an ultimatum to either pay salary arrears or resign.
The vigilante group known as the Bakassi Boys, supported by both the Anambra
and Abia state governments in the southeast, continued to carry out serious human
rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings, torture, and unlawful detention of
alleged criminals. These were documented in a detailed report by Human Rights
Watch and the Lagos-based Centre for Law Enforcement Education (CLEEN),
launched in Lagos in May. In August, the police raided several of the Bakassi Boys’
detention centers in Abia State and released scores of people held there illegally. In
September, a similar police operation took place in Anambra State, resulting in
scores of arrests of the Bakassi Boys.Many of those detained by the Bakassi Boys,
and released by the police, had suffered horrific torture and mutilation.
The O’odua People’s Congress (OPC), a Yoruba ethnic militia involved in vigilante
activities in the southwest, was responsible for fewer killings than it had been
in the previous two years; however, it continued to be active and engaged in violent
clashes with the police, as well as with other groups. In January 2002, there was a major clash between the police and the OPC in Owo, in Ondo State, in which the
police ambushed a large convoy of OPC members and killed and arrested dozens
of them. The OPC had previously been involved in several incidents of violence in
Owo in the context of a dispute over a local chieftaincy position.
President Obasanjo put forward to the National Assembly a draft bill outlawing
ethnic militia. The wording of the bill was ill-defined and there were fears that, if
passed into law, the sweeping powers it would grant to the president could be
abused to outlaw a broad range of organizations, including some that might not use
or advocate violence, but could be targeted on the basis of their perceived opposition
to the government.
The police carried out many extrajudicial executions, often shooting suspected
criminals on sight, and, in some cases, killing or injuring other individuals who
were not suspected of any crime.The federal government and the inspector general
of police promised to address these problems and to stamp out the widespread corruption
in the police force.However, some of the initiatives they launched, such as
“Operation Fire for Fire,” which was intended to tackle the high rate of violent
crime, seemed to have the opposite effect and resulted in further shootings of suspects
by the police,many of them fatal.The police force itself stated that at least 225
criminal suspects had been shot dead between March and June 2002.
The police were frequently involved in arbitrary arrests and detentions, often
motivated by attempts to collect bribes. Some of these problems could be attributed
to the very poor working conditions of the police, including low rates of pay, insufficient
resources and equipment, and inadequate training—all of which culminated
in an unprecedented police strike in January. The public continued to have
very little confidence in the police to maintain law and order. Likewise, the justice
system failed to deliver on many counts. Perpetrators of human rights abuses were
rarely successfully prosecuted. It was estimated that more than two thirds of
detainees in prisons and detention centers around the country were held awaiting
trial, sometimes without charge, in some cases for several years. Conditions of
detention remained very poor and ill-treatment and torture of detainees were
widespread.
No action was taken to prosecute those responsible for ordering and carrying
out the October 2001 massacre of more than two hundred civilians and widespread
destruction by the military in several towns and villages in Benue State. A commission
of inquiry, set up to study the conflicts in Benue, Taraba, Plateau, and
Nasarawa states, began holding hearings in May. However, no criminal investigation
into the military massacre was even begun. Senior government and military
officials, including President Obasanjo himself, refused to acknowledge that the
actions of the military in Benue constituted a grave human rights violation; instead,
they continued to justify the operation. President Obasanjo publicly dismissed a
detailed report by Human Rights Watch on the Benue massacre, published in April,
and gave no indication that he would order any criminal investigation into these
events.
Inter-communal violence continued in many parts of the country. There were
several outbreaks of violence in Plateau State, where scores of people were killed
between May and July in several local government areas. In February, more than seventy people were killed in Idi-Araba, an area of Lagos, in clashes between the
Yoruba and Hausa ethnic groups; the OPC was reported to have been involved in
the violence. The police were typically absent or overstretched during such disturbances,
or else intervened once most of the violence had subsided; in some cases,
their participation aggravated the situation as they were seen to be taking sides. In
many cases, local politicians and other influential figures in the local communities
appeared to be responsible for fuelling inter-communal violence and mobilizing
youths to fight.
There were continuing tensions in the oil-producing areas of the Niger Delta,
often aggravated by the actions ofmultinational oil companies. Local communities
were resentful of the absence of significant benefits for ordinary people from the
continuing exploitation of natural resources, most of the profits being siphoned off
by politicians. Communities staged several protests at oil facilities to demand a
greater share of resources and better employment and infrastructure for the local
population. For ten days in July, several hundred women occupied Chevron’s
Escravos terminal, demanding the oil company address their grievances. In October
Human Rights Watch published a report describing the ongoing human rights
problems connected with oil production, including extrajudicial executions and
other abuses by the security forces deployed in the Delta, and the role of oil companies
in exacerbating inter-communal disputes.
In many of the northern states, the increasingly widespread application of shari’a
(Islamic law) in criminal cases led to the imposition of sentences amounting to
cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments, often after unfair trials. Due process
was rarely observed.Defendants, many of whom came from poor and uneducated
backgrounds,were not informed about their rights and often did not have access to
legal representation. Judges and other court officials were poorly trained. January
2002 saw the first execution since shari’a began to be extended to cover criminal law
in 1999: A man tried in Katsina State was hanged after being found guilty of murdering
a woman and her two children.He was not represented by a lawyer and had
not appealed the sentence. Several other people were sentenced to death by stoning,
although the sentences were not carried out.These included two women sentenced
for adultery. One of them, Safiya Husseini in Sokoto State, had her conviction set
aside by the appeal court.However, the other,Amina Lawal in Katsina State, had her
death sentence confirmed by the appeal court. A couple (a man and a woman) were
also sentenced to death by stoning for adultery in Niger State, while a man found
guilty of raping a child faced the same sentence in Jigawa State.Defendants tried by
shari’a courts faced a range of other sentences, including floggings and amputations,
some of which were carried out. President Obasanjo publicly stated that he
was not in favor of sentences of death by stoning, but did not take any action to prevent
such sentences from being handed down. In March, newly-appointed Minister
of Justice Kanu Agabi wrote to the governors of the states which apply shari’a,
asking them to review its application on the grounds that it was unconstitutional
and discriminatory against Muslims.However, none of the governors are known to
have followed his request.
In addition to the discrimination against women evident in some of the sentencing
by shari’a courts (for example, in the cases of Safiya Husseini and Amina Lawal, the men allegedly involved in the adultery were acquitted), women across
Nigeria suffered a range of other serious abuses. Trafficking of women, as well as
children (both girls and boys), for prostitution and labor, remained a serious problem.
Nigeria was a critical country for the human trafficking trade, as a receiving
country, as a country of origin, and as a transit route for traffickers. Initiatives set
up by the government to try to stem the trade seemed to have little effect.Women
also suffered discrimination in terms of inheritance rights, especially in the southeast,
and were made to undergo humiliating widowhood rites.However, a number
of states took measures to end this discrimination; Oyo became the third state to
adopt a law granting widows inheritance rights. Female genital mutilation
remained widespread, although several states have adopted laws prohibiting it.
The Human Rights Violations Investigation Commission, known as the Oputa
Panel, set up in 1999 to investigate human rights abuses committed under previous
Nigerian governments since 1966, presented its final report to the government in
May. President Obasanjo undertook to implement its recommendations; however,
by October , neither the commission’s report nor its recommendations had been
made public, nor had the government announced details of how it would implement
the recommendations.
Nigeria acceded to the Mine Ban Treaty on September 27, 2001. Antipersonnel
mines were among the debris found after a massive explosion at a military ammunition
depot in Ikeja, in Lagos, in January 2002, which killed hundreds of people.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Many nongovernmental organizations continued to work actively to promote
human rights, including through human rights education, advocacy, and reporting
on human rights violations.Most of them intensified their activities in preparation
for the 2003 elections and developed programs to raise public awareness of voter
rights and election-related issues, and prevent political violence.
Members of the human rights organizations Human Rights Monitor and the
Civil Liberties Organisation faced harassment by the State Security Services in connection
with their individual contributions to research and report-writing on the
Benue massacres. Copies of a book on impunity and state-sponsored violence in
Nigeria, published by CLEEN and the World Organisation Against Torture, were
blocked at customs from entering Nigeria because of the book’s “perceived political
undertone.”
The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), set up by the government
in 1996, continued to monitor human rights developments and advise the government
on human rights policies. It investigated and intervened on a number of individual
cases; however, its broader impact remained limited, in part due to
insufficient resources. The British Foreign and Commonwealth Office funded a
new program of volunteers to work with the NHRC to develop its work on several
priority themes, including the environment, communal conflicts and extrajudicial
killings, and prisons.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The United States,United Kingdom and other Western governments continued
to view Nigeria as a key ally in Africa in the “war against terrorism,” especially in
view of its large Muslim population. These political considerations led to a reluctance
to criticize Nigeria’s human rights record. Overall, foreign governments
remained silent on the range of serious human rights abuses taking place in Nigeria,
with the exception of the sentences of death by stoning under shari’a, which
were widely condemned at the international level, by government officials, parliamentarians
and nongovernmental organizations in several world regions.
United Kingdom
The U.K. continued to be among the most influential Western governments in
relation to Nigeria and a strong supporter of President Obasanjo. The British government
strengthened its relationship with Nigeria in the context of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), an initiative led by President Obasanjo
and several other African heads of state to seek international support for development
in Africa. There were several visits to Nigeria by U.K. government officials,
including by Prime Minister Tony Blair in February, during which he re-asserted
his support for NEPAD; however, he did not publicly raise human rights issues with
the Nigerian government. The British government failed to condemn publicly the
massacres by the Nigerian military in Benue in October 2001.
The U.K. Department for International Development launched a seven-year
program of assistance to the Nigerian justice system, entitled Access to Justice,
which covered all aspects of the justice sector, including the Nigerian courts, the
prison service and the police, and long-term reform of these institutions. The program
was set up at federal level and in the states of Jigawa, Benue, Ekiti, and Enugu.
In terms of police reform, it included a human rights component in policing and
suggested alternative techniques to some of those currently used by the Nigerian
police, for example to limit excessive use of force. A British police adviser was to
work full-time with the Nigerian Ministry of Police Affairs and the office of the
inspector general of police.
European Union
The E.U. was a major donor and had a seven-year plan for assistance to Nigeria,
for the period 2001 to 2007.The program,which would concentrate on Abia,Cross
River, Gombe, Kebbi, Osun, and Plateau states, focused on two main sectors:
improvement of service delivery, especially water and sanitation, and state and local
institutional and economic reform. The program also included support for
strengthening democracy and human rights, and stressed the role of civil society in
ensuring popular participation in decision-making.
United States
Alongside the U.K, the U.S. was Nigeria’s principal backer and donor in the West.
The U.S. government provided assistance to Nigeria in a range of sectors.Assistance
and training for the Nigerian police and the National Drug Law Enforcement
Agency (NDLEA), including police reform and assistance to combat drug trafficking
and corruption, was channeled through the U.S State Department’s Bureau of
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs and totaled U.S.$2 million
for fiscal year 2002. A separate program by the U.S. Justice Department’s International
Criminal Training and Assistance Program (ICITAP) was designed to focus
on the physical and operational rehabilitation of the Nigerian police, as well as support
for the National Assembly and nongovernmental organizations. The U.S.
Agency for International Development (USAID) had a budget of almost $80 million
for assistance to Nigeria.
Assistance to the Nigerian military, to include defense reform and training for
peacekeeping operations, was budgeted at $6 million for fiscal year 2002, while
$750,000 was budgeted for U.S. training of Nigerian military under the International
Military Education and Training (IMET) program. The U.S. Congress also
approved $26 million for the West African Stability Fund, part of the U.S.’s voluntary
peacekeeping operations budget; however, the disbursement of the proportion
of this money allocated to Nigeria was put on hold following objections by the head
of the Senate Foreign Relations Africa Subcommittee, who opposed military assistance
to Nigeria until the government had taken steps to enforce accountability for
the killings by the military in Benue in 2001.
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Africa Walter Kansteiner visited Nigeria in
July but failed to raise human rights issues publicly, focusing instead on Nigeria’s
key role as an oil producer and encouraging it to increase its production (Nigeria
was the fifth largest supplier of oil to the U.S.). The U.S. State Department planned
to post an officer in the embassy in Abuja with responsibility for following issues of
corporate responsibility in Nigeria.
The U.S. State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2001
provided an accurate and comprehensive description of the situation in Nigeria. It
noted numerous killings by the security forces and violence during inter-communal
conflicts; however, it did not adequately stress the government’s continuing
failure to investigate these abuses or take preventive action, especially with regard
to the military massacre in Benue—the most serious human rights incident involving
the security forces during the period covered.
World Bank
In March the World Bank approved two loans to the Nigerian government,
totaling U.S.$237 million, for the development of the health system and a community-
based urban development project. It also announced a $25 million technical
assistance loan to the Niger Delta Development Commission (NDDC) for a community
action program.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
The Niger Delta: No Democratic Dividend, 10/02
The Bakassi Boys: The Legitimization ofMurder and Torture, 5/02
Military Revenge in Benue: A Population Under Attack, 4/02
JOS: A City Torn Apart, 12/01
RWANDA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The Rwandan government, dominated by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF),
demonstrated continuing hostility towards political dissent, press freedom, and an
independent civil society as it moved towards a new constitution and national elections
in 2003. Eight years after the 1994 genocide that killed at least half a million
Tutsi, the government launched gacaca, an innovative, participatory, state-run justice
system meant to speed up genocide trials and promote reconciliation. But its
concern for justice had limits: It refused to let gacaca jurisdictions hear allegations
of Rwandan Defense Force (RDF, formerly Rwandan Patriotic Army, RPA) war
crimes, and it tried to stop the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda from investigating RDF suspects. Under growing international pressure
over the presence of its troops in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
Rwanda signed a peace treaty with the DRC and withdrew most of its soldiers, leaving
unresolved the question of accountability for the crimes they committed there.
In April, authorities arrested former President Pasteur Bizimungu and former
Minister Charles Ntakirutinka on charges of attacking state security, fostering ethnic
division, and engaging in banned political activities. Nine months previously
the two had formed a new political party, PDR-Ubuyanja, which the government
had declared illegal despite there being no applicable law. In 2001, authorities confiscated
notes and recordings from journalists who interviewed Bizimungu and on
one occasion obliged diplomats to leave his house.They seized all copies of a memoir
that Bizimungu tried to publish in late 2001. Street mobs attacked both Bizimungu
and Ntakirutinka with impunity. In December 2001 unknown assailants
assassinated another PDR-Ubuyanja founder,Gratien Munyarubuga, at midday in
the capital, Kigali. Authorities detained another supporter, Catherine Mujawamariya,
at the end of 2001 for a month and arrested twenty-four other suspected
PDR-Ubuyanja members in April and May 2002, including the treasurer of the
Rwandan League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LIPRODHOR)
as well as a Rwandan employee of the United States embassy. Some were
freed within two months but others were held for longer periods. Before Bizimungu’s
arrest authorities restricted his movements, refusing even to allow him to attend church services. In a highly publicized speech delivered before an international
audience shortly before the arrest, President Paul Kagame warned that no
one would be able to protect Bizimungu and other dissidents if the government lost
patience with them.The courts denied Bizimungu’s and Ntakirutinka’s requests for
provisional release, and as of November they remained in prison.
In January the government arrested the secretary-general of the Democratic
Republican Movement (MDR), Pierre Gakwandi, accusing him of inciting ethnic
division and defaming the government. Parliamentarian Jean Mbanda, arrested in
2000 immediately after he had published criticism of the government, remained
jailed without trial on charges of corruption.
In March local officials were elected at the cell level (Rwanda’s lowest local
administrative unit) but political parties were prohibited from campaigning. Parties
had been similarly limited in district council elections in 2001 and seemed
likely to face similar restrictions under the new constitution. In November, a government
commission issued a draft constitution that, if approved,would only allow
parties to operate at the national and provincial levels, not the local level.
In February a criminal law took effect that punishes any speech or action considered
to promote discrimination or sectarianism. Courts can dissolve political
parties or nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) found guilty of sectarianism,
and can annul election results if a candidate employed discrimination or sectarianism.
A law promising press freedom took effect in July, but not before the government
had effectively closed down three journals and harassed another. In late
December 2001, the police detained the editor of Le Partisan for three days for publishing
articles criticizing the government. After his release, the editor fled the
country and the journal collapsed. In January police arrested Laurien Ntezimana
and Didace Muremangingo of Ubuntu, and charged them with attacking the security
of the state for publishing the word “ubuyanja,” a term meaning “renewal” also
found in the name of Bizimungu’s party. Provisionally released in February, they
were ordered not to leave Butare town without permission, while a provincial
administrator banned publication and distribution of Ubuntu. The government
expelled the Ugandan-born editor of the New Times on immigration charges in
May shortly after he had published an editorial calling for Bizimungu’s release. In
January, the government minister responsible for the press accused the journal
Umuseso of publishing divisive propaganda and compared it to newspapers that
incited genocide in 1994. In May, police questioned Umuseso’s editor after he
poked fun at a presidential speech, and in July they held three Umuseso journalists
for two weeks after they stopped to observe police conduct during a dispute.
The new press law permits heavy sentences against journalists, publishers, or
even street vendors of publications found guilty of broadly defined infractions like
endangering law and order, defaming authorities or undermining army morale. In
a welcome move, the law permits the licensing of private radio and television stations.
But it also creates a national press council operating under presidential
authority to accredit or ban publications and to close down radio or television stations.
The government required all local and international NGOs to register under terms of a law passed in 2001. Although the law grants the authorities broad powers
to interfere in such organizations, they appeared to have granted registration to
most applicants, including those critical of the government, with the exception of
the Modest and Innocent Association (AMI), a small organization that provided
reconciliation training to educational and religious institutions and that published
Ubuntu. The Butare provincial administrator banned all activities by AMI and
warned members they could resume their work only if they disassociated themselves
from Ubuntu’s editors, Ntezimana, a respected lay theologian and past recipient
of the Pax Christi Award, and Muremangingo, a young genocide survivor.
Gacaca was launched in twelve pilot jurisdictions in June, and was to be
expanded later to some eleven thousand jurisdictions to try more than one hundred
thousand detainees accused of genocide, many of whom had been languishing
in overcrowded and inhumane prisons and communal lock-ups since 1994-95.
In October 2001, approximately 250,000 “persons of integrity” were elected as
judges and then received only six days of training. In some cases, the trainers themselves
were poorly informed and differed, for example, on such important questions
as the difference between intentional and unintentional homicide.
Gacaca courts at the cell level include nineteen judges who establish lists of victims
and accused persons and place the accused in one of four categories depending
on the gravity of the crime. They will hear cases involving crimes against
property.Courts at the sector level will judge those accused of assault and unintentional
homicide while those at the district level will judge persons accused of intentional
homicide. The regular courts retain jurisdiction over the more than two
thousand persons accused of being high-level leaders, notorious killers, and rapists,
who could face the death penalty.As of September 2002, prosecutors had registered
approximately twenty thousand confessions from detainees who might benefit
from reduced sentences and from the chance to convert half of the prison time into
community service should their confessions be accepted. Numerous detainees,
having been in prison for years,might thus be eligible for release or community service
immediately should they confess.
Although the President signed an order authorizing community service in February,
the government had not organized its implementation or financing at this
writing, nor had it prepared the survivor community for the return of confessed
killers to communities.
Gacaca raised several human rights concerns.The accused, for example, have no
right to legal counsel. Given the poor training of judges,defendants accused of similar
crimes may be classed in different categories, resulting in sentencing disparities.
The impartiality of judges was raised in several communities and in several cases
those accused of having themselves participated in the genocide resigned. In addition,
sentences for rape will violate the principle of non-retroactivity because the
gacaca law imposes long prison terms or even the death penalty while earlier penal
law imposes only terms of five to ten years.There is no protection for witnesses and
detainees, who testify publicly, thus making it difficult for Tutsi—a small minority
in most communities—to accuse others.
The law establishing gacaca courts authorized them to hear charges of war
crimes and crimes against humanity.President Kagame and other government officials stated repeatedly, however, that these courts may not hear accusations of such
crimes by RDF soldiers,which must be taken to regular courts, a position that continued
to be questioned by people in several communities. There were problems
obtaining the required quorum of one hundred adults at some of the gacaca sessions
and local authorities threatened fines or other sanctions against absentees or
used the Local Defense Forces, a government paramilitary force, to compel attendance.
The regular judicial system functioned poorly, in part because of lack of resources,
and in part because of interference from the executive branch. In March,
six Supreme Court judges were obliged to resign because of alleged corruption.
During the first half of 2002, the regular courts tried only 757 persons for genocide
(from 1997 to June 2002, the courts tried 7,211 persons, resulting in 1,386 acquittals
and 689 death sentences, though no executions have occurred since 1998). The
acquittal rate increased from 22 percent in 2001 to almost 27 percent in the first half
of 2002, while the proportion of cases ending in death sentences fell sharply from
8.4 percent in 2001 to 3.8 percent in the same period. In July prosecutors began the
latest in a series of efforts to resolve the problem of detainees whose cases had never
been adequately investigated, presenting 750 detainees who had insufficient case
files (of some seven thousand) before local communities to collect witness testimony.
As a result, eighty were provisionally released for lack of credible evidence.
In June the Ministry of Local Affairs and local authorities directed police and
members of the Local Defense Forces to round up hundreds of street children in
Kigali. They detained them in overcrowded centers that lacked sufficient water,
food, sanitation and supervisory staff. A member of the Local Defense Forces
reportedly shot a child who tried to escape from a detention center. The United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reacted slowly and with insufficient force
when the Rwandan authorities rounded up street children and detained them in
miserable conditions.
In September Rwanda withdrew most of its troops from the DRC, as called for
in a July 30 peace treaty with the Kinshasa government. In the months before,
Rwandan troops had made war against the Banyamulenge, a Congolese people of
Rwandan origin, whose protection had once been advanced as a justification for
Rwandan military intervention, and had fought numerous other engagements in
support of its local allies the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD). Rwandan
troops reportedly supported RCD soldiers in putting down a mutiny at Kisangani
where more than a hundred civilians were killed. In the first nine months of 2002,
as in earlier years, Rwandan soldiers were accused of many war crimes, including
killing and rape.Military authorities claimed that such crimes were punished and
that several RDF soldiers had been arrested, but no convictions had been
announced at this writing.
Having in previous years encouraged Congolese of Rwandan origin to flee to
Rwanda, beginning in August Rwandan authorities cooperated with the RCD in
forcibly repatriating more than nine thousand such persons who had been refugees
in Rwanda since 1996. Possibly the intent behind this decision was to help expand
the potential base of supporters for the RCD. Rwandan officials forced refugees to
destroy their shelters and closed schools for the thousands of children in camps inside Rwanda. Those sent back to the DRC suffered lack of food, water, and medical
care, in part because RCD authorities refused to allow humanitarian organizations
access to them.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
LIPRODHOR, the country’s most independent human rights organization,
operated with little of the official harassment which had troubled its work in previous
years (notwithstanding the arrest of its treasurer—see above). It was registered
by authorities and began publishing a new monthly journal on human rights.
Supporting documentation missing from its registration application led to the
League of Human Rights in the Great Lakes Region (LDGL) being attacked by a
government minister for noncompliance with the legal registration requirement,
and to security agents visiting its offices. In an exchange of letters published in
Umuseso, a member of the government human rights commission accused the
LDGL secretary-general of the serious charge of minimizing the genocide.
In a report covering 2001, the National Human Rights Commission tackled the
politically sensitive issues of land rights and illegal detention but said little about
political arrests. One member of the commission privately sought to excuse the
arrest of Ntezimana and Muremangingo in connection with the Ubuntu affair.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
International Justice
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) experienced its most
troubled year to date. Shortly after Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte announced her
intention to indict RDF soldiers for war crimes committed in 1994, a part of the
mandate established for the ICTR, Rwandan genocide survivor organizations in
January called on prosecution witnesses to boycott the ICTR for a number of reasons,
including alleged mistreatment of witnesses. In June the government
imposed new travel restrictions on prosecution witnesses that disrupted three trials,
and refused to provide access to documents needed by the prosecution. In July
Del Ponte informed the U.N. Security Council about these obstructions.
The U.N. delayed approval of the Tribunal’s U.S.$192 million biennial budget
for three months because the Tribunal lacked a clear strategy for finishing trials by
2008.Under United States (U.S.) pressure, the U.N. in August approved hiring temporary
judges to ease the backlog of cases, but those judges will not start until 2003.
Even with temporary judges, the prosecutor’s initial plan of issuing 136 new indictments
threatened to overwhelm a tribunal that already had more than fifty suspects
in custody and that had issued only eight judgments between January 1997 and
October 2002. In October, the Prosecutor scaled back her plan to 26 new indictments.
The Tribunal amended its rules to allow the transfer of suspects to national courts for trial subject to the agreement of the arresting states. It seemed unlikely
that many arresting states would consent to transfer to Rwanda, however, as long as
Rwanda retained the death penalty.
After the U.S. announced $5 million in rewards for information leading to the
arrest of ten prominent suspects, the ICTR was able to arrest former chief of staff
General Augustin Bizimungu, former prefect of Kigali Colonel Tharcise Renzaho
and the former mayor of Murambi, Jean-Baptiste Gatete.
Despite the estimated thousands of rapes committed during the 1994 genocide,
as of this writing the ICTR had convicted only two defendants of crimes of sexual
violence, one of whom had his sentence reversed on appeal. Crimes of sexual violence
were included in nineteen outstanding indictments.
European Union
E.U. representatives met with the Rwandan foreign minister in February to
express concern over restrictions on freedom of the press and freedom of association,
and again in April after the arrest of Pasteur Bizimungu. In September, E.U.
representatives protested a plan to impose a 40 percent tax on the salaries of expatriates
working for international NGOs, seeing this as a possible impediment to
their work. The E.U. gave Rwanda, one of twenty-eight countries targeted for its
European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights, U.S.$155 million in assistance,
and gave an additional $4 million to local and international NGOs and $1.28
million to the National Human Rights Commission for monitoring gacaca. It gave
$475,000 towards rebuilding the Rwandan Supreme Court to make it possible for
the ICTR to hold trials in Kigali.
The United Kingdom continued strong political and financial support to the
Rwandan government, providing approximately $50 million, two-thirds in budgetary
support and the remaining third in technical assistance. It made modest
efforts to support civil society and press freedom and to support independent
research on gacaca. In October 2001, the Dutch government sought to make
Rwanda a preferred aid recipient, but in the face of stiff domestic and parliamentary
opposition, it compromised by granting Rwanda this special status but with
restrictions: no sector-wide budget support and the obligation to meet certain
benchmarks on human rights and democratization. The Netherlands disbursed
$19 million in aid, which included budget support and technical assistance to two
provinces in furtherance of decentralization as well as significant political and
financial support to local human rights organizations and the press.
Belgium was the single largest donor to gacaca, giving $4.75 million to the government
and NGOs, out of a total assistance package of $17 million. Belgium also
coordinated diplomatic and donor responses to gacaca.
United States
The U.S. administration put serious diplomatic and financial pressure on the
Rwandan government to withdraw from the DRC, an effort that culminated in
President George W.Bush meeting with President Kagame in September. In the face of the crisis between the Rwandan government and the ICTR, the U.S. pressured
Rwanda to permit witnesses to travel so that trials could resume, but it failed to give
strong backing to investigations of alleged RDF crimes. At the International Monetary
Fund meeting in June, the U.S. refused to approve funding for Rwandan’s
Poverty Reduction Growth Facility, in part to indicate strong disapproval of Rwandan
human rights abuses in the DRC. The U.S. State Department human rights
report criticized Rwanda’s poor record in 2001, prompting a sharp rejoinder from
the Rwandan government. The U.S. Agency for International Development
(USAID) gave $32 million in assistance.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Rwanda: Observing the Rules ofWar? 12/01
SIERRA LEONE
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Sierra Leone made significant progress in 2002. On January 18, President
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah declared that the decade-long civil war had ended, and on
March 1, he lifted the four-year state of emergency. On May 14 the people of Sierra
Leone went to the polls and re-elected President Kabbah and his Sierra Leone
People’s Party for a further five-year term. The elections were largely peaceful,
though there were a few reports of violence and intimidation. Eleven parties vied
for the presidency and 124 parliamentary seats. The seventeen thousand-strong
peacekeeping force of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
completed disarmament of over forty-seven thousand combatants, contributing,
with British-led efforts to rehabilitate the ill-disciplined police and army, to dramatic
improvement in prospects for peace, security, and respect for human rights.
By October more than 195,000 Sierra Leonean refugees from Guinea, Liberia, and
the broader sub-region had returned home. Two important transitional justice
mechanisms aimed at ensuring accountability for the horrific abuses that characterized
the war—the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission—also began operations. Against these positive developments,
the intensification of civil war in neighboring Liberia created a large refugee population
in Sierra Leone, resulted in instability in the border areas, and drew in hundreds
of Sierra Leonean former combatants to fight for both Liberian government
and rebel forces.
From May 2001 through January 2002, UNAMSIL disarmed and demobilized
close to forty-eight thousand combatants from the rebel Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) and Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC), and from the government-allied Civil Defense Force (CDF) militias. Of these, 6,845 had been child
combatants, 92 percent of them boys. The vast majority of former child soldiers
have been reunited with their families and about half of them were either enrolled
in educational support or skills training programs. The United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) identified at least four hundred girls who remained with their
former RUF captors, willingly or unwillingly. There were few reports of retaliation
against former RUF combatants as they returned to their villages and towns.However,
in former rebel strongholds returning refugees and internally displaced civilians
sometimes faced problems from former rebels including intimidation and
refusal to vacate returnees’ homes that they had occupied.
In addition, a December 2001 dispute over mining in the diamond-rich Kono
district led to serious clashes between former RUF rebels and youths from a local
organization called the Movement of Concerned Kono Youths (MOCKY).During
the clashes the youths, supported by policemen and former CDF militiamen, and
allegedly backed by local chiefs and leaders, attacked former RUF combatants and
their families. The clashes left at least thirteen mostly former RUF combatants
dead, the majority of them hacked to death with machetes. During the fighting
thousands of civilians, including hundreds of former RUF fighters, fled the area.
There were periodic reports of MOCKY members using intimidation to evict non
Konos from towns within Kono district in what appeared to be an attempt to consolidate
ethnic Kono control over the diamond-mining area.
After being held without charge for eighteen months, former RUF leader Foday
Sankoh and forty-nine other former RUF rebels on March 4 were taken to court
and charged with various criminal offenses including murder. The charges related
to an incident on May 8, 2000 when Sankoh’s bodyguards had opened fire on
demonstrators in Freetown, the capital, killing at least twenty. Separately charged
to court also in March were thirty-six members of the West Side Boys, a splinter
group of the AFRC, who had been captured in September 2000, during a British
assault on their base.
While there were very few complaints of abuses by the army, there were frequent
complaints of corrupt, unprofessional, and in some cases violent practices by the
Sierra Leone Police. Hundreds of ordinary criminal suspects continued to be
arrested without warrants and/or unlawfully detained, many without due process
guarantees as stipulated in the constitution. The insufficient number of judges,
magistrates, prosecutors, and courtrooms continued to lead to huge backlogs
within the legal system and the denial of justice for hundreds of detainees.The High
Court was only functional in Freetown and two other provincial towns; several
magistrates courts also remained closed, though three destroyed during the war, in
Kambia,Makeni and Magburaka, were refurbished and reopened.
On July 5 President Kabbah formally swore in the seven Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC) commissioners, three international and four national.
The commission had one year to prepare a record of abuses in Sierra Leone during
the civil war from 1991 and make recommendations to avoid their repetition and
promote healing. Efforts to establish the TRC were spearheaded by the Office of the
United Nations (U.N.) High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and was
a priority for both the UNAMSIL human rights section and local human rights groups. In August the originally proposed budget of U.S.$9.98 million was scaled
back to $6,276,440, of which, at this writing, barely a third had been pledged by
donors. Following a three-month preparatory period, hearings were scheduled to
begin in October 2002, but were pushed back until November following this poor
donor response.
On January 16, after over a year of negotiations, the U.N. and the government of
Sierra Leone signed an agreement that created the legal framework for the Special
Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL), an independent court using both international and
Sierra Leonean law, judges, and prosecutors. In March, the Sierra Leonean Parliament
passed an act implementing this agreement into law. The court will be based
in Freetown and will prosecute persons bearing “the greatest responsibility” for
serious violations of international humanitarian law and certain crimes under
national law perpetrated from November 30, 1996 onwards. On April 19, 2002,
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan appointed a senior attorney of the United
States Department of Defense, David Crane, as the SCSL chief prosecutor, and
Robin Vincent (United Kingdom) as registrar. After great delay by the U.N. Secretariat
in obtaining the necessary approvals for funding the SCSL, it began operations
in July. The SCSL is to operate for at least three years and has a proposed
budget of U.S.$56.8 million. While funds for the court’s first year have been
secured, there are shortfalls for the second and third years. A management committee
representing the major donor states (United States, United Kingdom,
Netherlands, and Canada) plus Lesotho and Nigeria, has oversight over the functioning
of the court.UNAMSIL offered little administrative and logistical support
to the SCSL, despite official commitments to do so.
Among the impacts on Sierra Leone of the renewed war in Liberia, as of October
2002 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had registered
more than 37,500 Liberian refugees in Sierra Leonean camps. Liberian
government troops and rebels of the Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD) often crossed into Sierra Leone to loot, buy provisions, escape
fighting, or abduct people who are then forced to work for them as porters. From
January to October there were at least fifteen such cross-border incursions, resulting
in at least two deaths and the abduction of scores of Sierra Leoneans.
Hundreds of former RUF,West Side Boys and CDF combatants in Sierra Leone
crossed over to fight as mercenaries with either the Liberian government or the
LURD. There were also credible reports of recruitment from within the Liberian
refugee camps in Sierra Leone. The presence of hundreds of Liberian government
and rebel deserters in Sierra Leone prompted the government of Sierra Leone to
move to set up an internment camp,which at this writing was under construction.
Another vulnerability of refugees was highlighted in February 2002, in a report
by UNHCR and Save the Children-U.K. which alleged that refugee children in
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone had been subjected to sexual abuse and exploitation
by employees of national and international nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), UNHCR and other U.N. agencies. The report provoked a major outcry,
including from Kofi Annan who said he was “clearly shocked and disturbed.” The
report found that the victims were mostly teenage girls, and that the perpetrators
were often “men in positions of relative power and influence who either control access to goods and services or who have wealth and/or income.” The government
of Sierra Leone, U.N. agencies and NGOs established a Coordination Committee
for Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (CCSEA) to address the problem. The U.N.
Office for Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) and the UNHCR inspector-general
conducted an in-depth follow-up investigation, and in Geneva, the U.N. and
humanitarian community formed the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC)
Task Force on Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse to look at issues of
protection and codes of conduct. However, the strategies adopted by the humanitarian
agencies generally lacked a discussion of the importance of holding perpetrators
accountable.
UNAMSIL was itself responsible for some similar and other abuses. In April witnesses
saw a woman apparently being raped by two Ukrainian peacekeepers near
the eastern town of Joru.There was no formal investigation into the matter. In June
a Bangladeshi officer was accused of sexually assaulting a fourteen-year-old boy living
in a transit camp for recently returned refugees. A formal UNAMSIL investigation
came up with inconclusive results and the peacekeeper was repatriated soon
after the investigation. On July 18 two people were killed and three injured after
Nigerian UNAMSIL peacekeepers moved to quell violence that had erupted in
Freetown after a Sierra Leonean black-market trader was allegedly murdered by
Nigerian criminals. Initial reports by an ad-hoc UNAMSIL task force set up to
investigate the incident found that the peacekeepers “employed a combination of
persuasion, crowd dispersal tactics and firing of warning shots into the air” to break
up the riot. They concluded that “the facts available to UNAMSIL indicate that at
no time was firing directed at the crowd.”By contrast, an August 22 report by a committee
of seven Sierra Leonean human rights groups found that the peacekeepers
fired into the crowd, killing the two, and characterized the peacekeepers’ conduct as
“disproportionate use of force.” The leadership of UNAMSIL was generally reluctant
to investigate allegations of abuses by peacekeepers.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Numerous human rights NGOs operated in Sierra Leone. Thirty-three of these
groups were part of a coalition called the National Forum for Human Rights
(NFHR) whose purpose was coordination, and technical advice to the membership.
The establishment of government control over previously inaccessible areas
of the country allowed human rights groups to start operating outside Freetown.
However, most of these lacked funding, expertise, and institutional support.
As in past years, these groups did little monitoring of human rights abuses.Most
of their activities focused on human rights and civic education for the public, promoting
reconciliation, and preparing for the TRC. Local groups did not generally
document and publicly denounce governmental non-compliance with due
process, and abuses by the police or army.
The formation of an autonomous, quasi-judicial national human rights commission,
as provided for in the 1999 Lomé Peace Agreement, received little national
or international attention and neither UNAMSIL nor the government actively advocated for its formation. Meanwhile, the existing governmental body, the
National Commission for Democracy and Human Rights (NCDHR), formed in
1996, continued to be severely constrained by lack of funds. As in past years, it did
little or no monitoring or documentation of human rights violations. Its activities
consisted of voter education; human rights education for the army, police and
members of Parliament; and preparation for the TRC. It did, however, continue to
run a successful legal aid clinic for indigents.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
International election observers, including the Carter Center, European Union,
Commonwealth Observer Group, Organization of African Unity, and Economic
Community ofWest African States, praised the manner in which the elections had
been held, although they noted irregularities including multiple voting, underage
voting, and direct interference with the marking of ballots. With the successful
completion of disarmament and the peaceful elections, international donors
turned their attention to post-conflict issues, including the reintegration of former
combatants, resettlement of refugees and the internally displaced, consolidation of
state authority, and the fight against corruption.While there was donor support for
the Special Court for Sierra Leone, at least for its first year of operations, there was
inadequate support for other accountability mechanisms including the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission (to which, at this writing only U.S.$2.1 million—
$500,000 each from the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Netherlands,
$400,000 from Norway, and $200,000 from Sweden—had been pledged towards
the more than $6.2 million budget) and rehabilitation of the judicial system.
United Nations
The presence of 17,500 peacekeepers, currently the largest and most expensive
U.N. military mission in the world, contributed significantly to the successful completion
of both disarmament and elections. UNAMSIL’s budget for 2002 was an
estimated U.S.$717 million. In a June 19 report to the U.N. Security Council on
UNAMSIL,KofiAnnan said that existing governmental security apparatus was not
yet capable of protecting Sierra Leone from both internal and external threats and
warned that the international community must protect the major investments that
had made possible the progress achieved so far. On September 24, the Security
Council extended UNAMSIL’s mandate for a further six months, following a further
report on UNAMSIL which laid out benchmarks to govern the withdrawal of
the U.N. from Sierra Leone, including the ability of the police and army to maintain
security, the successful re-integration of ex-combatants, and the situation in
the broader sub-region. The resolution also encouraged UNAMSIL to promote
zero tolerance of sexual violence and exploitation and called on states to bring to
justice their own nationals responsible for such crimes in Sierra Leone.
The UNAMSIL human rights unit—mandated in 2001 to be twenty persons
strong—usually operated with at least seventeen monitors and operated four regional human rights offices, in Kenema, Port Loko, Makeni, and Koidu. The
monitors conducted investigations into ongoing and past abuses, including an in
depth project on victims of amputation and sexual violence, and set up a database
to map human rights abuses during the conflict. UNAMSIL supported a research
project on war-related sexual violence by Physicians for Human Rights, and in February
jointly launched the project’s comprehensive report. In June 2002, OHCHR
funded a month-long mission to Sierra Leone by a team of Argentinian forensic
experts who conducted preliminary investigations into numerous mass grave sites
and alleged “execution houses.”
In December 2001, the Security Council extended for an additional eleven
months the ban on imports of rough diamonds from Sierra Leone that did not have
a government certificate.
The Mine Ban Treaty entered into force for Sierra Leone on October 1. Sierra
Leone had not submitted its initial Article 7 Report, which was due on March 20.
Organization of African Unity/African Union
and Economic Community of West African States
Diplomatic activity by the OAU/African Union and Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) focused on resolving the crisis in Liberia, including
by addressing its regional aspects. However, there was reluctance to address the
presence of LURD rebels in Sierra Leone.
European Union
The E.U. Special Envoy for the Mano River region (i.e. Guinea, Liberia, and
Sierra Leone), Hans Dahlgren, had by October 2002 visited the region five times
following his appointment in 2001.
Ongoing European Commission development cooperation projects in Sierra
Leone totaled Û142 million (approximately U.S.$139 million), and were primarily
focused on social sector development. In late 2001, the European Commission gave
Û10 million ($9.85 million) to the Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration
(DDR) Multi-Donor Trust Fund to assist former combatants. In January 2002,
the European Commission granted Û17 million ($16.75 million) for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons affected by crisis within the
Mano River Union.Out of this, Û11 million ($10.8 million) was granted to projects
in Sierra Leone.
The European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights chose Sierra Leone
as one of its “focus countries,” and made available Û2 million per year over three
years (2002-04) to be allocated to NGOs working on human rights and good governance.
At this writing, the E.U. itself had not decided on any joint E.U. contribution to
the Sierra Leone Special Court, though a number of member states contributed,
including Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
United Kingdom
The U.K. continued to play a pivotal role in political and military developments
in Sierra Leone. Priorities were the rehabilitation of the army and police, the fight
against corruption, and the provision of humanitarian relief. During a visit to
Sierra Leone in February, Prime Minister Tony Blair gave reassurance of the U.K.’s
long-term commitment to Sierra Leone. However, Secretary of State for International
Development Clair Short, visiting in February, warned that governmental
failure to address “endemic” corruption could jeopardize the U.K.’s willingness to
invest in and assist the country.
The U.K. continued its efforts to rebuild, restructure and equip the Sierra Leone
Army and the Sierra Leone Police. In May, the British-led International Military
Advisory and Training Team (IMATT) completed the training of over fourteen
thousand Sierra Leonean soldiers, some three thousand of whom were former
rebels or government militia members. In July, 220 British combat support troops
left Sierra Leone, albeit 114 mostly U.K. military personnel continued to play a
major role in advising and directing military operations, including the staffing of
key positions within the Sierra Leone defense headquarters. In coordination with
the Commonwealth Secretariat, the U.K. also provided officers and funds for training
and administration of the Sierra Leone Police, including the secondment of a
British officer as inspector general.
During 2002, U.K. assistance to Sierra Leone, mostly administered through the
Department for International Development (DFID), was estimated to be _38.3
million (U.S.$59 million). This included funding for the Anti-Corruption Commission,
rehabilitation of the legal system, reintegration programs for combatants,
training of the army and police, assistance to the National Electoral Commission
and to human rights and civil society groups, humanitarian aid, and helping to
restore the local Paramount Chiefs. The U.K. pledged e5.9 million ($9.1 million)
over three years to the Special Court, _322,000 ($500,000) to the TRC, and spent an
estimated _16 million ($24 million) on IMATT.
United States
U.S. policy on Sierra Leone revolved around supporting the consolidation of
civil authority, fighting corruption, combating the spread of HIV/AIDS, and providing
humanitarian support.The U.S. pledge of $15 million over three years to the
SCSL was the largest of any contributing nation. The U.S. total humanitarian and
emergency contribution in fiscal year 2002, including grants to aid agencies,World
Food Programme, assistance to refugees, programs to combat HIV/AIDS, reintegration
of combatants, and development programs was $56 million. In March, the
U.S. contributed $1.9 million to the DDR program. In September, the U.S. dispatched
an additional $6.6 million from the Emergency Refugee and Migration
Fund (ERMA) to respond to the refugee crisis brought on by the renewed war in
Liberia. The U.S. provided three military officers to work with the IMATT.
Of the seven West African battalions trained by the U.S. for peacekeeping with
UNAMSIL, five—four Nigerian and one Ghanaian—were in 2001-02 deployed to Sierra Leone. There was no mechanism set up to monitor the behavior and performance
of the soldiers. 
SOUTH AFRICA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
President Thabo Mbeki continued to head a government dominated by the
African National Congress (ANC) without serious challenge to his leadership,
though the year saw significant tests of the political status quo. Tensions grew
between the ANC and the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP), a junior partner in the
national government. The ANC’s alliance partners, the South African Communist
Party (SACP) and Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), challenged
the government’s liberal economic strategy, including by calling a two-day strike in
October. In a worrisome trend, several independent-minded members of parliament
(MPs) were removed or resigned from positions as chairs of parliamentary
portfolio committees during the year. The main opposition party, the Democratic
Alliance, incongruously grouping together the former governing party, the New
National Party (NNP), with the opposition party of the apartheid era, fell apart in
late 2001. Smaller parties also developed splits, and a new party, the Black Consciousness
Forum, was created. The Constitutional Court held in October that a
“floor-crossing” law, aimed at allowing elected representatives to join other parties
without losing their seats, was valid only in the municipal sphere of government,
but left the door open to amendments allowing floor crossing in the provincial and
national spheres as well. Soon after the decision, control of the Cape Town municipal
council passed to a new ANC/NNP alliance. A coup plot by a militant rightwing
group was uncovered in August, leading to the indictment of ten people,
including three senior army officers. In late October, right-wingers were again
blamed for a series of bomb blasts that exploded in Soweto.
In May, President Mbeki pardoned thirty-three convicted prisoners, primarily
from the ANC and Pan-Africanist Congress, even though some of them had been
denied amnesty by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC).Other parties
protested the pardons or demanded similar treatment for their own members.
Human Rights Watch wrote to President Mbeki expressing its concern at the pardons
and at the suggestion that a further amnesty for apartheid-era politically
motivated crimes might be granted, as well as at the government’s failure to make
arrangements for reparation payments to approximately twenty-two thousand victims
identified by the TRC. South African victims of apartheid brought a multi-billion
dollar suit in the United States against U.S., Swiss and German banks as well as
the IBM corporation, claiming loans to the apartheid government helped prop it
up in defiance of a 1985 to 1993 United Nations (U.N.) embargo.
After finalizing the last two volumes of its report, the TRC was formally dissolved in March. Publication of the final volumes was, however, delayed by an IFP
court challenge to its findings. The army denied accusations that it had failed to
turn over thousands of documents to the commission, and there was concern that
TRC documents relating to the previous government’s chemical and biological
weapons program had disappeared after having been handed to the National Intelligence
Agency. Wouter Basson, a chemical weapons expert with the old South
African army, was acquitted in April on charges including embezzlement from an
apartheid-era defense project, murder, and drug trafficking, after a thirty-month
trial. There were suggestions that he might stand trial again in Namibia. In another
trial relating to apartheid-era crimes, two former Ciskei Defence Force members
charged with the 1992 “Bisho massacre”were acquitted in March.
The Constitutional Court continued to play a prominent role. In July it ordered
the government to develop a plan for providing a short course of the drug nevirapine
to HIV-positive pregnant women in order to prevent mother-to-child transmission
of the virus in childbirth. Controversy surrounding the government’s
policy on HIV/AIDS continued despite the court ruling, though Mbeki withdrew
somewhat from making direct statements on the epidemic. Though several large
employers announced their own plans to provide antiretroviral treatment to
employees, the vast majority of the approximately five million people living with
AIDS were without any treatment. AIDS-related nongovernmental organizations
in Mpumalanga continued to battle the province’s ban on their supplying free postrape
antiretroviral treatment in state hospitals.
The Constitutional Court also struck down a controversial section of the Criminal
Procedure Act that gave immunity from prosecution to officers using deadly
force to arrest criminal suspects even when no life was in danger. Despite this ruling,
the government had at this writing yet to bring into force a 1998 amendment
to the act that would address the constitutional issues, though the police service had
issued an instruction that members should comply with the ruling. In September,
the court struck down as discriminatory a law that prevented same-sex life partners
from adopting children. Lesbian and gay rights activists also won a victory through
a settlement granting pension benefits to same-sex partners of state employees.
Despite several government defeats, notably on the HIV/AIDS case, Justice Minister
Penuell Maduna praised the role of the court in a speech in August.
South Africa’s vast internal economic disparities continued to generate human
rights abuses. It was estimated that twenty-two million people lived in abject
poverty and went hungry almost every day.Although basic access to public schooling
for both boys and girls was widely available, there were wide disparities in
schools’ resources: more than 45 percent of schools had no electricity and more
than a quarter no clean water. Access to clean water generally improved, but continuing
problems were indicated by an ongoing cholera epidemic; almost 108,000
infections had been reported since August 2000. A new minimum wage regime for
domestic workers,among the poorest paid, was set to take effect in November 2002;
a proposed minimum wage for farm workers had yet to be finalized.
The slow pace of land reform generated controversy. In May, police in
Mpumalanga arrested more than two hundred marching protesters from the Landless
People’s Movement. Police also arrested around seventy-five protesting land rights activists on the eve of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held
in Gauteng in August; after two nights in prison, during which one woman
allegedly was denied medical treatment and suffered a miscarriage, they were
charged with violation of a little-used 1993 law regulating public gatherings, and
released. In July, the constitutionally-created South African Human Rights Commission
began a major investigation into human rights abuses in rural areas. On
June 20, the agriculture and land affairs minister announced that nearly thirty
thousand land restitution claims had been settled in the previous financial year,
benefiting 332,243 people. In Alexandra township in Gauteng, an urban renewal
project resulted in the eviction of hundreds of residents without the necessary support
for relocation. Evictions from informal settlements also continued in the
Western Cape. In September, the Supreme Court of Appeal ruled that the law preventing
illegal eviction protected not only informal settlers but also occupants
whose tenancies had expired or who had defaulted on home loans. Protests against
electricity cut-offs in Soweto also resulted in the jailing of dozens of protesters.
The South African Human Rights Commission severely criticized the handling
of reported rape cases by police, prosecutors and community leaders. The government
responded that initiatives had been undertaken to improve the system,
including a new program to train police in handling domestic violence cases. Civil
society groups launched a “Justice for Women” campaign in April to expand the
definition of self-defence to cover women who killed abusive husbands, and to
secure presidential pardons for such women who were serving sentences under past
laws. In October, the South African Law Commission completed a major consultation
process on a new Sexual Offences Bill, designed to completely overhaul the law
in this area.
More than twenty thousand rapes of children were reported in 2001. Rapes of
infants and very young children continued to be widely reported in the media.Fully
one third of children under age eighteen had been victims of sexual abuse, according
to an independent medical study released in March.Government investigations
continued into widespread sexual abuse of children by educators, reported on by
Human Rights Watch in 2001. More than seven hundred thousand children had
been orphaned by AIDS, according to a study released in March, increasing their
risk of exposure to sexual and other abuse. Domestic and international child trafficking
were problems in South Africa. The illegal use of child labor was also widespread;
the February conviction of an employer for using child labor was reportedly
the first such conviction in South Africa. The U.N. special rapporteur on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography visited South Africa in September
and recommended the creation of a national agency to coordinate responses to
child abuse and neglect.
After a one-year moratorium, the South African Police Service (SAPS) resumed
the reporting of crime statistics and said crime levels had stabilized in 2001. The
reported murder rate continued its seven-year downward trend.Nevertheless, violent
crime remained a major problem,with more than fifteen thousand murders in
the first nine months of 2001, the latest period for which statistics were available.
Among these deaths were 103 farmers and farm workers; in February 2002, there
was a spate of apparently racist murders of blacks in Mpumalanga. The police “rural protection plan,” criticized by Human Rights Watch in 2001, continued to
focus more attention on the killings of farm owners and their workers than on
other rural residents. The Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD), a statutory
body, reported 214 deaths in police custody and 371 otherwise as a result of police
action in the year to April 2002, a 12.8 percent decline on the previous year, though
complaints to the ICD had increased by 15 percent.The ICD called for greater civilian
oversight of police to help discover and prevent torture, and criticized the lack
of a legal duty to report incidents of torture.
Prisons remained seriously overcrowded, with the total prison population
reaching 175,290 at the end of 2001, outstripping the system’s capacity by around
sixty-five thousand. About a third of the total prison population consisted of persons
awaiting trial, with more than half of incarcerated juveniles (under the age of
twenty-one) still awaiting trial, and 40 percent of pretrial prisoners unable to afford
relatively low bail. To address these problems, an increase in the number of courts
was planned, and the justice minister said measures such as plea-bargaining and
modified bail conditions would be considered for non-violent crimes.The national
director of public prosecutions reported a 20 percent increase in the volume of
criminal court cases heard from 2000 to 2001. Calling for greater volunteerism
among attorneys to help reduce court dockets, the Legal Aid Board continued to
phase out the use of private lawyers in favor of salaried employees.
Children were particularly ill served by the justice system, though efforts were
under way to improve the situation. In September 2002, around 3,960 children
(under age eighteen) were being held in custody,of whom 2,157 were awaiting trial.
Many were held unsegregated from adults. A Child Justice Bill tabled in September
2002 emphasized alternatives to incarceration for child offenders and would raise
the minimum age for criminal capacity from seven years to ten. By October two
“one-stop”Child Justice Centers for arrested children had been opened; more were
planned for 2003.
The Department of Correctional Services reported that prison assaults increased
by 4 percent in the year ending March 2001, and official-on-prisoner
assault increased by almost 11 percent.Violence resulted in twelve deaths in prison
in the same period, the report said.As part of a national commission investigating
prison corruption, investigators uncovered thirty-two cases in one KwaZulu-Natal
prison where warders had used prisoners to carry out crimes including robbery and
murder.President Mbeki in August authorized the Special Investigation Unit in the
office of the national director of public prosecutions to conduct a wide-ranging
probe into corruption in prisons procurement and management. The Judicial
Inspectorate of Prisons reported that more than half of the prisoners released from
jail in South Africa were HIV-positive.
A new Immigration Act was finally passed after heated last-minute debate in
May, as the provisions of the old law struck down by the Constitutional Court had
to be replaced by June 2002. Controversial provisions of the law were the policing
of borders by the defence force rather than the Department of Home Affairs, a
quota system for work permits, and the creation of special new immigration courts.
The department agreed in late 2001 to temporarily postpone deporting thousands
of Zimbabwean farm workers in the Northern Province, in return for farmers’ promises to cease employing foreigners. In January 2002, new guidelines were created
for the police in relation to the arrest and detention of undocumented
migrants, requiring officers to have “reasonable grounds”to arrest someone on suspicion
of being illegally in the country. However, police raids rounding up suspected
foreigners on arbitrary grounds continued. Immigrants also continued to
be vulnerable to violent xenophobic attacks. An undocumented migrant was
beaten to death at a privately-run repatriation center in March.His death led to the
suspension of five guards accused of his murder and sparked a riot at the center,
which had been criticized in the past by human rights organizations.Human rights
lawyers won a court order in March recognizing the right to apply for asylum while
in the transit area of an airport, including the right to legal representation. But
problems continued: Human Rights Watch wrote to Home Affairs Minister Mangosuthu
Buthelezi in May expressing concern at the detention and deportation of
foreigners at Johannesburg international airport, in some cases without the opportunity
to apply for asylum.
The report of a major investigation into corruption in government arms purchases
was released late in 2001, amidst controversy over information omitted from
the final report. There were allegations that investment setoffs promised in return
for costly government munitions deals had proven far less valuable than originally
claimed and were in any case very difficult to enforce. A new Prevention of Corruption
Bill was published in April 2002.
A government report in August revealed that South Africa had sold arms to
India, Israel, Pakistan, Rwanda, and Zimbabwe, among others, in 2000 and 2001.
Critics stated that these sales were in contravention of the government’s stated policy
of not selling arms to countries that consistently violate human rights. Parliament
and the executive debated the National Conventional Arms Control Bill,with
some MPs arguing for increased parliamentary oversight of arms sales, while the
Defence Ministry supported greater secrecy. South Africa was a leader in promoting
universalization and full implementation of the Mine Ban Treaty in Africa. In
September 2002, a bill to enact the Mine Ban Treaty into South African law was
introduced to parliament. Joint operations between the police of South Africa and
neighboring countries successfully destroyed thousands of guns, ammunition,
mortars and mines.
Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the South African Law
Commission resumed work on revisions to a 1999 draft anti-terrorism bill, releasing
a new version for public comment in August 2002. The bill made the commission
of a terrorist act punishable by life in prison, and criminalized membership in
and the provision of material support to designated terrorist organizations.The bill
would require police to obtain written consent from a prosecutor and a judge
before detaining a person suspected of having information on terrorist activity, and
would require interrogation through judicial hearings. These last provisions
replaced previous much harsher proposals allowing a fourteen-day detention
period. The President signed the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism in November 2001, though neither it nor the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings (signed in 1999) had
been ratified at this writing. South Africa ratified the OAU Convention on the Prevention
and Combating of Terrorism in September 2002.
South Africa ratified the Protocol to the African Charter on the establishment of
the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights in June, but did not make a declaration
allowing South African individuals and organizations to petition the
prospective court directly.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The South African Human Rights Commission continued to complain of official
indifference to its activities, under-funding and a lack of full independence. In
August, National Assembly Speaker Frene Ginwala broached the need for parliamentary
oversight of the commission and other independent constitutional bodies,
including the Commission for Gender Equality and the Commission for the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural,Religious and Linguistic Communities.
Civil society in general was strong, with one study finding close to one
hundred thousand non-profit organizations in the country, more than half of
which had cooperative relationships with the government.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
President Mbeki traveled extensively during the year to promote the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) to world leaders, including at the G8
summit in Canada in June. South Africa hosted the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in August. At the 2002 session of the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights in Geneva, however, South Africa failed to maintain its previously positive
role.
South Africa’s central political and economic role in southern Africa continued,
though Mbeki was cautious in criticizing irregularities in the Zimbabwean national
elections in March and ongoing harassment of the opposition there.He was active
in diplomatic efforts to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
agreeing in September to provide 1,500 troops to a U.N. peacekeeping force. South
African troops in Burundi since late 2001 to protect the transitional government
there extended their stay by another six months in May.
European Union
The E.U. remained South Africa’s largest international aid, trade and investment
partner, with Û127 million (U.S.$110 million) available for development cooperation
in 2002. South Africa maintained strong diplomatic ties to the E.U. and its
member states,with several high-level visits throughout the year.The United Kingdom
gave £36.75 million (U.S.$57.7 million) in development assistance in 2000-01,
and Prime Minister Tony Blair “warmly endorsed” NEPAD, recognizing President
Mbeki’s leadership. Germany, France, and Denmark also pledged support for various
projects including improvement of the justice system, housing in rural areas,
and the fight against HIV/AIDS. The E.U. Foundation for Human Rights in South
Africa continued to support a large number of human rights initiatives.
United States
The first meeting of the South Africa-United States Bilateral Cooperation
Forum took place in February. The U.S. Trade Representative said that the “next
logical step”was a free trade agreement.The U.S. ambassador to South Africa stated
that the U.S. endorsed NEPAD and South Africa’s economic policies, and was committed
to helping South Africa remain at the “vanguard” of African progress
through trade and development assistance. The U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID) spent $51.3 million in development assistance to South
Africa in 2001, and projected $56.4 million in 2002, with a focus on crime, unemployment,
housing, and HIV/AIDS prevention. The United States’ National Institutes
ofHealth also granted R110 million ($10.57 million) over five years to a South
African university for HIV/AIDS research.
SUDAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The Sudan government and the rebel Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army (SPLM/A) made great strides in 2002, on paper, toward respect for human
rights and settlement of the nineteen-year civil war. The war, however, heated up
as the parties fought over oilfields and key garrisons; it was not brought to a halt
until the parties agreed on October 15 to a standstill during peace negotiations.On
October 30, Talisman Energy Inc., the Canadian oil company leading the development
of the only concession producing oil for export in Sudan, announced that it
would sell off its Sudan assets, thus bringing to a successful close a major campaign
against the company by nongovernmental organizations in Canada, the United
States (U.S.), and Europe.
The first agreements between the warring parties took place between January
and March—these were four agreements proposed by U.S. Special Presidential
Envoy for Peace in Sudan John Danforth. On July 20 the parties signed initial peace
protocols in Machakos, Kenya, agreeing to a referendum in which the south would
be able to chose between unity or independence, following a six-month pre-interim
and six-year interim period after the signing of a final peace agreement.
The four Danforth agreements were: (1) an internationally monitored cease-fire
in the Nuba Mountains for humanitarian access purposes; (2) “zones of tranquility”
for polio, rinderpest, and guinea worm health programs; (3) an international
commission to investigate slavery; and (4) an internationally monitored end to
attacks on civilians and civilian objects.
The Nuba Mountains agreement, concluded first and signed in Switzerland on
January 19, resulted in a six-month cease-fire in the Nuba Mountains, extended in
July, allowing food drops to neglected areas and permitting free access by civilians
to all areas of the Nuba Mountains—access that, however, the government did not provide. This and other human rights aspects of the cease-fire agreement did not
receive sufficient attention from the Joint Verification Mission, composed under
the agreement of military personnel seconded by various European countries and
the U.S. under Norwegian leadership—and chronically understaffed and underfunded.
The government army strikingly lacked captured combatants, leading to a conclusion
it had a forbidden “take no prisoners” order. The government continued to
deny access by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to anyone
detained in connection with the conflict, despite an explicit provision in the Nuba
Mountains agreement for ICRC access to those persons.
More positively, a series of new mine action projects were initiated in the Nuba
Mountains,with a number of assessments on both sides. The U.S. deployed part of
its quick reaction demining force to conduct an assessment on both sides. Operation
Save Innocent Lives, a southern Sudanese NGO, cleared a total of 526 kilometers
of road and 263,093 square meters of land between April 2001 and March 2002.
Both the government and the SPLM/A renewed pledges not to use antipersonnel
mines anywhere in Sudan, although there were still unconfirmed allegations of use
by both sides. Evidence that landmines were used by the Sudanese government
emerged with the death on June 11 of six agricultural aid workers in a project on
the SPLM/A side of the Nuba Mountains, close to government lines. The SPLA
apparently mined a road in the oilfields of Sudan north of Ler, Western Upper
Nile/Unity State, in September, killing four or five road construction workers in a
military convoy.
The Danforth-proposed slavery commission, composed of eminent international
persons and field workers, conducted its research and wrote a well-received
report on slavery and abductions in Sudan issued in May, with many recommendations.
Most had yet to be realized as of this writing. Negotiations on zones of
tranquility were more difficult than envisioned, and enforcement consumed much
diplomatic time.
The Sudan government originally balked at the fourth Danforth agreement, for
no targeted attacks on civilians. On February 20 its helicopter gunships attacked
Bieh, a food distribution site in Western Upper Nile/Unity State oilfield region, and
killed twenty-four civilians, injuring many more. The attack was witnessed by
United Nations (U.N.) food monitors, and condemned worldwide.The Sudan government
later apologized for the “accident,”and in March it and the SPLM/A signed
the agreement not to attack civilians or civilian objects.
In June-July, the U.S., United Kingdom, and Norway took a role as lead mediators
at the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD, a regional organization
comprising Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, and
Uganda) peace talks between the Sudanese government and the SPLM/A, hosted
and led by the Kenyan government. The protocol signed at Machakos on July 20
referred in the preamble to human rights and the parties’ desire to establish a
“framework for governance through which human rights would be guaranteed,”
and stated their desire to find “a comprehensive solution that respected the fundamental
human and political rights of all Sudanese peoples, including agreement to
establish a democratic system of governance.”
Meanwhile, the government of Sudan built several arms plants to become selfsufficient in weapons and ammunition. In August 2002 Russia confirmed the
export to Sudan in 2001 of twenty-two armored combat vehicles and twelve attack
helicopters. Under a defense cooperation agreement with Russia, first discussed in
December 2001, Sudan negotiated to buy some twelve MiG-29 fighter planes said
to be worth U.S.$120 million.The contract was to be finalized in May 2002, according
to media reports citing Russian defense industry sources. In September 2002,
the U.S. government imposed sanctions on three state-owned Russian companies
(though not the Russian government) for arms supplies to Sudan, which was still
on the U.S. list of countries it considered sponsors of terrorism. A Bulgarian company
lost its arms trading license in May 2002 pending a criminal investigation into
alleged illegal arms transfers (reportedly dismantled tanks) to the Sudanese government.
The company maintained its innocence, saying it was making final deliveries
under a mid-1990s contract to help build an arms factory. Bulgarian officials
acknowledged such a contract had been approved, but said new shipments to
Sudan had not been authorized.
In December 2001, the National Assembly, dominated by the ruling (Islamist)
National Congress (N.C.), approved the extension for another year of the state of
emergency in effect since December 1999. It amended the constitution in May
2002, granting President Omar El Bashir greater executive powers and allowing for
his indefinite rule, and additional powers to the security forces and police.
Repression of opposition political activity remained the norm. The opposition
Popular National Congress (PNC)—founded by President Bashir’s erstwhile
Islamist ally, Dr. Hassan Turabi—suffered a series of arrests and rearrests; by September
some 150 activists throughout the country were in detention. Dr. Turabi
continued in prolonged arbitrary detention, mandated by presidential decree, contrary
to a court decision in October 2000 ordering his release. One wing of the
Umma Party joined the government in 2002, but the main faction under Sadiq al
Mahdi remained outside the government and its followers continued to suffer
arrests; in late May security forces arrested at least twenty-five student Umma
members for attempting to form a students’ union.
Moderate students’ protests at mass arrests and security and police attacks
against them during October demonstrations led to Islamist student militia attacks
against them, injuring many, and subsequent torture after the hospitalized were
taken to security detention. Five of the University of Khartoum’s twelve faculties
remained closed as of this writing.
The press was faced with intermittent increased repression: journalists and editors
were detained and questioned about the publications’ content; newspapers
were fined heavily; and editions of many papers were confiscated because of articles
the censors did not like, although all papers were subjected to prior censorship.
While outside support arrived for the English-language Khartoum Monitor, there
was less support for equally harassed colleagues in the Arabic-language press. Al
Ayam was punished by one day’s closure for an article discussing the health hazards
of female genital cutting, although official government policy opposes the practice.
Another instrument of repression were “emergency tribunals” established
under the 1998 State of Emergency Act.These courts, composed of one civilian and
two military judges, handed down stringent sentences summarily, without any respect for the right to a fair trial. By July 1, 2002, at least nineteen people had been
executed in the Darfur region after sentencing by these tribunals. The emergency
tribunals summarily sentenced eighty-eight people to death in Darfur, allegedly in
response to lethal raids by the Riziegat Baggara ethnic group on the smaller Ma’alia
tribe.
Other courts also imposed draconian penalties without fair trial, as in the Darfur
region where six men were sentenced to amputations and cross amputations
(one hand and the opposite foot amputated) for crimes such as robbery and the
unlicensed possession of weapons in December 2001. In that month, a court in
Southern Darfur sentenced an eighteen-year-old Dinka woman to death by stoning
under shari’a (Islamic law) for the crime of adultery; she did not have legal representation
or an interpreter. After international protest the sentence was
overturned on appeal, but the trial court imposed forty lashes, administered on the
spot, without counsel or right of appeal.
The war continued to lead to pervasive human rights abuses.The Sudanese government
continued to displace and kill civilian populations, the most active theatre
of war being the oilfield areas of Western Upper Nile/Unity State. There, the government
brought in Islamist militia and Arab Baggara militia troops (muraheleen)
to supplement its regular troops in attacking the civilian population and occasionally
the rebels.
In early 2002 the pro-government Nuer (southern) militia of Gen. Paulino
Matiep joined forces with the muraheleen and conducted scorched earth campaigns
to drive tens of thousands of Nuer residents from their homes. The horsebacked
muraheleen crossed rivers to Nuer areas (inaccessible before the oil
companies built bridges).Women and children in Western Upper Nile/Unity State
were abducted and raped by the muraheleen, this Nuer militia, and government
army forces in early 2002; it was feared that the muraheleen enslaved those
abducted. The World Food Program (WFP) and Operation Lifeline Sudan in
March 2002 conservatively estimated that 174,200 individuals remained displaced
due to the oilfields war.
In January 2002,Cmdr.Riek Machar (who in 1991 led a breakaway faction from
the SPLM/A and in 1997 signed a peace agreement with the government) and the
SPLM/A announced their forces were merging, and a local Nuer commander in
Block 5A switched loyalties to the SPLM/A. The oil consortium operating south of
Bentiu in Block 5A led by Swedish company Lundin then announced its operations
were suspended due to insecurity, and until a negotiated peace was reached.At this
writing, only the consortium led by Talisman continued to produce oil for export,
at 230,000 barrels per day, from one concession. Oil revenue was at least 20 percent
of government income in 2001, and the military budget consumed about 60 percent
of oil revenue in that year.
The muraheleen who with the government army “protected” the rail line from
Babanusa to Wau in Bahr El Ghazal used this role also to carry out several slave raids
in 2002.The government’s Committee for the Eradication of Abduction ofWomen
and Children (CEAWC) continued to exist but failed to alleviate the slavery problem
as local administrations in Baggara areas refused to cooperate in turning over
enslaved persons.
The government relied more heavily in 2002 on its growing air force to bomb
locations throughout the rebel areas and to reinforce garrison towns. Numerous
well-documented incidents of intentional aerial bombing of civilian targets (with
no military significance) occurred during 2001-2002, as in Bieh, above. According
to the church, in June government aircraft bombed the compound of the Roman
Catholic bishop of Torit in Ikotos, Eastern Equatoria, injuring at least four construction
workers. On September 21, the government bombed a cattle camp near
Lui,Bahr El Ghazal, and killed thirteen Dinka cattle herders (four of them children)
and more than fifty cattle.
The government continued to require high school students ages sixteen and
older to serve in the Popular Defense Force (PDF, an Islamist government militia),
often sending them—with inadequate training—as child soldiers to the front lines.
Its militias continued to forcibly recruit southerners residing in Khartoum as well
as those living in the south, among them many underage boys.
The SPLA, which took the garrison town of Kapoeta earlier in 2002, on August
31 captured Torit, 100 kilometers east of the largest southern town, Juba (under
government control since the beginning of the war). Reportedly government casualties,
many by SPLA summary execution of captured or wounded combatants,
were high.
The day after the SPLA took Torit, the government announced that it was withdrawing
from the peace negotiations on the pretext that the SPLA had broken a
non-existent “cease-fire.”The government then bombed Torit and areas untouched
for years, such as the Samaritan’s Purse hospital in Lui, Bahr El Ghazal.
After retaking Torit in October, the government returned to the peace negotiations
and on October 15 it and the SPLM/A reached an agreement on a military
standstill, extended until March 31, 2003. On October 26, the parties agreed with
the U.N. that they would permit full humanitarian access to all parts of Sudan,
through December 31.
The agreement to full humanitarian access was a reprieve from prior government
bans: it had maintained a two-year-plus ban on relief flights in many areas,
including Eastern Equatoria and most of Western Upper Nile/Unity State. The
most draconian ban to date was a September 27-October 6 ban effectively blocking
all humanitarian assistance to the non-government areas of the south.
When instances of rape and other abuses by SPLA soldiers against persons displaced
from Raga,Western Bahr El Ghazal,were reported, the SPLA authorities singled
out those thought responsible and summarily executed several soldiers, on the
basis of summary courts martial not subject to appeal.Reports of summary executions
of captured non-southern enemy soldiers ordered by SPLA Cmdr. Peter Gatdet
circulated, but the SPLA seemingly took no action to rein in this commander.
According to local sources, on March 13, 2002, SPLA forces attacked the village
of Tuhubak, already under SPLA control east of Torit. Some 200 forces burned all
the 173 homes in this village, population 970, and killed at least twenty-five civilians,
mostly elderly, women, and children. North of Abyei, on September 21, an
SPLA pre-dawn attack on the village of Todaj captured some forty-five civilians,
including many children under the age of fifteen, for conscription.The SPLA forces
reportedly tortured and humiliated the chief, and looted the village and all the cattle. The forty-five captives were taken to SPLA territory and held for two weeks,
then released. Human Rights Watch written inquiries to the SPLM/A regarding
these attacks went unanswered.
In a positive move, a settlement was reached in the Eastern Equatoria area
around Chukudum in August between the Didinga and the SPLA army and their
Bor Dinka relatives living as displaced persons in the area. The reconciliation conference,
sponsored by the New Sudan Council of Churches, came after years of lowlevel
warfare with many civilian casualties between the Didinga and SPLA.The area
remained heavily mined (mostly by the SPLA).
The SPLA continued to recruit underage soldiers in or near battlefields,while at
the same time it demobilized thousands of underage soldiers elsewhere. Child soldiers
were still common: Human Rights Watch in August interviewed SPLA soldiers
aged fifteen and sixteen (recruited two years earlier) from small tribes of
Southern Blue Nile.
The SPLM/A permitted ICRC access in five or six locations to its “prisoners of
war,” mostly non-southerners.
The Sudanese government had for years provided bases and other military support
for the abusive Ugandan rebel forces of the Lord’s Resistance Movement
(LRA), in retaliation for the Ugandan government’s backing of the SPLA.After September
11, 2001, the U.S. put the LRA on its list of terrorist organizations, and the
Sudanese government hastened its promised withdrawal of support from the LRA.
The Sudanese government had provided bases for the LRA south of Juba, but after
it began to withdraw its support the LRA began raiding and looting Sudanese villages
for food, and killing Sudanese civilians. The Sudanese government gave the
Ugandan government permission to pursue the LRA inside Sudan, starting in
March 2002. As a result of the campaign, LRA forces returned to Uganda, where
they carried out further abuses. (See Uganda.) The Sudanese government clashed
several times with units of LRA remaining in the Imatong Mountains and elsewhere
in southern Sudan, but did not offer much protection to the thousands the
LRA displaced.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Fledgling human rights organizations and monitors in the capital Khartoum
(the only place in government areas they could exist) continued to be at risk of arbitrary
arrest and harassment. They were subjected to harassment and arrest of their
leaders by security forces; Toby Madut, head of one southern human rights group
in Khartoum, was briefly jailed in 2002.
In SPLA-controlled southern and Nuba areas, small steps were taken in building
a civil administration, funded by foreign governments. Although SPLA relations
with the New Sudan Council of Churches improved in 2001, there was still little
space for the establishment and growth of an independent human rights entity,
albeit several indigenous nongovernmental organizations, including women’s
groups, said they were attempting to play that role informally.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
One effect of the U.S. government “war on terror” was continued engagement
with Sudan, which had already been cooperating since 2000 in some intelligence
and counterterrorism matters.
United Nations
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Sudan Gerhart Baum delivered a report
critical of the government and the SPLA to the U.N.Commission on Human Rights
in April, noting that the “overall human rights situation remains a matter of concern”
and that the “human rights situation has not yet changed and no tangible
improvement can yet be appreciated.”
The commission passed by one vote the resolution to reauthorize the rapporteur’s
mandate. Baum subsequently expressed cautious optimism about the
Machakos process, but called for a more comprehensive agreement, one that would
incorporate a role for human rights, democracy, and civil society in the ongoing
peace negotiations. The commission resolved that the Sudan government should
consider how to expand the office of the commission’s adviser in Sudan to include
monitoring, but the government did not respond.
When the special rapporteur called on the government in August to provide
transparency in accounting for its oil revenues, the government refused to permit
him to enter Sudan for his regular visit in the latter half of 2002, although through
the intervention of the German government, he was finally invited to visit in
October.
United States
As noted above, the U.S. vigorously supported the IGAD peace negotiations.At
the same time, the Bush administration prolonged to November 2003 existing
extensive U.S. economic sanctions on U.S. citizens and corporations doing business
with Sudan.
The U.S. Congress increased pressure on the Sudanese government in October
2002 with passage of the Sudan Peace Act. The law would impose greater sanctions
on the Sudan government should it walk away from talks or not negotiate in good
faith with the SPLM/A. It separately provided that U.S.$100 million would go to the
areas controlled by the opposition political and military umbrella group National
Democratic Alliance (NDA), of which the SPLA was the largest member.Although
the Danforth-negotiated agreement to halt targeted attacks on civilians and civilian
objects was signed by both parties in March 2002, as of this writing the U.S. State
Department,which undertook to enforce this agreement, had not seen its contractor,
PAE Government Services, Inc., conduct the first investigation.
In September, a New York federal court declined to strike down a lawsuit, commenced
in November 2001, against Talisman for harm to the Sudanese plaintiffs
including displacement and destruction of personal property, on account of Talisman’s
oil activities.
European Union
The E.U. in late 2001 agreed to continue its “critical engagement”with the government
of Sudan for another year, envisioning resumption of E.U. development
aid to Sudan by the end of 2002 if certain benchmarks (in human rights) were met.
As the peace talks under IGAD got underway, however,with E.U. members playing
a leading role, the goal shifted to one of encouraging Sudan and the SPLM/A to take
serious steps on the road to peace through the IGAD process, and maintaining a
common donor/international front on the peace issue.
As the year progressed, the E.U. expressed public concern about ongoing abuses
(such as the February bombing of the Bieh relief site). The E.U. demanded unrestricted
access for aid agencies to reach civilians affected by the civil war,which was
eventually accomplished in the context of the IGAD peace talks at Machakos.
UGANDA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The Ugandan political landscape in 2002 was characterized by continued conflict
over the “movement” system, by which Uganda is governed.As a result, political
and civil rights were violated, though on a somewhat lesser scale than during the
violent election year 2001. Uganda was a major player in armed conflicts in the
region:Continuing during most of the year, the occupation by the UPDF (Uganda’s
army) of the northeastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) began
to be scaled back in September; meanwhile, the UPDF fought a major military
offensive against the rebel Lord’s Resistance Army in northern Uganda and southern
Sudan. In both wars, civilians were victims of widespread abuse.
Legal restrictions as well as arbitrary arrest and detention were used to suppress
political dissent.On May 9, parliament adopted the highly contested Political Organizations
Law, which retained current constitutional restrictions on political parties
and added new ones. It outlawed most activities normally associated with
political parties, such as opening and operating branch offices, and holding delegates’
conferences and rallies.Existing political parties would “legally cease to exist”
if they failed to register within six months of the law’s entry into force.
A parliamentary commission investigating the violence during the 2001 presidential
and parliamentary elections unearthed cases of detention of suspected
opposition politicians in illegal locations, torture, and state-sponsored violence
against opposition supporters. For example, Kidima Mubarak, who had campaigned
in 2001 for a parliamentary candidate opposing the brother of army commander
James Kazini, testified before parliament in March 2002 about his arrest in
June 2001 followed by two months of detention at military barracks in the Ugandan-
controlled areas of the DRC.
On January 12, 2002, police broke up a peaceful rally in Kampala organized by
an opposition party, the Uganda’s People’s Congress (UPC), by firing on demonstrators
with live ammunition. They killed a young journalist, Jimmy Higenyi, and
injured several other persons with gunfire. They briefly detained several UPC leaders
and two journalists. Local elections held in February were the occasion for cases
to manipulation and abuse by government forces. Plainclothes agents abducted a
campaign worker for Kampala’s mayor, took him to the headquarters of Chieftaincy
Military Intelligence (CMI—a government security agency), and later to an
unacknowledged detention center in Kampala. They accused him of cooperating
with armed rebel groups and beat him severely. Nevertheless, the overall level of
violence was reduced compared to the elections of the previous year, and in some
areas opposition representatives were voted into leadership positions in the local
administration.
Not only known or suspected political opposition supporters but civilians at
large continued to be subject to arbitrary arrest and detention by government security
forces, including the police, UPDF, Presidential Protection Unit (PPU), CMI,
and members of the Kalangala Action Plan (a militia close to Presidential Advisor
Kakooza Mutale). In many cases agents carrying out the arrest wore civilian clothes
with no identifying insignia.Civilians were held in army barracks in different parts
of the country (although by law the army is allowed to carry out arrests only in
emergency situations), at CMI headquarters and at a facility controlled by the Joint
Anti Terrorism Task Force in Kampala. Detainees were held in overcrowded cells
and sometimes tortured. One woman, released in April 2002, testified how her
detention had included being held for a week in March 2001 in a hole dug in the
ground; another detainee told Human Rights Watch how he had been tortured on
the genitals. On July 23, 2002, a detainee of the CMI, Patrick Manenero, died while
being rushed to hospital.According to the death certificate, his death was caused by
internal bleeding due to blunt force trauma.
In previous years, the government held large numbers of people on treason
charges, particularly in western Uganda, where suspects were accused of supporting
the rebel Allied Democratic Front (ADF). During 2002, civilians continued to
be held without trial for prolonged periods under constitutional provisions allowing
detention of treason suspects without charge for up to 360 days. In April,
Human Rights Watch interviewed several treason suspects in western Uganda who
had just been released after months or years of detention, only to be told that there
were no charges against them. A few victims submitted complaints to the Ugandan
Human Rights Commission.
In May, a tough anti-terrorism law came into force. The Anti-Terrorism Act has
a broad definition of terrorism, describing it as the “use of violence or threat of violence
with intent to promote or achieve political, religious, economic and cultural
or social ends in an unlawful manner.”The law carried a mandatory death sentence
for those found to be terrorists. It could threaten also the legitimate work of journalists
who publish material considered “likely to promote terrorism.”
In June, Ugandan security forces started a crackdown on criminals or alleged
criminals in Kampala, called “Operation Wembley,” to deal with an apparent
increase in crime. According to the nongovernmental Foundation for Human Rights Initiative, nine persons were killed by security operatives in action, in circumstances
that might have been extralegal. Over four hundred people were
arrested, and in late August a court martial was set up to try the suspects, including
civilians, undermining due process protections.
Uganda’s human rights record was also tainted by its involvement in two armed
conflicts wracking the region. The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), which had been
waging a war in northern Uganda and committing gross human rights violations
since 1989, had been supported by the Sudan government in retaliation for
Uganda’s support of the Sudanese rebels, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army (SPLM/A).Under United States (U.S.) pressure the Sudan government
cut off assistance to the LRA, and in March 2002,with the permission of the Sudan
government, the UPDF launched a major offensive against the LRA in southern
Sudan, called “Operation Iron Fist.”The initial plan to eliminate the LRA failed, as
the LRA fled to mountains in southern Sudan and then crossed back into Uganda.
These military operations had a horrendous impact on the civilian population in
northern Uganda and southern Sudan. (See also Sudan.) From May the LRA
increased its attacks in northern Uganda, abducting and killing civilians, looting
villages, and attacking camps for internally displaced persons; United Nations
(U.N.) sources indicated that the LRA had attacked sixteen such camps by July. On
July 24 and 25 LRA soldiers killed an estimated fifty-seven people in several villages
about twenty-two kilometers from Kitgum town. In mid-August the rebels
announced that all nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) working in northern
Uganda—most of them providing humanitarian aid—had to withdraw, or risk
becoming targets of new attacks. Despite this warning, relief agencies continued
operations. The LRA also attacked and looted camps for Sudanese refugees in
Uganda, causing casualties among the refugees, and attacked humanitarian aid
trucks serving the displaced in southern Sudan. In early July, LRA forces attacked a
refugee camp in Adjumani, killing six refugees, and causing over half of the twelve
thousand inhabitants to flee. On August 5 an LRA raid on the Achol-pii settlement
in Pader district resulted in the deaths of about sixty people. The rebels looted all
the recently-delivered food, and burned what they could not carry. They forced the
camp’s twenty-four thousand refugees and relief staff to flee the site. The refugees
were provisionally moved to a site in western Uganda, and by September their permanent
relocation to other camps was underway, a measure that was long overdue.
Since the outbreak of hostilities in northern Uganda, the LRA have abducted
Ugandan children, trained them in southern Sudan and forced them to fight in the
front lines. Abductions continued in 2002, albeit on a lesser scale than in previous
years. As protection parents in affected areas sent their children to towns, where
they stayed overnight in hospitals, schools or other places under poor conditions.
Despite the return of the LRA to northern Uganda in May, few child soldiers managed
to escape their captors. The LRA did release some one hundred sick and elderly
people including children with their mothers in June.
UPDF forces also committed human rights abuses in the context of the northern
war. From 1996, Ugandan civilians in the north of the country were forced by
the army to move into camps for internally displaced people, and living conditions
for the over four hundred thousand civilians in the camps remained very poor in 2002. The camps provided little or no protection from the LRA, and residents were
vulnerable to abuse by the UPDF and individual soldiers. The Ugandan army
recruited children in the camps as “home guards”—a reserve force used to guard
the camps and fulfill other security functions. In response to the LRA’s 2002 campaign
in northern Uganda, the army stepped up the existing pattern of arbitrary
long-term detention of civilians suspected of collaborating with the LRA, and tortured
some detainees.
For most of the year the UPDF continued to occupy the northeastern parts of
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), where it trained, equipped, and supported
several rival rebel groups and competing ethnic militias, which committed
gross abuses and continued to recruit child soldiers. The Ugandan involvement
fueled conflict among different communities.Members of the UPDF continued to
be involved in highly profitable business in the northeastern DRC, such as the
exploitation of timber, diamonds, and gold, as well as collecting fees for the “protection”
of farms and trucks.The role of Ugandan elite networks in the exploitation
of resources was highlighted in a widely publicized report by the U.N. Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth in DRC,published in October.The Sun City Accord, a power-sharing agreement
between the Congolese government and the Ugandan-backed Movement for
the Liberation of Congo (MLC) concluded in April, did not end the war in the
northeastern DRC. By August, the Ugandan army chased away the rebel Congolese
Rally for Democracy-Liberation Movement from Bunia, and handed over control
to the Union of Congolese Patriots, comprising extremists from the Hema ethnic
group,which committed gross abuses against civilians. In September, the Ugandan
and Congolese governments struck a peace deal in Luanda, and Uganda withdrew
its troops from parts of the northeastern DRC, but left two battalions in Bunia (See
also DRC.)
As a result of regional conflict, Uganda hosted close to two hundred thousand
refugees at the beginning of 2002, coming principally from Sudan, Rwanda, and the
DRC. The Ugandan government estimated in 2002 that as many as fifty thousand
refugees lived in Kampala. These refugees suffered from a variety of protection
problems, stemming partly from the government’s preference that refugees reside
in camps. Some refugees, including victims of torture, suffered from a lack of medical
assistance on the part of UNHCR and its local subcontractor. Other refugees
faced insecurity at the hands of agents linked to their original persecutors.Human
rights activists and other prominent community leaders from the Rwandan-controlled
parts of the DRC were followed by agents of the security services of the rebel
Congolese Rally for Democracy-Goma, and sometimes threatened. Refugees who
had fled the Ugandan-held territories of the DRC were in an especially difficult situation
as they were effectively under the control of the same authorities responsible
for their original persecution. Rwandan refugees also faced severe problems. In
one particularly egregious case, approximately forty-five Rwandan army officers
sought asylum in Uganda, but were detained for weeks at the end of 2001 and in
early 2002, and later held under house arrest, by the Ugandan authorities.UNHCR
was denied access to these refugees. Finally, the Ugandan and Rwandan governments
established a Joint Verification Team to question the officers and other alleged military dissidents. The confidentiality of the officers’ claims was seriously
compromised since detailed information was disclosed to the Rwandan government.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights organizations, church bodies, and other independent associations
continued to play a vital role in Uganda’s public life, but their freedom was
threatened by the Non-Governmental Organizations Amendment Bill brought
before parliament. The bill would introduce more complicated registration procedures
and allow the suspension of NGOs whose objectives “are in contravention of
any government policy or plan,” and NGO leaders could be imprisoned if they violated
the bill. A coalition of Ugandan organizations campaigned against this law,
which was still before parliament at this writing.
Several human rights organizations published important studies on the plight
of the internally displaced.Human Rights Focus, a Gulu-based organization, published
a report on the “protected villages” of northern Uganda. It documented
attacks by the LRA on the displaced, as well as abuses by the Ugandan security forces
administering the camps. This was followed by the publication of a report on
human rights abuses against internally displaced people in the Rwenzori region of
western Uganda, by the Kabarole Research Centre and two international organizations.
On World Press Freedom day,May 3, the Eastern Africa Media Institute organized
a conference on press freedom in Uganda, raising among other issues the
threats against journalists in the new anti-terrorism law.
The Foundation for Human Rights Initiative continued to carry out an impressive
program of work on Uganda’s prisons. Early in the year, the organization met
with the prime minister and the minister of internal affairs to discuss recent cases
of arrest and torture.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
In the context of the geopolitical changes after the attacks on September 11,
2001, Uganda reasserted its role as a key African ally for the United States, United
Kingdom and other Western governments.
United Nations
The U.N. was involved at several levels in addressing the war in northern Uganda
and the war in the DRC.
In March, UNICEF called on the LRA to release all child soldiers. The plight of
children abducted by the LRA in northern Uganda was also highlighted in a resolution
by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in April and at the United
Nations General Assembly Special Session on Children in May.However, preoccupied with the serious abuses against children by the LRA, UNICEF and other relevant
U.N. agencies failed to make the issue of recruitment of children by the Ugandan
army itself in northern Uganda a priority. Later in the year, U.N. agencies in
northern Uganda faced major problems delivering humanitarian aid.
In the DRC, the U.N. pushed for a peaceful solution to the conflict, while
increasing its peacekeeping force—MONUC—on the ground. Unfortunately, the
presence of MONUC in Ugandan-held territories was very thin and largely unable
to monitor and report on the severe human rights abuse that continued to shatter
the Ituri region. The U.N. Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and other Forms of Wealth in the DRC continued its investigations,
building on findings from its first two reports, published in April and November
2001. In these reports the Panel accused several persons close to Uganda’s President
Yoweri Museveni, as well as UPDF officers and soldiers, of involvement in illegal
business with diamonds, timber, gold and other resources.
The situation of refugees remained precarious, and in the absence of adequate
governmental protection, UNHCR failed to perform its protection responsibilities
on behalf of some refugees in camps as well as in urban areas in Uganda who faced
serious human rights violations.
European Union
The E.U. underlined the need for peace in the DRC, and as relations between the
Ugandan and Rwandan governments continued to deteriorate, Uganda’s key E.U.
interlocutor, the United Kingdom (U.K.), played an important mediation role in
late 2001 and during 2002, and arranged several meetings between the two
country’s leaders. The U.K. failed, however, to exert pressure to ensure respect for
human rights in the Ugandan-held areas of the DRC. It remained, overall, supportive
of Ugandan policies: the U.K. was the largest bilateral donor and carried out
large reform programs in a variety of sectors. In general the E.U. continued to support
the Ugandan government politically and financially, albeit cautious E.U. criticism
was expressed concerning the state of civil liberties, in particular the Political
Organizations Law.
United States
The U.S. government welcomed the adoption of the anti-terrorism act and put
the LRA on its official list of “terrorist organizations,” providing legitimacy for the
government military offensive in the north and in Sudan.While the U.S. government
noted a number of serious human rights issues in the State Department’s
Country Report on Human Rights Practices, it avoided putting pressure on the
Ugandan government to remedy abuses, and remained largely quiet on the human
rights violations in the Ugandan-held areas of the northeastern DRC. The U.S. was
Uganda’s second largest donor, and its strong political support was reiterated during
President Museveni’s visit to the U.S. in May.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Hidden in Plain View: Refugees Living Without Protection in Nairobi and Kampala,
11/02
AMERICAS OVERVIEW
The failed coup in politically polarized Venezuela was the most dramatic
sign of problems that were increasingly apparent across Latin America and
the Caribbean: the fragility of electoral democracy and the weakness of the rule of
law. Even though,with the glaring exception of Cuba, the formal trappings of democracy
were in place throughout the region, voters seemed to be losing confidence
in the ability of elected governments to cope effectively with the challenges of the
day.With poverty and inequality on the rise, widespread popular disenchantment
with the region’s shallow democracies raised serious concern.
Argentina was another extreme case,with three presidents shuffling through the
office during a single ten-day period in December 2001, a crisis provoked by the
country’s near-total economic collapse.Haiti, whose government’s democratic credentials
were already subject to question, saw increasing political turmoil. Street
protests and rioting erupted in both countries, as well as in Venezuela, Paraguay,
and Bolivia. The violence and brutality of the police response to such incidents
brought deserved attention to the deeply ingrained failings of the region’s criminal
justice systems.
Unable to bring prosperity to the electorate, some political leaders seemed all
too capable of securing financial benefits for themselves. In certain cases, as a commentator
observed with regard to Argentina, government officials treated public
money as “the spoils of war.” For all the talk of anti-corruption efforts, little concrete
progress was made in stemming the practice. And it was official corruption
that—perhaps more than any other single factor—eroded public trust in government.
The region’s vigorous press helped to monitor corrupt practices, but its ability
to do so was limited in some countries by oppressive criminal defamation laws.
In Panama, most notably, government officials retaliated against investigative journalists
by bringing many of them to court.
The lack of government transparency that facilitated corruption received
increased attention, however, and some countries made progress toward remedying
it. In Mexico and Peru, laws on freedom of information were passed that
affirmed that information in the hands of the state was, in principle, public. Such
laws also established procedures for citizens to seek the release of government documents
and fixed penalties for improper denials of access.
In Colombia, the region’s only armed conflict and most pressing human rights
crisis worsened. Indicating an apparent preference for a more hard-line approach,
voters elected President Álvaro Uribe Vélez in May by an unprecedented majority.
Uribe immediately imposed emergency measures that weakened the ability of state
institutions to monitor and investigate human rights violations. He also tried to
permit warrantless searches and wiretaps and to restrict the movement of journalists,
measures ruled unconstitutional by the country’s highest court. And in a particularly
worrying move, Uribe authorized the army to recruit and arm a force of
fifteen thousand peasant allies, raising fears that the army’s existing paramilitary
allies might simply be “legalized.”Although President Uribe and his defense minister
announced a zero-tolerance policy toward any collaboration between government
forces and illegal paramilitary groups, numerous credible reports of joint
military-paramilitary operations and tolerance for paramilitary activities persisted.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army (Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, FARC-EP), the country’s
largest guerrilla group, intensified attacks after the breakdown of peace negotiations
in February. In the deadliest incident, in May, guerrillas launched a gas cylinder
bomb that hit a church where displaced persons were gathered in Bojayá,
Chocó, killing 119, including at least forty-eight children. The FARC also escalated
its offensive against the state’s civilian infrastructure, killing mayors and other local
officials.
Venezuela, though not in a state of armed conflict, was repeatedly on the brink
of violence.The continuing political strife,which resulted in an April coup attempt,
abated somewhat in the wake of Hugo Chávez’s reinstatement as president, but
worsened notably toward the end of the year.
President Chávez, a one-time coup plotter himself, was forced from office on
April 11 by the military after shootings disrupted a massive protest march. The
march,which was called in support of a general strike, involved the participation of
labor groups,business organizations, the political opposition, and members of civil
society. As some five hundred thousand people headed toward the presidential
palace in downtown Caracas, where Chávez’s supporters had gathered to oppose
the march, marksmen in nearby buildings opened fire. Eighteen civilians died and
more than 150 others were injured during the protest.Victims included both government
supporters and members of the opposition, as well as a press photographer
covering the event.
Late that evening, a group of senior military officers ousted President Chávez
and allowed Pedro Carmona Estanga, the head of the country’s leading business
association, to declare himself president. This rupture of the constitutional order
gave way to a broader attack on the rule of law as Carmona dissolved the legislature
and the Supreme Court, and revoked the country’s new constitution. Although
Chávez was reinstated as president on April 14, some forty to sixty people were
killed in a second eruption of violence that took place during the weekend he was
deposed.Most of the victims were believed to be Chávez supporters who were killed
by security forces during rioting in poor neighborhoods of Caracas.
In Haiti, although events were less dramatic, a similar level of political polarization
was evident.The political opposition, already skeptical of continuing promises
made by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was further embittered by the violent
events of December 17, 2001. Taking advantage of reports of a coup attempt (later
shown to be unfounded), gangs of youths—members of the so-called popular organizations aligned with the party of President Aristide—embarked on largescale
reprisal attacks against the opposition. Burning the headquarters of political
parties and destroying the homes of opposition leaders, the gangs roamed through
cities and towns unhindered by the police.
Haiti’s underlying political stalemate stemmed from legislative elections held in
2000 that were plagued by fraud. Although international negotiators continued
their efforts to facilitate a solution to the impasse in 2002, the lack of progress discouraged
donor states, leaving hundreds of millions of dollars in international aid
frozen. President Aristide complained vociferously of the aid suspension, but
showed little inclination to take the concrete steps needed to resolve the situation.
Massive political protests in Argentina, a symptom of the country’s ruinous
economic conditions, led President Fernando De la Rúa to resign in December
2001. Two more presidents followed in quick succession, until finally the Congress
elected Peronist Eduardo Duhalde to the presidency. Nationwide, at least twentythree
people were killed during the violent clashes and rioting that accompanied
the protests. The economic crisis brought with it a sharp increase in violent crime
and kidnappings. Police brutality, an already chronic problem, worsened.
Police violence raised serious concern in other countries as well, particularly
Venezuela, where high rates of violent crime led to public indifference to abuses
against suspected criminals. “Social cleansing”-type killings by Venezuelan police
were a grave problem, especially in the provinces. In the state of Portuguesa, a selfstyled
“extermination group”composed of off-duty members of the state police and
National Guard was responsible for killing alleged street criminals and drug-users.
In the English-speaking Caribbean, where violent crime rates were also extremely
high, several states persisted in efforts to strengthen the death penalty.
These states—notably Barbados, Belize, and Jamaica—sought to evade certain rulings
of the Privy Council, the London-based appellate tribunal, and the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights that hindered their application of the penalty. In
December, for example, Jamaican Prime Minister P.J. Patterson announced during
a nationally televised speech that he would seek a constitutional amendment to
reinstate hangings. Earlier,Patterson had asserted that the Privy Council was “making
it impossible for the [death penalty] to be carried out.”He was referring to the
fact that in Jamaica, as in other Caribbean countries, the death penalty existed as
a legal punishment, but its application had been narrowed by several appellate
rulings.
One such ruling was handed down in March, when the Privy Council, upholding
an earlier decision of the Eastern Caribbean Court of Appeal, struck down the
mandatory death penalty that existed in seven Eastern Caribbean countries. In
October, the Privy Council overturned the death sentences of two men convicted
of a 1999 killing in Trinidad. As of November, legislatures in Belize and Barbados,
reacting against such rulings, were considering proposed constitutional amendments
to restrict appeals in capital cases.
Guatemala and Cuba remained the only Spanish-speaking countries in the
region to apply the death penalty to normal crimes, although several other Latin
American states reserved the right to execute persons convicted of treason during
wartime or of other extraordinary offenses. In Guatemala, however, President Portillo announced a moratorium on the application of the death penalty, and, at this
writing, neither Guatemala nor Cuba had carried out any death sentences in 2002.
Prison conditions in Latin America were generally abysmal, with many prisons
overcrowded, understaffed, decaying, and dangerous. A riot in La Vega prison, in
the Dominican Republic, left twenty-nine inmates dead on September 20.Most of
the victims died of smoke inhalation, the result of a fire that prisoners lit to protest
a weapons search.The overcrowded and badly managed facility,built for three hundred
people, held nearly twice that number at the time of the riot. In January,
twenty-seven prisoners in Brazil were killed during a riot in the prison of Porto
Velho, in the state of Rondonia, and. In Peru, the inmate population of the remote
Challapalca high security prison, located at fourteen thousand feet in the Andes,
doubled from fifty to more than one hundred over the course of the year.Due to its
oxygen-thin air, isolation, and freezing temperatures, Peru’s human rights
ombudsman and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights had repeatedly
called for the prison’s closure, saying it posed unacceptable health hazards to
both inmates and staff.
Throughout Latin America and the Caribbean, workers continued to suffer
myriad violations of internationally recognized labor rights. Common abuses
included the worst forms of child labor, employment discrimination, and violations
of the right to freedom of association. In some cases, violations were perpetuated
by the government’s failure to enforce domestic labor legislation and, in other
cases, national labor laws fell short of international labor standards. The result was
the same, however: employers were able to violate workers’ rights with impunity. In
Colombia, where the defense of labor rights was an extremely dangerous activity,
union leaders and members were frequently killed.
In an encouraging sign of progress, several countries took meaningful steps
toward accountability for past abuses. In Mexico, for example, the government
made the historic decision to publicly acknowledge acts of political violence committed
by its security forces during the 1960s and 1970s, and to try to bring to justice
those responsible for such crimes. President Vicente Fox, in November 2001,
announced the creation of a special prosecutor’s office that was charged with this
task. In Argentina, a number of senior military officers implicated in abuses committed
during that country’s “dirty war” were in detention or under house arrest,
including former military ruler Leopoldo Galtieri. As of November, however, the
Argentine Supreme Court had yet to rule on appeals of two federal court decisions
striking down the country’s amnesty laws, a ruling that would be critical to the success
of efforts to establish accountability.
In Chile, although courts made significant progress in prosecuting members of
the military implicated in the “disappearances”committed during the Pinochet era,
General Augusto Pinochet himself escaped justice. Disagreeing with many legal
experts, Chile’s Supreme Court held that the “moderate dementia” Pinochet was
deemed to be suffering from was sufficient to satisfy the statutory requirements for
terminating proceedings in the notorious “Caravan of Death” case.
Peru’s truth commission held public hearings in cities and rural areas all across
the country, beginning in April. The hearings, which were televised, were devoted
to first-hand testimonies regarding massacres, extrajudicial executions, rapes, and other abuses committed in Peru from 1980 to 2000. Also in April, as the result of
negotiations with the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the attorney
general named a special prosecutor to investigate and prosecute hundreds of forced
disappearances, killings, and other crimes, mainly committed during the 1980s.
The special prosecutor was also mandated to exhume and identify human remains
in the more than five hundred clandestine burial sites believed to exist in Peru.
In Central America, too, the gross human rights violations of past decades continued
to receive attention,with exhumations of mass graves taking place in a number
of countries. In Panama, in April, a government-sponsored truth commission
issued its final report on abuses committed during military rule. In Guatemala, the
country with the most tragic past record of large-scale killings and massacres, the
intimidation of witnesses, justice officials, and human rights defenders was a serious
problem, hindering the quest for accountability.
Another important milestone in the push for accountability in Latin America
was the establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which entered
into force on July 1.The ICC was designed to prosecute individuals accused of committing
genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes. Several Latin American
countries ratified the ICC treaty over the course of the year, namely, Ecuador,
Panama, Brazil, Bolivia, Uruguay, Honduras, and Colombia. Although there was
considerable regional support for the court, many countries—including Chile,
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, and
Nicaragua—had yet to join the ICC at this writing.
By implementing appropriate national legislation, several countries showed that
they took seriously their obligation to ensure the effective functioning of the ICC.
On September 25, for example, Brazil adopted the Rome Statute for the International
Criminal Court as national law.Argentina and Ecuador made progress with
draft implementing legislation,while Peru,Bolivia, and Venezuela were starting the
implementation process.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The human rights movement in Latin America and the Caribbean showed
impressive grassroots strength, while benefiting from acknowledged legitimacy at
the governmental level. Numerous local and regional nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) were dedicated to the defense of human rights, including concerns
such as women’s rights, gay and lesbian rights, and free expression.Made up of talented
and committed activists, lawyers, community leaders, and others, these
groups worked to put human rights principles into practice locally. In some countries,
the work of nongovernmental groups was supplemented by that of permanent
national human right commissions, ad hoc parliamentary bodies, and other
government organs. Attesting to their expertise and ability, a number of Latin
American human rights defenders played high-profile international roles at the
United Nations and other fora.
In several countries, however, including Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, and
Brazil, individual activists faced intimidation, assault, and sometimes death for their advocacy of human rights. Colombia remained the most dangerous country
for human rights defenders. In the first eleven months of 2002, sixteen defenders
were reported killed there. Government investigators handling prosecutions of
paramilitary leaders were also at risk, as were witnesses in such cases.
In Cuba, unlike other countries in the region, human rights monitoring was not
recognized as a legitimate activity, but stigmatized as a disloyal betrayal of Cuban
sovereignty. Cuban human rights defenders continued to work under extremely
difficult conditions, facing surveillance, harassment, and possible criminal prosecution.
The public in many Latin American countries, having lived through repressive
military governments, generally recognized the importance of human rights principles.
Nonetheless, human rights defenders were frequently stigmatized for protecting
the rights of unpopular groups, particularly criminal suspects.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Given world attention to other regions, human rights conditions in Latin America
and the Caribbean were not extremely prominent on the United Nations’s
agenda, although specific problems and situations received attention.
James LeMoyne, the special adviser on Colombia to the U.N. secretary-general,
was a frequent visitor to Colombia over the course of the year. He played an
extremely active role in trying to salvage peace talks between the Colombian government
and the country’s largest guerrilla group, although the talks ultimately
failed.
In both Colombia and Guatemala, the United Nations maintained a long-term
human rights field presence. In Mexico, the government agreed in July to the opening
of an in-country U.N. human rights office. The U.N. verification mission in
Guatemala, known as MINUGUA, played a central role in monitoring compliance
with the country’s 1996 peace accords. In Colombia, the U.N. maintained a field
office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights that documented abuses committed
by all parties to the country’s armed conflict. There were moments of high
tension between the office and the Colombian government, notably after the office
raised questions regarding the role of the Colombian army at Boyajá, the site of a
large-scale killing by guerrillas.The U.N.High Commissioner for Refugees also had
field offices in Colombia, with an operational capacity in the Urabá and Middle
Magdalena regions as well as the department of Putumayo.
For the tenth time in eleven years, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights
passed a resolution on human rights in Cuba. The language of the resolution was
weaker than in the past, but, notably, the resolution was sponsored by Latin American
governments. Ignoring strongly worded Cuban denunciations, a large majority
of Latin American states with seats on the commission voted in favor of the
resolution.
As of this writing, six countries in Latin America—Argentina,Brazil,Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, and Peru—had issued standing invitations for visits of U.N.
human rights monitoring mechanisms.Mexico, for example, hosted two such visits
during the year: the February fact-finding mission of the special rapporteur on
the human rights of migrants, and the August mission of the representative of the
U.N. secretary-general on internally displaced persons. In September,Haiti hosted
the visit of Louis Joinet, the U.N.’s newly-appointed independent expert on the situation
of human rights in Haiti.Cuba,which in past years had allowed only a select
few U.N. human rights representatives to visit, lobbied to weaken the U.N.’s monitoring
mechanisms at the April session of the U.N.Commission on Human Rights.
Organization of American States
The Organization of American States (OAS) expended significant diplomatic
energies in trying to contain the twin political crises in Venezuela and Haiti. On
April 13, in the immediate wake of President Hugo Chávez’s ouster in Venezuela,
the OAS Permanent Council held an emergency meeting as contemplated under
the terms of the newly created Inter-American Democratic Charter.At the close of
the meeting, the Permanent Council issued a resolution condemning the coup and
stating that the events in Venezuela justified the charter’s application—a decision
that could have led to the application of sanctions had Chávez not been reinstated
as president. OAS Secretary General César Gaviria traveled to Venezuela several
times over the course of the year, attempting to facilitate a political dialogue
between the opposing forces and avoid a deepening of the crisis.
In Haiti,OAS Assistant Secretary General Luigi Einaudi worked to effect a negotiated
resolution to that country’s political crisis, undertaking several missions to
the country. The OAS Permanent Council, at a January meeting, also examined the
Haitian situation.Concerned about the violent and systematic attacks on the political
opposition that took place on December 17, 2001, the Permanent Council
issued a resolution calling upon the Haitian authorities to carry out a thorough
investigation of the attacks. In March, at a follow-up to the January meeting, the
OAS and the Haitian government signed an agreement to establish an OAS Special
Mission to Haiti. The mission, which began functioning the following month, was
designed to help address the country’s failings in the areas of democracy and
human rights.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, an OAS human rights
body, sent fact-finding and advocacy missions to several countries in the region,
including Venezuela,Haiti, and Argentina. In October, the commission held hearings
regarding the situation of people living with HIV/AIDS. One hearing provided
a general overview of human rights issues pertaining to the HIV/AIDS pandemic;
the others covered the denial of access to anti-retroviral medication to people in
Ecuador, and a similar case in El Salvador. Throughout the year, the commission
issued recommendations to Latin American governments regarding specific
human rights cases.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the OAS tribunal whose jurisdiction
covered human rights—and whose rulings had binding force—issued several
important decisions. In August, for example, it ordered Venezuela to pay compensation amounting to U.S. $1,559,800 to the relatives of thirty-seven people killed by
security forces during a February 27, 1989 popular revolt.
Europe
The European Union (E.U.) supported efforts to address the region’s most
pressing human rights and humanitarian problems, including, most notably, the
armed conflict in Colombia.Among other forms of help, it provided financial support
for the Colombian peace process and for humanitarian assistance to displaced
persons.When peace talks between the Colombian government and the FARC-EP
broke down in February, however, the E.U. adopted a noticiably harder stance
toward the FARC-EP. In June, after sustained debate and significant pressure from
Colombia’s then-President Andrés Pastrana, the E.U. added the FARC-EP to its
blacklist of “terrorist” organizations.
As of November, Cuba remained the only Latin American country lacking an
E.U. cooperation agreement covering trade and development.Although the Cuban
government and E.U. representatives engaged in discussions regarding such an
agreement, Cuba was unwilling to implement the reforms necessary to satisfy the
E.U.’s “common position” on Cuba, which made full economic cooperation contingent
on steps toward greater democracy and respect for human rights.
European courts, via efforts to extradite suspected perpetrators of gross human
rights abuses, played a useful role in pressing for accountability for such crimes. In
January, for example, Swedish courts sought the extradition of former Argentine
naval officer Alfredo Astiz, known as the “Angel of Death” for his activities during
Argentina’s period of military rule. The Argentine government rejected the extradition
request, however, asserting the principle of territorial sovereignty.
In May, the second Summit of Heads of State and Government of Latin America,
the Caribbean and the European Union (E.U.-LAC) was held. Participants at
the summit condemned human rights abuses and agreed to cooperate more closely
to protect human rights and strengthen the rule of law.
United States
The U.S. government devoted relatively little high-level attention to Latin America,
reflecting a shift in priorities dating from the September 11, 2001 terrorist
attacks. Scant progress was made toward deepening bilateral relationships in the
region, disappointing countries like Mexico, which had hoped to negotiate a joint
migration policy that would include protections for Mexicans living in the United
States. To the extent that Latin American countries remained on the U.S. foreign
policy agenda,U.S. officials concentrated primarily on counter-narcotics and trade
policy, with human rights issues being of secondary importance.
In Colombia,U.S. anti-drug efforts were increasingly assimilated into U.S. antiterrorism
efforts, which meant, in practice, counter-insurgency. The country’s
main guerrilla forces and its umbrella paramilitary alliance were both included on
the State Department’s official list of terrorist groups, and both were accused by
U.S. officials of involvement in drug trafficking. Colombia remained the world’s third largest recipient ofU.S. military aid, after Israel and Egypt, receiving $374 million
in military aid in 2002. In a new development, the U.S. lifted restrictions that
had prevented the funding from being allocated to combat illegal armed groups,
thus permitting direct U.S. funding of Colombian efforts to fight guerrillas and
paramilitaries.
U.S. aid legislation included human rights conditions that required the Colombian
military to take effective steps to break ties with paramilitary groups, suspend
from duty officers implicated in gross human rights violations, and cooperate with
civilian authorities in prosecuting alleged human rights abusers.Despite clear evidence
that Colombia had failed to comply with a single one of the statutory requirements,
the conditions were not enforced. The U.S. State Department certified
Colombia’s compliance with the conditions in May, thereby releasing 60 percent of
the funds available, and again in September, releasing the remaining funds.The certification
decisions sent a clear and disturbing message to the Colombian military
that there would be no consequences for flouting the law’s human rights requirements.
Nevertheless, in November, the State Department suspended an air force unit
from receiving U.S. funding because of evidence that the unit was implicated in an
indiscriminate attack near the town of Santo Domingo,Arauca, in 1998.U.S. pressure
also led to the resignation of Navy Admiral Rodrigo Quinoñes, one of the most
senior Colombian officers linked to support for paramilitary abuses.
Another major focus of U.S. policy in Latin America was trade. In August, legislation
on Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), known as "Fast Track," was passed,
granting the president the power to negotiate trade agreements that would not be
subject to amendment by Congress.The TPA legislation included a set of objectives
to guide the negotiation of future trade accords, including an objective that such
accords should protect workers’ rights. Armed with TPA, the Bush administration
sought to conclude a free trade agreement with Chile by the end of 2002, as well as
to negotiate another trade accord with five Central American countries, and, ultimately,
a hemisphere-wide Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA).Unfortunately,
there was no indication that U.S. trade negotiators intended to push for strong protections
that would require parties’ labor laws to meet international labor standards.
In negotiating trade agreements, the United States also continued to promote
strict patent protections for pharmaceutical innovations, thus undermining access
to essential HIV/AIDS medicines.U.S.-backed patent provisions in the draft FTAA
went beyond existing World Trade Organization (WTO) rules in their protection
of pharmaceutical patents. These protections restricted the ability of prospective
member states to make full use of indirect price controls, such as compulsory
licensing, contained in the WTO’s Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property (TRIPS).The United States also sought to include such "TRIPS-plus"
proposals in its bilateral agreement with Chile, as well as in the multilateral accord
being negotiated with a block of Central American countries. These proposals
undermined the 142-country consensus reached at the WTO’s Fourth Ministerial
Conference in Doha, Qatar, regarding the appropriate balance between intellectual
property right protections and public health concerns.
Cuba remained the exception to the U.S. government’s region-wide push for strengthened trade relations. Although a number of U.S. political leaders traveled
to the island, including former President Jimmy Carter in May, Bush administration
officials remained adamantly opposed to any softening in the U.S. economic
embargo on Cuba.
The U.S. government described the promotion of democracy as a central pillar
of its policy in the region. In April, however, when Venezuelan President Hugo
Chávez was temporarily ousted in a military coup, U.S. officials failed to immediately
condemn the interruption in the constitutional order and instead publicly
blamed the Chávez government for provoking the crisis. Only after other governments
in the region denounced the coup did the United States join them in supporting
an OAS resolution condemning it.
The Bush administration sought to undermine regional support for the International
Criminal Court, threatening to cut off military aid to countries that supported
the court.
On a bilateral basis, in contrast, the U.S. government did make some significant
contributions toward promoting accountability for human rights abuses. In
August, the State Department released 4,677 declassified documents containing
information on human rights violations that took place in Argentina during that
country’s period of military rule.Many of the documents proved highly relevant to
cases under investigation in the Argentine courts. In Guatemala, the U.S. government
provided assistance to local efforts to investigate and prosecute past abuses,
supporting the work of forensic teams exhuming clandestine cemeteries and of
NGOs involved in human rights prosecutions. In Colombia,Department of Justice
officials administered a $25 million program to strengthen the capacity of the
attorney general’s Human Rights Unit by funding satellite offices, providing the
office with training and equipment, and working to improve the security of threatened
prosecutors and witnesses.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
The Americas division of Human Rights Watch kept abreast of human rights
developments around the region through close contact with local advocates, frequent
country visits, and intensive monitoring of the news media and other sources
of information. The division sought not only to identify pressing human rights
problems but also to understand the root causes of violations and develop effective
strategies for addressing them. These strategies involved targeted advocacy with
policy-makers, careful coordination with local NGOs, and outreach to the broader
public via the media and the Internet.
Among the issues the division addressed in 2001 were accountability and child
soldiers in Colombia; the protection of human rights defenders in Guatemala; the
political crisis in Venezuela; freedom of association and child labor in Ecuador; the
treatment of Haitian immigrants and Dominico-Haitians in the Dominican
Republic; freedom of expression in Chile; accountability,press freedoms, and political
prisoners in Mexico; human rights prosecutions in Argentina; and the treatment
of political dissidents in Cuba.
Over the course of the year, the Americas division fielded investigative and advocacy
missions to Argentina, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela. With the information collected during
these trips, the division prepared detailed reports, briefing papers, and other materials
to document the problems under review.To facilitate the broad dissemination
of its findings, the division put a high priority on translating its materials into
Spanish (and Portuguese, in some instances) and posting them on the Human
Rights Watch website.
Besides disseminating information via written materials,Human Rights Watch
directly addressed high-level government officials and representatives of relevant
regional and international bodies. In several countries, Human Rights Watch representatives
held meetings with presidents and other top government officials. In
meetings, as well as in correspondence and written statements, the Americas division
made specific recommendations for improving human rights conditions.
As the region’s gravest human rights crisis, Colombia was a major focus of the
Americas division’s energies during 2002.The division’s work in support of human
rights in Colombia had three tracks: pressing for change within the country,working
to influence U.S. policy toward Colombia, and promoting U.N. and other international
efforts. Human Rights Watch conducted two research missions to
Colombia.During the first mission, researchers collected the testimonies of former
child soldiers, and held meetings with NGOs and others with expertise relevant to
the issue. The second visit gathered material for a report on the record of Colombia’s
attorney general’s office, in particular investigations of alleged human rights
abuses by high-ranking military officers and paramilitary leaders. The resulting
report, A Wrong Turn: The Record of the Colombian Attorney General’s Office, found
that Attorney General Luis Camilo Osorio had undermined key investigations and
contributed to a climate of fear within the Human Rights Unit. A Human Rights
Watch delegation released the report at a press conference in Bogotá on November
8, after meeting with the Colombian president, the attorney general, and others.
In Guatemala, the Women’s Rights Division released a report in February documenting
persistent sex discrimination and abuse in Guatemala’s largest femaledominated
labor sectors—export processing plants and domestic labor. The
Americas division conducted an advocacy mission in August to press the government
to take more aggressive steps to protect human rights defenders, who had
been subject to numerous acts of intimidation during the course of the year. It also
pressed for progress on judicial cases involving egregious human rights abuses
committed during Guatemala’s civil war, which ended in 1996.
In Ecuador, the Americas division released a report in April documenting harmful
child labor and obstacles to unionizing in that country’s banana sector.After the
release, Human Rights Watch pressed the government to enforce child labor laws
while urging the banana industry to respect those laws. In July, the banana industry
signed an agreement to eliminate illegal child labor in the sector within roughly
one year, and in October, the government created a new System of Child Labor
Inspection and Monitoring. Human Rights Watch applauded these initiatives,
while expressing serious concerns about their implementation. Human Rights
Watch also pushed for greater respect for workers’ right to freedom of association and was disappointed by the banana industry’s lack of response to these concerns.
As a condition for receiving enhanced tariff benefits under the U.S. Andean Trade
Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA), the government of Ecuador
committed to take steps to improve respect for workers’ right to organize, but the
commitment was expressed only in vague and general terms.
Concerned about the racist treatment of Haitian immigrants and Dominico-
Haitians in the Dominican Republic, a Human Rights Watch delegation traveled to
Santo Domingo in April to release a new report on the topic. The report described
how Dominicans of Haitian descent are systematically denied Dominican citizenship,
despite the Dominican constitution’s conferral of citizenship to persons born
on Dominican soil.As a result, the report explained, many Dominicans of Haitian
descent live a precarious existence, perpetually at risk of expulsion from their own
country.The report also documented the myriad due process violations that “Haitian-
looking”people are subject to during deportations. In a meeting with Dominican
President Hipólito Mejía, the Human Rights Watch delegation recommended
a number of reforms to help prevent future abuses.
In Chile,Human Rights Watch continued to press the government to move forward
with legal reforms aimed at scrapping the country’s repressive laws on “insult
to authority” (known as desacato), which place journalists and others at risk of
incarceration when commenting on governmental policies. The Americas division
obtained commitments to make the issue a top legislative priority from both
Chilean President Ricardo Lagos and the chair of a congressional committee due to
initiate the debate on a reform law.
ARGENTINA
Argentina was gripped in 2002 by the worst economic, political, and social
crisis in its recent history. Half the population was living below the
poverty line, according to government statistics, and unemployment stood at 22
percent. Argentines of all social classes took to the streets to protest when the government
blocked the withdrawal of bank deposits. Social unrest and crime escalated.
Under these very difficult conditions, the human rights situation deteriorated
on most fronts. Police violence, already a serious problem, continued unchecked.
Journalists covering public protests suffered numerous attacks and threats, even as
the press remained vigorous and independent. Although confidence in the judiciary
was low, a few judges took positive steps to pursue investigations of the grave
and systematic human rights violations committed during the country’s period of
military rule.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
As protests against austerity measures engulfed the country,President Fernando
De la Rúa of the Radical Party declared a state of emergency on December 19, 2001.
Unable to muster support to lead a national unity government, he resigned office
the following day. Senate President Ramón Puerta briefly took the reins until the
legislative assembly elected Peronist Adolfo Rodríguez Saá as president for a sixtyday
period. After seven days in power, Rodríguez lost the support of his party and
resigned. Following another brief interregnum, the Congress elected Peronist
Eduardo Duhalde to head a government of “national salvation.” In July 2002, as the
economy nose-dived and street violence continued, Duhalde agreed to hold elections
in March 2003.
Seven people were killed, most from gunshot wounds, during protests on
December 19 and 20, 2001, in the Plaza de Mayo and adjoining Buenos Aires streets.
Police used tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse demonstrators, some of whom
carried sticks, hurled stones and firebombs, broke windows of banks and shops,
and lit fires.At least sixteen others died nationwide in violent clashes and incidents
of looting.
In the early hours of December 29, Juan de Díos Velaztiqui, a police sergeant
working off-duty as a security guard, shot dead three youths,Cristián Gómez,Maximiliano
Tasca, and Adrián Matassa, in a Buenos Aires gas station café. The youths
had been watching scenes of the protests on the café’s television. The guard reportedly
drew his pistol and shot them at point blank range after they jeered at images
of a policeman being beaten by protesters.Velaztiqui was arrested and charged with
homicide.
The shooting by police of two protesters in June led to the resignation of the
security minister of the province of Buenos Aires and the chief and deputy chief of
the provincial police force. Dario Santillán and Maximiliano Kosteki, both in their
twenties, were killed by close-range shotgun fire in a train station during a protest
of unemployed workers on June 26 at the Pueyrredón bridge in the suburb of Avellaneda.
At least two others were wounded. In July, a Buenos Aires province police
inspector and another officer were charged with aggravated homicide, and four
others were accused of trying to cover up the crimes.
The economic crisis brought with it a sharp increase in violent crime, robberies,
and kidnappings.Many police officers lost their lives in armed confrontations.Both
criminal suspects and innocent citizens were killed by police in confused incidents
in poor neighborhoods of Buenos Aires province. Press reports suggested that in
several of these cases, police failed to observe international norms on the use of
lethal force, and planted evidence to avoid criminal charges.
Torture continued to be a deeply engrained problem.Victims included criminal
suspects in police custody and prisoners in the penitentiary system. In August, a
court official of the Buenos Aires Criminal Cassation Court told a visiting representative
of the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights that from March
2000 until July 2002, the court had registered 1,236 torture complaints in Buenos
Aires province alone. The source of the court’s information was a data bank set up in March 2000 to monitor allegations of torture and ill-treatment. There was also a
sharp increase in alleged ill-treatment of minors in police custody. The number of
complaints registered by the juvenile division of the Buenos Aires Province
Supreme Court doubled in less than a year, from 738 cases in May 2001 to 1,516 in
April 2002.
Torturers acted with almost complete impunity, and victims who denounced
abuses often suffered reprisals. According to official figures released in January by
the attorney general’s office, out of 676 complaints of torture or ill-treatment made
in the year 2000, only four resulted in trials and there were no convictions.During
the first six months of 2001, of 271 complaints made to the courts, two resulted in
trials, with only one ending in conviction.
The governor of Buenos Aires province, Felipe Solá, took some important steps
to tackle the problem of torture and prison abuses.He established a human rights
secretariat in the province, among the objectives of which was to combat torture.
The provincial government also proposed legal reforms to alleviate overcrowding
in prisons and police stations. Both the human rights secretariat and the province’s
vice-minister of security also signed a declaration on police abuses presented to the
provincial supreme court in Buenos Aires in September.
Conditions of detention were extremely poor, due to severe prison overcrowding
and the continuing use of police lockups to detain suspects awaiting trial.More
than eighteen thousand prisoners were being held in Buenos Aires province’s
thirty-six prisons, whose capacity was fourteen thousand. In August, some seven
thousand people, including juveniles, were reportedly being held in police stations
in Buenos Aires province,which had a capacity of fewer than three thousand.Conditions
were often appalling. According to the Center for Legal and Social Studies
(CELS), a respected nongovernmental human rights organization, minors alleged
that they were forced to use bottles and plastic bags to urinate and defecate in due
to the lack of toilet facilities. Several police detention centers were closed down on
court orders due to the bad conditions. CELS reported that in addition to beatings
with fists and nightsticks, kicking, and burning with cigarettes, police used electric
shocks and plastic bags placed over the head to produce asphyxiation, torture
methods commonly used during military rule.
Journalists were frequent victims of police aggression. The nongovernmental
press freedom group Periodistas recorded fifty-two attacks on journalists, press
photographers, and television camera crews from November 2001 to July 2002.
While the violence that accompanied many protests placed journalists at inevitable
physical risk, in several incidents police deliberately targeted reporters and photographers
covering demonstrations, or detained, insulted, and beat them. Alberto
Noal,who was covering a protest by hospital workers in the regional hospital of Rio
Grande, Tierra del Fuego province, on December 28, 2001, was allegedly pulled
down by his hair, handcuffed, beaten, trodden on, and kicked by six or seven officers,
one of whom fractured his ribs with a wooden truncheon.He was hospitalized
for three days.Marcos Díaz Muñoz, Salta province correspondent of América TV,
was hit in the stomach with a truncheon while filming a policeman clubbing a
demonstrator during a June 20 protest.
In September, journalists’ right to protect the secrecy of their sources came under attack when federal judge Claudio Bonadío subpoenaed telecommunications
companies to provide a list of calls made and received by Thomas Catán, the
Argentine correspondent of the London Financial Times. Judge Bonadío was investigating
allegations that members of Congress had solicited bribes from foreign
banks to halt a bill to reintroduce a health scheme for bank employees,which would
have cost the banks hundreds of millions of dollars a year. In two articles published
by the Financial Times in August,Catán described a meeting with the ambassadors
of the United States and the United Kingdom,in which senior bankers had allegedly
complained that legislators had approached them for money. Catán applied to the
Federal Court for an injunction to safeguard his rights under article 43 of the constitution,
which protects the secrecy of journalists’ sources. The Federal Court met
and issued a resolution reprimanding Judge Bonadío for “grave disdain for basic
constitutional guarantees.” In October, the court ordered Judge Bonadío to destroy
the list of calls, stating that the judge’s measure was an “unreasonable restriction of
freedom of expression.”
In December 2001, during his short tenure as president, Alberto Rodríguez Saá
sent a bill to Congress to eliminate the crime of criminal defamation in cases
involving public figures.By the end of September the bill had still not been debated.
There were some notable advances in investigations of human rights violations
committed when Argentina was under military rule. In July, Judge Claudio Bonadío
ordered the house arrest of former military ruler Leopoldo Galtieri for the “disappearance”
in 1979 and 1980 of eighteen members of the Montoneros, a left-wing
Peronist guerrilla organization, who had returned or were planning to return to
Argentina from exile.
Facing charges as well were former army chief General Cristino Nicolaides and
former general Carlos Suárez Mason, both of whom were already under house
arrest for the theft of babies born to mothers abducted during military rule. Judge
Bonadío also ordered the arrest of some forty lower level police and army agents,
many of them formerly attached to a unit of the army’s notorious 601st Batallion
responsible for overseas intelligence operations. Among them was Col. Alberto
Crinigan, a former army intelligence expert who was still in active service. The
newspaper Clarín cited a senior army source as saying that Crinigan’s arrest “does
not help to pacify spirits.” In October 2001, Bonadío became the second federal
judge (the first was Gabriel Cavallo) to nullify Argentina’s amnesty laws (the full
stop and due obedience laws, passed in 1986 and 1987 respectively) as unconstitutional
and in violation of international norms.
At the end of September, the Supreme Court had still to rule on appeals of the
two federal court rulings striking down the amnesty laws, both of which had been
unanimously confirmed by the Federal Court of Buenos Aires in November 2001.
The future of the Galtieri prosecution, as well as others, was dependent on the
Supreme Court upholding the laws’ nullification. In an opinion provided by the
Supreme Court at the end of August, Attorney General Nicolás Becerra recommended
that the court declare the laws to be unconstitutional. Becerra stressed the
link between Argentina’s present-day violence and its legacy of human rights violations:
“the violence which still breaks out within some institutions and is now
invading the daily life of our country in a generalized way must be halted by a clear message that the rule of law is in force.”The minister of defense,Horacio Jaunarena,
who had previously served in that post under the governments of Raúl Alfonsín
and Fernando De la Rúa, expressed once again his opposition to the re-opening of
human rights trials, stating that such proceedings would “contribute to generating
or aggravating the state of uncertainty that exists in the armed forces.”
Three days before his resignation in December 2001, President De la Rúa passed
a decree formalizing his government’s refusal, on grounds of territoriality, to consider
the extradition of Argentines to stand trial abroad for human rights crimes.
The De la Rúa government undertook, however, to submit such cases to national
courts for possible prosecution in Argentina. During the brief interregnum of
Alberto Rodríguez Saá, the newly appointed minister of justice, respected jurist
Alberto Zuppi, announced that he would seek to reverse this policy and to allow the
Argentine courts to decide each case on its merits. The Duhalde government, however,
left the De la Rúa decree in place.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Journalists, public officials, lawyers, and relatives of victims who denounced
police abuses were threatened and intimidated. At about 4:00 a.m. on September
20, unidentified gunmen fired at the La Plata home of Estela de Carlotto, president
of the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo (Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo) and also of
the Provincial Commission for Memory (Comisión Provincial por la Memoria), a
nongovernmental group dedicated to the memory of victims of military rule.
According to the commission, the bullets shattered the windows of Carlotto’s front
door, entering her living room and bedroom. Police officials reported that a shotgun
of the type issued to the security forces was used in the attack. The minister for
security of the province of Buenos Aires, Juan Pablo Cafiero, said he was convinced
it was politically motivated.
Two days before, the commission had presented a document to the province’s
Supreme Court denouncing police abuses, which it compared to those committed
during the dictatorship. On the morning of September 25, a commission employee
answered the telephone to an angry caller who threatened: “guerrilla sons-ofbitches,
stop fucking around and watch out because we are going to kill (reventar)
all of you.” Sara Derotier, the provincial government’s under-secretary for human
rights and also president of the commission, told Human Rights Watch that two
suspicious cars had been parked at night outside her home in Merlo the previous
June, arousing the concern of her neighbors. The provincial government gave her
home police protection.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In September the Committee on the Rights of the Child met to consider
Argentina’s second periodic report on compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The government presented alarming statistical evidence of the
growing poverty of Argentina’s children. In its comments on the government
report, issued in October, the committee expressed “deep concern”at reports of torture
and police brutality of which children were victims.
Organization of American States
Following a timely visit to Buenos Aires in July and August, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights issued a public statement in which it referred to
“the profound impact on the human rights situation in the country of the unprecedented
social and economic crisis.” The commission welcomed President
Duhalde’s assurances rejecting future army participation in public security.
European Union
On January 17, Sweden asked Argentina to extradite naval officer Alfredo Astiz,
who had been arrested at the end of December on an international warrant issued
by a Stockholm court. Popularly known as the “Angel of Death,”Astiz had worked
as an undercover agent at the Navy Mechanics School (Escuela Mecánica de la
Armada, ESMA) a notorious torture center during the period of military rule. Ever
since Argentina’s 1983 return to democracy, Sweden had sought his extradition for
the January 1977 “disappearance” of seventeen-year-old Argentine-Swede Dagmar
Hagelin.
On January 28, the Argentine government denied the extradition request, arguing
that it would violate Argentine sovereignty.Astiz walked free after being held for
thirty-two days at a naval base close to his parents’ home in Mar del Plata.
In early November, the government was due to rule on a request by France for
the extradition of retired Chilean general Luis Ramírez Pineda, who was detained
on an international arrest warrant on September 13 while on a private visit to
Buenos Aires. Ramírez was facing charges in France for the “disappearance” of
Georges Klein Pipper, a French-born psychiatrist who was taken by soldiers on September
13, 1973 to the Tacna Regiment base, of which Ramírez was commander at
the time.
United States
On August 21, the State Department released 4,677 declassified documents
about human rights violations that took place during military rule. Although the
documents had been promised by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright in November
2000 in response to requests from Argentine human rights groups and judges,
their release was delayed by the events of September 11, and by the crisis in
Argentina.
Many of the documents proved highly relevant to cases under investigation in
the Argentine courts, and especially to the case against General Galtieri. An April
1980 U.S. embassy memorandum, reporting on a conversation with an Argentine
intelligence official, describes how agents of the 601st Battalion detained two of the
Montoneros, Horacio Campiglia and Susana de Binstock, in Brazil with Brazilian cooperation, and secretly interned them in the detention camp at Campo de Mayo,
from where they “disappeared.”The memorandum reports how a tip-off led to the
arrest of twelve other Montoneros who were on their way by bus to Argentina from
Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay. Another document, containing an organizational
chart of the 601st Battalion, traced a chain of command leading directly up to
Galtieri.
BRAZIL
Brazil made only limited progress in curbing such long-standing human
rights problems as police brutality, inhumane prison conditions, assaults
on freedom of the press, and forced labor. Positive steps taken by the outgoing
administration of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso included the passage of a
renewed National Human Rights Program and the opening of police archives containing
information on abuses committed during the 1964-1985 dictatorship.
The October election to the presidency of the Workers’ Party candidate, Luiz
Inácio Lula da Silva, raised hopes for human rights improvement.Although human
rights issues were not central to his political campaign, President-elect da Silva
publicly committed himself to promoting the welfare of Brazil’s marginalized populations.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Extrajudicial killings and abusive police practices continued to be a severe problem
in many parts of the country. In the coastal state of Espírito Santo, for example,
a paramilitary vigilante group called Scuderie Detetive Le Cocq—composed
mainly of members of the civil and military police forces—was known to operate
freely, engaging in death squad activity as well as organized crime.
In July, the country’s top official human rights body—the federal Human Rights
Defense Council (Conselho de Defesa dos Direitos da Pessoa Humana, CDDPH),
headed by Justice Minister Miguel Reale Junior—recommended that the federal
government intervene in Espírito Santo to re-establish order. The council’s recommendation
for federal intervention was made after the local bar association filed a
complaint claiming that the state government had been infiltrated by organized
crime and after the president of the bar association had received several death
threats. Federal Attorney General Geraldo Brindeiro overruled the council’s
request for federal intervention, arguing that it was not a viable option during an
election year. This decision, supported by President Cardoso, prompted Reale
Junior’s resignation, as well as that of the head of the Federal Police and other highranking
law enforcement officials.
Instead of intervening in Espírito Santo, the federal government decided to create a joint federal and state police task force to investigate organized crime and
human rights abuses.At this writing, the task force was investigating the murder of
human rights lawyer Joaquim Marcelo Denadai (described below), the links
between the Scuderie and the state’s public authorities, and several death threats
against state judges.
Despite widespread police abuses, only four of Brazil’s twenty-six states (São
Paulo,Pará,Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro), and the Federal District, had a police
ombudsman’s office to respond to complaints of police brutality. Low wages, poor
training, and inadequate equipment all contributed to widespread corruption and
violence among police forces. In certain cases, police allegedly resorted to extrajudicial
killings to eliminate potentially incriminating witnesses. On May 29, for
example, two hooded men—who according to local press reports were members of
São Paulo’s military police—murdered José Luciano do Nascimento, a construction
worker with no previous criminal record. Nascimento had previously filed a
complaint for grievous bodily harm against police sergeant Wagner Gomes de
Oliveira, who shot him in the knee during a police operation in Vila Bulow, causing
serious injuries and forcing him to use crutches.
Violence against rural workers remained widespread and sometimes involved
police participation. According to the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral
da Terra, CPT) a total of 1,548 rural workers were killed in land disputes in
Brazil from 1988 to August 2002. In 2002 alone, at least sixteen rural laborers were
murdered in land conflicts and seventy-three people received death threats.
Violence against rural workers was primarily directed at the leaders of peasant
organizations. On January 19, for instance, Jose Rainha Junior, the general coordinator
of the Rural Landless Worker’s Movement (Movimento dos Trabalhadores
Rurais Sem Terra,MST), was shot in the shoulder as he escaped an ambush in western
São Paulo state. According to a Brazilian rights group, the ambush was organized
by a local landowner whose farm had been occupied by MST members earlier
that day. On June 27, Ivo Laurindo do Carmo, another MST leader, was stabbed to
death in the Irituia region, in the east of Pará state.Do Carmo was a prominent land
reform activist who promoted occupation of farms and plantations by peasants as
a means of putting pressure on the government to accelerate land reform.According
to MST officials, in the months prior to his killing Do Carmo had received
repeated threats from gunmen hired by plantation owners. On July 23, another
MST leader from the state of Pará—Bartolomeu Morais da Silva—was tortured
(both of his legs were broken) and killed with twelve shots to the head.As with Do
Carmo, Da Silva had received anonymous death threats prior to his assassination,
and believed that local landowners were responsible.
Cases of rural violence, including killings, were rarely prosecuted, and criminal
prosecutions rarely ended in convictions. An exception was the case of the Eldorado
dos Carajás massacre, which came to trial in 2002. The massacre occurred in
1996 during a protest roadblock organized by members of the MST. On April 16,
1996, around 1,500 peasants blocked a rural highway in Eldorado dos Carajás, in
the Amazonian state of Pará, to demand agricultural reform and to draw attention
to their petition for the right to settle on idle farmland nearby. On April 17, the state
governor of Pará, Almir Gabriel, and the secretary of public security, Pablo Sette Cbmara, ordered the military police to disperse the crowd. In the ensuing confrontation,
nineteen landless peasants were killed and sixty-nine were wounded.
According to judicial investigations, some of the victims were shot at point-blank
range, while others were killed at a considerable distance from the site of the clash.
The three commanding officers in charge of the operation were Col.Mario Pantoja,
Maj. Jose Maria Oliveira, and Capt. Raimundo Lameira, all members of Pará’s military
police force.
In May 2002, a Pará court found Colonel Pantoja guilty of the murder of the
nineteen peasants, sentencing him to 228 years in prison. Major Oliveira, one of
Pantoja’s subordinates, was sentenced to 158 years in prison: eight years and four
months for each of the people killed. Despite their convictions, Pantoja and
Oliveira were not arrested,being allowed to appeal their sentences in freedom.Captain
Lameira, the third commanding officer charged in the case, was acquitted. The
tribunal also absolved nine police sergeants and another 126 military police officers,
ruling that they had only “fired their weapons into the air” and not at peasants.
The prosecutors handling the case announced plans to appeal the acquittals, arguing
that “the condemnation of the high-ranking officers and not those who perpetrated
the massacre is absurd.”
The government officials with political responsibility for the institutions that
carried out the massacre—the governor of the state of Pará,Almir Gabriel, and the
general commander of the military police at that time, Colonel Fabiano Lopes—
were not prosecuted for the massacre. The MST and the Pará Society for the Protection
of Human Rights, both of which withdrew from the trial claiming that
judges were subject to pressure from local politicians and landowners, continued
their efforts to transfer cases involving human rights violations to federal courts in
Brasilia.Advocates of federalizing human rights crimes believed that such transfers
were needed because of the undue influence of local authorities and powerful landowning
elites over trials affecting their interests. At this writing, a bill was pending
before Congress that would grant the federal government jurisdiction over serious
human rights violations.
The torture of criminal suspects remained a widespread practice. A particularly
notorious case of torture and negligent treatment was that of Fernando Dutra
Pinto, who died in January 2002. Dutra Pinto had kidnapped Brazilian media
tycoon Silvio Santos and his daughter, killed two police officers, and then turned
himself in to the local authorities. The governor of São Paulo state, Geraldo Alckmin,
publicly guaranteed Pinto’s safety, promising him protection from police
retaliation. Only six months later, however,Dutra Pinto was dead.According to the
Teotônio Vilela Human Rights Commission (Comissão Teotônio Vilela de Direitos
Humanos), a respected nongovernmental organization (NGO), Dutra Pinto was
attacked and severely beaten by prison guards at the Belém Temporary Detention
Center (Centro de Detenção Provisória do Belém). He was denied adequate medical
treatment in prison and, as a result, died of a pulmonary infection three weeks
later.
The living conditions of many of Brazil’s penitentiaries, jails, and police lockups
remained inhumane, and violence against prisoners was common. A central problem
was the overcrowding of Brazil’s penal system, especially in the states of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Bahia, Rio Grande do Sul, and Pernambuco. According to
official figures, as of April, Brazil’s 903 penal institutions housed 235,000 inmates,
well above the system’s capacity of 170,000. The lack of space, combined with an
underfunded and understaffed penal system, led to frequent prison riots and other
outbreaks of violence.
In January, for example, twenty-seven inmates were killed during a prison riot
in the Urso Branco penitentiary, near the Rôndonia state capital of Porto Velho.The
uprising began after a failed escape attempt and a protest against overcrowding and
restrictions on circulation inside the prison. According to local press reports, the
victims were stabbed, shot, hung, or flung from the roof of the penitentiary by prisoners
belonging to rival gangs.
A similar incident occurred in late May, when twelve inmates and a guard were
killed during a riot at a maximum-security prison in Manaus, Amazônas. Prisoners
organized the riot to protest the death of an inmate who, according to press
reports, had been beaten and tortured to death by prison guards. Inmates also
demanded improved health care and that steps be taken to address overcrowding.
On September 15, São Paulo state authorities shut down the largest prison in
Latin America, the Casa de Detenção, in the Carandirú prison complex.The prison
was notorious as the site of a 1992 massacre in which 111 inmates were killed by riot
police.Prisoners were transferred to smaller and more modern penitentiaries in the
state’s interior.
Youth within the penal system were also subject to a range of abuses and illtreatment.
Human Rights Watch research in northern Brazil revealed that it was
common practice for youth detention facilities to punish inmates through
improper cell restriction, sometimes for periods of a month or more. Many detained
youth were deprived adequate health care and education, despite the
requirements of Brazilian law. They were also vulnerable to violence. Responding
to a disturbance in a facility in the state of Pará in April, military police shock troops
fired tear gas and rubber bullets at the youth inside, and beat some of them with
batons and tree branches.
Censorship prior to publication, exorbitantly high lawsuits against the press,
and violence against journalists continued to undermine freedom of expression in
Brazil. Federal and local judges repeatedly banned publications and ordered the
confiscation of newspapers and magazines under the guise of protecting “honor
and integrity.” On May 24, Judge Marcelo Oliveira da Silva censored CartaCapital,
a weekly magazine published in the city of São Paulo. The magazine was ordered
not to disclose the contents of taped conversations between presidential candidate
Anthony Garotinho and Guilherme Freire, a donor to Garotinho’s previous campaigns,
or else incur a U.S.$200,000 fine.Media outlets suffered disproportionately
high monetary damages in civil lawsuits involving libel charges. Journalists investigating
acts of corruption and embezzlement often ended up facing criminal prosecution.
Violent attacks against journalists, including threats and killings, were also of
concern.According to the National Newspapers Association (Associação Nacional
de Jornais, ANJ), an organization of newspaper publishers, nine journalists were
murdered since 1995. At the time of this writing, most of these crimes remained unsolved, contributing to impunity and encouraging further violence against
members of the press. A particularly violent case involved Tim Lopes, an investigative
reporter for the Brazilian television network TV Globo who disappeared on
June 2. Lopes was last seen in a shantytown in the city of Rio de Janeiro, where he
was investigating drug trafficking and the sexual exploitation of minors.According
to police reports, Lopes was executed by Elias Pereira da Silva, a powerful local drug
trafficker. Lopes was tortured and dismembered, after which his body was burned
and buried in a clandestine cemetery. On August 8,Maurício de Lima Matias, a suspected
accomplice in the assassination, was killed in a shoot-out with police officers.
At this writing, seven suspects in Lopes’ murder were in custody, including
Pereira da Silva.
Journalist Domingos Sávio Brandão,owner and publisher of the Folha do Estado
daily newspaper, was killed by two unidentified gunmen on September 30.According
to local press reports Brandão’s death was related to his investigations of drug
trafficking and corruption among public officials. However, no suspects had been
apprehended at this writing.
Violence against gay men and lesbians was also a cause of concern.Hate crimes
against gay men were believed to be especially serious in the states of São Paulo,
Pernambuco, and Bahia, and in the Federal District.
Forced labor—formally abolished in 1888—re-emerged over the past years,
especially in the northern states’ ranches and timber industries. According to the
Catholic Church’s Pastoral Land Commission, at least twenty-five thousand people
were subject to forced labor in Brazil in 2002, and local authorities—including state
police forces, attorneys, and courts—largely tolerated such abuses. Earlier in the
year the Ministry of Labor’s special antislavery Mobile Enforcement Team reported
that 1,400 workers had been freed, many of them showing signs of malnourishment
and suffering from potentially deadly diseases such as malaria and hepatitis.
In September, the federal government opened police archives from the 1964-
1985 dictatorship, bringing to light information regarding the killing or disappearance
of hundreds of activists who had opposed the military government.However,
the archives were only made available to victims and their families, as well as to a
special commission investigating the crimes committed during this period.
In May, President Cardoso launched a renewed version of the 1996 National
Human Rights Program, created to curb discrimination and protect the rights of
minority groups, including blacks, indigenous people, lesbians and gay men, and
the elderly. The right to same-sex unions,which permitted the transfer of property
and the extension of social security and health benefits to partners of the same sex,
was one of the highlights of the 518-item program. Some of the measures, like the
right to same-sex marriages, were discussed in Congress.
While this program represented a step forward, history indicated the need for
sustained attention to the program’s implementation. For six years, the Cardoso
administration had failed to adequately put into practice the 1996 human rights
plan and to bring about significant improvements in human rights conditions.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights defenders faced death threats and harassment. A report released
in early 2002 by Brazil’s Global Justice Center and Ireland’s Front Line analyzed
fifty-six cases of violence against human rights activists over the preceding five
years. The report identified nineteen homicides and thirty-seven other incidents,
including attempted murders, beatings, kidnappings, and disappearances.
The paramilitary group Scuderie Detetive Le Cocq, active in the state of Espírito
Santo, was believed to be responsible for the murder of local human rights lawyer
Joaquim Marcelo Denadai on April 15. Prior to his assassination, Denadai had
accused the Scuderie of “death squad” killings and complained about widespread
corruption in the state’s police forces, including police participation in numerous
illegal activities. At this writing, police officer Dalberto Antunes da Cunha, an
alleged member of the Scuderie, was awaiting trial. A police detective who had been
investigating the Scuderie, Francisco Badenes, also received death threats.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In January,United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson
visited the country for three days. She met with Ministry of Justice officials to
follow up on the implementation of the results of the World Conference Against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. She also met
with President Cardoso and participated in a number of activities organized by the
World Social Forum in Porto Alegre.
Jean Ziegler, U.N. special rapporteur on the right to food, visited Brazil in
March. After meeting with the president, other political and judicial figures, and
NGO representatives, he declared that serious and chronic malnutrition in a
country as rich as Brazil was unacceptable and constituted a violation of the right
to food.
In March, Brazil extended a standing invitation to the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights to send special thematic rapporteurs to investigate human
rights conditions in the country.
Organization of American States
In February, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR)
issued a report on the 1993 extrajudicial execution ofDeniz Bento da Silva—a landless
activist—by members of the military police of Paraná state. The commission
concluded that the police violated da Silva’s right to life, among other rights.
In March, the IACHR urged the Brazilian government to take measures to protect
inmates at the Urso Branco penitentiary, in the city of Porto Velho, state of Rôndonia,
after a January prison riot ended in the killing of twenty-seven inmates. The government’s failure to adopt such measures, leading to the killing of ten more
inmates after the commission’s report, forced the intervention of the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights,which in June ordered the government to adopt measures
to prevent further inmate deaths at Urso Branco.
European Union
Bilateral relations between the European Union and Brazil were strengthened in
2002. The European Union remained Brazil’s main trading partner, absorbing the
largest share of its exports, and serving as the most important source of development
aid and foreign investment.As of April, the European Union had committed
Û210 million (roughly U.S.$205 million) to cooperation projects in Brazil.
United States
In its 2002 human rights report, the U.S. Department of State identified police
brutality as an ongoing problem, observing that state police forces engaged in
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detentions, and torture. The State Department also
lamented the failure of state governments to adequately investigate and prosecute
human rights violations. Other issues addressed in the report were harsh prison
conditions, violence against land reform leaders, the harassment of human rights
defenders, child abuse and prostitution, and violence against women and gays and
lesbians.
At this writing, the United States government had not engaged in any programs
aimed at addressing human rights issues in Brazil.
CHILE
The Chilean courts persevered in efforts to clarify the fate of victims of the
military dictatorship and to hold accountable those responsible for
killings,“disappearances,” and other serious abuses. In two separate cases, however,
the Supreme Court and the Santiago Appeals Court ruled that the mental infirmity
of former dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet was serious and irreversible, leading
them to exempt him from prosecution for human rights crimes. The government
of President Ricardo Lagos suffered reverses in its efforts to ratify important human
rights treaties, including the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal
Court. Congress approved a law abolishing film censorship and began discussion
of a bill to strengthen free expression guarantees.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
On July 1, the Supreme Court held that General Pinochet was unfit to undergo
trial in the notorious “Caravan of Death” case, involving the murder of fifty-seven
political prisoners and the abduction of eighteen others not long after the September
1973 military coup. Expanding upon an appeals court ruling issued a year previously
that had suspended the proceedings on mental health grounds, the
Supreme Court panel ruled by four votes to one that Pinochet’s condition was irreversible,
and closed the case against him permanently.Disagreeing with many legal
experts, the court held that the “moderate dementia” Pinochet was deemed to be
suffering from was sufficient to satisfy the statutory requirements for terminating
proceedings.
A week later Pinochet resigned his honorary lifetime seat in the Senate, which
had been empty since he was arrested in October 1998 in Britain. Due to a constitutional
amendment introduced by President Lagos’s government in April 2000,
Pinochet was allowed to retain both his parliamentary immunity from prosecution
and his senatorial stipend because of his status as former president. Immediately
after the court proceedings, Pinochet embarked with his family and entourage on
a visit to the northern port of Iquique. His frequent public outings in the city
prompted the minister of defense to urge the general to “rest up,” and he returned
earlier than planned to Santiago. Although the Supreme Court decision satisfied
members of the government, the armed forces, and the Catholic Church, many
Chileans remained unconvinced that Pinochet was seriously ill.
Argentine judge María Servini de Cubría continued to seek the former dictator’s
extradition to stand trial for the car-bomb attack that killed Gen. Carlos Prats,
Pinochet’s predecessor as army commander, and Prats’ wife, Sofia Cuthbert. The
assassination occurred in September 1974, when the couple was living in exile in
Buenos Aires. As a first step toward the extradition, Judge Servini petitioned the
Santiago Appeals Court to lift Pinochet’s immunity. On October 7, the Santiago
Appeals Court dismissed the request by sixteen votes to five, holding that the July
Supreme Court ruling was applicable to this case also. Lawyers for the Prats family
appealed to the Supreme Court, arguing that the appellate court had exceeded its
competence and should have ruled only on the merits of the case. A Supreme Court
justice also denied a request for the extradition of five former secret agents already
charged in Argentina for the murder, holding that evidence of their involvement
was insufficient. At this writing, the Supreme Court had still to rule on an appeal
lodged by lawyers for the Prats family against this ruling.
In April, the Supreme Court renewed the mandate of more than twenty “special
judges” appointed to investigate, exclusively or with priority, the fate of hundreds
of people who “disappeared” under military rule. The judges were commissioned
to continue the investigations after an official civil-military roundtable initiated in
August 1999 to provide information about the “disappeared” produced flawed and
incomplete information on their fate and the whereabouts of their bodies. The
court investigations led to dozens of former military officials being charged for
extrajudicial executions and “disappearances.”
Concluding its work in June 2000, the roundtable had agreed that each branch
of the armed forces would provide the fullest possible information on the whereabouts
of the “disappeared” within six months. The suspicions of relatives and
human right lawyers that some branches had concealed information collected as a
result of the agreement were confirmed in October,when air force general Patricio
Campos was arrested and charged with obstruction of justice. Campos, who had
been given the job of collating information volunteered by members or former
members of the air force, confessed that he had concealed and destroyed details
about five of the “disappeared.”The facts came to light as a result of interviews published
in the newspaper La Nación with a former member of the Combined Command
(Comando Conjunto), a death squad active during the military government.
The former agent said that the squad had regrouped recently in order to thwart the
judicial investigations.Campos’prosecution led to the resignation of air force commander-
in-chief Gen. Patricio Ríos,who had appointed Campos knowing that the
latter’s wife had been a member of the Combined Command.
Human rights groups, and some judges, accused the Medical Legal Service (Servicio
Medico Legal, SML, a forensic branch of the Ministry of Justice which identifies
skeletal remains) of incompetence, excessive delays, and of hiding evidence
from the courts. It became known in August that the SML had suppressed for seven
years a report by the Department of Forensic Medicine and Science of the University
of Glasgow, Scotland,which had been commissioned by the Ministry of Justice
in 1994 to identify the remains of twenty-seven bodies recovered from a grave in
Santiago, thought to be victims of “disappearance”during military rule.The report
cast doubt on the identification by the SML of three victims whose remains had
been already returned to their relatives and buried. Lack of confidence in the work
of the SML led several judges, including the judge who had investigated the Caravan
of Death case, Juan Guzmán, to rely on the services of former members of the
institution who had been dismissed or who had resigned to work independently.
The courts achieved justice in other cases dating from the military dictatorship.
On August 5, Judge Sergio Muñoz sentenced Maj.(Rtd.) Carlos Herrera Jiménez, a
former army intelligence agent, to life imprisonment for the 1982 murder of trade
union leader Tucapel Jiménez, an influential opponent of the dictatorship. High
level cover-ups and the inactivity of the former investigating judge had prevented
clarification of the crime for twenty years. The director of army intelligence at the
time, Gen.(Rtd.) Ramsés Álvarez Scoglia, received a ten-year prison sentence for
ordering the murder. Three other former army generals who helped cover it up
received suspended sentences. Each of the generals implicated benefited from a
reduction of sentence due to the time that had passed before they were indicted,
even though their own cover-ups had contributed to the delays.
Freedom of expression continued to be limited by outmoded laws protecting
public authorities from criticism. On January 15, television panelist Eduardo Yáñez
Morel was arrested and charged with contempt of authority (desacato) for his
remarks on a talk show dedicated to miscarriages of justice, aired in November
2001. After a former prisoner complained that the courts had not offered her an
apology for a wrongful conviction, Yáñez commented: “the justice system is
immoral, cowardly and corrupt …. I think not to show its face is a sign of moral cowardice.” The Supreme Court promptly filed charges against him under article
263 of the criminal code,which makes anyone who offends the president,members
of Congress, or the higher courts of justice, “by word or deed,” liable to fines and
imprisonment. Yáñez was held overnight in prison. In October, the Santiago
Appeals Court ruled by two votes to one against the appeal of his indictment.
Largely due to the Yáñez case, the government presented a bill to Congress in
September proposing repeal of article 263, as well as provisions of the code of military
justice making it a crime to insult the armed forces, and prohibiting civilians
from making comments considered likely to damage military morale or discipline.
Human Rights Watch had advocated each of these reforms in its 1998 and 2001
reports on freedom of expression in Chile.
After long debate,Congress approved at the end of October a bill eliminating the
powers of the film classification board to censor films, and removing members of
the armed forces from the board. The reform put into effect a July 2001 constitutional
amendment abolishing film censorship, and allowed Chileans to see more
than four hundred films banned by the board during military rule.
A dramatic inmate protest in the high security “Alpha Module” of Santiago’s
Colina Dos prison in January drew attention to ill-treatment and inhumane conditions
of detention in this unit and led to the dismissal of seven prison guards.On
January 18, guards allegedly beat and clubbed some twenty-five inmates after they
had demanded a meeting with a prison official to discuss grievances. Some of the
prisoners then cut and stabbed themselves with knives to draw attention to the
abuses. In a letter to relatives cited in an electronic newspaper, one prisoner said
that they were kept locked in their cells for hours without light or any toilets, so that
they were forced to “defecate in bags or newspapers and throw them into the corridor.”
An official of the Supreme Court visited the prison soon afterwards and confirmed
the reports of ill-treatment. The Santiago Appeals Court granted a habeas
corpus petition filed by one of the prisoners injured in the protest, and ordered the
Alpha Module closed until improvements had been made. In April, a Colina Dos
prison guard was charged with the sexual abuse of a prisoner held on drug charges.
In September, the head of the prison service (gendarmería) announced measures
intended to fully segregate youth held in adult prisons from adult prisoners.
The instructions followed a ruling by the Santiago Appeals Court that current practices
infringed Chile’s obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In January, the president of the Episcopal Conference,Cardinal Francisco Javier
Errázuriz, appeared in person in the Senate to persuade the committee considering
Chile’s ratification of the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) not to
recommend ratification. The prelate argued that the convention expressed a “unilateral
vision” of women, and criticized recommendations to Chile made by the
committee established to monitor compliance with the convention.He also warned
that ratification of the Optional Protocol would intensify pressure on Chile to legalize
abortion. Human Rights Watch wrote to the chair of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee urging ratification. In the wake of the Cardinal’s intervention,
however, the government postponed consideration of the protocol and chances of
its early approval by the Senate receded.
On April 8, the Constitutional Court ruled by five votes to one that Chile could
not ratify the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal Court without
a prior constitutional reform. The government presented to the Senate a constitutional
amendment. This required a two-thirds majority of both chambers to be
approved, and by October debate on the reform had not progressed.Many rightwing
Congress members were said to oppose ratification, partly as a reaction to the
detention of Pinochet in London.
Chile ratified the Mine Ban Treaty in September 2001. In August 2002, the army
destroyed some seventy-six thousand landmines warehoused near the northern
city of Arica, in a ceremony attended by President Lagos, the minister of defense,
and the minister of foreign affairs. The rest of Chile’s stockpile of more than two
hundred thousand mines was to be destroyed by 2003, and the localization and
destruction of mines in the ground was expected to follow. The press reported that
twelve people had died and seventy had been wounded by mine accidents in recent
years.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Chile had a sturdy network of human rights defenders, who worked freely and
without government restriction.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In April, the Committee on the Rights of the Child published its observations on
Chile’s compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.The committee
praised Chile for several improvements in legislation protecting children’s rights.
However, it urged stronger measures to combat child abuse, including abuse taking
place in state institutions run by the National Service for Minors (Servicio Nacional
de Menores, SENAME). It also recommended that more effective steps be taken to
prevent discrimination against disadvantaged children, particularly those belonging
to indigenous groups, children with disabilities, and children living in rural
areas.
European Union
Enforcing an international arrest warrant, in September Interpol arrested seventy-
seven-year-old Gen. Luis Ramírez Pineda in Buenos Aires. He was one of
eighteen Chilean former military officials, including General Pinochet, wanted for
questioning by French judge Sophie-Helene Chateau in connection with the “disappearance”
of five French nationals during and after the 1973 military coup.
Ramírez had been commander of the Tacna regiment army base in Santiago,where
twenty-four supporters of deposed President Salvador Allende were taken after surrendering on the day of the coup. French-born doctor Georges Klein Pipper, an
advisor to Allende, was among those who “disappeared” after being taken to the
army base and tortured. In early November the government was still considering a
request from the French government for Ramírez’s extradition.
Organization of American States
In March, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights published details
of two settlements awarding compensation to victims of discriminatory court decisions
and miscarriages of justice. Under the terms of the settlement between Juan
Manuel Contreras, Víctor Eduardo Osses, José Alfredo Soto, and Chile, the government
provided a life-time pension and issued a public apology to the aforementioned
young men, who had been wrongly convicted of a murder they did not
commit, after confessing under duress and without legal representation. The
Supreme Court had rejected their plea for compensation claiming that the trial
court’s acceptance of their confessions was not “unreasonable,” the grounds
required under the constitution for compensation to be awarded.As part of the settlement,
the government agreed to carry out studies and propose a constitutional
amendment to strengthen the right to compensation for miscarriages of justice.
United States
On October 1, the Bush administration notified the U.S.Congress that it hoped
to complete negotiations with Chile on a free trade agreement by the end of the
year. In August, Congress approved President George W. Bush’s request for fasttrack
trade promotion authority to conduct the negotiations, enabling the president
to present proposals to Congress for approval or rejection without
amendment. Chilean and U.S. negotiators continued to meet throughout the year,
and by October had completed twelve rounds of talks. The agenda included agreements
on labor rights and environmental issues.
COLOMBIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Colombia’s internal war intensified in 2002 following the February 20 collapse
of three years of formal talks between the government and Colombia’s largest guerrilla
group. Paramilitary groups operating with the tolerance and often support of
units within Colombia’s military were linked to massacres (defined in Colombia as
the killing of three or more people at the same place and time), selective killings,
and death threats. There were numerous and credible reports of joint militaryparamilitary
operations and the sharing of intelligence and propaganda, including army-generated appeals to guerrillas to turn themselves in.Throughout Colombia,
paramilitaries continued to move uniformed and heavily armed troops unhindered
past military installations.
Compared to past years, the government reported more clashes between its
troops and paramilitaries, and more arrests of suspected paramilitaries. Yet paramilitaries
appeared more numerous and militarily stronger than ever. They
claimed to have over ten thousand armed and trained members, a number that was
not disputed by government or other sources.
In July, paramilitary leader Carlos Castaño announced the dissolution of the
United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia,
AUC), the paramilitary alliance he headed. But by September, the AUC had
reunited, though it continued to be prey to internal conflicts over profits reaped
from drug trafficking. Mayors, municipal officials, governors, human rights
groups, the public advocate’s office, and even some police detachments regularly
informed the appropriate authorities about credible threats by paramilitaries. Yet
only rarely did military forces take effective action to stop paramilitary advances.
A tragic example was the case of Boyajá, Chocó, one of the worst slaughters of
the entire Colombian conflict. In April, the Catholic Church and public advocate
sent warnings to military and police commanders about large groups of paramilitaries
traveling along the Atrato River past military installations maintained by the
army’s Seventeenth Brigade and the navy’s River Battalion No. 50, a unit that has
received U.S. training and weapons.The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, FARC-EP),
which also maintained a presence in the region, clashed with paramilitary forces at
Boyajá on May 1. During the fighting, guerrillas launched at least one gas cylinder
bomb that hit a church where displaced persons were gathered, killing 119, including
at least forty-eight children.
The Bogotá office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights
(UNHCHR) concluded that guerrillas were directly responsible for the displaced
persons’ deaths. U.N. investigators also criticized the military’s failure to heed
reports of paramilitary forces in the area and mount an operation to catch them.
Investigators received credible information suggesting that, after the clash, soldiers
met with a paramilitary commander whose forces remained in the area despite the
military’s presence. On July 9, the inspector general’s office (Procuraduría) opened
an investigation of the commanders of the security force units in the region,among
them Maj. Gen. Leonel Gómez Estrada, commander of the Colombian army’s First
Division, and Fourth Brigade commander Brig. Gen.Mario Montoya. In a disturbing
development apparently aimed at stifling human rights reporting, three of the
generals targeted in the investigation filed slander charges in May against Father
Jesús Albeiro Parra Solis, a priest who had helped raise the alarm about the paramilitary
presence.
Even when the authorities were under orders to arrest paramilitary leaders, they
rarely did so.As of this writing, for example, the attorney general’s office had at least
twenty-six outstanding arrest warrants against Castaño. In addition, Colombian
courts had returned guilty verdicts against him in absentia in three cases, including
the murder of presidential candidate Bernardo Jaramillo in 1990.
Massacres, traditionally used by paramilitaries to spread terror, were less
numerous than in 2001, but the decrease appears to have reflected a change in
paramilitary tactics rather than a decrease in overall violence. Witnesses, church
officials, and municipal observers, among others, described to Human Rights
Watch how paramilitaries seized large groups of people, then killed individuals separately,
to avoid the publicity that results when incidents are recorded as massacres.
As the Bogotá office of the UNHCHR noted in March,“Although these [tactics] had
less drastic effects than the massacres, [paramilitaries] committed numerous individual
executions. The Office was informed of cases in which the paramilitaries,
after choosing their victims from a large group of people they had abducted, killed
them individually or in small groups, leaving the bodies scattered in different locations.”
Elected in May with 53 percent of the vote, an unprecedented majority, President
Álvaro Uribe Vélez immediately imposed several emergency measures to
address political violence. Some weakened the ability of state institutions to monitor
and investigate human rights violations, and gave the security forces power to
arrest and tap telephones without warrants in certain circumstances. Another
measure allowed the executive branch to place large areas under military control
and restrict the movement of civilians and the entry of foreigners, including journalists
working for international media. In September, the Uribe administration
announced that twenty-seven municipalities containing over one million people in
the departments of Bolívar, Sucre, and Arauca had been designated “rehabilitation
and consolidation” zones where rights were curtailed.
Fernando Londoño, who headed the newly combined interior and justice ministries,
told the Colombian Congress that he intended to make emergency measures
“permanent,”raising fears that Colombia would return to a pattern of decades past,
when presidents maintained the country under a virtually unbroken state of siege
and rights were routinely violated by state agents.
President Uribe began recruiting a planned one million civilian informants to
provide information in exchange for cash. By mid-September, the army reported
having paid over U.S.$340,000 for information that led to the capture of members
of illegal armed groups. In addition,President Uribe authorized the army to recruit
a force of fifteen thousand peasants to fight in their home regions with regular
troops. Both strategies raised serious questions about the government’s ability to
ensure that informants and new recruits were not drawn from paramilitary groups,
whose forces were already working with some military troops but were seeking to
“legalize” the relationship. It also threatened to repeat the tragic history of the
1980s,when similar laws combined with a lack of oversight led to egregious human
rights violations.
The criminal prosecution of the perpetrators of human rights crimes deteriorated
markedly as Attorney General Luis Camilo Osorio, who took office in mid-
2001,undermined or derailed key cases.His hostility to human rights investigations
was evidenced, most notably, by his purge of prosecutors and investigators willing
to pursue such cases.
In April 2002, seven prosecutors with the attorney general’s Human Rights Unit
and one member of the Technical Investigation Unit (Cuerpo Técnico de Investigaciones, CTI) received credible and serious threats related to their work investigating
high-profile cases of human rights violations. Attorney General Osorio
failed to take any measures to protect the officials. Subsequently, they requested
protective measures from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR). Dozens of other prosecutors and investigators resigned or fled Colombia.
After the Spanish government extradited former Colombian ambassador to the
European Union Carlos Arturo Marulanda to Colombia to face charges of supporting
illegal paramilitary groups, the attorney general’s office dropped the most
serious charges against him and ordered his release on November 1. In its annual
report, the UNHCHR office said that Osorio’s record raised “serious concerns
about the prospects for strengthening the institution and its commitment to combating
impunity [and] …the independence and autonomy of prosecutors in their
investigations into human rights violations, particularly those involving paramilitary
groups and public officials.”
According to Colombia’s national planning department, illegal armed groups
increased in number again in 2002. In addition to paramilitaries, there were over
twenty-one thousand guerrillas, most of whom belonged to the FARC-EP. The
FARC-EP, the National Liberation Army (Ejército de Liberación Nacional, ELN),
and the AUC all actively incorporated children into their ranks, severely punishing
or even killing them if they attempted to leave.
The FARC-EP escalated attacks on civilians, among them hundreds of mayors
and other local officials. “Our orders are to prevent all representatives of the state
from functioning in every part of Colombia,” guerrillas announced in June. On
June 5, FARC-EP gunmen killed the mayor of Solita in the southern department of
Caquetá.When President Uribe was sworn in on August 7, guerrillas launched an
attack with mortars and explosives in Colombia’s capital, Bogotá, killing at least
nineteen bystanders.
In several regions, paramilitaries were in control of towns while guerrillas controlled
the countryside, making travel across these areas highly risky.At roadblocks,
armed fighters demanded to see identification cards from all travelers, and the possession
of identification from an area deemed to be under the influence of the
enemy could be a death sentence.
Armed groups extrajudicially executed perceived opponents and, on some occasions,
those who simply broke their rules. For example, the FARC-EP reportedly
executed a leader of a community of Emberá indigenous people, Bertulfo Domicó
Domicó, near Dabeiba, Antioquia, in July, for violating local rules on travel. Paramilitaries
also targeted indigenous leaders, reputedly ordering three of them killed
near the town of La Hormiga, Putumayo, in August.
In some areas, guerrillas imposed rules regarding hair length and clothing,
including prohibiting girls and women from Medellín’s poor neighborhoods from
wearing midriff-baring shirts. In Barrancabermeja, Santander, paramilitaries
reportedly punished young people who violated similar rules by whipping them,
binding them to posts in public places for up to twenty-four hours, and shaving
their heads and facial hair.
Guerrillas sought to influence politics and raise money via kidnapping. As of
this writing, presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt, seized in February 2002, remained in FARC-EP custody along with the governor of Antioquia; the former
governor of Meta; a former defense minister; Msgr. Jorge Enrique Jiménez Carvajal,
a Colombian bishop who heads the Latin American Episcopal Council
(CELAM); and hundreds of Colombians kept for ransom. Victims included children
as young as three years old, such as a girl kidnapped on July 18 in an effort to
force her father, a mayor, to resign. (The mayor had submitted his resignation
before the child was taken, but the government had refused to accept it.) According
to País Libre, a nongovernmental organization that collected information on kidnapping,
guerrillas were responsible for 58 percent of the 2,253 kidnappings
recorded in the first nine months of 2002, roughly comparable to the previous
year’s rate. Paramilitaries were linked to 6 percent.
In the first ten months of 2002, the FARC-EP used gas cylinder bombs in over
forty attacks on cities and towns, causing mainly civilian casualties.The FARC-EP’s
use of these weapons in civilian areas was a blatant breach of international law and
demonstrated a disregard for the most basic standards of respect for human life.
According to the Consultancy for Human Rights and Internal Displacement
(Consultoría para los Derechos Humanos y el Desplazamiento, CODHES), over
two hundred thousand Colombians were forcibly displaced in the first eight
months of 2002, most by paramilitaries. In addition, at least 1.2 million Colombians
permanently left the country over the past five years, according to the International
Organization on Migration. In 2001 alone, twenty-three thousand
Colombians sought asylum as refugees across international borders according to
the U.S. Committee for Refugees.
CODHES noted a dramatic increase in forced displacement provoked by the
FARC-EP. In one dramatic case, the office of the public advocate reported that
FARC-EP guerrillas forced over one thousand residents of the river hamlet of
Puerto Alvira, Meta, to abandon their homes in July, then used them as human
shields to block government forces, in violation of humanitarian law. Calling it an
“unprecedented event,” Public Advocate Eduardo Cifuentes said that investigators
also found that guerrillas had looted homes and stores.
On August 5,Colombia ratified the Rome Statute for the International Criminal
Court,bringing the number of ratifications to seventy-seven.However,before leaving
office and in coordination with incoming President Uribe, President Pastrana
invoked article 124 of the statute, which allows a state party to decline the ICC’s
competence for up to seven years for war crimes committed by one of its nationals
or on its territory. Such crimes were committed routinely by both rebel and paramilitary
forces in Colombia, as well as by the military officers who worked with
paramilitary groups.The article 124 declaration was not made public at the time of
Colombia’s ratification nor was it discussed in the Colombian Congress.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Especially in rural areas and small towns, attacks against rights defenders
remained common. In the first eleven months of 2002, sixteen defenders were
reported killed, most by groups that were not clearly identified at the time of this writing. In addition, the individuals responsible for over a decade’s worth of previous
attacks remained largely unpunished. A two-year government effort to resolve
outstanding cases, including the murders of human rights defenders, through a
special interministerial committee had yet to deliver results.
Among the year’s victims was José Rusbell Lara, a member of the “Joel Sierra”
Human Rights Committee in the department of Arauca, one of the most violent
areas of Colombia. After visiting Colombia in July, the IACHR issued precautionary
measures asking the Colombian authorities to protect the members of the
Arauca-based committee. However, effective protection measures were not taken.
Rusbell was shot and killed by presumed paramilitaries on November 8.
In a new and disturbing development, church leaders who spoke out in favor of
peace and human rights or who protested abuses were targeted by both sides, often
during mass or prayer services. For instance, guerrillas were believed responsible
for the murders of two Protestant pastors as they were preaching in a hall near San
Vicente del Caguán, Caquetá, the unofficial capital of the zone previously ceded to
guerrillas for peace talks. José Vicente Flórez, a member of the United Pentecostal
Church, was shot and killed on July 14; Abel Ruiz, also a Pentecostal minister, was
shot and killed in the same spot two weeks later.On March 16, a gunman killed Cali
Archbishop Isaias Duarte Cancino, who frequently spoke out against corruption.
In the first eleven months of 2002, eleven other priests, one nun, and eighteen
Protestant pastors were killed in Colombia,more church leaders killed in any comparable
period in the country’s recent history.
Threats against human rights defenders were serious and included threatening
telephone calls, fake invitations to the defender’s funeral, and obvious surveillance
by armed men. A frequent target was the “José Alvear Restrepo”Lawyers Collective,
which represented victims of human rights abuses,among them trade unionist and
congressional representative Wilson Borja.Prior to his election to Colombia’s lower
house, Borja survived an assassination attempt in 2000. Evidence collected since
points to the involvement of several active-duty and retired security force officers
working with paramilitaries. In May, the collective was named on posters distributed
at Bogotá’s National University, Colombia’s largest, alleging that it was
engaged in a campaign of “open persecution” against the army and represented a
“narcoterrorist organization” run by guerrillas.
There were continuing indicators that military intelligence, which kept the
names of rights defenders on file, viewed human rights work as evidence of guerrilla
sympathies. On August 16, troops from the Cali-based Third Brigade searched
the home of Jesús Antonio González Luna, the human rights director of the United
Workers Federation (Central Unificado de Trabajadores, CUT), Colombia’s main
labor federation, allegedly in search of guerrilla propaganda.Using the new powers
included in President Uribe’s emergency measures, the security forces forcibly
entered the Bogotá office of the Permanent Assembly by Civil Society for Peace, a
non-profit group dedicated to promoting peace efforts, on October 25 without the
presence of any oversight agencies.
The year 2002 was especially devastating for trade unionists. According to the
National Trade Unionist School (Escuela Nacional Sindical, ENS), 146 trade unionists
were murdered in the first ten months of the year,more than in the same period in 2001. The ENS believed that most of the killings were committed by paramilitaries,
but it noted an alarming increase in attacks by the FARC-EP, thought to be
responsible for at least nineteen of the killings. Of that number, guerrillas killed
seven in a massacre that took place on April 26 at a farm near Apartadó,Antioquia,
by far the most dangerous state for trade union activity.
The Association of Family Members of the Detained and Disappeared (Asociación
de Familiares de los Detenidos y Desaparecidos,ASFADDES) also reported
continuing threats. On July 10, men identifying themselves as police investigators
tried unsuccessfully to argue their way into an ASFADDES office in Bogotá. This
incident followed several others in which ASFADDES members received threatening
telephone calls or noted that they were being followed. Yolanda Becerra, the
director of a women’s group in Barrancabermeja, Santander, also reported threats,
most apparently made by paramilitary groups. Both groups were issued precautionary
measures by the IACHR.
Witnesses to alleged crimes remained extremely vulnerable, and government
programs to protect them remained dramatically underfunded and poorly managed.
On January 25, for example, twelve heavily armed men shot and killed Angel
Riveros Chaparro, the leader of a local peasant association.Chaparro was a witness
to the 1998 Santo Domingo incident, in which a Colombian air force helicopter
allegedly shot a rocket at civilians, killing nineteen, among them seven children.
The case remained stalled in Colombia’s military courts.
The government invested more than in years past on protection measures. A
range of officials, including the Colombian National Police and Interior Ministry,
took steps to protect defenders, providing bodyguards, police escorts, and other
measures.Nevertheless, these efforts remained dramatically underfunded and were
concentrated in large cities, meaning that defenders in outlying areas remained vulnerable.
The UNHCHR office expressed concern over the lack of resources to critical
institutions, among them the public advocate’s office and the witness protection
programs administered by the attorney general. It was also clear that prosecutors
and investigators working on human rights cases were extremely vulnerable.At the
new Human Rights Unit satellite office in Medellín, for example, prosecutors suffered
under crushing case loads, insufficient resources, poor equipment, no travel
funds, and constant tension related to the investigations themselves, which often
targeted Colombia’s most ruthless and dangerous people.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Members of the international community, acting separately, in country
alliances, and through the European Union and the United Nations, continued to
play a critical and sometimes highly controversial role in Colombia. One of the
most high-profile contributions came during the Colombian government’s
attempt, in January and February, to salvage its ultimately unsuccessful peace talks
with the FARC-EP. Along with U.N. representative James LeMoyne, the ambassadors
of Canada, Cuba, Spain, France, Italy,Mexico, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland spent many days in the zone designated for talks, trying to facilitate the negotiating
efforts of government and guerrilla representatives.
European Union
After peace talks failed, the European Union adopted a significantly harder
stance toward the FARC-EP. In June, after sustained debate, the European Union
added the FARC-EP to its blacklist of “terrorist”organizations, in part motivated by
evidence that guerrillas had been using the zone ceded to them for talks to train
fighters and make weapons and explosives.
Three members of the Irish Republican Army, captured in 2001, remained
detained in Colombia on charges of training the FARC-EP to make sophisticated
explosives.
United Nations
The office of the UNHCHR maintained a high profile and continued to play a
critical role in documenting abuses committed by all sides. It also provided the
Colombian government with technical and other assistance related to improving
human rights protection, and training prosecutors, Internal Affairs investigators,
and members of the security forces in human rights and international humanitarian
law.
Anders Kompass, the head of the UNHCHR office in Bogotá, completed a threeyear
term and was replaced in October by Swedish diplomat Michael Fruhling.
There were moments of high tension between the office and the government. In
May, after U.N. investigators invited by the government to visit Boyajá raised questions
about the role of the security forces there, Colombian General Mario Montoya
accused the U.N. of promoting “baseless” reports and failing to help restore
stability to the area.
The U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women, Radhika Coomaraswamy,
visited Colombia in November 2001.Coomaraswamy emphasized her concerns
about sexual violence against women by illegal armed groups and the plight
of the internally displaced, the majority of whom are women and children.
United States
The United States continued to play a pivotal role in Colombia because of its status
both as the primary purchaser of the illegal narcotics produced in Colombia
and used by armed groups to finance war, and as the main supplier of military aid
to the Colombian government. In 2002, the U.S. government provided Colombia
with $374 million in military aid and, in a new development, lifted restrictions preventing
the Colombian security forces from using the funding to combat illegal
armed groups.The change revoked a long-standing requirement that funds only be
spent on antinarcotics activities. As of September 13, according to government
reports, there were 138 temporary and permanent U.S. military personnel and 250
U.S. civilians retained as individual contractors in Colombia.
The aid legislation included human rights conditions that required the Colombian
military to take effective steps to break ties with paramilitary groups, suspend
from duty officers implicated in gross human rights violations, and cooperate with
civilian authorities in prosecuting alleged human rights abusers. In the biannual
reviews required by law,Human Rights Watch and two other human rights groups
showed that Colombia had failed to meet these conditions. The State Department
pressed Colombia to make progress, and the United States suspended military assistance
for several weeks to reinforce the message. Nonetheless, Secretary of State
Colin Powell ultimately certified Colombia’s compliance with the conditions on
May 1, thereby releasing 60 percent of the funds available.The certification decision
sent a harmful message to the Colombian authorities, and particularly the armed
forces, that human rights were less important than the ability to wage war freely.
Human rights groups took part in a second round of State Department meetings
in late August, linked to the certification of the remaining 40 percent of military
aid. Human Rights Watch again demonstrated that Colombia had failed to
meet a single one of the statutory conditions and described disturbing setbacks
since the May 1 certification. Nevertheless, Deputy Secretary of State Richard
Armitage certified Colombia a second time on September 9.
As the second certification was pending, paramilitaries charged that the Colombian
army attempted to demonstrate compliance by killing twenty-four AUC fighters
on August 9 near Segovia, Antioquia, in a purported ambush. Calling it a “war
crime,” AUC leader Castaño contended that soldiers had detained, disarmed, and
then executed the men. The army denied the accusation, but investigators from the
inspector general’s office found that soldiers had significantly altered the scene of
the incident before civilian investigators arrived, raising questions about the ambush
scenario.
In a more positive development, U.S. officials more consistently stressed the
need for Colombia to pursue paramilitaries and guerrillas with equal vigor. On
September 24, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft announced that the Justice
Department had filed an extradition request for Castaño and fellow AUC leader
Salvatore Mancuso on charges of drug trafficking, a decision that promised to provoke
further tumult before year’s end. The U.S. State Department suspended the
U.S. visa of Admiral Rodrigo Quiñones, implicated in a series of serious human
rights violations dating from 1991. In addition, the U.S. Congress authorized the
use of U.S. military assistance for the creation of a special unit of the Colombian
military dedicated to bringing paramilitary leaders to justice.
Department of Justice officials administered a $25 million program to
strengthen the capacity of the attorney general’s Human Rights Unit. A key element
of the program was the establishment of eleven satellite offices outside of Bogotá.
As of June 2002, all eleven offices were functioning, including prosecutorial teams
in Medellín, Cali, Bucaramanga,Villavicencio,Neiva, Barranquilla, and Cúcuta.
The program also funded training for prosecutors and investigators, travel
expenses, and equipment such as computers, desks, fax machines, and radios.U.S.-
funded mobile exhumation equipment was, for example, used to document the
Boyajá massacre. The state department proposed an additional $10 million for the
Human Rights Unit in the fiscal year 2003 budget, pending at this writing.
In its 2002 conference report, however, the U.S. Congress rebuked U.S. Justice
Department officials for failing to conduct appropriate consultations before buying
highly sophisticated forensics equipment for the attorney general’s office. Not
only was this equipment not compatible with other equipment already in use; as of
June 2002, two years after aid was first sent, it was still not in operation. While
arguably useful, the equipment failed to “address [the Human Rights Unit’s] priority
needs of security, mobility and communications equipment for prosecutors, in
particular for those prosecutors based in secondary cities and outlying regions,”the
U.S. Congress noted.
U.S.marshals also worked with the attorney general’s office to improve the security
provided for employees and threatened witnesses. During a June visit to
Colombia, Human Rights Watch was informed that Colombia was due to receive
sixty armored vehicles destined for threatened prosecutors and investigators, particularly
those assigned to the new satellite offices.
The United States also pressed Colombia to sign a “non-extradition” agreement
that would prohibit the extradition of U.S. and Colombian servicemen to stand
trial before the ICC. Colombia complied, in large part because the U.S. threatened
to prevent countries that were signatories to the Rome Statute and who had not
signed the immunity pledge from receiving U.S. military aid.Colombia was receiving
more military aid than any country except Israel and Egypt.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
A Wrong Turn: The Record of the Colombian Attorney General’s Office, 11/02
CUBA
With the visit of former U.S. President Jimmy Carter to Cuba in May,
Cubans were exposed to unprecedented public discussion of democracy
and human rights.But as no legal or institutional reforms were made, the country’s
lack of democracy and intolerance of domestic dissent remained unique in the
region.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The highlight of former President Carter’s five-day visit to Cuba was his address
on May 14 at the University of Havana, which was broadcast live on Cuban television.
Speaking in Spanish,Carter urged the Cuban authorities to allow democratic
changes and to grant basic political freedoms. He specifically criticized the Cuban
government’s ban on opposition movements and made direct reference to the Varela Project, a petition drive organized by Cuban dissidents to call for a national
referendum on civil and political reform.At the close of his speech, he engaged in a
spirited question-and-answer session with members of the audience—an audience
that included Cuban President Fidel Castro.
Carter drew attention to some of the country’s most serious human rights problems.
A one-party state, Cuba restricted nearly all avenues of political dissent.
Although the criminal prosecution of opposition figures was becoming increasingly
rare, prison remained a plausible threat to Cubans considering nonviolent
political dissent. The government also frequently silenced its critics by using shortterm
detentions, house arrests, travel restrictions, threats, surveillance, politicallymotivated
dismissals from employment, and other forms of harassment.
Cuba’s legal and institutional structures were at the root of rights violations.The
rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly, movement, and the press
were strictly limited under Cuban law. By criminalizing enemy propaganda, the
spreading of “unauthorized news,” and insult to patriotic symbols, the government
curbed freedom of speech under the guise of protecting state security. The government
also imprisoned or ordered the surveillance of individuals who had committed
no illegal act, relying upon laws penalizing “dangerousness” (estado peligroso)
and allowing for “official warning” (advertencia oficial). The government-controlled
courts undermined the right to fair trial by restricting the right to a defense,
and frequently failed to observe the few due process rights available to defendants
under domestic law.
The organizers of the Varela Project, led by prominent dissident Oswaldo Payá,
presented an important symbolic challenge to the government’s intransigence in
the area of political rights. On May 10, the organizers delivered a petition to the
National Assembly—Cuba’s unicameral legislature—containing more than eleven
thousand signatures.Relying on constitutional protections for the right to petition,
the Varela Project asked the government to hold a referendum on a broad array of
civil and political rights, including competitive elections, freedom of the press, and
an amnesty for political prisoners.
The Cuban government responded to the reform effort with a signature drive of
its own. In June, in what seemed like a distorted caricature of the earlier campaign,
the authorities organized a mass signature collection effort in support of Cuba’s
socialist system. Holding marches all across the country, and employing many
thousands of signature collectors, the government claimed to have gathered more
than eight million signatures in two days. With this purported mandate, the
National Assembly then proceeded to approve an official proposal enshrining the
socialist system in Cuba’s constitution as “irrevocable.”
A number of political dissidents were detained over the course of the year, with
some facing criminal prosecution. The Cuban Commission for Human Rights and
National Reconciliation (Comisión Cubana de Derechos Humanos y Reconciliación
Nacional, CCDHRN), a respected Havana-based nongovernmental group,
released a partial list of political prisoners in July that included 230 reliably documented
cases. (It should be noted that not all of the cases listed involved persons
who were wrongly detained or prosecuted on the basis of nonviolent political
expression; it also listed people convicted of crimes such as “piracy,” if the crimes were politically motivated.) The list showed a net increase of twenty cases over a
similar list compiled in January. The increase led the CCDHRN to suggest that a
ten-year general trend away from the use of political imprisonment was coming to
an end.
The vast majority of the year’s politically motivated detentions took place during
incidents in February and March. The first group of arrests occurred when the
government tried to block members of the opposition from commemorating the
anniversary of the 1996 shoot-down of two small planes by the Cuban air force.
Several dissidents were arrested in advance of the event,while others were detained
when they tried to reach a beach in the Miramar neighborhood of Havana to throw
flowers into the sea. While most of the detainees were quickly released, a few
remained in long-term detention.
Among those still detained as of early November were Leonardo Miguel Bruzón
Avila, president of the February 24 Human Rights Movement, Carlos Alberto
Domínguez González, an independent journalist, and Emilio Leyva Pérez and
Lázaro Miguel Rodríguez Capote, president and coordinator, respectively, of the
Cuban Pro Human Rights Party.None of the detainees had been officially charged
with a crime.To call attention to his indefinite detention without trial,Bruzón Avila
reportedly went on a hunger strike that began in late August and continued into
October, raising serious concerns for his health.
On February 27, in a dramatic incident, a group of twenty-one young male
Cubans, including three teenagers, crashed a stolen bus through the gates of the
Mexican embassy in Havana. The group apparently believed that Mexico was
granting refugee visas to Cubans, a rumor sparked by a U.S.-funded Radio Martí
broadcast in which the Mexican foreign minister was reported saying that the
embassy was open to all Cubans, including dissidents. Scores of other Cubans were
turned away after trying to enter the embassy on foot. At the embassy’s request,
Cuban police entered the compound some thirty hours after the break-in and
detained the asylum seekers.More than one hundred others were also arrested.
Some thirty political dissidents who did not participate in the embassy actions
were also reportedly detained, having been arrested at some distance from the
embassy. As of early November, a group of prisoners that included Iovany Aguilar
Camejo, coordinator of the Fraternal Brothers for Dignity Movement, and Carlos
Oquendo Rodríguez and José Aguilar Hernández, president and vice-president of
the July 13 Movement, respectively, remained behind bars.
The embassy incident ended in a swirl of recriminations and conspiracy theories.
The Cuban government accused the U.S. of maliciously instigating the breakin,
while some dissidents surmised that President Castro had engineered the
incident in order to embarrass Mexican President Vicente Fox, seen by the authorities
as overly sympathetic to the Cuban dissident community. The Cuban authorities
even aired a special television broadcast to discuss the incident. In it, Castro
emphasized that “no one who storms into an embassy will ever leave [Cuba],” and
attacked the asylum-seekers as “delinquents and anti-social elements.”
A group of ten dissidents, human rights advocates, and independent journalists
was arrested on March 4 at a provincial hospital in Ciego de Avila. They had gone
to the hospital to visit a reporter who had reportedly been physically attacked by the police earlier in the day while he was traveling to a meeting of the Cuban Foundation
for Human Rights. Reacting with disproportional severity to a minor disruption,
state security police arrested the group after its members shouted statements
such as “Long live human rights.”Among those taken into custody was Juan Carlos
González Leiva, a blind human rights advocate who was said to have been assaulted
by police when he was arrested, requiring four stitches on his forehead. The other
arrestees were seven dissidents and human rights activists—Delio Laureano
Requejo, Lázaro Iglesias Estrada, Virgilio Mantilla Arango, Enrique García Morejón,
Antonio García Morejón, Odalmis Hernández Matos, and Ana Peláez García—
and two independent journalists—Léster Téllez Castro and Carlos Brizuela Yera.
The authorities quickly released the two women who had been arrested, placing
them under house arrest.The remaining prisoners were kept in detention,however,
and remained there as of early November. In September, the Ciego de Avila prosecutor’s
office notified the ten members of the group that they had been formally
charged with the crimes of contempt of authority (desacato), public disorder,
resistance, and disobedience. The threatened sentences varied, with one defendant
facing seven years of imprisonment. Of González Leiva, the lead defendant, who
faced a possible six-year sentence, the indictment noted critically that “he was not
integrated into mass organizations and was not involved in any socially useful
activities.”
The year also saw the release of several well-known dissidents. In early May, just
prior to Carter’s visit,Vladimiro Roca Antúnez was freed from Ariza prison.He had
spent over two years of his five-year sentence in solitary confinement. Prosecuted
together with three other well-known dissidents,who were all released from prison
in 2001, Roca was freed two months before the expiration of his sentence. The son
of the late Blas Roca, considered a hero of the Cuban revolution,Roca was educated
as an economist and had once flown missions as a Cuban air force fighter pilot.
Years later, with his three co-defendants, Blas had embarked upon relatively highprofile
dissident activities, holding press conferences in 1997 and releasing an analytical
paper on the Cuban economy,human rights, and democracy. In the resulting
criminal prosecution, the government had cast him as the group’s ringleader, giving
him the stiffest sentence of the four.
On October 31, Dr. Oscar Elías Biscet González was released from prison, having
served out a three-year criminal sentence. A physician and prominent activist,
Biscet was convicted in February 2000 of dishonoring patriotic symbols,public disorder,
and instigating delinquency, for protests that included turning the Cuban
flag upside-down and carrying anti-abortion placards.
Other dissidents who continued serving out their prison sentences included
Francisco Chaviano González, incarcerated since 1994,Carlos Cabrera Roca, incarcerated
since 1996, Joaquín Barriga San Emeterio, incarcerated since 2000, and codefendants
Néstor Rodríguez Lobaina and Eddy Alfredo Mena González, both
incarcerated since 2000.
The government continued to prosecute people for “illegal exit” if they
attempted to leave the island without first obtaining official permission to do so.
Such permission was sometimes denied arbitrarily, or made contingent on the purchase
of an expensive exit permit.
Prisoners were kept in abusive conditions, often in overcrowded cells. Many
prisoners lost weight during incarceration and received inadequate medical care.
Some endured physical and sexual abuse, typically by other inmates with the acquiescence
of guards. Prison authorities insisted that all detainees participate in politically
oriented “re-education” sessions or face punishment. Political prisoners who
denounced poor conditions of imprisonment were frequently punished by long
periods in punitive isolation cells, restricted visits, or denial of medical treatment.
Cuba retained the death penalty for a large number of offences, but a de facto
moratorium on its use seemed to be in effect.Because the authorities did not release
public information on death sentences and executions, however, it was difficult to
ascertain the status of prisoners facing capital punishment.
The government maintained tight restrictions on the press, barring independent
news reports from being published within Cuba. Although local independent
journalists regularly sent their stories outside of Cuba for publication, they had to
work under extremely difficult conditions. They frequently faced police questioning,
short-term detention, surveillance, confiscation of their notes and other materials,
and travel restrictions aimed at preventing them from covering certain events.
In May, the Committee to Protect Journalists, a U.S.-based press freedom group,
named Cuba as one of the “ten worst places to be a journalist.”Besides Domínguez,
detained since February, and Téllez Castro and Brizuela Yera,detained since March,
the authorities kept independent journalist Bernardo Arévalo Padrón behind bars.
Incarcerated since 1997,Arévalo Padrón was serving a six-year sentence for “insulting”
President Castro.
Despite some limits on freedom of religion, religious institutions and their leaders
were granted a degree of autonomy not granted to other bodies. Several religious-
run groups distributed humanitarian aid and carried out social programs.
The authorities did, however, continue to slow the entry of foreign priests and
nuns, limit new church construction, and bar religious institutions from running
schools (although religious instruction was allowed). In contrast to the first
decades after the Cuban revolution, discrimination against overtly religious persons
was rare.
The government recognized only one labor union, the Worker’s Central of Cuba
(Central de Trabajadores de Cuba, CTC). Independent labor unions were denied
formal status and their members were harassed.Workers employed in businesses
backed by foreign investment remained under tight government control. Under
restrictive labor laws, the authorities had a prominent role in the selection, payment,
and dismissal of workers, effectively denying workers the right to bargain
directly with employers over benefits, promotions, and wages.Cuba also continued
to use prison labor for agricultural camps and ran clothing assembly and other factories
in its prisons. The authorities’ insistence that political prisoners work without
pay in poor conditions violated international labor standards.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights monitoring was not recognized as a legitimate activity, but rather
stigmatized as a disloyal betrayal of Cuban sovereignty. No local human rights groups enjoyed legal status. As a result, human rights defenders faced systematic
harassment, with the government placing heavy burdens on their ability to monitor
human rights conditions. Besides routine surveillance and phone tapping, the
authorities in some instances used arbitrary searches, short-term arrests, evictions,
travel restrictions, and politically motivated dismissals from employment.
Human rights defenders were generally denied exit visas to travel abroad unless
a humanitarian reason (such as a sick overseas relative) could be proffered.
Oswaldo Payá, for example, was unable to travel to Washington, D.C., in September
to receive a democracy award from the National Democratic Institute.
International human rights groups such as Human Rights Watch were barred
from conducting fact-finding investigations on the island.Cuba was also one of the
few countries in the world, and the only one in the Western Hemisphere, to deny
the International Committee of the Red Cross access to its prisons.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
At its fifty-eighth session in April, and for the tenth time in eleven years, the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights passed a resolution on human rights in Cuba. The
language of the resolution, passed by a vote of twenty-three to twenty-one, was
weaker than any in the past. Rather than expressing concern about violations, the
resolution simply invited the Cuban government to make the same progress with
respect to civil and political rights that it had with regard to economic and social
rights.What was most notable about the resolution, however, was that it had the
broad support of Latin American countries,which were increasingly willing to recognize
Cuba’s human rights problems.
Cuban representatives played a negative role at the commission by pressing to
weaken the commission’s human rights monitoring mechanisms under the guise of
reviewing their functioning. In November, similarly, Cuba was one of only eight
countries to vote against the U.N. General Assembly’s adoption of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention Against Torture, a new treaty aimed at eliminating torture
and improving prison conditions.
In November 2001 and November 2002, as in past years, the U.N. General
Assembly adopted by a resounding majority a resolution calling for an end to the
U.S. economic embargo on Cuba.
Latin America
Ignoring strongly worded Cuban denunciations, eight Latin American countries—
an unprecedented number—voted in favor of the Cuba resolution at the
U.N. Commission on Human Rights. Only Venezuela voted against the resolution,
while Brazil and Ecuador abstained.
Although Mexican President Vicente Fox visited Cuba in February, a move
hailed by the Cubans as a sign of strengthening links, the two countries’ relations
worsened quickly. Fox met with dissidents during his visit and, in April, his government supported the U.N. resolution on Cuba. In late April, in what was perceived
as a retaliatory gesture,President Castro made public a recording of a private
telephone conversation he had had with Fox. The recording, contrary to the Mexican
authorities’portrayal of the incident, showed that in March Fox had asked Castro
to leave a development conference in Mexico early so as to avoid contact with
U.S. President George W. Bush.
European Union
European Union (E.U.) representatives formally resumed a political dialogue
with the Cuban government in December 2001 during a visit to Havana.As of early
November 2002, however, Cuba remained the only Latin American country without
an E.U. cooperation agreement. The E.U. “common position” on Cuba, originally
adopted in 1996 and reviewed every six months, made full economic
cooperation conditional on reforms toward greater democracy and human rights
protection.
In October, the European Parliament announced that it would be awarding
democracy activist Oswaldo Payá the prestigious Sakharov Prize for Freedom of
Thought.
United States
Former president Carter may have made the most high-profile visit to Cuba, but
he was certainly not the only U.S. political figure to travel to the island over the
course of the year. Other visitors included Minnesota Governor Jesse Ventura,
Tampa Mayor Dick Greco, and several members of Congress.With U.S. business
and agricultural interests applying their substantial influence toward lifting the
U.S. economic embargo, the pro-engagement lobby demonstrated increasing political
clout.
Carter himself called for an end to the embargo during his visit to the island,
arguing that it restricted the freedoms of U.S. citizens. In July, the House of Representatives
voted 262-167 to loosen both trade and travel restrictions, and a similar
bill was pending in the Senate.The main obstacle to change remained the executive
branch, which promised to veto any legislation that weakened the embargo’s provisions.
Bush administration officials tried to counter the pro-engagement effort by
making strong and continuing verbal attacks on Cuba. In May, just prior to Carter’s
visit to the island, Under Secretary of State for Arms Control John R. Bolton
accused Cuba of developing a limited capacity for germ warfare research.Assistant
Secretary of State Otto Reich reprised these claims in October, although he did not
put forward evidence to support them. And just after the one-year anniversary of
the September 11 terror attacks, Reich’s deputy assistant secretary of state asserted
that Cuban agents had intentionally provided false leads regarding possible terrorist
plots.
In August, former Cuban nurse Eriberto Mederos was convicted of illegally
obtaining U.S. citizenship by concealing his role in what prosecutors said was a decade of electroshock torture in a psychiatric hospital near Havana. Less than a
month later,Mederos died of cancer, and his conviction was vacated because he had
not had a chance to appeal it.
GUATEMALA
Incidents of political violence rose in 2002 as Guatemala struggled to deal
with the legacy of massive human rights violations committed during the
country’s civil war, which ended in 1996. Although political violence was, for the
most part, no longer carried out as a matter of state policy, impunity for acts of violence
remained a chronic problem. Efforts to investigate and punish past abuses
made little progress, and the human rights defenders promoting them faced violence
and intimidation.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Guatemala made little progress in investigating and prosecuting past abuses.
Three years after a U.N.-sponsored Historical Clarification Commission reported
that over two hundred thousand people were killed and tens of thousands of
human rights violations (including “acts of genocide”) occurred during the
country’s armed conflict, only a small number of these cases had been addressed by
the criminal justice system.
Guatemalans seeking accountability for past abuses continued to face daunting
obstacles.The work of the attorney general’s office was severely handicapped by the
meager budget allotted to the office by the Guatemalan Congress,which resulted in
prosecutors carrying excessive caseloads with inadequate resources. The courts
(including the Supreme and Constitutional Courts) routinely failed to resolve judicial
appeals and motions in an expeditious manner and thus allowed defense attorneys
to engage in dilatory legal maneuvering.The army and other state institutions
failed to cooperate fully with investigations into abuses committed by current or
former members. Perhaps the most serious obstacle to progress on human rights
cases was the intimidation of witnesses and justice officials. (See below.) The police
failed to provide adequate protective measures to persons involved in sensitive
cases.
An important exception was the trial of three senior officers charged with planning
the murder of anthropologist Myrna Mack. In October, a three-judge tribunal
convicted Col. Juan Valencia Osorio for his role in the 1990 killing. Valencia, who
was sentenced to thirty years, was the first senior military officer to be jailed for
planning human rights violations committed during Guatemala’s civil war.His codefendants,
Gen. Augusto Godoy Gaitán and Col. Juan Guillermo Oliva Carrera,
were acquitted by the same tribunal.
Unfortunately, the Mack case appeared to be the exception that proved the rule
of impunity in cases involving abuses carried out by current or former members of
the Guatemalan military. The conviction was obtained only after a costly twelveyear
campaign by Helen Mack, the victim’s sister.The case was plagued throughout
by the use of threats and violence to intimidate justice officials, witnesses, and
lawyers. In July, Helen Mack was forced to leave the country after being tipped off
about a plot to assassinate her. In August, Roberto Romero, a lawyer acting for the
Myrna Mack Foundation, reported that he had received death threats and that his
Guatemala City home had been shot at. The prosecution’s case was hampered by
the military’s refusal to supply justice officials with requested documentation and
its obstruction of the investigation by submitting false information and doctored
documents. It was also hampered by the defense’s use of dilatory legal maneuvers
and the failure of judicial magistrates to resolve these in a timely fashion.
Another case in which limited progress was made involved charges pressed by
twenty-one indigenous communities affiliated with the Association for Justice and
Reconciliation (AJR), legally represented by the Center for Human Rights Legal
Action (CALDH), against former presidents Romeo Lucas García and Efraín Ríos
Montt, as well as top military officers in their respective governments. Both cases
alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity, including genocide, committed in
the early 1980s. A special prosecutor within the attorney general’s office, who
opened formal investigations into the two cases in 2000 and 2001, respectively, continued
taking testimony from hundreds of eyewitnesses to the massacres.
Meanwhile, other important cases languished. For example, in a case involving
a 1982 massacre of over 160 people in the village of Las Dos Erres, Petén, defense
attorneys continued to prevent a trial from taking place by filing dozens of dilatory
motions. Nearly all of these motions were rejected by the court as being “notoriously
unfounded.”
Lawyers from the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation complained of judicial irregularities
in a civil suit brought by relatives of eleven people killed in a 1995 massacre
in the community of Xaman, in the department of Alta Verapaz. One problem was
the judge’s decision to disallow fifty-four of the sixty questions the foundation’s
lawyers had prepared for the oral examination of the soldiers who allegedly participated
in the massacre.Another was the judge’s decision to summon forty witnesses
from Xaman to present their testimony before the court at the same hour of the
same day. The forty witnesses, mostly women, traveled to Guatemala City from
their remote village, many with children in tow.When their lawyers realized that
these women would be forced to spend hours and possibly days waiting in a
cramped courthouse room to have their turn giving testimony, they sought and
obtained a suspension of the proceeding.
One of the few successful prosecutions of military officers for political violence—
the 2001 conviction of three officers and a civilian for the 1998 killing of
Bishop Juan Gerardi Conedera—was reversed by an appeals court in October. The
appeals court accepted the defense team’s claim that a lower court had failed to conduct
a proper review of evidence presented at the trial. Lawyers from the Archbishop’s
Human Rights Office (ODHA),which was civil party to the prosecution in
the case, had previously raised serious questions about the impartiality of one of the appeals court judges reviewing the case—including the fact that this judge had
allegedly referred to the ODHA lawyers as personal “enemies.”Both the ODHA and
the public prosecutor petitioned the Supreme Court to overturn the appeals court
ruling on the ground that it overstepped the proper scope of judicial review. The
Supreme Court granted a injunction temporarily suspending the appeals court ruling
while it evaluated the merits of these petitions.At this writing, a final ruling by
the Supreme Court was still pending.
Charges of government corruption produced violent reprisals in several
instances. Prosecutor Miguel Angel Bermejo,who was investigating charges of corruption
within the Interior Ministry, reported receiving death threats and being
tipped off that several people were planning to kill him if he continued with the
investigation. In February, a witness in one high-profile corruption case, César
Augusto Rodas Furlán, was shot dead in Guatemala City.
Members of the national police continued to employ excessive force against
civilians.Most of these cases involved abuse of authority by poorly trained and disciplined
police officers.However, there were also cases of apparently deliberate use
of excessive force in police operations. In January, for example, officers from the
Department of Antinarcotics Operations (DOAN) raided the village of Chocón,
opening fire on residents and killing two civilians. At this writing, several officers
were under investigation.
Women and girls working in Guatemala’s two female-dominated industries—
the export-processing (maquiladora) and the live-in domestic worker sectors—
faced widespread sex discrimination at the hands of private employers and the
government. Domestic workers continued to be denied key labor rights protections,
such as the rights to the minimum wage and an eight-hour workday, and had
only limited rights to paid national holidays.Younger women and girls, in particular,
sometimes faced sexual harassment and violence in the homes where they
worked. The Congress failed to act on proposals to reform the labor code to provide
domestic workers equal protection.
Women and girls working in the maquiladora sector, though formally protected
under the law, encountered persistent sex discrimination in employment based on
their reproductive status, with little hope for government remedy. Guatemalan
maquiladoras, many of which were suppliers for well-known South Korean and
U.S.-based corporations, discriminated against women workers in a number of
ways—including requiring women to undergo pregnancy tests as a condition of
employment; denying, limiting, or conditioning maternity benefits to pregnant
women; denying reproductive health care to pregnant workers; and, to a lesser
extent, firing pregnant women. At the time of this writing, the Guatemalan government
had still not adopted policies or practices to investigate and remedy in a
systematic way these gender-specific labor rights violations.
The Congress failed to pass legislation to abolish the death penalty. In July, however,
President Portillo announced a moratorium on the application of the death
penalty during his presidency.
In July, President Portillo announced his support for a program of monetary
compensation for former members of the Civil Self-Defense Patrols (Patrullas de
Autodefensa Civil, PAC),which were an integral part of a counterinsurgency strategy that entailed widespread and egregious human rights violations during the
country’s civil war. The proposal did not include any screening process to exclude
the worst offenders from receiving compensation. The president’s announcement
fueled efforts already underway to renew PAC affiliations and allegiances. Given the
PAC’s historic role in human rights abuses, these efforts threatened to undermine
the progress that had been made toward re-establishing the rule of law in
Guatemala.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Guatemalan human rights defenders were subject to numerous acts of intimidation.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights stated that it had
received reports of “more than 100 attacks and acts of intimidation against legal
defenders” (including justice officials, civil society leaders, and civilian witnesses)
in 2002. These attacks included “illicit searches of the offices of human rights
organizations, the theft of equipment and information, death threats made by telephone
and in writing, physical assault, the surveillance of individuals, kidnappings,
and in some cases murder.”
While some of these incidents might have been attributable to common crime,
many others were clearly committed with the aim of intimidating members of the
human rights community. For example, death threats were sent to various nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), including the Archbishop’s Human Rights
Office, making reference to their work on human rights cases. The offices of some
NGOs were vandalized—and the members of others have been assaulted—by men
who showed no interest in stealing valuable items that common criminals would be
expected to take.
Most seriously, on April 29, a member of the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation,
Guillermo Ovalle de León, was shot to death in a restaurant next to the foundation’s
Guatemala City office. As foundation members pointed out to Human Rights
Watch, given the small size of the restaurant, it seemed an unlikely place to stage an
armed robbery. In July, two men assaulted one of the foundation’s lawyers in front
of the same office.The lawyer told Human Rights Watch that the assailants had held
her in a stranglehold and insulted her,but did not take the laptop computer that she
was carrying at the time.
According to both Guatemalan government and U.N. officials, these acts of
intimidation were most likely being carried out by clandestine groups with possible
links to both public security forces and organized crime.This conclusion is supported
by the fact that the perpetrators revealed themselves, in their threats and in
their actions, to be in possession of the sort of detailed information regarding the
identities and routines of their victims that had traditionally been the domain of
military intelligence.A written threat directed at a team of forensic anthropologists
included the names of people who had not participated in exhumations since the
mid-1990s, suggesting that the perpetrators had either been collecting information
for several years—or at least had access to an institution that had collected it in the
past.
Many observers believed that the attacks were aimed at undermining efforts to
investigate and prosecute past human rights abuses.Whatever the actual motive,
they clearly had this impact, forcing members of the targeted organizations to take
protective measures—including leaving the country—that undermined their work
on human rights cases.
In response to the crisis, the Portillo administration arranged a series of meetings
between a special “Security Cabinet” (consisting of the government’s top ministers
and led by the vice president) and representatives of the NGOs that had been
targets of harassment. These talks did not produce concrete results, however, and
several NGO representatives broke them off, arguing that the government was not
taking serious steps to investigate and take action against the clandestine groups.
The attorney general named a special prosecutor to handle these cases. This
prosecutor, Tatiana Morales, enjoyed the respect and confidence of the human
rights community. However, the resources at her disposal were minimal.Without
more money and more investigators, it appeared unlikely that she would make substantial
progress on the large number of cases assigned to her.
The government ratified several treaties relating to human rights, including the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflicts, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) continued
to play a central role in monitoring compliance with the 1996 peace accords.MINUGUA’s
reports contained detailed human rights analyses and indicated that significant
aspects of the accords were still not implemented.
Guatemala maintained a standing invitation to the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights to send special thematic rapporteurs to investigate human rights
conditions in the country. In June, after a six-day official fact-finding mission,Hina
Jilani, special representative of the secretary-general on human rights defenders,
expressed concern regarding the climate of terror and insecurity in which the
human rights community conducted its work. She noted the lack of commitment
by the Guatemalan government to ensuring their protection and the general worsening
of the human rights situation. Jilani, together with the U.N. special rapporteur
on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions, issued an urgent appeal to
the Guatemalan government to investigate death threats and guarantee human
rights workers the right to life and physical integrity.
In August, the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women offered a critical assessment of the institutions set up by the
Guatemalan government to promote gender equality.
Organization of American States
In July, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) sent a delegation
to Guatemala to assess the situation of human rights defenders. The delegation
met with President Alfonso Portillo and cabinet officials, as well as
representatives of human rights, indigenous rights, and labor organizations. The
delegation issued a statement at the close of its visit outlining its findings, including
that “the Commission has found that no significant progress has been made in
the investigation and punishment of those responsible for human rights violations.”
It added that this failure was “one of the most important reasons for the persistence
of impunity in Guatemalan society.” It urged the government to allocate
greater resources to the attorney general’s office and other institutions charged with
protecting human rights. The commission also described a “pattern of intimidation
against human rights defenders.” Finally, it expressed “deep concern” over the
reorganization of groups of former members of the PAC.
European Union
Political and economic relations between the European Union and Guatemala
were strengthened in June with the adoption of a five-year cooperation agreement.
The primary objective of the cooperation agreement was to improve conditions for
the implementation of the 1996 peace accords by strengthening civil society and
promoting respect for human rights.
United States
The U.S. government provided assistance—through the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID)—to local efforts to investigate and prosecute
past abuses, supporting the work of forensic teams exhuming clandestine
cemeteries and of NGOs involved in human rights prosecutions. During her
recently-ended term in Guatemala, Ambassador Prudence Bushnell intervened
with the government on several occasions to press for increased protection for
human rights defenders.
Since 1990, the U.S. Congress had maintained a ban on International Military
Education and Training (IMET) and Foreign Military Financing (FMF) to
Guatemala. The ban was modified after the peace accords were signed to permit
training in expanded-IMET courses in the specific areas of civilian control over the
military, military justice reform, and respect for human rights. According to
embassy sources, in 2002, non-lethal training was provided to counter-narcotics
units within the national police force,U.S. and Guatemalan military doctors set up
medical clinics on military bases, and U.S. military lawyers participated in a military
justice project aimed at reforming Guatemala’s military code.
The U.S. State Department revoked the visas of former top-ranking military
officers, including former general Francisco Ortega Menaldo, who led the military
intelligence unit, known as the “D-2” (formerly known as the “G-2”), that was
implicated in numerous human rights violations. These visas were revoked under a section of the law that authorized action against people known to have allowed or
conspired in the trafficking of illegal narcotics.
HAITI
Haitians saw worsening political instability, economic stagnation, and popular
discontent in 2002, as well as repeated eruptions of violence. After
more than two years of political impasse, anti-government protests gained
strength, with many thousands of Haitians taking to the streets in mid-November.
Human rights conditions remained poor, characterized by frequent allegations
of police violence, arbitrary arrest, and wrongful detention,among other problems.
Journalists came under serious threat, facing harassment, physical violence, kidnapping,
and, in a December 2001 case, murder. With the moribund economy
showing no signs of recovery,Haitians became increasingly impatient with the government’s
apparent unwillingness or inability to address the country’s many
chronic ills.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Little real headway was made toward ending the political stalemate dating from
the local and legislative elections of 2000,which were marred by widespread fraud.
As of mid-November 2002, Fanmi Lavalas, the party of Haitian President Jean-
Bertrand Aristide, and the Democratic Convergence, the main opposition coalition,
remained far apart in their positions, despite the negotiation efforts of the
Organization of American States (OAS).Commenting on the deadlock,OAS Assistant
Secretary General Luigi Einaudi complained that political leaders were unwilling
to rise above their “entrenched personal positions,” in order to put an end to the
“fragmentation and paralysis that [was] leading the country as a whole toward disaster.”
Only two months earlier,on September 4, the Permanent Council ofOAS,warning
of the “potential for humanitarian disaster” in Haiti, had passed a resolution
supporting the unblocking of international financial assistance. By most estimates,
several hundred million dollars in aid was involved, much of it having been suspended
for years, although some humanitarian aid was being channeled through
nongovernmental organizations.
A sixteen-point set of stipulations, OAS Resolution 822 outlined steps for
strengthening democracy and re-establishing political stability in Haiti. It noted, in
particular, the Haitian government’s promise to hold “free, fair and technically feasible
legislative and local elections” in the first half of 2003.As a necessary first step
toward those elections, it called upon the authorities to establish an independent,
neutral, and credible electoral body (called the Provisional Electoral Council, CEP) within two months. The deadline for the formation of the CEP passed in early
November,however,without visible progress toward its establishment.Much of the
opposition had refused to participate in the electoral preparations, claiming that
the government had failed to implement other elements of Resolution 822 and previous
OAS resolutions.
The opposition’s obvious mistrust of government promises, and its disinclination
to cooperate with government initiatives, was at least partially sustained by bitter
memories of violent attacks carried out in December 2001. Early on the
morning of December 17, several armed men wearing the uniform of Haiti’s disbanded
army stormed the National Palace in Port-au-Prince. Two police officers
were killed in the attack, as well as two civilian bystanders and one of the assailants.
The Haitian government immediately condemned the assault as a coup attempt,
but a subsequent OAS inquiry found that there was no substance to this claim.
On the day of the palace assault, government supporters embarked upon a wave
of political violence, unhindered by police. In Port-au-Prince, barricades of burning
tires, erected by members of so-called òganizasyon popilè (popular organizations)
aligned with the party of President Aristide, blocked the main roads.Mobs
traversed the city freely, pillaging and setting fire to buildings associated with opposition
parties and leaders. Such groups burned down the homes of opposition leaders
Gérard Pierre-Charles and Victor Benoit, and looted and destroyed the
headquarters of the Democratic Convergence, and of three political parties, KONAKOM,
KID, and ALAH.Similar acts of violence, as well as a few killings, took place
in several provincial cities, including Gonaives,Cap-Haitian,Petit-Goâve, and Jeremie.
According to numerous witnesses, police made no effort to prevent the widespread
destruction.
The OAS’s three-month investigation concluded that the palace assault was carried
out with the cooperation of at least some members of the Haitian National
Police. It noted, in addition, that in the wake of the assault some assailants used official
government vehicles in attacking opposition buildings, and that several government
officials distributed arms. The OAS report, which called for the
prosecution of perpetrators of the attacks, also concluded that the government
should pay “adequate and prompt reparations” to all organizations and individuals
who suffered injuries or monetary losses in the attacks.
The OAS September 4 resolution reiterated these calls for accountability and
financial recompense. But as of mid-November,while the government had reportedly
offered nearly $1 million in compensation to opposition parties, it had made
little progress toward investigating and prosecuting those responsible for the
attacks.
Amiot Metayer,named in the OAS report as a suspect in the attacks, was arrested
on July 2, but was broken out of prison a month later. A former ally of President
Aristide and a leader of one of the so-called popular organizations, Metayer was
implicated in the attack on the Gonaives home of opposition politician Luc
Mesadieu, and the killing of Mesadieu’s assistant, Ramy Daran, who was doused
with gasoline and burned to death.
Metayer’s dramatic escape, in the company of more than 150 other inmates,
came about after heavily-armed men rammed a stolen tractor through the wall of the Gonaives prison. In the days before and after the jailbreak, the men, who
belonged to a gang known as the Cannibal Army, staged several attacks on other
local buildings.They initially demanded the ouster of President Aristide, and raised
crowds of protesters estimated in the thousands. They also reportedly accused the
government of orchestrating the December 17 attacks, a claim denied by government
spokesmen.Within a week of the prison break, however,Metayer and his men
renounced their calls for a new government, but still refused to return to prison.
Metayer remained free and in control of much of the city of Gonaives in early
December.
Even more massive political protests took place in November 2002. In Port-au-
Prince, university students protested against what they termed government interference
in education, occupying university buildings and demanding new
elections.The mobilization culminated in two marches that drew several thousand
students. In Cap-Haitien, the country’s second largest city, an estimated ten thousand
or more demonstrators held a march in the city center on November 17, calling
for the resignation of President Aristide. The following day, several thousand
protestors poured into the streets of Petit-Goâve.
Freedom of the press came under serious threat in Haiti, as journalists were
harassed, threatened, and attacked. On December 3, 2001, in the most serious incident,
Radio Echo 2000 reporter Brignol Lindor was cut to pieces by a machetewielding
mob just outside of Petit-Goâve. The murder was believed to have been
committed by Fanmi Lavalas supporters who were angered by Lindor’s political
reporting.
As of November 2002, ten suspected perpetrators had been indicted for the slaying,
although it was not believed that any of them had actually been arrested for it.
The mayor of Petit-Goâve, Bony Dume, was not among those indicted, despite the
fact that he had urged government supporters to implement a “zero tolerance”policy
against Lindor, a message widely understood as a call to murder.
There was even less concrete progress in the investigation into the April 2000
murder of prominent radio journalist Jean Dominique. Indeed, the investigation
stalled for several months due to the government’s inept handling of judges’ assignments
to the case. Judge Claudy Gassant,who had shown real initiative in pursuing
the investigation during 2001, fled Haiti in January when his mandate for the case
expired. After he left the country, a period of confusion ensued, and responsibility
for the case was not clearly resolved until July.
Over the course of the year, at least thirty journalists were attacked or threatened,
allegedly by pro-government partisans, and several journalists and their family
members went into exile. Radio journalist Israel Jacky Cantave was kidnapped
in July, held for a day and beaten; he fled the country in August. In May, Reporters
without Borders, a Paris-based press freedom group, placed President Aristide on
its blacklist of press predators.
The continued incarceration of former general Prosper Avril, despite a series of
court orders mandating his release, raised concerns regarding the government’s
respect for legal institutions.Avril—who headed the country’s government for two
years after a 1988 coup and whose rule was characterized by egregious human
rights abuses—was arrested in May 2001 on criminal charges. The prosecution of Avril as part of a genuine effort to establish accountability for past abuses would
have been welcome, but the circumstances and timing of the arrest suggested that
it was politically motivated. The arrest came while Avril was signing copies of a
book critical of the Aristide government, not long after having attended a highlypublicized
opposition meeting. In June 2001, an appeals court ordered Avril’s
release because the arrest warrant against him had expired, but the order was
ignored. In April 2002, the government complied with another court order for his
release, but then rearrested Avril on charges of involvement in a 1990 massacre
moments after releasing him.The investigating judge who signed the arrest warrant
fled Haiti weeks later, claiming that the Haitian authorities had forced him to sign
it. In October, for the third time, a court ruled that Avril should be released, but as
of mid-November he remained in Port-au-Prince’s national penitentiary.
The criminal justice system remained generally dysfunctional and abusive.
While most crimes went unpunished—partially due to the extremely small size of
the police force—some criminal suspects were dealt with violently. In choosing
which crimes to pursue, the police seemed increasingly responsive to political
influence. The government’s stated “zero tolerance” approach to crime fighting
continued to arouse concern, and allegations arose of people being abducted and
killed by police. Claims of illegal and arbitrary arrests were also common.
Prison conditions were extremely poor.With space for about 1,260 inmates, the
country’s prisons held a total of more than 4,100, or more than three times their
capacity. Prisoners received only one meal a day, resulting in high levels of malnutrition.
Many prisoners suffered from diseases, including serious ailments like
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.
Of all Latin American and Caribbean countries, Haiti continued to have the
highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS.According to the United Nations, an estimated 12
percent of the urban population and 5 percent of the rural population were
infected with the HIV virus.Many children were orphaned because of the disease.
The common practice of using “restavèks,” or child domestics, frequently
resulted in serious abuses. In April, the National Coalition for Haitian Rights, a
respected human rights group, issued a report describing the practice and calling
for its abolition.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Because of the extremely polarized political situation, as well as the general
weakness of the rule of law,Haiti was a very difficult place for human rights defenders
to work. Activists, as well as judges handling controversial cases, faced severe
pressure and harassment.
Trade unionists also faced serious hazards.A May 27 union rally at the Guacimal
plantation near St.Raphael, in the north of Haiti, was reportedly attacked by armed
men, including members of Fanmi Lavalas. Two elderly peasants were reported
killed by this group in the wake of the attack, and several union workers, peasants,
and journalists were arrested, brought to Port-au-Prince, and arbitrarily detained
for months. Two of the detainees, Jérémie Dorvil and Urbain Garçon,were reportedly still being held as of mid-November. The rally had been called by the St.
Raphael Guacimal Workers’Union to press demands for better working conditions
and benefits.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Using hundreds of millions of dollars of international humanitarian and development
aid as a carrot, donor countries attempted to encourage improvements in
democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. President Aristide, attempting an obvious
analogy to the situation of Cuba, responded by repeatedly protesting the aid
“embargo” (or even “economic blockade”) imposed on the country.
United Nations
Because the new independent expert on the situation of human rights in Haiti
had not yet been appointed, no report on Haiti was submitted to the 2002 session
of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. In March, Louis Joinet was appointed
to the post, and he visited Haiti in September.
Organization of American States
OAS representatives, particularly Assistant Secretary General Luigi Einaudi,
continued to be extremely active in seeking a negotiated solution to Haiti’s political
crisis, with the organization sending numerous missions to the country. Amid
speculation that it would invoke the Inter-American Democratic Charter, the
newly-adopted pact that outlines preventive measures to be taken when democracy
is at risk in any OAS member state, the OAS Permanent Council also took up the
matter, discussing the Haitian situation at a meeting in January. The resulting OAS
resolution, which made reference to the charter, called upon the Haitian government
to take steps to resolve the crisis, including by carrying out a thorough, independent
inquiry into the December 17 violence.
In March, as a follow-up to the January meeting, the OAS and the Haitian government
signed an agreement to establish an OAS Special Mission to Haiti. The
mission, designed to assist the Haitian government in strengthening democracy,
specifically in the areas of security, justice, human rights, and good governance,
began operating in April.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) carried out two
on-site visits to Haiti in 2002. In August, the commission issued a report stating that
it was “deeply preoccupied by the weakness of human rights in Haiti, the lack of an
independent judiciary, the climate of insecurity, the existence of armed groups that
act with total impunity and threats to which some journalists have been subjected.”
The OAS special rapporteur for freedom of expression, who also visited Haiti in
August, documented an increase in acts of harassment against journalists.
European Union
The European Union continued to withhold financial aid to the Haitian government,
a partial suspension of funding generally estimated at about U.S. $350
million. In January, the E.U. Presidency issued a declaration explaining the suspension,
stating that democratic principles were still “not upheld in Haiti.” In July, the
E.U. reiterated its reasons for suspending aid, stating that aid would resume only
once there was a basic political agreement between the government and the opposition
in Haiti.
United States
U.S. policy toward Haiti centered around concerns of drug-trafficking and
immigration, particularly the fear that a Haitian meltdown would result in massive
migration toward Florida.
Unlike Cubans,who under U.S. law were granted automatic asylum upon arrival
in the country,Haitians were detained by the Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS) and then repatriated.Most Haitian migrants, however, never even made
it to U.S. shores, but rather were picked up at sea by Coast Guard patrol boats.During
the fiscal year that ended on September 30, 1,486 Haitians were interdicted at
sea, a number comparable to that in previous years. The relatively small numbers
of Haitians who did reach U.S. territory—like the 221 migrants whose boat landed
in Key Biscayne, Florida, in October—were placed in mandatory detention while
their asylum claims were processed, in accordance with an INS policy instituted in
December 2001. In a legal brief submitted in November, the INS argued that releasing
Haitian migrants from detention could trigger a mass exodus from Haiti, with
“significant implications for national security.”
The United States reportedly canceled the visas of several Haitian government
officials believed to be implicated in drug-trafficking and corruption. But the failure
of the U.S. authorities to extradite or deport members of the coup-era high
command resident in the United States, particularly Florida, continued to hinder
Haitian efforts toward accountability for past abuses. Emmanuel “Toto”Constant,
a notorious former paramilitary leader who was once on the payroll of the Central
Intelligence Agency, remained in Queens,New York, having been extended protection
from deportation. Certain Haitians implicated in coup-era abuses did face
deportation, however. In March, the U.S. deported Capt. Jackson Joanis, a former
police official convicted in absentia of the 1993 murder of pro-Aristide businessman
Antoine Izmery. In April, the INS arrested Herbert Valmond, a former lieutenant
colonel in Haiti, detaining him pending deportation. Haitian officials had
issued a warrant for Valmond’s arrest in 1998 for his alleged role in the massacre of
twenty-five Haitian peasants four years earlier.
Despite pressure from the Congressional Black Caucus and others, the U.S.
maintained its suspension of direct aid to the Haitian government. Some $55 million
in aid to Haiti was channeled to nongovernmental groups.
MEXICO
In the second year of Vicente Fox’s presidency, Mexico took unprecedented
steps toward establishing accountability for past abuses committed by state
security forces. The government also continued its active cooperation with international
human rights monitors, welcoming external scrutiny of the country’s
compliance with international norms. Progress toward eliminating the obstacles to
full compliance with these norms remained limited, however.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
After decades of official secrecy and denial, the Mexican government publicly
recognized the acts of political violence perpetrated by its security forces during the
“dirty war”of the 1960s and 1970s. In November 2001, the National Human Rights
Commission (Comisión Nacional de Derechos Humanos, CNDH) released a three
thousand-page report on state abuses committed during that era. The report was
based largely on information from secret government archives on more than five
hundred people who had been reported missing. It confirmed that at least 275 of
those missing had been arrested, tortured, and killed by state security forces. It also
identified seventy-four former officials as being responsible for these crimes. (The
CNDH did not reveal the names of the suspects, but did turn the list over to the
attorney general’s office.)
The government took important steps toward eradicating the culture of secrecy
that had prevented the Mexican public from learning about these and other political
crimes. In June, the Fox administration released eighty million pages of secret
intelligence files compiled between 1952 and 1985. President Fox also signed a
national freedom of information law, passed by the national congress, which
directed federal agencies to favor “the principle of publicity of information” over
secrecy and to publish information regarding their basic operations in a routine
and accessible manner.The law defined all government information as “public”and
established a special standard for information pertaining to crimes against humanity
or gross human rights violations, expressly prohibiting the government from
withholding such information under any circumstances. The law also granted citizens
the right to seek the release of information not already public, as well as to
appeal official decisions to withhold documents.
Some states also made progress toward increased transparency. In April, the
state of Sinaloa passed a freedom of information law and the governor of
Michoacán convened a series of panels to discuss the possibility of doing the same.
The Fox administration committed itself to bringing to justice those responsible
for past political violence. In November 2001, after receiving the CNDH’s report
on forced disappearances, President Fox announced the creation of a special prosecutor’s
office to investigate and prosecute these and other acts of violence committed by state security forces against opposition groups. The attorney general
named Ignacio Carrillo Prieto to head the new office and announced that the office
would receive all the resources needed to fulfill its charge.At this writing, the special
prosecutor’s office had received some four hundred complaints of “forced disappearances,”
as well as eleven complaints related to the 1968 Tlatelolco massacre and
four complaints related to the 1971 “Jueves de Corpus” massacre. In July and
August, the office summoned former President Luis Echeverría Alvarez and former
regent ofMexico City Alfonso Martínez Domínguez to answer questions about the
massacres. It was the first time a public prosecutor questioned high-level officials
about these crimes. The interrogations produced little new information, however,
as Echeverría Alvarez chose not to respond to the special prosecutor’s questions
(exercising his constitutional right against self-incrimination), and Martínez
Domínguez denied all responsibility. In November, former general Luis Gutiérrez
Oropeza also declined to testify before the special prosecutor.
The Mexican army took steps toward accountability in September, announcing
that a military judge had ordered the arrest of Brig. Gen. Mario Arturo Acosta
Chaparro, Gen. Francisco Quirós Hermosillo, and Maj.(Rtd.) Francisco Barquin
on charges of homicide in the cases of 143 people who disappeared while in army
custody during the 1970s. A conviction in these cases would represent the army’s
first official acknowledgment of its own responsibility for the human rights abuses
committed during that era. It was unclear, however, whether the army intended to
pursue charges against other senior officers (two of the three men facing charges,
Brigadier General Acosta Chaparro and General Quirós Hermosillo, had already
been incarcerated on drug charges). It was also unclear whether prosecutions
before the military courts would interfere with the work of the recently created
special prosecutor’s office on those same cases.
In contrast to efforts to address past political violence, little was done to remedy
the systemic problems of the Mexican justice system that had allowed these and
other human rights abuses to go uninvestigated and unpunished. One of these
longstanding problems was the fact that the justice system left the task of investigating
and prosecuting army abuses to military authorities. When, for example,
Valentina Rosendo Cantú, an indigenous woman in Acatepec, Guerrero, reported
being beaten and raped by soldiers in February, the public prosecutor’s office
turned the case over to its military counterparts. Similarly, when Inés Fernández
Ortega, an indigenous woman in Ayutla, Guerrero, reported being raped by
patrolling soldiers in March, her case was also turned over to the military prosecutor’s
office.
The military justice system was ill-equipped to investigate and prosecute cases
like these. Lacking the independence necessary to carry out reliable investigations,
its operations also suffered from a general absence of transparency. The ability of
military prosecutors to investigate army abuses was additionally undermined by a
fear of the army, widespread in many rural communities, which inhibited civilian
victims and witnesses from providing information to military authorities. In the
cases of Rosendo Cantú and Fernández Ortega, rights advocates working with the
two women reported that military authorities had shown no sign of proceeding
with investigations into the alleged crimes.
Other prominent cases involving army abuses continued to languish in the military
justice system. One was the case against soldiers who illegally detained and
allegedly tortured environmental activists Rodolfo Montiel and Teodoro Cabrera
in 1999. (The two men were freed last year after President Fox reduced their sentences.)
Lawyers representing Montiel and Cabrera reported that the military prosecutors
handling the case made no effort to advance it, and a civilian judge rejected
their petition to have it transferred to civilian jurisdiction.
Another case involved alleged abuses committed by military authorities who
jailed Gen. José Francisco Gallardo in 1993 after he publicly criticized the army’s
human rights practices.After President Fox ordered Gallardo’s release in February,
the former general sought to press charges against the military brass that had jailed
him. Again, the public prosecutor turned the case over to the military justice system,
which seemed unwilling to pursue a serious investigation of the case.
The civilian justice system also suffered from a lack of effective judicial oversight
of police practices. The CNDH reported in July that the most common type of
human rights violations reported by civilians involved abuses committed by police,
including arbitrary detention and torture. Among the cases documented by the
CNDH was the extrajudicial execution of three men in Jalisco state by federal police
officers in January. The police captured the three men after one of them had shot
and killed another police officer.Witnesses reported that the three men were executed
while in custody. In March,Guillermo Vélez Mendoza, an alleged member of
an abduction ring, was arrested by federal judicial police and died soon afterwards.
The attorney general’s office initially claimed that Vélez had died while trying to
escape from the police, but a CNDH investigation concluded that Vélez had been
subject to arbitrary arrest, abuse of authority, and murder—having been strangled
to death. At this writing, the five police officers involved in the case remained free
and it was unclear whether they would face trial or punishment.
The CNDH issued a special report on abusive practices within Mexico City’s
prisons, documenting extortion of prisoners by guards, as well as the imposition of
solitary confinement for indefinite periods of time. There were also reports that
children held in some juvenile detention facilities were forced to live in squalid conditions
and were subject to beatings and sexual abuse.
Migrants were especially vulnerable to abusive practices by government agents.
In December 2001, for example, a Dominican citizen was severely beaten in a Mexico
City detention facility, allegedly by migration officials. In January, seven Mexican
migrants from Chiapas state were detained by migration officials in the Sonora
state airport and reportedly compelled to sign a statement identifying themselves
incorrectly as Guatemalan citizens.After being detained for a week, the seven were
deported to Guatemala. In June,Mexican soldiers in Baja California opened fire on
a truck transporting five Mexican and twenty-three Salvadoran migrants toward
the border with the United States, wounding eight, one seriously.
Legitimate labor organizing activity continued to be obstructed by collective
bargaining agreements negotiated between management and pro-business unions.
These agreements often failed to provide worker benefits beyond the minimum
standards mandated by Mexican legislation, and workers sometimes only learned
of the agreements when they grew discontented and attempted to organize independent unions. Yet when workers sought to displace non-independent unions,
they ran the risk of losing their jobs. For example, efforts to form independent
unions in factories that produced for the Alcoa corporation in Piedras Negras,
Coahuila, failed in October when management fired independent union leaders,
elected in March, in one plant, as well as a slate of independent candidates who had
announced their intention to run in future union leadership elections in another
plant.
Mexican laws on defamation were excessively restrictive and tended to undermine
freedom of expression. As a means of chilling investigative reporting, public
officials and politicians sued journalists who published articles exposing alleged
acts of corruption and embezzlement. Besides monetary penalties, journalists
faced criminal prosecution for their alleged defamation of public officials. In April,
for example, former Mexico City Mayor Rosario Robles filed criminal defamation
charges against a journalist for an article that appeared in the daily newspaper
Reforma, which reported on alleged corruption during the Robles administration.
If convicted, the journalist could face up to two years in prison. In another case, an
arrest warrant was issued in October against the director and seven correspondents
of a newspaper in Chihuahua,who faced defamation charges for a series of articles
that reported on corruption allegations against the former mayor of Ciudad Juarez,
Manuel Quevedo Reyes.
Journalists occasionally faced violence at the hands of government agents.News
correspondents reported being beaten by police in several states—including Chiapas,
where police officers reportedly beat a correspondent in March, and Hidalgo,
where police officers reportedly assaulted and broke the leg of a camera operator in
June.
Mexico ratified a number of international human rights treaties, including, in
March, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women, and, in April, the Inter-American Convention
on Forced Disappearances.Ratification of the statute of the International Criminal
Court was delayed after the Congress declined to vote on a proposal submitted by
President Fox for a constitutional amendment that would remove potential legal
obstacles to ratification. At the time of this writing, congressional leaders were
debating whether to draft their own constitutional amendment before voting on
the treaty.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Government officials and civilians who challenged abuses committed by members
of security forces were vulnerable to violent reprisals. An officer of the Baja
California state human rights ombudsman’s office reported being subject to threatening
phone calls from members of the Mexican border patrol (“Grupo Beta”) after
she began investigating charges that they had abused a group of forty-two migrants
detained near the U.S. border.
In February, police in Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, gunned down lawyer Mario
Escobedo Salazar under highly suspicious circumstances. Escobedo and another lawyer had reported receiving telephone threats for three months from unidentified
male callers who warned them that they would be killed if they continued representing
two men who had confessed to a crime after having been illegally
detained and allegedly tortured by police. Just prior to being killed, Escobedo called
his father on his cell phone and said he was being pursued by police who intended
to kill him. In April, a judge threw out criminal charges against seven police officers
involved in the incident, accepting their claim that Escobedo had provoked his own
death by opening fire on them.
Over a year after the shooting death of human rights lawyer Digna Ochoa in
October 2001, government investigators had yet to resolve the case.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In April, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights,Mary Robinson,
and Mexico’s under-secretary of foreign affairs in the area of democracy and
human rights,Mariclaire Acosta, signed the second phase of a technical cooperation
program for Mexico. The program focused on assessing the human rights situation
in the country, combating torture and ill-treatment, and promoting the
rights of indigenous people. In July, the two parties agreed to open an in-country
office of the U.N. rights agency that would work with the government and civil society
organizations on the preparation of a national human rights program to
address those issues, as well as on problems related to the administration of justice.
Throughout the year, Mexico maintained a standing invitation to the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) to send special thematic rapporteurs
to investigate human rights conditions in the country. In February, the
special rapporteur on the rights of migrants conducted a fact-finding mission to
Mexico and the United States, finding that migrants were subject to violations on
both sides of the border. In April, the special rapporteur on the independence of
judges and lawyers presented the findings of his May 2001 mission to Mexico. His
report attributed chronic impunity to a variety of factors, including corruption
within the judicial system, harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders,
and obstacles to communication between lawyers and imprisoned clients.
In August, the representative of the United Nations secretary-general on internally
displaced persons visited Mexico to examine the situation of internal displacement.
Finding that internally displaced communities lacked adequate legal
protection and assistance, he urged the government to formulate a national policy
on internal displacement.
Organization of American States
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights sent its special rapporteur
on the rights of migrant workers and their families to Mexico in July to participate
in a series of “working meetings” with government officials and human rights organizations. The commission also issued several recommendations to the Mexican
government related to its handling of specific human rights cases.
European Union
The first Mexico-European Union summit under the Economic Partnership,
Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement between the two parties took
place in Madrid in May.Participants reiterated their commitment to the promotion
and implementation of the human rights provisions of the U.N. Charter and in
international human rights instruments. The leaders agreed to strengthen political
and economic coordination and cooperation.
United States
In March, in its annual human rights report, the U.S. Department of State
described “impunity”and “disregard of the law”as being “major problems”in Mexico,
especially at the state level. It observed that while the government “generally
respected many of the human rights of its citizens,” there were still regions of the
country “where a poor climate of respect for human rights presents special concern.”
Despite such criticisms, however, the U.S. government did not pursue strong
bilateral action to promote human rights,but focused instead on issues such as economic
relations, immigration control, and narcotics.
Efforts that had been underway to develop a bilateral agenda to address migration
and other issues—which had gained momentum prior to September 11,
2001—were largely abandoned by the Bush administration in 2002. In August,
President Fox cancelled a visit with President Bush to protest the execution of a
Mexican citizen in Texas.
PERU
While Peruvians had high hopes that the government of President Alejandro
Toledo would make a decisive break with the authoritarian policies
of his predecessors, his administration lacked a clear vision of human rights and
often seemed to be improvising in the face of conflicting pressures. The truth commission
established by caretaker president Valentín Paniagua in 2001 and supported
by Toledo enjoyed credibility and wide public support, despite political
attacks and budgetary problems.However, the quest for truth was not matched by
comparable progress in the quest for justice, with prosecutors making little headway
on key rights cases.
Important reforms were instituted in the national police force, but torture
remained endemic. Prison conditions did not improve, and in some cases sharply
deteriorated. Belated government proposals to reform the draconian anti-terrorism laws bequeathed by the Fujimori government did not address many due
process concerns and added some new ones. In tackling these legacies, President
Toledo faced considerable obstacles: a resurgence of activity by armed groups; a
stagnant economy; popular unrest as living standards failed to improve; and a fractious
opposition often critical of efforts to examine the past.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
A car bomb explosion in a shopping center fifty meters from the U.S. embassy in
Lima on March 20, the eve of a state visit to Lima by President George W. Bush,
abruptly brought the issue of terrorism to the fore.The blast killed nine people and
wounded at least thirty others. In June, the government announced that it had
arrested and charged three alleged members of the Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso,
S.L.) guerrilla group in connection with the attack. This and other incidents
attributed to Shining Path brought renewed calls from politicians for tougher antiterrorism
measures. These security concerns complicated long overdue efforts to
reform anti-terrorist legislation, which had been repeatedly criticized by the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights for violating due process guarantees.
In mid-June, the government imposed a thirty-day state of emergency in the
southern city of Arequipa, to quell violent protests and looting. The protests began
with a hunger strike by eight mayors protesting government proposals to privatize
two electricity companies, allegedly in breach of a campaign promise. Two young
people died and 150 people were injured during the six-day riots,which threatened
to engulf Tacna,Cusco, and other cities. The protests subsided when Toledo promised
to suspend the sale of the companies.
Between April and September, Peru’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission
held televised hearings in rural towns across the country,devoted to the testimonies
of victims of “disappearances,” extrajudicial executions, torture, rape, and massacres
that took place from 1980 to 2000.The hearings were unprecedented in Latin
America; all previous truth commissions had met behind closed doors.After years
of official silence, the hearings brought home with tremendous emotional force the
suffering caused by Peru’s twenty-year counterinsurgency effort.
The commission also participated in the exhumation of clandestine graves in
Ayacucho province, permitting the identification of remains. In January, the
remains of eight peasants were discovered in a grave in the district of Chuschi, identified,
and returned to their relatives for burial. In August, bones belonging to nine
victims were found in two graves in Totos, Cangallo province; five were positively
identified. Both the Chuschi and Totos victims were believed to have been summarily
executed in 1983 by government troops led by a captain with the nom-deguerre
of “Jackal” (“Chacal”). In response to the clamor of victims’ relatives for
justice, the commission set up a unit to refer egregious cases to the courts immediately
rather than waiting until it completed its work in July 2003.
The impartiality of the commission was repeatedly questioned by politicians
belonging to the Popular American Revolutionary Alliance (Alianza Popular Revolucionaria
Americana, APRA). APRA leader Alan García was president of the country from 1985-1990, a period during which many of the most serious human
rights violations took place.Although the government supported the commission,
it was slow to make up its 60 percent share of the commission’s budget; the remaining
40 percent was funded by other countries. In August, Salomón Lerner, the commission’s
chair, warned publicly that the commission would have to stop work
within a week if U.S.$3.3 million promised for 2002 was not received.Managers of
a special fund administering monies recovered from corruption agreed to meet the
sum and released U.S.$1.5 million to tide the commission over.
Trials of officials implicated in human rights violations during Alberto Fujimori’s
rule continued, but progress was modest. On July 1, anti-corruption judge
Saúl Peña Farfán sentenced Vladimiro Montesinos, Fujimori’s close political advisor,
to nine years and four months of incarceration for usurping the functions of
the head of the National Intelligence Service (Servicio de Inteligencia Nacional,
SIN).Montesinos, held at the naval base of Collao, faced criminal charges in seventy-
five other cases.Along with Fujimori, he was charged with organizing the Colina
Group, a death squad responsible for extrajudicial executions, torture, and
“disappearances” in the early 1990s. In October, prosecutor Richard Saavedra filed
charges against forty-four members of the group for the abduction and murder of
journalist PedroYauri Bustamante on June 24, 1992.
Cabinet ministers and prominent members of Congress tried to prevent the
prosecution of army commandos who had participated in an operation to free seventy-
one people held hostage by guerrillas in the Japanese ambassador’s residence
in 1997. Fourteen members of the Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement
(Movimiento Revolucionario Túpac Amaru,MRTA) were killed in the operation.
Some of the freed hostages reported having seen several of the guerrillas alive
and in custody before they were killed. Forensic examinations carried out on the
exhumed bodies established that eight of the guerrillas were apparently shot in the
head after capture, or while defenseless because of injuries. On May 13, Judge
Cecilia Pollack ordered the arrest of twelve senior army officers who participated in
the raid. The ministers of defense and justice criticized the arrest warrants. Congress
issued a statement of concern, and APRA and National Unity (Unidad
Nacional,U.N.) legislators presented bills to award the accused an amnesty. On July
29, in a clear demonstration of official support, the implicated commandos led
Peru’s traditional annual military parade.
Although the amnesty initiative did not succeed, a military judge initiated parallel
proceedings in a military tribunal, challenging the jurisdiction of the civilian
court.On August 16, a Supreme Court panel ruled unanimously in favor of the military
tribunal, on the ground that the operation took place in a district of Lima
under a state of emergency at the time. It also ruled that the civilian court should
retain jurisdiction over four of the accused, including Montesinos and then army
commander-in-chief Gen.Nicolás de Bari Hermoza, whom the court claimed had
acted outside the chain of command. In addition to awarding the case to a tribunal
lacking independence and impartiality, the decision effectively prejudged one of
the key issues of the trial: who had given the orders and on what authority.
In April, the attorney general appointed Felipe Villavicencio Terreros as Special
Prosecutor on Forced Disappearances, Extrajudicial Executions and the Exhumation of Clandestine Graves. The post was created under a friendly agreement
between the government and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
reached in January 2001, by which the state accepted responsibility for 159 cases of
“disappearances,” mainly dating from the 1980s, and undertook to continue judicial
investigations to clarify the fate of the 250 victims and bring the perpetrators to
justice. The special prosecutor was also mandated to exhume and identify human
remains. (There were believed to be more than five hundred clandestine burial sites
across the country.) Unfortunately, the new office was seriously under-resourced.
Dr.Villavicencio had two assistant prosecutors,but lacked full-time assistance from
prosecutors at the local level, as well as a budget for a database.
There was little progress in the government’s attempts to have Alberto Fujimori
extradited from Japan to stand trial for corruption and human rights violations. In
June, the cabinet approved a Supreme Court judge’s request for the extradition
materials to be filed. In early November, the bulky file was still be being translated
into Japanese.Fujimori’s spokesman announced in July that he was planning to run
for president again in the 2006 elections.
On July 26, President Toledo introduced a bill to reform Peru’s draconian antiterrorist
laws, a legacy of the Fujimori government.The government hoped to allay
international criticism by removing the laws’ due process shortcomings, while
making the laws more severe and ensuring that those convicted under the existing
laws could not find procedural reasons to justify their release. In fact, the reform
proposals created additional due process concerns: for example, those arrested for
a second terrorist offense committed after serving their sentence for the first one
could be interned as a “security measure” for up to thirty years, contravening the
presumption of innocence, and detainees held on terrorism charges could be kept
in custody for up to six years without a finding of guilt, if the investigation met with
“special difficulty.”
Torture remained a serious problem. The Human Rights Commission (Comisión
de Derechos Humanos, COMISEDH), a respected nongovernmental human
rights group, documented fifty-three cases involving seventy-seven victims from
January 2001 through August 2002. Fifteen of the victims died as a result of torture.
A law introduced in 1998 explicitly outlawing torture made little impact on the prevailing
impunity for this serious crime: In the four years since its promulgation
there were only three convictions. Many prosecutors failed to file complaints, or
filed them for the lesser crime of “abuse of authority.” In other cases, military prosecutors
assumed jurisdiction under military laws that classified torture as a specific
military offense. Often they investigated the crime in parallel with civilian courts,
refused to cooperate with them, or formally disputed their jurisdiction.
Of particular concern in 2002 were reports of the torture of military recruits. By
September, COMISEDH had documented nine such cases. On July 9, Rolando
Quispe Berrocal, a nineteen-year-old recruit at the Domingo Ayarza army base in
Huamanga, was woken in the night by three sergeants who allegedly doped him
with an impregnated cloth and forced into his anus a talcum powder container into
which a light bulb had been inserted. After he had been hospitalized and operated
on for his injuries, army officials mounted guard around Quispe and threatened
both him and members of his family. On July 24, the Ayacucho military prosecutor charged him with lying, maintaining that he was a homosexual and had inflicted
his injuries himself.He was sentenced the following month to thirty days detention
and payment of damages of 1,500 soles (approx.U.S.$416).At the same time, a military
court opened an investigation for “abuse of authority” against those responsible
for his torture.
Despite welcome improvements in the rules covering those convicted or held on
terrorism charges, the prison infrastructure remained woefully deficient, and overcrowding
was severe. Lima’s Lurigancho prison, for example, designed for 1,800
prisoners, housed around seven thousand. Prisoners slept huddled in rows on the
floor of large pavilions. Prisoners with tuberculosis or HIV/AIDS (2.6 percent of
inmates in 1999, most at an advanced stage of the disease) were treated by volunteers
from Doctors Without Borders (Médicins Sans Frontiers); the state provided
none. The population of the remote Challapalca high security prison in Puno,
located at fourteen thousand feet in the Andes, doubled from fifty to more than one
hundred in 2002. Due to its oxygen-thin air, isolation, and freezing temperatures,
Peru’s human rights ombudsman and the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights had repeatedly called for the prison’s closure as a health hazard both to
inmates and staff.
In August, the government promulgated an access to information law, aimed at
promoting transparency in government.The law established that all information in
the hands of the state was, in principle, public, and fixed penalties for refusal of
access. The Peruvian Press Council described the law as a “step in the right direction,”
but said that it had been approved in a hurry and without enough debate. In
particular, it criticized a provision that allowed the cabinet to classify information
as secret on overly broad national security grounds.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Edwar Alvarez, a lawyer working for the respected human rights group, the
Institute of Legal Defense (Instituto de Defensa Legal, IDL), received death threats
from José Eduardo Tomanguilla, a police lieutenant who had just been sentenced
to ten years imprisonment for the torture and “disappearance” of Alejandro Trujillo
in March 2000. Shortly afterwards Tomanguilla escaped from custody, raising
concern for Alvarez’s safety.
As of this writing, the Peruvian Congress had yet to appoint a successor to Dr.
Jorge Santistevan as human rights ombudsman.The ombudsman’s office had been
without a titular head since December 2000, and had been headed provisionally by
Santistevan’s deputy, Walter Albán. The ombudsman’s office continued to command
credibility and wide popular support in Peru for its vigor and independence
in defending human rights. In May,Human Rights Watch wrote to the president of
Congress, Carlos Ferrero Costa, urging that a competent appointee be named
quickly.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
At the April session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, in a welcome
development, Peru issued a standing invitation for visits of U.N. human rights
monitoring mechanisms, putting it among only five countries in the Americas that
had done so.
In August, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
congratulated Peru on “great progress” in enacting legislation to combat discrimination
against women. Several experts, however, noted that the electoral quota system
for women had been disregarded in some parts of the country in the April 2001
elections.
Organization of American States
In April, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) issued its
conclusions in the case of U.S. citizen Lori Berenson, convicted of terrorism in June
2001 after a trial in a civilian court. The commission found that the trial violated
the principle of legality, as well as Berenson’s due process rights. The commission’s
observations centered on the 1992 anti-terrorism law on which the new trial was
based. It also criticized the use of evidence obtained during her first trial by a military
court. The commission called on Peru to redress the violations of Berenson’s
rights and reform the terrorism laws.
During a visit to Peru in August, Marta Altolaguirre, a commission member,
announced that Minister of Justice Fausto Alvarado Dodero had promised to
implement the IACHR’s recommendation to close down Challapalca prison.
In October, the commission admitted for review a case presented by the human
rights ombudsman’s office and a women’s rights group alleging that in three electoral
districts the electoral authorities had failed to respect the 30 percent quota for
women candidates.
United States
On January 7, the State Department released a group of thirty-eight declassified
documents in response to a request from a Peruvian congressional committee
investigating charges of corruption and human rights violations against Vladimiro
Montesinos. Forty-one other documents obtained under the Freedom of Information
Act by the National Security Archive, a Washington-based group, were published
the same month. Both sets of documents provided valuable information for
on-going court investigations into human rights violations in Peru. In September,
during a visit by Toledo to Washington, the State Department announced that
another fifty-four declassified documents would be released shortly.
In July, United States officials reportedly confirmed their intention to resume
joint aerial drug interdiction missions in Peru. Such missions had been suspended
in April 2001 after a missionary, Veronica Bowers, and her infant daughter were killed when their plane was mistaken for a drug-trafficker’s aircraft and shot down
by a Peruvian fighter jet.
According to a press statement issued by the Association of Baptists for World
Evangelism (ABWE) in March,“after being warned nothing would be done for our
missionaries unless we agreed to release the U.S. government from responsibility
for any payment for losses to our organization, ABWE has chosen to grant a
release.”Human Rights Watch learned that the United States was considering giving
Peruvian pilots sole decision-making responsibility when the program was
resumed, making it easier for the United States to deny responsibility for future
mistakes resulting in death or serious injury. In August,Human Rights Watch wrote
to President Toledo urging him to reject any such program if it entailed the unlawful
use of lethal force against civilians, whether drug-traffickers or not.
VENEZUELA
Venezuela experienced extreme political turmoil in early 2002, which culminated
in a failed attempt to oust President Hugo Chávez in April. After
the attempted coup, Venezuelan society remained deeply polarized, political
protests continued, and economic conditions worsened, leaving the country at risk
of further violent conflict and jeopardizing democracy and the rule of law. The
human rights situation was also marked by problems in the administration of justice,
police abuses, and threats to freedom of expression.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Opposition to the Chávez government began to mount at the end of 2001, following
the passage, by presidential decree, of forty-nine economic laws, including
legislation covering land reform and tightening the government’s control over the
oil industry. On December 10, 2001, Venezuela’s leading business association,
Fedecámaras, led a one-day general strike to protest the new laws. Thousands of
businesses across Venezuela, as well as the country’s largest labor union confederation,
the Confederation ofVenezuelan Workers (Confederación de Trabajadores de
Venezuela, CTV), participated in the strike. Members of the armed forces also
began to take an overtly critical position; in February 2002, several high-ranking
military officers called for Chávez’s resignation.
On April 9, following labor disputes at Venezuela’s national oil company, CTV
and Fedecámaras called another general strike. Tensions increased when, on April
11, labor groups, business organizations, the political opposition, and members of
civil society participated in a massive protest march to support the strike and to
demand Chávez’s resignation. Marksmen in civilian clothes in nearby buildings
opened fire as some five hundred thousand people marched to the presidential palace in downtown Caracas, where Chávez’s supporters had gathered to oppose
the march. Eighteen civilians died and more than 150 others were injured during
the protest. Victims included both government supporters and members of the
opposition, as well as a press photographer covering the event.
In the immediate wake of the violence, a group of senior military officers forced
President Chávez from office. Pedro Carmona Estanga, head of Fedecámaras, acted
briefly as the country’s self-declared president. This rupture of the constitutional
order gave way to a broader attack on the rule of law as Carmona dissolved the legislature,
the Supreme Court, and the country’s new constitution, which had been
approved under Chávez in 1999 by a constituent assembly and a popular referendum
vote. In addition, authorities conducted illegal searches and detentions of
Chávez supporters during the days following the coup.
Street protests by Chávez supporters continued after he was removed from
office, and rioting and looting occurred in the poor,western areas of Caracas. Some
forty to sixty people were killed during this second eruption of violence.Most were
believed to have been killed by security forces, including by the Metropolitan
Police. Rapidly, military units also began to rise up in support of Chávez. Under
mounting popular and military pressure, the short-lived Carmona government
folded, and Chávez returned to power on April 14.
Although democratic institutions were restored, democracy remained at risk.
Amid growing polarization in the military, further street protests, and the threat of
more strikes, dialogue between the government and the opposition broke down,
while Chávez continued to publicly disparage the opposition and the largely antigovernment
media. Sectors of the opposition continued to seek both constitutional
and extra-constitutional means to oust him from office.
Street violence broke out again on August 14 when the Supreme Court, previously
considered to be loyal to Chávez, voted by eleven votes to eight to dismiss
charges against four senior military officers accused of plotting his overthrow in
April. Chávez responded to the verdict by announcing that the judges responsible
for the vote would be investigated for drunkenness and falsifying documents, and
said he was considering reforms to the constitution.Meanwhile, opposition leaders
advocated a referendum and the filing of criminal charges against the president.
In September, in an effort to block demonstrations, the government restricted
freedom of movement in the areas surrounding six key military installations, a state
radio, and a state television center, designating them as “security zones.” The constitutionality
of the move, based on a little-used 1976 law, was questioned by the
opposition and human rights groups.
Anti-Chávez strikes and marches continued.On October 22, a group of fourteen
military officers, including some generals and admirals, declared that they were in
“legitimate disobedience” of the Chávez government and called on other members
of the armed forces to join them. The generals said that they considered the square
where they read out the declaration—the Plaza Francia, in Caracas’s upscale
Altamira district—to be “liberated territory.” The opposition used the square for
further protest activities, and began to collect signatures for a referendum to force
Chávez’s resignation.Meanwhile,more generals joined the group. On November 4,
scores of people were injured, including an Ecuadorian cameraman who was shot but saved by his flak-jacket, when pro-government demonstrators tried to prevent
government opponents from presenting a list of referendum signatures to the
National Electoral Council.
Human rights conditions suffered in this highly polarized environment.By early
November, only four people had been detained in connection with the April shootings.
Video footage taken during the protest march suggested that two members of
the Metropolitan Police (under the command of an anti-Chávez mayor),one member
of the National Guard, and at least eleven civilians fired their weapons.Most of
the civilians were said to work for, or to have worked for, the Chávez government.
Efforts by the legislature to establish a truth commission to determine responsibility
for the April deaths stalled when government and opposition legislators were
unable to agree on its composition and authority. A draft truth commission law
proposed in May by a group of nine human rights nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) was weakened during initial deliberations in the legislature.Membership
criteria were relaxed, and the powers of the proposed commission were reduced,
casting serious doubts on its future credibility, independence, and effectiveness. By
early November, the law had still not been approved.
This failure to make progress in investigating the April violence was symptomatic
of endemic problems within the Venezuelan justice system as a whole. The
attorney general’s office and the judiciary—under-funded and inefficient—proved
incapable of dispensing justice efficiently and impartially.
“Social cleansing”-type killings by police forces continued to be a grave problem,
especially in the provinces. In the state of Portuguesa, a self-styled “extermination
group” composed of off-duty members of the state police and National Guard was
responsible for killing alleged street criminals and drug-users. In a study released in
October 2001, the Human Rights Ombudsman, a state body charged with the promotion
and defense of human rights, reported that a second extermination group
had appeared in the state, and that these groups were believed to have committed
105 killings in Portuguesa in 2000-2001. They were reportedly financed in part by
local storekeepers. Similar extermination groups were reported to be active in the
states of Falcón,Yaracuy,Anzoátegui, Bolívar,Miranda,Aragua, and Zulia.
At this writing, fourteen policeman were in detention in Barquisimeto, state of
Lara, facing charges for killings in Portuguesa. In most cases the judiciary either
failed to detain and charge those responsible for killings attributed to the police, or
trials were subject to excessive delays.Victims’ family members and lawyers suffered
death threats.Miguel Ángel Zambrano, a former inspector of the Portuguesa police
who had carried out investigations into the activities of the death squads, kept
receiving anonymous death threats by telephone, and was beaten and threatened by
police officers who confronted him in person.Unidentified individuals he believed
to be linked to the police shot at him twice, leading him to go into hiding. In Falcón,
the state police commander lodged criminal complaints against people who
denounced killings for “insulting the police.”
Prison conditions in Venezuela remained inhumane. Levels of inmate violence
were extremely high, abetted by insufficient staffing and equipment, widespread
corruption among guards, and the unchecked entry into prisons of narcotics and
firearms. Five prisoners died and some twenty were injured during a May prison riot in El Rodeo prison in Guatire. According to interior and justice ministry figures,
there were eighty-four shooting deaths and forty-two stabbing deaths in
Venezuelan prisons between January and May.
Although Venezuela’s record on freedom of expression attracted a great deal of
international criticism, there were some positive aspects: There was no censorship
of print media prior to publication, journalists were not imprisoned, and the press
was free to say what it wished. Indeed,much of the media clearly sympathized with
the opposition, advocated opposition positions, and used bold language in criticizing
the government.
Nonetheless, on occasion the government openly interfered with private television
programming by forcing private media stations to transmit government-supplied
broadcasts.This interference was particularly pronounced during the week of
the failed coup, when the Chávez government repeatedly interrupted scheduled
programming to air its views on the political situation. On April 11, the Chávez
government temporarily halted the transmission of the main private television stations
altogether.
State interference with private programming diminished dramatically following
the events of April. However, as before, President Chávez launched regular tirades
against members of the news media during his weekly Aló Presidente radio program,
using strong and offensive language. Given the polarized political situation,
Chávez’s aggressive attacks on his press critics risked being interpreted by his supporters
as an incitement to violence.
Indeed, local journalists did receive serious threats and, in some instances, were
subject to violent physical attacks.At least twenty-five journalists sought protective
measures from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. On February
21, Chávez supporters disrupted an anti-Chávez protest at the University of
Venezuela (Universidad de Venezuela), reportedly attacking members of the press
with sticks and stones, and injuring a journalist and a cameraman. Lina Ron, a
prominent Chávez supporter who participated in the incident, was arrested and
briefly jailed for her alleged involvement in the riot.
In addition, an unidentified assailant threw an explosive device at the offices of
the Caracas newspaper Así Es La Noticia on January 31. Another unidentified
attacker threw a grenade at the Caracas offices of the television station Globovisión
on July 9. In the early morning of September 13, the station of Promar TV in Barquisimeto,
was hit by fire bombs. Previously the station director had received death
threats.Although no one was injured in these attacks, they caused material damage
and intimidated employees. No arrests were made in connection with these incidents.
The Chávez government continued to undermine the independence of labor
unions. New union elections held under the supervision of the National Electoral
Council (CNE), a state body, occurred in the fall of 2001. On October 25, 2001,
Venezuela’s largest trade union federation, CTV, participated in the state-supervised
election process and elected Carlos Ortega as its president.However, the CNE
refused to approve the results of the election, claiming that there had been irregularities.
Although the Supreme Court urged the CNE to make a final decision as to
the election’s legitimacy, by November it had not done so.
Applications for asylum by Colombians more than doubled in the first eight
months of 2002, probably because of the breakdown of peace negotiations in
neighboring Colombia in February.Most Colombian asylum seekers lived in complete
economic insecurity and legal limbo. In October 2001, a new Organic Law on
Refugees and Asylum Seekers entered into force, prohibiting the forcible return of
asylum seekers until their applications had been decided, and establishing a
National Commission for Refugees to consider asylum applications. By the end of
October, however, legislation regulating the composition and powers of the commission
had still not been approved, meaning that there was no body to process
applications. In September,William Spindler, a spokesperson of the regional office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said that more than a
thousand refugees from Colombia were awaiting a decision, of whom about half
had filed their applications in 2002. They included human rights lawyers and trade
unionists who had received death threats from both paramilitaries and guerrillas.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights defenders came under increasing pressure in 2002. In April and
May, Liliana Ortega, executive director of the Committee of Relatives of Victims of
the Events of February-March 1989 (Comité de Familiares de Víctimas de los Sucesos
de Febrero-Marzo de 1989, COFAVIC), a respected nongovernmental human
rights group, received threats via telephone and electronic mail. The Venezuelan
authorities provided her and COFAVIC with police protection, and the attorney
general opened an investigation into the threats.However,COFAVIC reported that
little progress was made in this investigation.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
On April 15, in the immediate wake of the failed coup, U.N. Secretary-General
Kofi Annan called President Chávez to express satisfaction that the restoration of
constitutional order in Venezuela was underway. He appealed for national reconciliation
and stressed the importance of maintaining an inclusive democratic system.
As coup rumors intensified again in early October, the secretary-general issued
a statement urging patience and moderation, and supporting international efforts
to promote dialogue.
Venezuela was expected to defend its record in implementing the rights codified
in the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment before the Committee against Torture in May. However, due
to the failed coup attempt, the committee granted Venezuela an extension until
November. In previous reviews of Venezuela’s record of compliance, the committee
expressed grave concern with the high number of cases of torture and abuse in
the country, as well as with the state’s failure to bring those responsible to justice.
Organization of American States
The Organization of American States (OAS) applied the newly-created Inter-
American Democratic Charter for the first time during the April political crisis in
Venezuela. Approved by the Permanent Council of the OAS and subsequently ratified
by the foreign ministers of OAS member states in September 2001, the charter
was designed to protect democracy in the region. It codifies the OAS’s power to suspend
member states deemed undemocratic and sets up mechanisms for responding
to coups and other threats to democracy.
As prescribed in the charter, the Permanent Council convoked an emergency
meeting regarding the coup on April 13, following a request by Latin American foreign
ministers. The Permanent Council issued a resolution condemning the alteration
of constitutional order and stating that the alteration justified an application
of the charter. The Permanent Council further resolved to send a mission headed
by the OAS secretary general to Venezuela immediately to promote democratic
normalization.At an emergency meeting of the General Assembly on April 18, the
secretary general presented the findings of this mission, noting concern for the
excessive polarization in Venezuelan society and the dangerous practice of political
advocacy within the armed forces.
The OAS sent two additional fact-finding missions to Venezuela in 2002. First,
the executive secretary of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) of the OAS traveled to Venezuela in February to investigate the status of
freedom of expression in the country.He expressed concern regarding the violence
that had occurred against members of the media and noted that statements by
high-ranking public officials against the media could lead to acts of intimidation or
self-censorship. Second, the president of the IACHR led a mission in May to evaluate
the human rights situation in Venezuela. Among other things, the president
underscored the need for an in-depth, impartial, and objective investigation into
the crimes committed in April.
Continuing to monitor democracy in Venezuela, the General Assembly of the
OAS adopted a resolution on June 4, pledging to provide Venezuela with support to
consolidate the democratic process and urging the Venezuelan government to
accept OAS assistance in promoting national dialogue in its reconciliation process.
In September, the OAS, the United Nations Development Program, and the Carter
Center formed a tripartite group aimed at facilitating dialogue. Following a fiveday
visit to Venezuela, the group drafted a Declaration of Principles for Peace and
Democracy, committing government and opposition to reject violence and seek
peaceful agreement. By the end of October, the government and some opposition
parties, excluding the two largest, had signed the declaration.
In August, the Inter-American Court ofHuman Rights ordered Venezuela to pay
compensation amounting to U.S.$1,559,800 to the relatives of thirty-seven people
killed by security forces during a February 27, 1989 popular revolt, known as the
Caracazo.
European Union
In May, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the second Summit of
Heads of State and Government of Latin America, the Caribbean and the European
Union, expressing “concern over the events that took place in Venezuela in connection
with the attempted coup d’état against President Chávez.” On October 8, the
European Union issued a statement backing the mediating efforts of the tripartite
group and the OAS secretary general.
United States
In contrast to the reaction of Latin American governments, the United States
failed to immediately condemn the April coup as an interruption in the constitutional
order. Rather, on April 12, in an initial State Department statement, the U.S.
blamed the Chávez government itself for precipitating the coup, stating that “undemocratic
actions committed or encouraged by the Chávez administration provoked”
the crisis. But the next day, as the illegal actions of the de facto government
continued, the U.S. voted in favor of the OAS resolution condemning the coup
attempt. In September, amid further coup rumors, the U.S. embassy in Venezuela
issued a declaration unequivocally stating its opposition to any illegal disruption of
constitutional rule in Venezuela.
The United States also supported OAS efforts to mediate the political crisis in
Venezuela. On June 3, at an OAS General Assembly meeting in Barbados,U.S. Secretary
of State Colin Powell said that Venezuela should avail itself of OAS mechanisms
to strengthen democracy.
ASIA OVERVIEW
Perhaps more than at any time since the depths of the Cold War, human
rights were marginalized in Asia in 2002.While trade and business interests
had gradually supplanted human rights as the focus of international dialogue in
Asia in the preceding decade, it was the focus on security after the September 11,
2001 attacks on the United States and, to a lesser extent, the threat of nuclear war in
South Asia, which relegated human rights to the periphery over the past year.
Beginning with the efforts to hunt down leaders of the Taliban and al-Qaeda in
Afghanistan, and ending with the bombing of a nightclub in Bali, terrorism and the
resulting “war on terror” dominated events in Asia in 2002. In between, shuttle
diplomacy in India and Pakistan succeeded in helping to avert the biggest human
rights catastrophe imaginable: a nuclear war between bitter rivals with no apparent
political or doctrinal limits. But just as fears were fading about the use of nuclear
weapons in South Asia, North Korea stunned its neighbors in East Asia with the
announcement by the United States that Pyongyang had admitted to having an
active nuclear weapons program and likely possessed enough weapons grade material
to produce a nuclear weapon. Though President Bush had earlier branded
North Korea as part of an “axis of evil” that included Iraq and Iran, the American
response was largely muted, as it attempted to join forces with South Korea, Japan,
and China to pursue a diplomatic rather than a military solution.
The emphasis on security came at a bad time for Asia. By late 2001 the region
was beginning to pull itself out of the economic crisis brought on by the financial
collapse of 1997. The longstanding argument about the juxtaposition between
“Asian values” and human rights—the false choice between rights, stability and
development, borne of the allegedly differing value that Asians place on individuality
and community—was finally in its death throes and in the process of being
abandoned by its proponents in Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, and Beijing.
But the commandeered planes that crashed on September 11, 2001 offered the
opportunity for governments in the region to construct another false dichotomy to
marginalize human rights. This time the antagonists were named “security” and
“civil liberties.” Although Western governments and Asian activists long ago
rejected the Asian values argument, in the aftermath of September 11 some Western
governments expressed sympathy for and even encouraged prioritizing security
over human rights. For Asians who have struggled for many years against
overbroad national security laws and anti-crime campaigns aimed at quelling
political dissent, this has been a crushing blow. Few argued the importance of security,
but the unanswered question in Asia was: at what price?
The constant focus on terrorism and security overshadowed developments that
in other times would have made headlines. In Nepal, full-scale civil war broke out
between an unpopular government and a Maoist insurgency seemingly modeled
on the scorched-earth tactics of Peru’s Sendero Luminoso. On the other hand, Sri
Lanka’s intractable civil war, in which terrorism had played a major part, reached a
pause as the most promising negotiations since 1995 began between the government
and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam with the assistance of Norway.
These moves towards war and peace,both of which had an international dimension
because of the involvement of outside powers, received surprisingly little international
attention.
In such a tumultuous year, it was difficult for good news to get much attention.
But in a tiny corner of Asia a people who only a few years ago seemed destined to
continue to suffer under the rule of an unpopular and violent occupying force
finally gained their freedom. On May 20, 2002, East Timor became the world’s
newest state in a midnight ceremony attended by U.N. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan and dozens of other world leaders. Only three years ago East Timorese were
victims of the scorched-earth policy of the Indonesian military after voting for
independence. Yet on May 20 the new East Timorese leader, Xanana Gusmao, and
the Indonesian president, Megawati Sukarnoputri, managed to shake hands,
thereby bringing a symbolic end to the conflict that had divided Indonesians and
East Timorese for more than two decades.
Many important issues remain unresolved in East Timor and Indonesia, including
the safe repatriation of thousands of East Timorese refugees and efforts to bring
to justice the military and militia leaders responsible for the killings after the 1999
independence referendum. But the success of East Timor in obtaining independence
and the end of systematic human rights abuses were a reminder to human
rights defenders and people around the world that their idealism may some day be
rewarded, even in places where it is hard to imagine that night can ever transform
itself into day.
TERRORISM AND THE WAR ON TERROR
The taking of measures to combat terrorism is not new. They always existed and they
always posed problems for human rights. But the problem has intensified. September 11
gave a sort of legitimacy.Where states once criticized these measures, now what we find
is a kind of tolerance.
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson
Many in Asia were surprised when they heard Western politicians and commentators
repeat again and again after the September 11, 2001 attacks that “everything
has changed.”While violence against civilians on such a large scale was a new
phenomenon in the United States, in Asia average citizens have long lived with the
destabilizing and debilitating effects of state and non-state terrorism. They have
had to cope with the immediate effects of such violence—death and injury to family
and friends—while being subjected to the sort of closing of political space that often follows: arbitrary targeting of political opposition supporters to instill fear,
martial law, states of emergency, and the suspension of civil liberties.
After the carnage caused, for instance, by the forced labor policies of the Khmer
Rouge in the 1970s, the shelling of populated areas by resistance forces in Afghanistan
in the early 1990s, or the military sweeps in Aceh in the late 1990s, victims
received neither comfort nor compensation. Camps in places like Bangladesh and
Sri Lanka remained full of refugees and internally displaced persons, for whom
seemingly random violence meant an end to a stable and predictable life and its
essentials, such as access to education, clean water, and health care.
This is not to suggest any shortage in Asia of sympathy for the victims or outrage
at the devastation caused by the September 11 attacks. Most in Asia appeared to
have been deeply moved and saddened by the attacks. Condemnation was widespread.
But many understood the use of planes as bombs as part of a continuum,
albeit more catastrophic, that included the kinds of atrocities so often experienced
in places like Kashmir,Karachi,Colombo, and Mindanao. For them, the grisly reality
of bombs and explosions was horrific, but hardly new.
What was different was the location of the attacks: in the heart of the most powerful
country in the world. This showed that no one was immune, not even the
greatest power in history. It seemed that the problems that Asians had known for so
long would now be the problems of their wealthier and more distant brethren.
Yet Asians, too, had to cope with the fallout from events half a world away. The
world’s only superpower insisted on this. For Asian governments, support for the
“war on terrorism” as defined by the United States was the price of continued good
relations. In a unipolar world, no Asian country, not even powers like China and
India, could afford to be seen as less than fully supportive of the war on terror.
When the planes crashed on September 11, they drove a large hole through the
region’s fragile human rights architecture. Perhaps more broadly than anywhere
else in the world, the United States muted its criticism of opportunistic repression
in Asia so as not to offend governments otherwise cooperating in the war. Longstanding
U.S concerns about human rights in Indonesia and democratic reform in
countries like Malaysia, Singapore, and Pakistan were muted.
Many governments in Asia that sought to entrench rights-restrictive policies
moved quickly to take advantage of the new political space afforded by the international
war on terror. In insisting that countries are “either with us or against us,” the
United States in particular urged countries in Asia to pass domestic anti-terror legislation,
arrest individuals perceived to be security threats, and to cooperate with
the United States in intelligence gathering.
In Asia, sweeping national security and anti-terrorism laws, often inherited as
part of the colonial legacy, have traditionally been used to suppress pro-democracy
movements and human rights activists.While there was a need in some countries
for new laws to deal with issues such as money laundering, most proposed or newly
enacted legislation was notable for limiting the rights of criminal defendants and
narrowing civil liberties, such as freedom of expression and freedom of association.
The protests of local activists that existing criminal laws were adequate to deal with
violent crimes and that the focus of anti-terror efforts should be on police measures
related to prevention and enforcement fell largely on deaf ears.
Instead of acting as a positive force for human rights, the United States and its
increasingly docile European allies began to speak about the subject as an afterthought.
Where once they viewed new criminal laws and procedures in countries
with weak legal and judicial systems skeptically through the prism of human rights,
those same actions—increased powers of surveillance of phones and email, streamlined
trial procedures, preventive detention, lengthened prison terms—were now
seen as positive developments in the war on terror. What would previously have
been denounced as overbroad and heavy-handed police measures were now either
endorsed, as when Pakistan rounded up thousands of suspected Islamic militants,
often with little or no evidence of individual culpability, or met with uncharacteristic
silence—the silence of assent.
Leaders in countries such as India, Nepal, Cambodia,Malaysia, and Singapore
were pleased to accommodate the new security agenda, which neatly dovetailed
with their aspirations to increase state power and marginalize political opponents.
There were two notable exceptions to this trend. One was South Korea, where
hastily drafted anti-terrorism legislation languished in the National Assembly after
the National Human Right Commission and local nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) argued that the legislation would be redundant and subject to misuse.
The other exception was Indonesia,where through most of 2002 the Indonesian
government argued that the passage of broad anti-terror legislation and precipitous
arrests of Islamic activists would only polarize the fragile political situation
and possibly lead to more, not less, violence. President Megawati apparently feared
alienating the Muslim constituencies and parties needed for re-election in 2004.
It is impossible to know if the Indonesian government was correct, but after the
Bali bombing in October the president came under tremendous international pressure
to sign an anti-terrorism decree and arrest leading Islamic activists. The
decree, which created a vague definition of the term “terrorism” and allowed for
detention of suspects for up to six months without charge, was signed amid concerns
that it would allow the military to resume the role in law enforcement that for
decades led to serious human rights abuses. The Indonesian military immediately
moved to reactivate defunct elements of its domestic intelligence network and train
special anti-terrorism squads that would effectively compete with their civilian
counterparts.
Local activists saw worrying signs of tolerance for resurgent police states. For
example, in March the Indian government rushed through the Prevention of Terrorism
Act, which created a broad definition of the term “terrorism” and greatly
expanded the state’s intelligence gathering and investigative powers. As with its
notorious forebear, the Terrorists and Disruptive Activities Act, which was used to
imprison political opponents and limit free expression, the new law was quickly
used not just against alleged terrorists, but against those expressing unpopular
views on subjects such as Kashmiri independence from India and Tamil independence
from Sri Lanka.
China took advantage of the anti-Islamist nature of the war on terror to deepen
its crackdown on ethnic Uighurs in Xinjiang province, arresting thousands ofMuslims
there in its latest “Strike Hard” campaign. China subtly collapsed the distinction
between peaceful separatists, those involved in violent separatist activity, and those participating in international terror networks. In what was seen as a quid pro
quo for Chinese support for the war on terror, the United States in 2002 formally
designated the small East Turkestan Islamic Movement as a terrorist group. The
U.N. Security Council subsequently placed the group on its list of international terrorist
organizations.
Members of the E.U. demonstrated the precedence of trade and economics over
human rights in relations with China when,without the United States as a member
of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in 2002, no resolution on China was
offered for the first time since 1991.
The war on terror left local human rights activists in places like Pakistan,
Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines isolated.Taking a principled stand against
the passage of overbroad legislation and the rounding up of the usual suspects, they
found themselves in the untenable position of being in opposition not only to their
own governments, but to the new policies of their erstwhile allies in the West (and
donor community), too.
Ironically, despite the dramatic transformation in Afghanistan after the fall of
the Taliban and the rhetoric about an end to tyranny and creation of democracy,
human rights proponents remained extremely isolated in Afghanistan.Though the
Taliban was replaced in Kabul by the strongly pro-Western administration of
Hamid Karzai, neither it nor the international community delivered on human
rights.
Created after the carefully choreographed meeting of the loya jirga in June, the
Karzai administration was heavily dependent on the United States and United
Nations. Karzai himself depended on the United States for his personal security,
while the country relied on Western aid in its efforts at reconstruction.Afghanistan
quickly transformed itself from the world’s most ardent opponent of the West to
one of its neediest supplicants.
But Afghanistan’s fragile peace depended almost wholly on the cooperation of
regional and local warlords who instead of being demobilized and disarmed were
in many cases armed and funded by the U.S.-led coalition, thereby insinuating
themselves into power in the new administration. Many of these men have long
records of gross human rights violations and may someday be the subject of investigations
into war crimes and crimes against humanity.While no one denies that
these new friends of the international community were the enemies of human
rights, the international community cynically offered them the patina of legitimacy
and consciously made the protection of rights a secondary consideration.
While the fall of the Taliban created opportunities for greater freedom and
respect for human rights, these opportunities were largely missed.At the core of the
problem was the decision by the United States to oppose the expansion of the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF) beyond Kabul, leaving
Afghans largely to fend for themselves if they opposed the policies of local warlords.
At this writing, Germany and the Netherlands, which were due to take joint command
of ISAF in early 2003, compounded this problem by also refusing to expand
ISAF, instead opting to focus on building the Afghan army and police, a necessary
step to be sure, but grossly inadequate to meet Afghanistan’s immediate security
needs.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) exacerbated
this problem with its “light footprint” policy, in which human rights monitoring
and protection have hardly been featured. This was particularly ironic given that
the leader of UNAMA, Lakhdar Brahimi, was also the author of the 2000 U.N.
report that recommended “a doctrinal shift in the use of . . . human rights experts
in complex peace operations to reflect an increased focus on strengthening rule of
law institutions and improving respect for human rights in post-conflict environments.”
The U.N. and others argued that confronting the warlords would risk political
stability. But the risks in allowing violent forces to retain power may have been
greater: an Afghanistan where human rights continued to be systematically violated
with impunity, as they had been since the Soviet invasion in 1979, and a
resumption of fighting among warlords who had a long history of mutual antipathy.
Civil war and the resurgence of fundamentalism would then become genuine
possibilities.
It was also likely that if the warlords were not disarmed and dislodged, elections
scheduled for 2004 would merely serve to confirm them in their current positions,
except with the added legitimacy of a popular vote (albeit one held at the barrel of
a gun). In spite of all the international attention, unless human rights were made
more of a priority Afghanistan was in danger of moving from being a failed state to
a state that once again failed its people.
In 2002, the war on terror also led to the radical realignment of many multilateral
and bilateral relationships within Asia and between Asia and the rest of the
world.Old enmities were forgotten, at least temporarily, and new friendships established.
Nowhere was the transformation greater than in Pakistan.Before September 11,
the military government of President Pervez Musharraf, who came to power in a
1999 coup, was almost completely shunned by Western governments. After the
coup, Pakistan lost billions in international aid. But after deciding to side with the
United States against the Taliban and al-Qaeda, Musharraf ’s administration was
rewarded with instant legitimacy and aid. Senior foreign affairs officials from
around the world came to Islamabad to meet the military dictator. The U.S.
rescheduled billions in debt, resumed economic aid, and authorized the first
weapons sales since 1998. The World Bank and Asian Development Bank dramatically
increased loans. Japan, the Commonwealth, and other Western governments
also adopted a policy of turning a blind eye to problems of democratic governance
and human rights in Pakistan.
In April 2002, Musharraf staged a rigged referendum in which electoral lists
were not used and no efforts were made to prevent multiple voting to gain a fiveyear
extension of his self-announced presidency. Official results claimed that 97.5
percent voted in favor, a result more akin to an election in Vietnam or Iraq than in
the normally rambunctious political atmosphere of Pakistan. On August 22,
Musharraf effectively announced that “l’etat, c’est moi” when he promulgated the
“Legal Framework Order (LFO).”The LFO amended the constitution to strengthen
the powers of the president at the expense of the legislative and judicial branches.
Musharraf effectively arrogated to himself the power to make all important decisions. This was a severe blow to a country with a strong legal and judicial tradition.
On the day that Musharraf made this announcement, President Bush announced
that, though democracy was important, he would not allow the LFO to affect the
U.S. alliance with Musharraf.“He’s still tight with us in the war against terror, and
that’s what I appreciate,” Bush said.
Action against terrorism also opened the way for American military forces to
return to the Philippines for the first time since being asked to leave Clark Air Force
base in Angeles City and the Subic Bay naval base in Olongapo City.Because of hostility
engendered by United States support of the martial law government of Ferdinand
Marcos, the Filipino Congress voted not to renew leases for these bases.
American forces left in 1992. But after the September 11 attack, the United States
identified the Abu Sayyaf group as an ally of al-Qaeda and deployed military advisors
and special forces to the southern Philippines to assist Filipino security forces
in attacking and apprehending members of the group.Observers in the Philippines
view Abu Sayyef as more of a kidnapping and extortion ring than a radical Islamic
group. The Filipino government also agreed to allow American military forces
access to Clark and Subic Bay facilities to facilitate the war on terror, a decision that
was deeply unpopular among activists in the Philippines.
Even the non-communist and communist states within the ten-member Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) agreed to cast aside the organization’s
longstanding policy of non-interference—often used as a mutual shield to avoid
criticism of poor human rights records—to cooperate on law enforcement and
extradition matters. No other subject in the history of the organization had ever
been able to pierce this core animating principle.
So intent was the U.S. on drawing Asian countries into the war on terror that in
2002 it proposed Malaysia, whose prime minister,Mahathir Mohammed, has long
been an outspoken critic of the United States, as the home of a new regional antiterror
body.The U.S. and others, including Malaysian human rights groups, the bar
council, and some judges had long criticized Mahathir for the misuse of the colonial-
era Internal Security Act (ISA) to detain political opponents and others in preventive
detention indefinitely without trial.
The U.S. and E.U. had been sharply critical of the arrest, flawed trial, imprisonment,
and physical mistreatment of Mahathir’s former heir apparent, Anwar
Ibrahim. Anwar was arrested in 1998 and was serving sentences totaling fifteen
years after falling out with his former mentor. But these concerns were muted as
Malaysia offered its cooperation in intelligence gathering and investigations into
alleged al-Qaeda cells in this officially Muslim country.
In October 2002,Mahathir, a long-time opponent of international standards on
human rights, confidently summed up the new place of human rights in the post-
September 11 world.He presented the measures taken in the United States,United
Kingdom, and elsewhere as a defense of the ISA, saying, “It is more necessary than
ever. Even the rich countries, the so-called liberal democracies, have decided that
there is a need for some preventive action to stop people from doing things that are
harmful.People have been detained in other countries now, just as we detain people
because they are a threat to security.”
The heavy emphasis on security at the expense of human rights, particularly freedom of expression and association, brought serious risks to Asia. The overwhelming
majority of Muslims in Asia held moderate religious and political views
and appeared to be far less interested in geopolitics than local concerns. The large
vote in Pakistan for more radical Islamist parties in the 2002 parliamentary elections,
the continued popularity of the ardently Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata
Party (BJP) government in India, the rise of Islamic parties in Bangladesh (particularly
in reaction to the aggressive “Operation Clean Heart,” in which thousands
were arrested and some detainees died in police custody), were indicators of widespread
hopelessness and failed politics in much of Asia.
The year 2002 made it clear that Asian leaders and their Western patrons and
interlocutors must be careful to walk the fine line between preserving security and
maintaining popular legitimacy. Otherwise, in an atmosphere of rising religious
intolerance at home and the demonization of Islam abroad, the appearance that
Western countries are actively supporting unpopular governments and their
heavy-handed policies runs the risk of radicalizing public opinion and creating a
self-fulfilling prophecy: intolerant, backwards looking, anti-modern states that
could one day slide into fundamentalism.
UNDER THE RADAR
In Nepal, full-scale civil war broke out between an unpopular government and
a violent Maoist insurgency. Despite the severity of abuses by both sides—often a
cycle of slaughters of police and army by the rebels and reprisals by government
forces, often against civilians–—the international community paid little attention.
The government’s depiction of the conflict as Nepal’s war against terror helped it to
secure military assistance from countries such as India, the United Kingdom, and
the United States.
The “people’s war” in Nepal began in February 1996 after the Nepalese government
rejected demands by the Maoist Communist Party of Nepal (CPN) to abolish
the constitutional monarchy. In November 2001, the CPN withdrew from peace
talks with the government and established an underground transitional government
called the People’s Council. The government responded by declaring a
national state of emergency and issuing the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities
(Control and Punishment) Ordinance.Within months of the declaration of emergency,
over 1,300 “suspected Maoists” had reportedly been killed by government
security forces, with the death toll continuing to increase dramatically. Suspected
Maoists included civilians once associated with Maoists as well as those possessing
Maoist literature. Once suspected, rebels and civilians alike were at risk of detention,
abduction, torture, and even summary execution. Freedoms of assembly,
association, and movement were suspended during the emergency period. In
August, the Federation of Nepalese Journalists reported that over 130 journalists
had been arrested since November 2001.
For their part,Maoist rebels targeted civilians and law enforcement authorities.
By February 2002 Maoists had reportedly killed over five hundred policemen,many
of whom were either wounded or had surrendered. As part of their parallel political system,Maoists set up “people’s courts” in areas where they exerted significant
control to try cases and mete out punishment (including execution) for those perceived
to be working against the revolution. By April over 440 civilians believed to
be “enemies of the revolution” had been killed. The international community
hardly noticed as Nepal slid into full-scale civil war, with rebels holding large
swathes of territory and no serious attempts at international mediation.
In Burma, the level of international attention also was modest.The military government,
the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC), freed the country’s
elected leader and long-time dissident, Aung San Suu Kyi, from house arrest and
entered a modest political dialogue with her National League for Democracy
(NLD). Though expectations were raised by her release, there was virtually no
progress toward a political settlement between the government and opposition.
Few believed that the SPDC was prepared to make meaningful political concessions
to the NLD or hold new elections.
While the U.N. special rapporteur on human rights and his staff gained largely
unfettered access to a limited number of political prisoners and had some private
interviews with victims of Burma’s forced labor policies, and the International
Labor Organization set up a liaison office in Rangoon to monitor the government’s
commitments to end forced labor, the human rights situation remained grim. The
SPDC continued to conscript large numbers of child soldiers and the Burmese
army stepped up its brutal push into ethnic minority regions, forcibly and violently
relocating entire communities.
Attacks on religious minorities in Asia reached alarming proportions in 2002. In
India over two thousand people were killed in state-supported violence against
Muslims in the western state of Gujarat,which is led by the BJP. In Pakistan, the government’s
continuing support of U.S. efforts against al-Qaeda led to a backlash that
included targeted violence against foreign nationals and religious minorities, in
particular Christians.
Attacks against Hindus in Bangladesh escalated dramatically following the
October 2001 general election that brought the Bangladesh National Party (BNP)
to power in coalition with hard-line Islamic parties.Christians, Buddhists, and dissenting
Muslims were targeted as well, many for their perceived support of the
opposition Awami League.Hindu homes were looted, vandalized, and burned and
Hindu temples and sacred sites were destroyed. Scores of Hindu women and girls
were raped. In some cases, they were gang raped in front of their male relatives.
Hindus were also assaulted on the streets, in their homes, and at their workplaces.
Systematic attacks resulted in a mass migration of Hindus to India, and in particular
to the bordering state of Tripura. The government did little to prosecute or
investigate the violence.
REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY DISPLACED PERSONS
After the closure in the 1990s of the last refugee camps for Vietnamese and Cambodians,
many assumed that the refugees problems in Asia were a thing of the past.
The exodus of Vietnamese and Cambodians from repressive communist states garnered headlines and high-profile and sympathetic political attention,while Afghan
refugees in Iran and Pakistan were largely ignored.
In 2002, the reality was apparent to all. People from around Asia continued to
flee repressive regimes, conflicts, natural disasters, and economic deprivation.
Gone were the headlines and the sympathy.
By some accounts, there were as many as five million refugees and more than two
million people displaced within their own countries in various parts of Asia. By far
the largest number was Afghans.At the beginning of 2002 there were over two million
Afghan refugees in both Pakistan and Iran and over a million displaced persons
inside Afghanistan.After the fall of the Taliban, approximately 1.5 million refugees
returned in 2002, while an estimated six hundred thousand displaced people went
home. The flow overwhelmed UNHCR and international aid organizations, but
Afghans voted with their feet in support of the end of war and the Taliban.
As a result of the conflicts in various parts of Indonesia—in Aceh, the Moluccas,
Central Sulawesi and elsewhere—the number of internally displaced swelled to
more than one million. Communal conflicts, caused by a complex mix of factors,
sparked violence and caused Indonesians to flee from their homes in record numbers,
with little attention from the region or the broader international community
to their vulnerable status.
As a legacy of the 1999 violence in East Timor, approximately thirty thousand
Timorese refugees remained in insecure camps in Indonesian West Timor, facing
the decision of whether to return to East Timor or stay in Indonesia.As part of the
separation process between Indonesia and East Timor, cessation clauses were due
to be invoked in December 2002, leaving many Timorese who stayed in Indonesia
without a clear legal status. Indonesia also did little to resolve the cases of approximately
1,200 East Timorese children separated from their families in the chaos of
the 1999 violence in East Timor. Some of these children were living in coercive conditions
in Indonesia far from their families and required international assistance
with family reunification.
The military government in Burma continued to create a steady flow of refugees
with its attacks on border ethnic areas, its policy of forced labor, land expropriations,
and repression of political activity. Close to a half million refugees remained
in Thailand, while on the western border more than fifty thousand mostly Chin
refugees fled to India and up to two hundred thousand Rohingya refugees were in
Bangladesh. Inside Burma, there were over half a million displaced people. There
were worrying signs that the Thaksin government in Thailand was no longer willing
to allow refugees to take refuge on Thai soil and that, as is often threatened by
Thailand, it was considering forced repatriation. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) continued its longstanding policy of weak intervention
with both Burmese and Thai authorities.
The violence in Gujarat meant that more than one hundred thousand people
were displaced from their homes in India. Residing in over one hundred makeshift
camps throughout the state, displaced people received little relief and rehabilitation
support from the state. At year’s-end, most camps had been closed, though many
people did not feel safe returning to their homes.
In 2002, a new refugee flow began out of the central highlands of Vietnam into Cambodia. Approximately one thousand indigenous Montagnards fled harsh
reprisals after organizing demonstrations against land expropriations and limits on
religious freedom and in favor of regional independence.As is so often the case, corruption,
particularly in relation to land grabs, helped to fuel discontent.Cambodia
allowed some asylum seekers to be processed for resettlement in the United States,
but violated its international obligation by returning hundreds more to Vietnam,
where some were given lengthy prison terms for illegal migration.
The world also began to understand the dimensions of the North Korean
refugee crisis.Because of the lack of access to North Korea and the difficulty of conducting
research in China, estimates ranged from ten thousand to three hundred
thousand North Koreans who had fled repression and starvation to reach China.
There were several high profile cases of North Koreans trying to enter diplomatic
compounds in Beijing but being forcibly removed.However, all who made it inside
the compounds were eventually resettled to South Korea via third countries.
Though China is a party to the Refugee Convention, refugees were frequently
picked up by Chinese police and returned according to a bilateral treaty with North
Korea. Some Chinese villagers who offered housing to refugees were punished.
There were reports that some of those forcibly returned were killed, tortured or
imprisoned. Because of North Korea’s severe punishment of individuals who flee
the country, even North Koreans who flee in search of humanitarian assistance
because of famine often become refugees sur place, since once in China they possess
a well-founded fear that they would suffer persecution if forced to return.
Nowhere was the lack of sympathy for refugees more apparent than in Australia.
Though Australia long ago abandoned its “whites only” immigration policy and
accepted a steady flow of immigrants from Asia, in 2002 Prime Minister John
Howard continued to play the “immigration card”that had helped him win re-election
the previous year.Australia continued to deny entry to asylum seekers who did
not apply for entry through established channels. Instead, it detained and forcibly
transferred those who tried to enter by sea, mainly Afghans and Iraqis, to other
countries in the Pacific (the Republic ofNauru and Papua New Guinea),or expelled
them to the edge of Indonesian waters. It effectively succeeded in closing its coastal
borders to all unauthorized entrants, including bona fide asylum seekers.
Australia also unilaterally narrowed the definition of a refugee under the U.N.
Refugee Convention and removed the possibility of judicial review in nearly all
immigration cases. It created a new temporary protection visa regime intended to
penalize and deter refugees who did not come directly to Australia from their
country of origin or who failed to apply for resettlement into Australia from their
first country of asylum—so-called secondary movers. It treated Indonesia as if it
were a “safe third country” even though Indonesia was not a signatory of the
Refugee Convention and had no national laws to allow the processing, protection,
or settlement of refugees. During 2002, Australia did accept a number of asylum
seekers in Indonesia and the Pacific detention facilities for resettlement, but it continued
to deny that it had any special responsibility for resettlement of the caseload
created by its non-admission policies.
Australia’s closed-door policy was implemented in tandem with a policy of
mandatory detention of all asylum seekers who arrived without authorization.
More than two thousand people remained in detention under extremely harsh conditions
in remote locations such as the Woomera Detention Center in South Australia.
This practice, which allowed for no review by a court or other independent
body, violated the fundamental norm against arbitrary and unlawful detention. It
also disregarded U.N. guidance stipulating that asylum seekers should only be
detained in exceptional circumstances. In violation of the U.N. Convention on the
Rights of the Child, Australia held hundreds of children, including many unaccompanied
by their parents, in detention centers. The U.N. Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention and a representative of the U.N. high commissioner for
human rights both visited Australia during 2002 and expressed outrage at the arbitrary
and brutal nature of the mandatory detention regime there.
ACCOUNTABILITY FOR PAST CRIMES
The newest Asian country, East Timor, ended Asia’s status as the only region that
had never had a U.N. or domestic judicial process set up to address genocide, war
crimes, or crimes against humanity.This was not for lack of candidates.Mao’s “cultural
revolution” in the late 1960s and early 1970s, Golkar’s bloody purge of alleged
Indonesian communist party members in the late 1960s, American carpet bombing
and napalm drops in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos in the late 1960s and early
1970s, Pol Pot’s reign of terror in Cambodia in the late 1970s, and the behavior of
Soviet forces and local warlords in Afghanistan in the 1980s and 1990s were all
appropriate subjects of inquiry.
East Timor could make a second claim to victimhood: between 1975-99 tens of
thousands of East Timor’s population of eight hundred thousand were killed by
Indonesian forces or died from disease or starvation as Indonesia attempted to
defeat separatists led by the man who would in 2002 become the first president of
East Timor, Xanana Gusmao. But there was no sign of international support for
addressing those crimes. For this reason, and because of fears that Indonesia could
retaliate with measures that would destroy East Timor’s economy, some Timorese
leaders backed away from the idea of accountability. In late 2002, Gusmao—who
was held prisoner by Indonesia for more than seven years—announced his opposition
to the Dili court’s “Special Panel for Serious Crimes,”which was set up by the
U.N. to conduct trials in alleged cases of crimes against humanity and other serious
crimes committed in East Timor between January 1 and October 25, 1999.Gusmao
objected that the special panel did not address the more extensive crimes of the previous
twenty-four years.
The other piece of the accountability puzzle for East Timor, prosecutions in
Indonesia, continued to be a complete failure. To head off action by the Security
Council to create an ad hoc tribunal for the crimes committed in 1999 by its military
forces and their agents, Indonesia promised to undertake investigations and
trials in Jakarta of senior military officials and members of its colonial administration
in East Timor. But prosecutors failed to indict the most senior figures in the
military. Instead, many were promoted and appointed to sensitive posts elsewhere
in Indonesia. In the few cases filed, charges were brought for failing to stop the crimes rather than for planning and committing them. At this writing, only one
prosecution had resulted in a conviction, and the sentence was only three years.
Though Indonesia had not acted in good faith in its dealings with the Security
Council, the Council showed no appetite for revisiting the subject, particularly
when the United States and other U.N. members, such as Australia,were singularly
focused on gaining Indonesian cooperation in the war on terror.
Perhaps the most compelling case for accountability in the world continued to
be Cambodia. Between 1975 and 1979, approximately two million Cambodians
(out of a population of eight million) were killed or died from starvation or disease.
But the United States, China, and their allies decided it was more important to
remove the Vietnamese army that dislodged the Khmer Rouge than to pursue justice.
The price for Chinese support for a peace agreement was the inclusion of the
Khmer Rouge as a party and no mention of Khmer Rouge crimes or justice for its
victims. Finally, in 1997, the U.N. adopted a resolution calling for accountability.
But while Prime Minister Hun Sen initially asked the U.N. for an international tribunal,
when a U.N.-appointed group of experts proposed this, he refused, citing
national sovereignty. In 1998, he stunned the country by embracing Khmer Rouge
leaders Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea and announcing that former Foreign Minister
Ieng Sary would not be prosecuted in any circumstances. Negotiations proceeded,
however, with the U.N. agreeing for the first time to a “mixed tribunal” in
Cambodia made up of a combination of international and local judges and prosecutors.
But in 2002 negotiations broke down. The U.N. withdrew, citing irreconcilable
differences over provisions in the law. The real issue was a determination by the
U.N. that Hun Sen’s government was not acting in good faith and did not actually
want a tribunal. It also became clear to the U.N. that, given the regular interference
by the Cambodian executive in judicial matters, it would be impossible to ensure
that a mixed tribunal could act with sufficient independence to ensure fair trials or
make the process credible.
While the U.N. is regularly and properly criticized for weakness on justice issues,
its decision on Cambodia demonstrated a commitment to principles over expediency.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan came under serious criticism and pressure
from U.N. members over his decision to withdraw. The United States, France,
Japan, and Australia pressed for symbolic trials, both because they misunderstood
Cambodian public opinion, which was strongly in favor of an international tribunal,
and out of a desire to improve relations with the Cambodian government. The
suspicion among many Cambodians was that other countries were only willing to
offer second-class justice for a country that no longer had geopolitical significance.
But if any country deserved genuine justice it was Cambodia, which had been
plunged into war and devastation by the decisions of outside powers. And it is
worth remembering that more people died during the reign of the Khmer Rouge
than the combined total for Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia, Sierra Leone, and East
Timor—the four countries for which, at this writing, some form of international
justice mechanism had been created. If justice for gross violations of human rights
is ever to become the norm in Asia, the place to start is with international standards
in Cambodia.
HIV/AIDS
According to government and U.N. figures, there are now more people living
with HIV/AIDS in Asia and the Pacific than in any other region except sub-Saharan
Africa. In June, UNAIDS reported its estimate of about 6.6 million Asians living
with HIV/AIDS, a number it said was rising dramatically. In India, the
government clung to an estimate of 3.97 million people living with HIV/AIDS,
essentially unchanged from its estimates for the last several years, a figure widely
disputed by experts both in and outside the country who noted that the epidemic
was likely to be growing very fast there. China reported a rise of more than 67 percent
in HIV infections in 2002, but the absolute numbers of persons living with
HIV/AIDS could be considered only a rough estimate in the absence of scientifically
sound prevalence surveys.
Many thousands of Chinese citizens in Henan province were infected when they
sold unscreened blood at state-sponsored collection centers that reinjected pooled
blood products into donors.
Indonesia and Papua New Guinea also reported dramatic increases in infection
rates.The high cost of medicines to treat HIV/AIDS meant that only a tiny fraction
(an estimated thirty thousand) of the millions of infected Asians had access to
treatment.
Despite the threat that HIV/AIDS posed to countries in Asia, and to emerging
economies in particular, most governments in the region not only remained reluctant
to admit the dimensions of the disease but also did not undertake the swift and
comprehensive action necessary to prevent transmission and provide care for those
already affected. In India, AIDS activists faced police harassment and even abuse.
In China, prominent AIDS activist Dr.Wan Yan Hai was detained for a month for
circulating a government report on the disease via e-mail. In Burma, where
HIV/AIDS infection rates are believed to be extremely high, the state had yet to
develop a national plan to address the epidemic.
Thailand and Cambodia was exceptions in the region: In Thailand, national
prevention programs helped to reduce the rate of transmission by tens of thousands.
Nonetheless, in August 2001, Thailand’s Health Ministry announced that
HIV/AIDS had become the leading cause of death in the country. In Cambodia, the
state promoted condom use and initiated national policies to counter stigma and
discrimination, although that did not prevent Cambodia from having one of the
highest rates of growth in transmission in Asia.
The rapid spread of HIV/AIDS was fuelled by many factors, including the lack
of national policies on discrimination (needed because of the widespread perception
of the disease as a sign of moral degeneracy) and the unequal status of men and
women,which forced women into unprotected sex both with partners and as commercial
sex workers (often as the result of deceit or being sold or forced into prostitution).
Across Asia, infection rates were highest amongst the most politically
marginalized groups: drug users, sex workers, men who have sex with men, and
ethnic minorities. Because of discriminatory treatment, members of these groups
were often forced underground, lacked access to information and adequate health services, and were subject to police harassment or criminalization. People living
with HIV/AIDS in Asia whose status became known by others risked not only community
harassment, but also being fired by employers or denied treatment in hospitals.
In China, some uninfected children orphaned by AIDS were reportedly
expelled from schools in Henan. The lack of freedom of association in China,Vietnam,
Laos, and elsewhere made it difficult and even dangerous for victims of these
abuses to organize openly to aid one another, to educate others about the disease,
or to seek redress.
AFGHANISTAN
2002 was a landmark year for human rights in Afghanistan. For the first time in
over twenty years, Afghans had realistic hopes for stable peace, legitimate governance,
increased development assistance, and new respect for human rights norms.
At the same time however, ongoing security problems in many parts of the country
continued to threaten many Afghans, especially vulnerable populations such as
women and girls, orphans, widows, displaced persons, the disabled, and ethnic
minorities.
The United States-led military campaign against al-Qaeda and the Taliban government
led to the collapse of the Taliban regime in late November 2001. On
December 5, 2001,Afghan representatives in Bonn, Germany, signed an agreement
outlining a power sharing arrangement and the plans for the creation of a new constitution
and democratic government by 2004. A small international peacekeeping
force was created to patrol Kabul, the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF), headed by the United Kingdom and later Turkey. An interim authority,
headed by Chairman Hamid Karzai, was sworn in on December 22, 2001, and ruled
for six months. In June 2002, an emergency loya jirga (“grand council”) convened
in Kabul under the Bonn Agreement and elected Chairman Karzai as president of
a second transitional government set to lead Afghanistan until 2004, at which time
general elections were to be held. Diplomatic relations between Afghanistan and
most nations were restored, United Nations agencies were reopened, and international
and developmental organizations were granted new access to help Afghanistan
rebuild after years of war and poor governance.
The fall of the Taliban regime allowed numerous military warlords to return to
power, many of them former commanders during the anti-Soviet “jihad” of the
1980s who later became local strongmen during the early 1990s.As the Taliban collapsed,
many of these warlords (who as allies of the U.S.-led coalition had received
significant military and financial support) seized local areas they previously ruled
and took control of the local political and security apparatuses. Some of these warlords
were implicated in alleged war crimes committed this year against Taliban
and al-Qaeda prisoners, reprisals against Pashtun villagers in the north and west of
the country, as well as other human rights violations.Many of these warlords also manipulated the selection of representatives for the loya jirga process during May
and June (or attended themselves) and generally intimidated the populations
under their control throughout the year.
Major commanders in the northeast of the country, many of whom fought with
the late anti-Taliban commander Ahmed Shah Massoud and were members of the
Jamiat-e Islami party wing of the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance (or United Front),
managed to secure key ministries in the Kabul-based government, although they
were not necessary firmly allied with President Karzai.Other regional leaders, such
as Gul Agha Sherzai in the south, Ismail Khan in the west, and General Rashid Dostum
in the north,were ostensibly allied with Kabul, but were either independent of
or quietly hostile towards Karzai, fracturing the sense of national unity created by
the Bonn Agreement.Tensions between President Karzai and some of his own ministers—
especially the Jamiat ministers—also raised worries about Karzai’s authority
outside the capital.
Security and protection problems were to be expected in Afghanistan’s postconflict
context; still, in a larger sense, numerous opportunities to improve the
human rights situation in Afghanistan—especially for women—were missed, both
by the Afghan government and the international community. The international
community, and some Afghan leaders, squandered chances to sideline military
commanders, disarm troops, and pressure local leaders to ensure human rights
protections. Generally, not enough attention was paid to making human rights
concerns integral to international and U.S.-led assistance and development efforts.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Human rights conditions generally improved in Afghanistan in 2002, but even
with the Taliban no longer in power, Afghanistan continued to suffer from serious
security problems.Warlords who sprang up in the Taliban’s place committed serious
human rights abuses against civilians and Taliban combatants. In many areas,
women and girls faced the same security problems that existed under the Taliban,
and sometimes the same government-enforced restrictions. Returning refugees
and internally displaced persons faced problems ranging from insecurity to lack of
basic humanitarian assistance. There were also a significant number of civilian
casualties from the U.S. military campaign, some of which may have been the result
of violations of international humanitarian law.
The End of Taliban Restrictions
The end of the Taliban regime was the most notable human rights development
in Afghanistan over the last year.Afghans did not face the widespread governmental
prohibitions on dress, conduct, employment, and religious activities that the
Taliban’s religious police, the Ministry for the Suppression of Vice and the Promotion
ofVirtue (“Vice and Virtue”), had enforced through draconian summary punishments.
Gone also were threats and arbitrary harassment by Taliban troops and
officials, and general insecurity in areas close to conflict lines.Women in most areas were free again to work, attend school and university, and walk in public without
the encompassing burqa (although, as explained below, many chose to continue
wearing them because of their fear of governmental instability and lingering fundamentalism;
in some areas, local government officials forced women to continue
wearing burqas).
Resurgent Warlordism
In many areas of Afghanistan, local commanders and their troops—warlords—
intimidated local populations; extorted money from businesses, farmers, traders,
and ethnic minorities; manipulated elections processes during the loya jirga,
through threats and violence; enforced in some areas Taliban-era restrictions on
female employment and education; and were implicated in possible war crimes
against civilians as well as Taliban and al-Qaeda troops.Commanders in most areas
enjoyed almost complete impunity to harass and intimidate local populations, and
to silence and sideline opponents.
In the last months of 2001 and first months of 2002, there was a wave of attacks
on Pashtun civilians in the north of the country, seemingly because they shared the
same ethnicity as the Taliban leadership. Specifically, troops associated with the
predominately Uzbek party Junbish-i Milli-yi Islami-yi, led by Rashid Dostum, the
predominately Tajik party Jamiat-e Islami, led in the north by Ustad Atta Mohammad,
and the predominately Hazara party Hizb-i Wahdat, led in the north by
Mohammad Mohaqiq, were all implicated in systematic and widespread looting
and violence in almost every province under their separate control, almost all of it
directed at Pashtun villagers. In scores of villages, homes were destroyed, possessions
were taken, and men and boys were beaten and in some cases killed. As discussed
in the women’s rights section below, there were several reports of rapes of
girls and women. In Chimtal district near Mazar-e Sharif, and in Balkh province
generally, both Hizb-i Wahdat and Jamiat forces were particularly violent: in one
village, Bargah-e Afghani, Hizb-i Wahdat troops killed thirty-seven civilians, the
largest known intentional killing of civilians since the fall of the Taliban. In other
villages, Junbish forces conducted thorough looting, in some cases torturing villagers
until they “confessed”as to where their valuables were hidden. East ofMazare
Sharif, in Baghlan and Kunduz provinces, Jamiat forces attacked several Pashtun
areas, severely beating civilians and extorting food, money, and other valuables.
Many Pashtuns fled from these areas, as well as other villages in the north, and went
to Pakistan or congregated in displacement camps in the west and south of the
country. The United Nations also investigated reports in November 2002 that Junbish
forces may have tortured and summarily executed witnesses to alleged killings
of Taliban prisoners in late 2001.
In the west of the country, forces associated with Governor Ismail Khan were
implicated in abuses against Pashtuns and other political opponents. Human
Rights Watch documented that Ismail Khan’s troops were involved in numerous
attacks against civilians in several districts in and around Herat city. In the south of
the country, near Kandahar, several local warlords were accused of extorting money
from local villagers, and troops in and around the city were repeatedly accused of stealing money, cars, motorcycles, and other valuables from civilians, often beating
them in the process.
Lingering Extremist Fundamentalism
In various areas around the country, and in Kabul city itself, there were troubling
signs that some Islamic fundamentalist groups were continuing to exert power,
intimidating and controlling populations, especially in the south and west of the
country. In the south, self-appointed Vice and Virtue police in Zabul province
intimidated women, teachers, journalists, and loya jirga candidates, and burned
down small shops selling video movies, audio cassettes, and movie posters. In western
Herat, governor Ismail Khan ordered a number of announcements on television
and radio about proper Islamic conduct, including instructions for all females
to dress in Islamic clothes (taken to mean the burqa or chadori) and not to associate
with men in public, and for men to refrain from wearing western clothes. Ismail
Khan’s troops began harassing women not dressed in the burqa or chadori—a more
restrictive version of the hijab worn in neighboring Iran.Herat’s police also began
arresting unrelated men and women seen together; in several cases,men were taken
to Herat’s jail and beaten by police troops; women and girls were taken to a hospital,
where police ordered doctors to perform forced medical checks to determine if
the women and girls had had recent sexual intercourse. There were also cases of
youth arrested for drinking alcohol being shaved and paraded around the city, and
made to “confess” publicly on local Herat television.
In Kabul, during the loya jirga, several conservative strongmen intimidated delegates,
suggesting that if they spoke on Islamic issues or the Koran, they would “face
the consequences.” Sima Simar, a member of the first interim government, was
accused of blasphemy, and told to appear in a court to face the charges (later
dropped).Through 2002, there were reports of police forces storming wedding parties,
insisting that playing music was “illegal,” and arresting and sometimes beating
musicians. Reconstituted Vice and Virtue squads patrolled Kabul, intimidating
women without burqas and men wearing Western clothes.
The effects of these instances of enduring fundamentalism was difficult to
gauge,but may have contributed to the general trend among women, even in Kabul,
to resist removing their burqas in public, although many women had not worn the
burqa before the Taliban regime. Resurgent fundamentalism helped sideline Sima
Samar from President Karzai’s cabinet, and affected Karzai’s approach to women’s
rights issues. It has also had a significant impact on the redevelopment of women’s
institutions in areas in the south and west of the country.
Loya Jirga
Under the Bonn Agreement, a special commission of the Interim Authority was
set up in early 2002 to convene a loya jirga—or grand council—in Kabul in June.
The loya jirga was charged with choosing a head of state for a second interim government,
approving proposals for this second government, and appointing its key
ministers.
The selection process for the loya jirga took place throughout May and June.
During the first stage, local authorities were supposed to choose a set of candidates
at the local level, using a “traditional manner” for selecting representatives (in other
words, using traditional local councils known as shuras); during the second stage,
these candidates were to travel to regional centers to vote in a regular ballot to
choose from among themselves a smaller group of final representatives who would
attend the loya jirga in the capital, Kabul. According to the Special Procedures
adopted for the convening of the loya jirga, the first and second stage elections were
to be seen as “free and fair” by regional loya jirga commission observers; otherwise
the commission could void the local elections, and appoint delegates themselves.
All concerned parties agreed that the overall aim of the loya jirga, as articulated by
Security Council resolution 1378, was the creation of a “broad-based,multi-ethnic
and fully representative”Afghan government.The first and second stages of the loya
jirga began in May, and the loya jirga itself took place from June 10-21.
That the loya jirga was even possible, and that it did in fact occur, was an important
political breakthrough for Afghanistan.After twenty-three years of war, many
Afghans were understandably overjoyed that leaders were gathering, and that political
decisions were being made through “exchange of words, rather than exchange
of bullets,” as one delegate put it. To many observers, the possibility of the meeting
ending in deadlock, chaos, or violence was very real, and there was significant relief
that it did not.
Still, there were serious shortcomings with the loya jirga. Despite the promise of
a partially democratic or at least loosely representative political event, the loya jirga
selection process and meeting in June was marred by manipulations and abuses by
Afghan warlords,who interfered with the decision-making of more legitimate representatives.
At the first and second stages of the selection process, Human Rights
Watch documented several cases in which local warlords had imposed themselves
into decision-making and voting processes, directly or indirectly intimidating voters
and delegates through threats and the heavy presence of armed troops.Many of
the delegates selected to the loya jirga were little more than puppets of the local
commanders, and the delegates who were legitimate representatives of Afghan
society were in many cases afraid to speak or vote freely during the loya jirga.
In almost every province in the west of the country, Ismail Khan intimidated,
arrested, or beat loya jirga candidates and their supporters. Pashtun representatives
from several areas accused Ismail Khan of arresting Pashtuns standing for election
to the loya jirga, threatening and beating most of them. Supporters of the former
king of Afghanistan—Zahir Shah—were also intimidated. Just before the loya jirga,
Ismail Khan arrested Rafiq Shahir, a prominent member of the Herat professional
shura, a local civil society group comprised of doctors, teachers, artists, and intellectuals,
holding him for several days, inflicting severe beatings, and threatening
him not to participate. In another province under Ismail Khan’s control, three candidates
were killed during the selection process. Human Rights Watch confirmed
that one of these killings was carried out by commanders loyal to Ismail Khan.
In the south, Human Rights Watch also documented a pattern of intimidation
by local leaders that resulted in several cancelled elections and, in some cases, led to
delegates withdrawing their nominations.
Throughout the country, warlords and regional military commanders were
selected for the loya jirga. General Rashid Dostum, the deputy defense minister in
the interim authority and regional leader of the north of Afghanistan, managed to
have himself elected to the loya jirga despite the fact he was serving as a military
commander and was accused of being complicit in human rights violations; both
factors made him ineligible for the loya jirga under the agreed upon procedures.
Other governors also attended, in violation of the loya jirga procedures, including
the governor of Kandahar,Gul Agha Sherzai, the governor of Nangahar,Haji Abdul
Qadir, and Ismail Khan. Zalmay Khalilzad, the U.S. special envoy to Afghanistan,
and Lakhdar Brahimi, the special representative of U.N. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, pressured the Afghan loya jirga commission to allow regional governors
and military commanders to attend.
Many delegates and participants in the loya jirga process were so afraid of local
warlords that they refused to speak openly with researchers from Human Rights
Watch. U.N. observers confirmed that a climate of fear was pervasive throughout
the elections.
At the loya jirga itself, Human Rights Watch documented more problems,
including a widespread and systematic pattern of intimidation and threats by warlords
and regional leaders; covert and overt surveillance by intelligence agents allied
with certain parties; and a general failure by the loya jirga commission, relevant
U.N. officials, and other international actors to enforce provisions in the Bonn
Agreement and the loya jirga procedures that were meant to sideline Afghan military
leaders and Afghans with records of serious human rights abuses. Numerous
loya jirga delegates complained to Human Rights Watch that they received explicit
threats from warlords warning them not to vote in certain ways or interfere with the
backdoor political dealing going on between them.Some delegates were threatened
several times. One delegate was threatened for giving a speech about women’s
rights in the Koran. The husband of the only female candidate for president was
threatened by intelligence agents allied with the Jamiat party. There were many
instances of intelligence agents making threats to delegates who wished to speak in
debate, and many instances of agents taking photographs and writing the names of
delegates who spoke openly about their frustrations with the process.
In addition, a general sense of chaos and poor management marred the loya jirga
throughout its proceedings. The voting for Hamid Karzai’s presidency proceeded
by secret ballot and was largely uncontroversial (although some delegates were disappointed
by the seemingly U.S.-imposed arrangement to have the former Afghan
king, Zahir Shah, withdraw as a candidate). Later votes taken on the arrangement
of the transitional government and its key personnel, however, were highly irregular:
there was no debate or proper vote on the composition of the next transitional
government (instead, Karzai nominated a cabinet which was approved by a vague
“voice” vote) and the loya jirga never approved any plan or proposal for the design
of the government.The loya jirga chairman,Mohammad Ismail Qasimyar, failed to
exercise effective control over the proceedings, and the United Nations failed to
assist the loya jirga commission in preparing for a more orderly meeting.Warlords
were handily able to manipulate the process, and as a result, most legitimate participants
were thoroughly disillusioned with it.
At the close of the loya jirga, President Karzai invited delegates who had been
threatened to report abuses to his office directly, but at the time of this writing, no
clear action had been taken to hold abusers accountable.
Continuing Insecurity
Although some of the worst violence during 2002 took place in the first few
months of the year, insecurity plagued most of the country throughout the year.
Local armed conflict continued in several areas of Afghanistan. Fighting between
rival commanders occurred in the provinces of Balkh, Jowzjan, Samangan, Sar-e
Pol, Bamiyan, Paktia, Paktika, Khost, Uruzgon, Hilmand, Farah, and Herat. As
described below, incidents of violence retarded refugee return programs, and led to
some displacement—especially from the north. Hundreds of civilians around the
country were killed and injured in the ongoing violence.
On February 14, 2002,Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism Abdul Rahman
was killed during a riot at the Kabul airport.Vice President Haji Abdul Qadir, a former
mujahidin military commander from Jalalabad, was assassinated by gunmen
in Kabul on July 6, 2002.
Security deteriorated further in late 2002.There was an assassination attempt on
President Karzai in early September in Kandahar, on the same day a large bomb was
detonated in Kabul, killing approximately twenty-six people. A few days later, over
ten civilians were killed in fighting in Khost, during fighting that began after a
bomb was detonated in the capital of that province. A month later, several civilians
were killed during a conflict near the Shindand airbase in the west. Scores of civilians
were also killed in violence in October and November in central and northern
provinces.
Throughout the year, humanitarian aid workers were attacked or shot at near
Mazar-e Sharif,Herat, and Kandahar cities.Travelers between major cities reported
that extortion, robbery, and harassment—almost all by armed troops—regularly
occurred on most roads. Trucks and buses were “taxed” repeatedly at military
checkpoints; local minorities often were forced to pay more than others. People
who challenged the troops risked being pulled from cars, beaten, and arrested.
Women and Girls’ Rights
Many women and girls in Afghanistan benefited from immediate relaxations of
Taliban-era prohibitions, and some women even secured some important governmental
posts at the local and national level. However, because of lingering insecurity
and recurring threats by fundamentalist groups, many female Afghans
continued to fear for their security, and, as noted above, continued to wear the
body-encompassing burqa, which Taliban police had forced women to wear under
threat of imprisonment and beatings.Although many women and girls returned to
workplaces and schools, millions remained marginalized in Afghanistan because of
continuing discrimination and harassment by governmental and non-governmental
actors, unable to secure their livelihoods, educations, or basic human rights.The
situation was especially bad in the west and south.
As detailed above, after the fall of the Taliban, the north of Afghanistan was
gripped by acute general lawlessness and insecurity, factional rivalry between Junbish,
Jamiat, and Hizb-i Wahdat troops, and retaliatory violence against Pashtun
civilians. As part of the general violence against Pashtuns, the forces noted above
perpetrated sexual violence against Pashtun women and girls, in some cases, gangraping
all the female members of a family, including girls as young as fourteen.
Women and girls of other ethnicities also experienced sexual violence in Mazare
Sharif, in northern Afghanistan. Although in May and June 2002 attacks against
ethnic Pashtuns decreased, some women living in camps near Mazar-e Sharif for
internally displaced persons (IDPs) faced increased sexual abuse, especially after
the camp was militarized by Jamiat forces.
Afghan women and girls in many areas also continued to face threats and violence
for not adhering to former Taliban edicts that had previously strictly controlled
their behavior, dress, expression, and movement.After schools reopened in
March 2002, women and girls in Zabul and Kandahar provinces in southern
Afghanistan felt unsafe walking to school because of the continued presence of
gunmen and soldiers allegedly aligned with the Taliban, some of whom would
threaten or attack them.In October, fundamentalists destroyed several girls schools
in the center and east of the country—either burning or rocketing the schools when
classes were not in session. In the west of the country, women were instructed not
to work or ride in cars with foreign men; some Afghan women working with international
agencies in Herat were harassed and intimidated, told to lower their
burqas, and not to show their face. Through October and November, the situation
for women’s rights in the city ofHerat deteriorated further: several women and girls
in Herat observed walking or driving with unrelated men were arrested and taken
to hospitals, where troops ordered doctors to perform forced gynecological checkups
to determine whether they had had recent sexual intercourse.
These threats and acts of violence denied women and girls the opportunity to
participate effectively at all levels in public life at a critical moment in the history of
Afghanistan.As the loya jirga got underway in June,many women felt compelled to
restrict their participation.The ongoing abuses were especially disappointing given
the context. Historically, loya jirgas have been largely unrepresentative of women,
since most delegates are chosen from male-dominated shuras. But at the June
assembly, 160 women were guaranteed seats out of 1,500 designated seats, and
women also had the option of being elected to non-reserved seats. One hundred
and eighty women delegates were actually present at the loya jirga, a significant step
forward for women’s political representation. However, a number of the women
delegates, such as some of the twenty-eight women from southern Afghanistan,
faced threats against participating in the elections. The husband of a candidate in
the south was told to make his wife withdraw, or they would be killed. As noted
above, Sima Samar, the former women’s minister, faced threats during and after the
loya jirga from men aligned with the Jamiat faction and officials in government.
Many other women were threatened not to “make trouble.”
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
At the beginning of 2002, Afghanistan continued to have one of the largest displaced
populations in the world:well over four million refugees were displaced outside
their country, mostly living in Iran and Pakistan, and over one million were
displaced within Afghanistan. As a result of the Taliban’s demise, the end of civil
conflict in many areas, good security conditions in major urban areas, and expectations
of better economic prospects attached to the increased international
involvement, hundreds of thousands of refugees returned in late 2001 and early
2002, mostly from Pakistan, but also from Iran, Europe, and the United States.
On March 1, 2002, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and Afghan authorities started a facilitated return program for refugees
from Pakistan, and on April 3, UNHCR and the governments of Iran and Afghanistan
signed a tripartite agreement for the voluntary repatriation of Afghan
refugees from Iran. Returning refugees from both countries were provided with
transportation and an assistance package from UNHCR and the World Food Program
(WFP), including a small cash grant to cover transport costs on arrival in
Afghanistan, and basic food and non-food items. UNHCR and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) also provided transport and basic assistance to
internally displaced persons wishing to return to their homes. UNHCR estimated
in mid-November 2002 that 1.7 million refugees had returned to Afghanistan in
2002, although it acknowledged that many returnees, especially from Pakistan,
were abusing repatriation programs: returning to Afghanistan, receiving assistance,
and then leaving once again.
At the same time, there were credible reports from Iran and Pakistan of forced
returns and deportations as well as “push factors” such as police harassment and
restrictions on employment rights and health and education services.
Refugees were returning to a country ravaged by decades of civil war and conflict,
destruction from the U.S. bombing campaign, insecure conditions in some
parts of the country, and the continuation of devastating drought in the south.
Basic infrastructure and services were essentially non-existent outside urban areas.
The homes and property of many refugees and displaced persons were destroyed,
and many returnees had absolutely no resources with which to resume rural life.
Most returnees faced a grim reality in their former towns and villages—no shelter,
food, roads, schools, health clinics, effective security, law enforcement, or employment
opportunities.As a result, although well over one million Afghan refugees in
Iran and Pakistan decided to return to Afghanistan in 2002,many did not return to
their original homes, or the homes of family members, but instead chose to reside
in urban areas such as Kabul, Jalalabad, and Mazar-e Sharif.Many more remained
in Pakistan and Iran, reluctant to return to areas in Afghanistan still suffering from
insecurity or severe drought. Many refugees continued to fear persecution at the
hands of local commanders in several areas of Afghanistan, such as former government
officials, journalists, political opponents, and critics of the current authorities.
Many residents of Mazar-e Sharif and Herat had to flee to Kabul or abroad to
escape political persecution. On August 6, 2002 UNHCR estimated that some eight
hundred thousand Afghans continued to be internally displaced in Afghanistan.As of mid-November,well over one million refugees remain in Pakistan and well over
one million remain in Iran.
The United Nations and Afghan government had not anticipated returns on this
scale.The Afghan authorities,UNHCR,other U.N. and humanitarian agencies,and
donors were seriously ill-equipped to cope with the scale and speed of the repatriation.
Agencies’ budgets were overstretched, which prevented UNHCR and others
from offering adequate assistance.Monitoring of returnee sustainability and security
was slow to start, and was insufficient in many areas.
There were also budgetary shortfalls for U.N. agencies whose work impacted
repatriation programming.When the fifteen-nation Afghanistan Support Group
met in Geneva in July 2002, the chair noted a budgetary shortfall of U.S.$777 million
for reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts in Afghanistan; at the same meeting
UNHCR announced that 25 percent of its budget had not been met and it still
required U.S.$70 million for the remainder of the year. These shortfalls in reconstruction
and development funds exacerbated the “overstretch” problems. At the
end ofMay 2002, the IOM announced that it was forced to suspend temporarily its
internal transport network for returning refugees from Iran and internally displaced
persons due to lack of funding (it was able to resume limited transport for
returning internally displaced persons in June). The World Food Program, which
supplies food to returning refugees in many areas, also warned that it would face
food shortages by November if donors did not step up to the mark. Development
programs—which could have a significant impact on returnee trends—were
stalled for most of the year.
Apart from the lack of funding and unmet humanitarian needs, returnees also
faced serious ongoing security problems throughout Afghanistan.As documented
earlier in this chapter, there were continuing hostilities between warlords in the
north and west of the country which made it impossible for humanitarian agencies
to operate in certain locations; there were also many areas in which lawlessness and
abuses by warlords’ forces made it impossible for refugees to return to their homes.
In addition, in some areas in the north and west of the country, fighting, political
oppression, and ethnically-based abuses were in fact still causing displacement:
according to UNHCR, roughly fifteen thousand Pashtun Afghans fled areas in the
west because of harassment by forces associated with Ismail Khan;more than thirty
thousand Pashtuns fled the north of the country because of abuses by forces there.
The threat of continued fighting, criminality, and political instability slowed
repatriation in many areas—especially areas outside of Kabul. General insecurity
repeatedly led to the temporary suspension of return programs. On July 2,UNHCR
announced that it was suspending returns of internally displaced persons from the
western province of Herat to Faryab and Samangan provinces and to parts of Balkh
province in northern Afghanistan, because of the escalating violence and worsening
human rights situation in northern and central Afghanistan. The gang-rape of
an international aid worker close to Mazar-e Sharif in early June and a series of
other attacks on aid agencies in the north around the same time prompted humanitarian
relief organizations to call for an extension of the ISAF and caused some to
threaten to withdraw altogether if security conditions did not improve. In September
of 2002, UNHCR suspended some operations in the west of the country, after a shooting incident at the Iran-Afghan border in which a UNHCR staff person was
almost hit.Refugees themselves hesitated to repatriate to several areas; for instance,
near Khost and in some places in Bamiyan, there were almost no refugee returns in
2002.
Landmines
On September 11, 2002, President Hamid Karzai deposited Afghanistan’s
instruments of accession to the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty with the United Nations,
making the country the 126th state party to this historic agreement. The accession
followed a pledge made during the first international mine action conference to
take place in Kabul in late July 2002:“Building a Peaceful Future for Afghanistan:A
Total Ban on Anti-Personnel Mines.” The move was likely to boost funding and
other international support for mine action programs in this heavily mine-affected
country.
Demining operations were virtually brought to a halt following September 11,
2001. The mine action infrastructure suffered greatly during the subsequent military
conflict, as some warring factions looted offices, seized vehicles and equipment,
and assaulted local staff. Approximately 80 percent of the demining
equipment for the southern region of Afghanistan was destroyed during October
and November 2001, mostly in a U.S. air strike on a U.N. compound near Kandahar
which was occupied temporarily by Taliban troops. Four deminers and two
mine detection dogs were also killed in errant U.S. air strikes in Kabul. Military
operations created additional threats to the population, especially unexploded U.S.
cluster bomblets, ammunition scattered from storage depots hit by air strikes, and
mines and booby-traps newly laid by Northern Alliance, Taliban, and al-Qaeda
fighters.
A funding shortfall for the mine action program in Afghanistan prior to September
11, 2001 had threatened to curtail mine action operations. After October
2001, about U.S.$64 million was pledged for mine action in Afghanistan. By March
2002, mine clearance, mine survey, and mine risk education operations had
returned to earlier levels, and subsequently expanded beyond 2001 levels.
The United States-Led Air War and Conduct of Taliban,
Northern Alliance, and Coalition Forces
U.S.-led Operation Enduring Freedom began in Afghanistan on October 7,
2001. The initial phases of the military offensive, through roughly January 2002,
largely consisted of two activities. The first was U.S. and British airstrikes against
fixed tactical and strategic targets throughout Afghanistan. The second involved
cooperation between Afghan opposition military forces and U.S. Special Operations
troops to identify emerging tactical and leadership targets for attack by U.S.
strike aircraft and heavy bombers.
Human Rights Watch sent a team to Afghanistan in March 2002 to investigate
allegations of civilian casualties during Operation Enduring Freedom. The United
States generally took significant precautions before attacking fixed strategic targets in both urban and rural areas. The use of precision-guided munitions in such
attacks was widespread and generally confined damage to intended targets.
However, the bombing caused significant numbers of civilian casualties due to
technical failures, human error (including misidentification of targets), and in
some cases, weapons selection and targeting decisions that were inconsistent with
international humanitarian law.
The use of cluster bombs by U.S. forces also caused civilian harm.Cluster bomb
strikes in populated areas, including two incidents near Herat, killed at least
twenty-five civilians and injured many more. Long after the initial attacks, unexploded
cluster bomblets littered villages and farmland, waiting to be cleared. They
became de facto landmines that caused scores of additional civilian casualties.
The Taliban and al-Qaeda bore major responsibility for civilian harm during the
air war. In particular, there was evidence that Taliban and al-Qaeda forces in some
cases used the civilian population to shield themselves from attack, a practice prohibited
by international humanitarian law.
As discussed in,Human Rights Watch World Report 2002, there were serious allegations
about the conduct of anti-Taliban forces in late 2001, including that forces
in the northeast and south summarily executed Taliban prisoners of war. In 2002,
there were several reports that Rashid Dostum’s troops had killed hundreds of Taliban
prisoners while transporting them in sealed containers from Kunduz towards
Mazar-e Sharif. The bodies were said to have been buried in mass graves in Balkh
province.There were also allegations that forces throughout Afghanistan summarily
executed Pashtuns and other minorities perceived to be associated with the Taliban.
These and other alleged crimes committed by anti-Taliban forces had not yet
been investigated by the United Nations at this writing.
U.S. and coalition military operations continued in eastern and southern
Afghanistan through the autumn of 2002 and were ongoing as of this writing.
There were sporadic incidents of civilian casualties in this period, including an
attack by an AC-130 gunship in Oruzgan Province on June 30, 2002, in which at
least thirty-five Afghan civilians were killed. The continued detention of Afghan
and al-Qaeda forces on U.S. military bases also raised serious issues of international
humanitarian law. (See United States.)
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The Bonn Agreement of 2001 mandated the creation of an Afghan human rights
commission, tasked with promoting human rights norms and investigating human
rights violations. (As noted below, the United Nations was also given an affirmative
right under the agreement to conduct human rights investigations.) The commission
remained in dire need of international support throughout the year, and at this
writing continued to be without basic resources such as cars, phones, and adequate
office space. The head of the commission, Sima Samar, although weakened by
attacks on her reputation, submitted a budget and plan for 2003 that included
investigations of abuses, a country-wide consultation process on accountability for
past abuses, and human rights education projects.
Several human rights and civil society groups—some of which had already been
operating in exile before the Taliban’s fall—opened offices in Afghanistan in 2002.
Most were severely underfunded,without adequate resources to operate effectively,
but the appearance of new groups itself was a welcome sign in a nation in which
human rights groups had long been suppressed.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) expanded its
operations throughout 2002, increasing staff and offices in almost every region in
Afghanistan.For the first time in years, the U.N. mission to Afghanistan had human
rights monitoring and protection staff working within Afghanistan. The 2001
Bonn Agreement expressly gave the U.N.“the right to investigate human rights violations
and, where necessary, recommend corrective action.” (Annex II.) UNAMA
human rights officials investigated human rights abuses in various parts of the
country and maintained human rights monitoring staff in several areas. The U.N.
also played a big role in organizing and monitoring the loya jirga, and in the protection
of delegates and other political representatives who faced threats following
its conclusion. U.N. civil and political affairs officers, and Lakhdar Brahimi, the
special representative of U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, continued to play a
major role in negotiating agreements between rival groups in Afghanistan and
maintaining stability.
Several U.N. human rights officials began preliminary investigations in Afghanistan.
The U.N. special rapporteur on Afghanistan, Kamal Hossein, traveled to
Afghanistan. The special representative of the secretary-general on children in
armed conflict and the special rapporteur on summary and extrajudicial executions
visited Afghanistan in the course of the year. U.N. High Commissioner for
Human Rights Mary Robinson traveled in Afghanistan extensively in March, and
reported her findings and conclusions.
UNAMA’s work on human rights suffered from serious weaknesses. The mission’s
“light footprint” approach—meant to lower the number of international
staff and increase Afghan participation in U.N. efforts—was not effective in
addressing human rights violations. Human rights components of the mission
were understaffed and given low priority by UNAMA leadership. No efforts were
made to place a heavy monitoring presence on the ground, patrol areas of concern,
or robustly investigate alleged war crimes.
UNAMA staff did work diligently with what resources they had to monitor
human rights conditions. They succeeded in containing some of the effects of
intimidation and abuses during the loya jirga, although they were ultimately unable
to stop local military commanders from manipulating the election process.
UNAMA staff also mediated several disputes between commanders, and in a number
of cases stopped or prevented local armed conflicts from erupting.
Still, by the end of the year, only one international human rights monitor was posted in each of Afghanistan’s eight regions, supported by two local staff. Because
the Afghan Human Rights Commission was weak and poorly organized,UNAMA
was unable to rely on its work to supplement the UNAMA mandate. The U.N. was
able to gather useful information on human rights conditions in many areas, and
intervened in important cases to protect vulnerable persons, but on the whole the
mission was reactive, and did not effectively process information gathered by staff.
The UNAMA office often did not publicize information and findings about local
human rights situations in the country.Many UNAMA staff expressed frustration
with the seemingly low priority put on human rights in the mission.
United States, Iran, Pakistan, U.S. Coalition Partners,
and ISAF Contributors
The United States was heavily involved in political settlements, negotiations,
and assistance to Afghanistan in 2002, but did not pursue a coherent or long-term
security strategy.Neither did Afghanistan’s neighbors, Pakistan and Iran. The official
policy of these countries during 2002 was to work with President Hamid Karzai
to help him strengthen his government and rebuild the country. Yet the U.S., Iran,
and Pakistan all actively supported local warlords in various regions of the country.
During the U.S.-led attack in Afghanistan in 2001, the United States,United Kingdom,
and other coalition partners supplied warlords with cash,weapons, uniforms,
and satellite telephones.
These policies were contradictory, and worked to destabilize the country. Local
warlords with records of human rights abuses, for instance Ismail Khan,Muhammad
Karim Khalili, and Rashid Dostum, all strengthened their grip on local power
outside of Kabul. Few meaningful steps were taken by the United States, Iran, or
Pakistan to counteract or blunt the effects of this strategy,nor by countries involved
in the U.S.-led coalition or in peacekeeping operations (ISAF), including Turkey,
Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, and Australia.Most nations acted as if police
training and the rebuilding of the Afghan Army in Kabul would be sufficient solutions
to Afghanistan’s security problems, despite the fact that these programs were
poorly administered, did not have much effect beyond Kabul, and were considered
to have little effect in the short- or medium-term.
International actors in Afghanistan resisted widespread calls to expand the ISAF
peacekeeping force beyond Kabul. Instead, security outside Kabul was put in the
hands of the local military forces that the U.S.-led coalition supported during the
war against the Taliban. As detailed above, many of these same forces committed
abuses against civilians. U.S. and coalition forces in some areas acted as de facto
monitors, and helped create a modicum of protection, but in many areas of the
country warlords continued to commit abuses against the population. President
Karzai and various Afghan leaders continued to call on the U.S. and its partners in
Afghanistan to expand ISAF.
On November 12, 2002, the United States Congress unanimously passed the
Afghanistan Freedom Support Act, which authorizes increased funding for reconstruction
programming, urges the president to act to expand peacekeeping forces outside of Kabul, and requires the president to deliver a report to Congress every
six months describing, among other things, what the administration has done to
improve security, human rights protections, and rule of law.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
All Our Hopes are Crushed: Violence and Repression in Western Afghanistan, 10/02
Afghanistan: Return of the Warlords: A Human Rights Watch Briefing Paper, 6/02
Taking Cover: Women in Post-Taliban Afghanistan: A Human Rights Watch Briefing
Paper, 5/02
Paying for the Taliban’s Crimes: Abuses Against Ethnic Pashtuns in Northern
Afghanistan, 4/02
BURMA
With the release of opposition leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi in May after
nineteen months of de facto house arrest, hope arose that the military
junta might take steps to improve its human rights record. However, by late 2002,
talks between Suu Kyi and the government had ground to a halt and systemic
restrictions on basic civil and political liberties continued unabated. Ethnic minority
regions continued to report particularly grave abuses, including forced labor
and the rape of Shan minority women by military forces. Government military
forces continued to forcibly recruit and use child soldiers.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Burma faced serious economic problems in 2002, but internal political struggles
prevented a unitary response to the economic crisis. A reshuffle of top generals in
November 2001 was followed by the March 2002 arrests of four relatives of former
top general Ne Win, amidst allegations of coup plots. In September 2002, the four
were sentenced to death for treason.
In the midst of this political and economic instability, Suu Kyi’s release in May
seemed to augur a new readiness on the part of the ruling military party, the State
Peace and Development Council (SPDC), to negotiate with opposition groups in
hopes of gaining much-needed international investment and aid. Suu Kyi traveled
outside of Rangoon to Mandalay and elsewhere, meeting with thousands of supporters
without interference or arrest.
These negotiations were held chiefly with the National League for Democracy
(NLD),which is led by Suu Kyi. The NLD had been elected to a majority of seats in
parliament in 1990, but was blocked from taking power by the then-ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC). SLORC changed its name to the
State Peace and Development Council and shuffled some top leaders. In 2002, local
NLD township offices reopened around the country. In September 2002, the NLD
called on the SPDC to fulfill its pledge to begin negotiations to hand over power to
the elected representatives. Ethnic minority opposition groups called for their
inclusion in negotiations between the government and the NLD, but the SPDC and
Suu Kyi have yet to agree to this.
During the negotiations, the government released more than three hundred
political prisoners. In August, Burmese opposition groups jointly called on the
SPDC to release hundreds of political prisoners still in prison, including eighteen
elected members of parliament from opposition political parties. The U.N. urged
the SPDC to declare a general amnesty for all political prisoners, but the SPDC
ignored these demands.
In the meantime,more political dissidents were arrested, and prominent political
prisoner U Aung May Thu passed away. In December 2001, seventy-four-yearold
former university rector Dr. Salai Tun Than was arrested for his one-man
protest in front of Rangoon City Hall. The Yezin University professor of agronomy
from Pyinmana had distributed copies of his letter calling for political reform and
multiparty elections.He is serving a seven-year sentence in a Rangoon prison.
In mid-August,during a visit by Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad,
the state detained fifteen Rangoon university students in the first major crackdown
after Suu Kyi’s release. Thirteen were subsequently released, but two law students
were sentenced to long prison terms for distributing pro-democracy pamphlets. In
September, dozens of dissidents were detained in Rangoon.
Burma’s other continuing human rights problems include the widespread use of
forced labor, forced relocations, censorship, use of child soldiers, violations of religious
freedom, and atrocities committed against ethnic minorities, whose regions
make up most of the country’s territory. Burmese Muslims were especially targeted
for persecution.
Although a law banning forced labor was passed in October 2000, authorities
continued to use forced labor, especially in rural ethnic regions. The Burmese military
compelled villagers to work on infrastructure and agricultural projects, as
porters in army camps, and on the construction of Buddhist temples. In November
in Shan State, villagers were compelled to build railroads and to farm; one laborer
who resisted was reportedly beaten to death. Children as young as seven were used
as forced labor in many parts of the country to carry army supplies or work on construction
sites.
The military continued to forcibly relocate minority villages, especially in areas
where ethnic activists and rebels were active, and in areas targeted for the development
of international tourism.The U.S. State Department’s 2002 country report on
human rights in Burma estimated that forced relocations had produced hundreds
of thousands of refugees, with as many as one million internally displaced persons
within the country.
The state continued to censor media. The Committee to Protect Journalists
reported that eighteen journalists were held on charges ranging from “illegal possession
of a fax machine” to smuggling poetry out of prison. One Burmese national was arrested in February and accused of sending information to foreign radio stations,
and the SPDC alleged that many more “informers”who were sending information
to foreign media would be arrested soon. Two Burmese magazines, Living
Color and Mhyar Nat Maung Mingalar, were each shut down for one month for
minor infractions.
Burma continued to use child soldiers. Thousands of boys, some as young as
eleven, have been forced into Burma’s national army.Recruiters typically staked out
railway, bus, and ferry stations; the street; marketplaces and festivals; and threatened
boys who could not produce identity cards with long prison terms or military
enlistment. Boys who resisted recruitment were often beaten or detained. Once
deployed, they were forced to fight against Burma’s ethnic minorities and other
opposition forces; and to participate in human rights abuses against civilians,
including rounding up villagers for forced labor, burning villages, and extrajudicial
executions.Child soldiers who deserted had few options, and typically either joined
armed opposition forces or fled to neighboring countries. After an October 2002
Human Rights Watch report on the use of child soldiers in Burma attracted international
attention, the government denied any recruitment or use of child soldiers.
Children were also present in many armed opposition groups, though the numbers
of child soldiers in these smaller armies were fewer. Both the Kachin Independence
Army and the United Wa State Army,which have historically been the largest
opposition groups, but which now sometimes align with the Burmese military,
forcibly recruited children. Others, such as the Karen National Liberation Army,
Karenni Army, and Shan State Army-South accepted boys who expressed a desire to
join, despite the armies’ official minimum recruitment age of eighteen.
Lack of access to education exacerbated human rights abuses against children in
Burma. Some schools in ethnic areas were closed because of fighting, and even
when schools were open, families were often unable to pay the school fees.Children
who left school often took jobs selling food or goods in the streets.Many traveled
to larger cities seeking work. These children became easy targets for military
recruitment or forced labor.
Many of the worst violations in the country were reported against civilians living
in minority regions, especially in Karen and Shan States. In March, fighting
flared up along the Thai-Burmese borders, when Karen rebels reportedly attacked
army outposts. In May, the Burmese military and Buddhist Karen allies attacked
Christian Karen villages, hospitals and schools. Burmese soldiers executed villagers
suspected of sympathy with the rebels, and in several instances also executed Karen
families caught while attempting to flee forced relocation.Townships in Shan State,
such as Loi Kha and Loi Kawwan, were closed off by the Burmese military to outside
visitors, amidst reports of forced relocation, forced labor, torture, rape, and
extrajudicial killings. Refugees reported massacres in Shan State in September.
Thousands of Karen and Shan refugees fled across the borders to Thailand.
In July, the Shan Women’s Action Network (SWAN) and the Shan Human
Rights Foundation (SHRF), based in Thailand, published a report on the systematic
rape of women and girls in Shan State by the Burmese military. The report,
based on interviews with refugees along the Thai-Burmese border,documented the
rapes of 173 women and girls by Burmese military forces.According to the report, officers committed 83 percent of the rapes, often in front of their troops; 25 percent
of the rapes resulted in death; and over half were gang-rapes. In some cases,women
were held in sexual slavery. The report attracted international attention. Subsequently,
the Burmese government claimed to have launched an investigation which
concluded the allegations were unfounded. In one of the ensuing series of press
conferences, the government said the report’s authors were “narco-terrorists”sponsored
by foreign governments. Some researchers reported harassment and threats
in Thailand after the report’s publication. In September, some refugees fleeing Shan
State reported that villagers were being forced to sign statements denying the rapes.
In the wake of international press reports alleging ties between al-Qaeda and the
Burmese government, the government launched a broad crackdown on Rohingya
Muslims.
Tensions between the Buddhist majority and Muslim minority were still apparent
in 2002, and restrictions were tightened in late 2001. Restrictions on travel by
Muslims were far more rigidly enforced, especially in Arakan State, and the government
limited the number ofMuslims allowed to travel to Mecca for the Hajj pilgrimage.
Muslims claimed they continued to have difficulties getting passports to
travel abroad and in building mosques. News accounts reported extortion and
abuse of Muslim crew members on fishing boats by the Burmese Navy off the
Maungdaw coast.
Other religious groups reported restrictions as well. In the northwest, observers
reported that the government was forcibly converting Naga Christians to Buddhism.
The government continued its widespread building project with new Buddhist
temples and statues erected around the country, including on ethnic minority
sacred sites. Some monuments sacred to ethnic minorities were destroyed and
replaced with new structures, such as hotels, against local objections.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The SPDC did not permit local human rights groups to operate in Burma and
those human rights and democracy organizations that did function had to do so
from abroad.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The release of Suu Kyi from house arrest and the release of political prisoners
were welcomed by the international community. Some governments and aid agencies
made plans to increase humanitarian assistance, such as to HIV/AIDS programs.
Western governments kept in place bans on investment or economic
assistance to Burma.The United Nations was especially active and appeared to play
a critical role in the negotiations that preceded Suu Kyi’s release. The U.N. special
rapporteur on human rights in Burma, Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, visited in February,
April and October, meeting with top generals, Suu Kyi, and ethnic minority representatives.
After the October visit, Pinheiro called for an inquiry into rights violations in ethnic minority regions, and proposed that the International Red Cross be
allowed into all areas of conflict in Burma.
U.N. Secretary-General KofiAnnan’s special envoy for Burma,Razali Ismail, visited
the country in December and August. Razali was widely viewed as active in
bringing about Suu Kyi’s release, but was unable to convince the SPDC to resume
the dialogue with Suu Kyi that began in October 2001, or to declare a general
amnesty for political prisoners.After a visit in November 2002,Razali said he would
quit the post if the government did not begin talks with Suu Kyi aimed at political
reforms.
The International Labor Organization (ILO) sent a high-level mission to Burma
in February, which was prevented from seeing Suu Kyi. This mission followed the
unprecedented decision of the ILO in 2000 to recommend that ILO members
review their economic ties with Burma and take appropriate action to ensure that
they did not abet what it called “widespread and systemic” forced labor. In March,
the ILO and the Burmese junta agreed that the ILO would appoint a liaison officer
to monitor Burma’s pledges to end forced labor. On September 9, 2002, Ms. Perret-
Nguyen was appointed to assume this position beginning in October.
Australia dispatched Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer to Burma in
October 2002. Downer was the first Australian senior official to visit Burma in
twenty years, and the first senior Western official to visit after Suu Kyi’s release.He
reported after his visit that Burma’s generals had given him no timeframe for political
reform, and that Suu Kyi was increasingly pessimistic about the prospects for
genuine change.
China continued to build its massive economic and military investment in
Burma. In December 2001, President Jiang Zemin visited Burma and promised
U.S.$100 million in new Chinese investment. That same month, authorities delivered
a digital high-resolution satellite ground station to the Burmese government.
In January and February 2002, the Chinese military delivered sizeable shipments of
arms to Burmese naval bases.
The European Union maintained its sanctions on Burma, but explored possibilities
for increased humanitarian assistance. The E.U. was again the sponsor of
critical Burma resolutions in both the U.N.Commission on Human Rights, and in
the U.N. General Assembly. A European Union troika delegation visited Burma in
March to continue a dialogue on promoting political reconciliation with the opposition.
In September, E.U. delegates met with Suu Kyi and called on Burma to make
progress toward democratization. The Asia-Europe (ASEM) summit in Copenhagen
in late September did not include Burma.
India initiated diplomatic talks with Burma in late 2001 aimed at joint action
against ethnic militant groups on their shared border. Senior Indian officials said
anonymously that the Indian government was trying to counter China’s growing
economic and military influence in Burma.
Japan, Burma’s largest single aid donor, announced that it would give Burma
debt relief of ¥1.8 billion (U.S.$14.4 million). Following Suu Kyi’s release, Japan
disbursed U.S.$4.9 million of a U.S.$29 million Official Development Assistance
(ODA) loan approved earlier for the renovation of a hydroelectric plant in eastern
Burma. In August, the Japanese foreign minister met with Suu Kyi and SPDC generals. She urged progress on democratization and human rights, but made no further
aid commitments.
Under the leadership of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian
government began a repressive crackdown on dissidents and other refugees fleeing
the Burmese junta and seeking asylum in Malaysia. Rohingya Muslim refugees fled
to Malaysia and Bangladesh. In June 2002, eight undocumented Rohingya migrants
entered the grounds of the local office of the U.N.High Commissioner for Refugees
in Malaysia and demanded asylum. In late July, Malaysian police arrested 135
mostly undocumented Rohingya migrants seeking asylum outside the same office.
In August, after Suu Kyi called for Burma to move more quickly toward reform,
Prime Minister Mahathir visited Burma and publicly declared that Burma should
not be rushed prematurely into democracy.
Russia became increasingly active in the ongoing Burmese military buildup,
promising to help Burma to construct a center for nuclear studies and a research
nuclear reactor. The plans were described as part of Russia’s commitment to
improving Burma’s technology and education sectors, but these facilities could also
provide a basis for future Burmese efforts to acquire the means to build nuclear
weapons.
Thailand’s relationship with Burma continued to be extremely tense,with occasional
outbreaks of violence along the border. At times, Thailand, the main destination
for minorities, political dissidents, rural people, and women and children
fleeing violence in Burma, appeared to respond to Burma with efforts aimed at
appeasing the military junta. In November, a group of undocumented migrants
and workers in northern Thailand were repatriated to Burma, amidst allegations
that some had been tricked into signing repatriation forms. Some Burmese child
soldiers tried to escape forced conscription by deserting their armies and fleeing
across the border to Thailand. Thai authorities should identify such children if
arrested for illegal presence and pass them over to the U.N. High Commission for
Refugees so that they may seek asylum, but many such children were unable to
access such protection and continued to live in hiding, fearing deportation to
Burma.
In late December 2001, the Thai government forcibly closed a major refugee
camp housing political dissidents, and conducted talks with Burmese authorities
about repatriation plans. The problem of illegal workers from Burma was gruesomely
highlighted when the bodies of twenty ethnic Karen villagers were found in
the river that divides Burma from Thailand. Investigators later concluded that the
Karens were being smuggled in by a Thai couple, who discovered en route that the
laborers had suffocated and simply dumped their bodies in the river. The border
problems were highlighted again in June when Karen gunmen, in a debt squabble,
fired on a school bus full of Thai children, killing two and injuring fourteen; this
sparked a manhunt by Thai authorities on the borders and greater ill-feeling
toward Burmese refugees living in Thailand.
In April, NGOs reported that about three thousand Burmese migrants deported
from Mae Sot, Thailand were forced to undergo HIV testing in a holding center on
the Burmese side of the border. Those who tested positive were reportedly segregated
and sent to a hospital in Rangoon. Both mandatory testing and the segregation of HIV-positive persons violate international standards.The Burmese government
has yet to take clear steps in mounting a serious response to the HIV/AIDS
epidemic.
In May, the Burmese-aligned United Wa State Army and Thai troops traded
artillery fire across the border.By July,Thailand and Burma were embroiled in a noholds-
barred media war, in which Burmese state press attacked the Thai monarchy;
Burmese authorities also closed lucrative border crossings to Thai traders. In what
was seen by many as an attempt to placate the Burmese junta and re-open the borders,
Thai authorities in August raided pro-democracy groups and a church on the
border, detaining dozens of Burmese refugee activists and repatriating them. The
border was officially reopened in October 2002.
In April, forty-nine U.S. congressional representatives called on the Burmese
government to release imprisoned student leader Min Ko Naing. Congressional
representatives and the U.S. State Department issued statements condemning the
Burmese military for raping girls and women in Shan State. While lauding the
release of Suu Kyi in April, the Bush administration said in June that it would
extend sanctions on Burma for another year.A U.S.Agency for International Development
(USAID) team visited Burma to explore the possibility of giving
HIV/AIDS assistance beyond the U.S.$1 million currently given through NGOs
and U.N. agencies.
In a groundbreaking ruling, a U.S. superior court judge in California ordered the
Unocal corporation to stand trial for alleged human rights abuses related to its
pipeline project in Burma. A jury trial was set for September 26, 2002 in Los Angeles,
where Unocal is based. In a related development, over thirty U.S. clothing manufacturers
announced that they would stop sourcing from Burma, and Marriott
International announced plans to withdraw from the two hotels it manages in Rangoon.
Neither the World Bank nor the Asian Development Bank resumed any assistance
to Burma.The SPDC failed to respond to the World Bank’s recommendations
for major economic reforms.A team from the International Monetary Fund visited
Burma in July, and found continuing economic problems and deteriorating social
conditions.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Crackdown on Burmese Muslims (Briefing Paper), 7/02
“My Gun Was As Tall As Me”: Child Soldiers in Burma, 10/02
CAMBODIA
Cambodia largely failed to meet its obligations to promote human rights in
2002. Local elections, held in February,were marred by killings and intimidation
of political opposition members and others, and subsequent continuing
violence offered a worrying prognosis for national elections in 2003. Opposition
newspapers were increasingly subject to threats, closure, and arrests of staff.At this
writing, there had been little progress in negotiations to establish a tribunal for former
Khmer Rouge leaders. The judicial system remained extremely weak and generally
unable to deliver justice to those whose human rights were violated, albeit
efforts were made to prosecute security officials accused of torturing detainees.
Prison conditions remained poor. Cambodia deported to Vietnam hundreds of
asylum seekers fleeing persecution of indigenous minorities there, in violation of
its obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention. The government failed to adequately
address trafficking in people.Many Cambodians suffered from poor education
and health services and insecurity of land tenure. There was some progress
in the field of labor rights, and environmentalists strengthened advocacy efforts on
behalf of Cambodia’s rural poor.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Cambodia in February held its first local elections in more than thirty years, to
elect leaders for the country’s 1,621 communes (administrative units consisting of
four to seven villages). The Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) consolidated its grip
on power by taking control of 99 percent of the commune councils. There were
numerous instances of violence, intimidation, vote-buying, and voter coercion,
although at a lower level than during the 1998 national elections. Fifteen prospective
candidates and activists of the political opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) and
the United National Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative
Cambodia (FUNCINPEC), as well as the two-year-old son of a CPP candidate,
were killed between January 2001 and polling day. A local election observer was
killed two days before the election.
Political violence continued in the aftermath of the commune elections and as
the country prepared for national elections, scheduled for July 2003.The mutilated
body of Kork Khom, a SRP activist from Takeo, was found in a rice field in July.
Some of his fingers and part of his left ear had been cut off, his leg was broken, and
numerous bruises marked his body. By November 2002, another six SRP and
FUNCINPEC activists had been murdered. In October, just before Senator Kem
Sokha resigned from the FUNCINPEC party, he sustained injuries in a car accident
that appeared to have been deliberately staged to warn or harm him.
In contrast to 1998, when no one was held accountable for election violence, in
2002 authorities arrested several people suspected of political killings. In ten of
twenty-four cases, provincial courts convicted defendants. In a move to appease donors, the Ministry of Interior pressured court officials to speed up trials in some
of these murder cases. As a result, legal observers found that some of the accused
were convicted based on insufficient evidence.
The National Election Committee (NEC), commissioned to organize, oversee,
and monitor the election process, failed to use its authority to implement any of the
penalty provisions in the Election Law in response to acts of bribery, violence, or
intimidation. Fair access to the media for parties other than the CPP was also
denied during the campaign.Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) involved in
election monitoring called for reform of the NEC, which was criticized as lacking
independence. In August the National Assembly passed a law empowering the Ministry
of Interior—rather than an independent recruitment committee advocated
by NGOs—to nominate NEC members.
Freedom of expression in political debate was dealt a blow in December 2001,
when Senators Chhang Song, Siphan Phay and Pou Savath were expelled by the
CPP after they expressed opinions differing from the party line during debate. Electronic
media remained under the control of persons and companies affiliated with
the CPP. The independent press affiliated with the political opposition was subject
to threats, closure and lawsuits. In April, the Phnom Penh court convicted the SRPaffiliated
newspaper Samleng Yuvachun Khmer (Voice of Khmer Youth) of defamation
and printing false information, and ordered it to pay 71 million riel
(approximately U.S.$18,000).The paper had published an article accusing two military
generals and businessman Mong Reththy, a close ally of Prime Minister Hun
Sen, of illegal logging. After the newspaper appealed the decision, Mong Reththy
and the generals agreed to drop the complaint.
In July, Sok Sothea, a reporter for the opposition Moneaksekar Khmer (Khmer
Conscience) newspaper was detained for several hours at the Ministry of Interior
after he shared a leaked document from the co-minister of interior with another
paper, which published the document. In August, the Ministry of Information
ordered the thirty-day suspension of Moneaksekar Khmer for publishing an article
that allegedly affected “national security.” The English-language Cambodia Daily
newspaper was threatened with suspension when it called January 7—the day that
the Khmer Rouge were defeated by Vietnamese troops in 1979—“Vietnamese Liberation
Day.”The Ministry of Information later dropped the fifteen-day suspension
order.
In September, the editor and a reporter from Chakraval (Universe) newspaper
were arrested, allegedly without warrants, and detained overnight after a complaint
by the director-general of the National Police. The pro-government paper had
reported about the confiscation by customs officials of a car purchased by the complainant,
as well as subsequent telephone threats made against the officials.The two
men were released, reportedly after an order from the prime minister. In October,
the Ministry of Information ordered the independent radio station Sambok Kmum
(Beehive) to stop broadcasting reports from the Voice of America and Radio Free
Asia.
Two Cambodian writers, Vann Nath and Moeun Chhean Nariddh, received
Hellman/Hammett awards from Human Rights Watch in 2002 in recognition of
the courage with which they have written about human rights.
The Cambodian government created a military anti-terrorism unit, reportedly to provide protection during November meetings in Phnom Penh of leaders of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The soldiers belonged to Battalion
911, which, according to the U.N., was implicated in killings, illegal detention,
and torture of FUNCINPEC soldiers after the 1997 coup by Hun Sen, then second
prime minister. In October, thirty high-ranking police officers completed a threemonth
training on fighting terrorism, conducted in Vietnam.
In February, United Nations (U.N.) Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced
the withdrawal of the U.N. from further discussions with the Cambodian government
over the establishment of a tribunal to bring to justice former leaders of
Democratic Kampuchea (Khmer Rouge). According to the U.N., the Cambodian
law establishing the tribunal was unable to guarantee the necessary independence,
impartiality, and objectivity.The U.N. had insisted that the tribunal be governed by
a memorandum between the U.N. and Cambodia, rather than the Cambodian law
adopted in August 2001.
Cambodian and international human rights groups supported the U.N. decision,
but stressed the need for accountability for grave human rights violations
committed by the Khmer Rouge from 1975 to 1979. In July,Hun Sen expressed willingness
to make amendments to the law. In August, Annan announced that he
needed a clear mandate from either the U.N. General Assembly or the Security
Council to resume negotiations, and that the Cambodian government was to seek
the support of the member states to initiate action either within the Security Council
or the General Assembly. In November, the General Assembly’s Third Committee
passed a resolution initiated by Japan, calling for the secretary-general to
resume negotiations with Cambodia on the “mixed tribunal” formulation, which
Cambodian and international human rights groups have criticized for falling far
short of internationally recognized standards.
Meanwhile, three former Khmer Rouge leaders—Ieng Sary, Khieu Samphan
and Nuon Chea—continued to live freely in Cambodia. The Phnom Penh military
court extended the pre-trial detention of Khmer Rouge military leader Chhit
Choeun (Ta Mok), and former S-21 (Tuol Sleng) prison director Kaing Khek Iev
(Duch), by adding charges of crimes against humanity. Both were initially arrested
in 1999.
Cambodia ratified the International Criminal Court treaty, thereby accepting
the court’s jurisdiction beginning July 1.
The trials during the year of around fifty persons accused of involvement with
the Cambodian Freedom Fighters (CFF), a group that claimed responsibility for
violent attacks in Phnom Penh in November 2000, demonstrated serious shortcomings.
Defendants were arrested without warrants, and denied a prompt trial.
One lawyer represented eighteen suspects, who gave testimonies incriminating
each other, making a proper defense for each of them impossible.The judge denied
requests by some of the defendants’ lawyers to summon witnesses, and ignored
claims by the accused of physical or mental pressure during interrogation. A highranking
military intelligence official, summoned by the court after one of the
defendants claimed the official had hired him to infiltrate the CFF, failed to appear.
Most of the accused were convicted and sentenced to terms varying from suspended
sentences to life imprisonment.
Plans for legal and judicial reform stalled. Less than 1 percent of the national budget was allocated to the justice sector, undermining the judicial system’s effectiveness.
A long overdue Statute for Judges, which includes a code of conduct, had
still not been adopted as of November.The Supreme Council ofMagistracy, a body
commissioned to oversee the functioning of the judiciary and guarantee its independence,
itself lacked independence.
Lacking faith in the judicial system, villagers often resorted to summary justice
by beating and killing people suspected of committing crimes. Local human rights
groups and the U.N. recorded sixty-eight incidents of mob violence from mid-1999
to August 2002.While police intervention saved some lives, they frequently refused
to act or were complicit in the violence. Only two persons served prison terms for
their involvement in a mob killing, after convictions by the Phnom Penh court in a
September trial.
Torture by security officials of detainees continued to be a problem. The criminal
procedure code was amended in November 2001 to extend the maximum
period in police detention—the time when torture commonly is used by police to
extract confessions—from forty-eight to seventy-two hours. Five guards accused of
torturing prisoners were acquitted in August by a Kompong Cham provincial court
despite witnesses, one of them a prison guard, and medical records corroborating
the torture.Without clarifying his decision, the judge found the five prison guards
not guilty of torture, but ordered administrative action, acknowledging that the
guards had been at fault. A more positive ruling came in April, when a Svay Rieng
provincial court sentenced three policemen to suspended prison terms for torture.
In many of Cambodia’s prisons overcrowding, unhygienic conditions, inadequate
food, and excessive pre-trial detention continued to be reported. In three prisons,
shackles were used to restrain prisoners.
In January,Cambodia,Vietnam, and the U.N.High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) signed a tripartite agreement on the voluntary, U.N.-monitored repatriation
of approximately one thousand asylum seekers from the Central Highlands
of Vietnam (Montagnards) who were sheltered at two UNHCR sites in Mondolkiri
and Ratanakiri provinces. The agreement crumbled in March after Vietnamese
officials barred UNHCR monitoring teams from the Central Highlands.On March
21, refugees and UNHCR staff were threatened and attacked when a delegation of
more than four hundred people, including as many as one hundred Vietnamese
government agents, overran Mondolkiri camp and conducted house-to-house
searches of the refugees’ huts.
At the end of March, in violation of the 1951 Refugee Convention, the Cambodian
government announced that any new Montagnard asylum seekers would be
considered illegal migrants and summarily deported without being given an
opportunity to claim asylum. More than four hundred Montagnards were
deported to Vietnam during April and May. In mid-April, UNHCR’s two provincial
refugee camps were closed, and their nine hundred residents transported to
Phnom Penh,where they were processed for resettlement to the United States. The
first group of Montagnard refugees left for the U.S. in June.
On July 25, Thich Tri Luc, a Vietnamese monk belonging to the banned Unified
Buddhist Church, disappeared in Phnom Penh after being granted refugee status by
UNHCR. As of November, Cambodian authorities had not responded to requests
by human rights groups for information on his whereabouts. In August, Cambodian authorities arrested and deported Guojun Li and his wife, Zhang Xinji, two
Falun Gong members under the protection of UNHCR, to China.
SRP member Sok Yoeun remained in detention in Thailand since his arrest in
December 1999 for illegal immigration,while hearings continued into the Cambodian
government’s request for his extradition as a suspect in a 1998 rocket attack on
a motorcade carrying Hun Sen. This was despite an apparent lack of evidence linking
Sok Yoeun to the attack, and also despite his having been under the protection
of UNHCR since shortly after his escape to Thailand in 1999.
Trafficking of human beings to, within, and from Cambodia, for purposes of
forced labor including prostitution,begging, and adoption remained a major problem.
In some cases, suspected traffickers were arrested. However, in several
instances trafficking victims were arrested and subsequently deported to Vietnam
on charges of illegal immigration. In August, the Phnom Penh court convicted ten
Vietnamese girls, most of them minors, who allegedly had been trafficked into
prostitution in a Phnom Penh brothel. The girls were sentenced to two to three
months in prison for illegal immigration.
In January, Cambodia ratified the optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution, and child
pornography. It also ratified the optional protocol to the CRC on the involvement
of children in armed conflict.
Labor conditions improved in some workplaces, due to the strengthened capacity
of labor unions, improved relations with factory management, and intensive
monitoring in many of Cambodia’s garment factories by the International Labour
Organization.Problems remained with pay, forced overtime, and discrimination of
workers who joined labor unions. In September, the Phnom Penh Appeals Court
overturned a ruling by the Kompong Speu court ordering the reinstatement of
seven workers who had been fired after organizing union activity. Khim Sam On
and Sok Bona, leaders of the Cambodian Federation of Independent Trade Unions,
who were arrested on July 15 allegedly for inciting violence at a Phnom Penh factory
in 2001, remained in detention as of November 2002, despite being cleared of
charges by the Ministry of Labor.
Implementation of the second phase of Cambodia’s “Demobilization and Reintegration
Project” was delayed after concerns about the project’s first phase
prompted the World Bank to call for a thorough evaluation. The U.S.$42 million
pilot project, largely funded by the World Bank and Japan, was aimed at downsizing
and disarming the military and cutting the military’s budget. The project was
hampered by divergent estimates of the size of the armed forces, with credible
reports that thousands of “ghost soldiers”were collecting compensation packages.
The government allocated more money for education and health in 2002, but
delays in disbursement of education funds meant that teachers were not paid and
students had to pay unofficial fees to their teachers. Slow disbursement of funds to
the health sector coupled with low wages for health personnel meant that many
Cambodians lacked access to adequate health care. In June, the National Assembly
passed a law on the prevention and control of the spread of HIV/AIDS, criminalizing
discrimination against people living with the disease.
Insecurity of land tenure contributed to landgrabbing, often by soldiers or companies with connections to local officials. Legal Aid of Cambodia represented more
than eight thousand families, or about forty-three thousand people, in land cases,
most of which involved military and local officials. In a significant case that was first
brought to court in March 2001, indigenous villagers in Ratanakiri province
launched a legal appeal against a military general who fraudulently obtained title to
their ancestral lands, putting some nine hundred villagers at risk of landlessness. In
March 2002,Hun Sen instructed the Ministry of Land Management to purchase the
land from the general and return it to the villagers, in exchange for the villagers
dropping their lawsuit.
While some steps were taken during the year to protect Cambodia’s natural
resources, environmental degradation remained a serious concern. Activists welcomed
a logging moratorium put into effect in January, and the government’s cancellation
of two Malaysian-owned concessions for illegal logging in June. Despite
these measures, extensive small- and medium-scale logging continued throughout
the year, and law enforcement in the forestry sector remained poor. There were
numerous reports of intimidation by concessionaires to stop local villagers from
accessing forests. In June, security guards of the Tomring rubber plantation company
in Kompong Thom province fired shots to intimidate local villagers attempting
to prevent the company from further clearing trees they used to collect resin.
Environmental groups expressed concerns about a Forestry Law passed by the
National Assembly in July, which lacked guarantees for local communities to continue
using non-timber forest products such as resin and rattan to sustain their
livelihoods.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Dozens of Cambodian human rights groups operated in the country, conducting
advocacy, training, and monitoring activities, counseling victims, and providing
legal services to Cambodia’s poor. There was ongoing violence, threats and
intimidation against human rights defenders in 2002.
In several cases, criminal proceedings that appeared to be without foundation
were initiated against human rights groups in an apparent attempt to intimidate
them. In February, the Phnom Penh court dropped criminal charges filed against
the deputy director of the League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights
(Licadho). These charges had been sought by the adoptive parents of a seven-yearold
girl, angered by Licadho’s request to local authorities to act to stop abuse of the
child; after police intervention, Licadho had been granted temporary legal custody
of the child. The adoptive parents appealed the court decision. In April the Phnom
Penh municipal court ordered Licadho to pay damages of five million riel
(U.S.$1,250) to a Phnom Penh orphanage,without specifying the basis for the fine.
Licadho had earlier filed a complaint against the orphanage for trafficking in
babies.
In August, the Cambodian military filed charges of defamation against members
of the Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee (CHRAC) in Kompong
Cham province. The complaint concerned a CHRAC report sent to different government institutions in March, requesting the resolution of eighteen human rights
abuses by soldiers between 1997 and 2001.
In April, several unidentified men physically attacked the director of Global Witness,
an independent forestry monitor, after the group uncovered evidence of illegal
logging. The government quickly denounced the act, but had not apprehended
any suspects as of November.
Police and local officials in Ratanakiri and Mondolkiri provinces bordering
Vietnam threatened villagers with arrest if they assisted Montagnard refugees.
Authorities forced villagers in both provinces to thumbprint statements pledging
not to help the refugees. On May 16, police arrested a fisherman in Mondolkiri
province because of his alleged assistance to Montagnards seeking refuge. After
three months in prison, charges of human trafficking were dropped and he was
released on August 12. On July 5, police arrested another man in Mondolkiri and
detained him in prison on charges of hiding illegal immigrants.He was released on
July 27, after charges were dropped.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The Cambodia Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights
(COHCHR) and UNHCR maintained field presences in Cambodia throughout the
year. After protracted negotiations, in February the Cambodian government and
COHCHR signed a memorandum of understanding, formalizing their cooperation
into early 2004. The special representative of the U.N. secretary-general for
human rights in Cambodia conducted four missions to the country, in which he
focused on political violence, judicial reform, and the right to education. In public
statements he condemned the forced deportations ofMontagnard refugees to Vietnam,
torture of detainees in custody, and mob violence. The then U.N. high commissioner
for human rights, Mary Robinson, visited Cambodia in August,
highlighting the problem of human trafficking and expressing concerns about the
deportation or disappearance of Vietnamese and Chinese refugees who had been
under the protection of UNHCR.
In March UNHCR publicly denounced intimidation and attacks on UNHCR
staff and refugees at the Mondolkiri refugee camp by Cambodian and Vietnamese
officials, and in April called for Cambodia to honor its international obligation to
provide asylum. In August UNHCR raised concerns with the Cambodian government
over the deportation of two Falun Gong members to China and the disappearance
of Vietnamese monk Thich Tri Luc.
In June, the U.N. Development Program started a four-year U.S.$1.5 million
project to continue building the capacity of the National Assembly and the Senate,
partly in the field of human rights.
Major Donors
International donors pledged U.S.$635 million in loans and grants to the Cambodian
government during the annual Consultative Group meeting of donors, held
in Phnom Penh in June.While commending progress in the areas of financial control,
investment, and land reform, donors expressed strong concerns at the slow
pace of legal and judicial reform, and that no anti-corruption law had been
adopted.
The World Bank approved a $24 million credit for a land management and
administration project, which included a mass land titling program. It delayed the
disbursement of a $15 million Structural Adjustment Credit, apparently because of
the lack of transparency in forestry reform. In September, the bank delayed the
implementation of the second phase of the demobilization program after irregularities
in the first phase were uncovered.
Japan remained the largest bilateral donor to Cambodia, and together with the
European Union (E.U.) and Australia, funded the commune elections.While Japan
and the E.U. generally commended the National Election Committee for the organization
of the elections, they expressed concerns about reports of violence and
intimidation. In July, the European Parliament issued a resolution calling on the
Cambodian government to uphold the right to first asylum for Montagnard
refugees. During a September visit to Cambodia, a delegation of European parliamentarians
announced that the Cambodian government had to ensure that the
2003 national election would be free and fair, if it was to receive further development
assistance from the E.U.
China continued to play an increasingly influential role in Cambodia. In August,
citing Cambodia’s support for the “one China” policy, the Cambodia government
announced that the Dalai Lama would not be allowed to attend an international
Buddhist conference, scheduled to take place in Phnom Penh in December. In
August, China pledged 20 million yuan (U.S.$2.4 million) in assistance to Cambodia
for military training and military hospitals.
Several donors, including Australia, Japan, France, and the U.S., urged the U.N.
secretary-general to resume negotiations with Cambodia in regard to the Khmer
Rouge tribunal. In April, India offered assistance to the Cambodian government if
it decided to try Khmer Rouge leaders by itself. China continued to oppose any
Khmer Rouge tribunal.
The U.S. resumed funding for HIV/AIDS, education, and anti-trafficking projects
in Cambodia after a five-year moratorium on financing government projects
as a result of the 1997 coup. In a report on human trafficking released in June, the
U.S. ranked Cambodia in the lowest category for not complying with minimum
standards to combat the practice. The report stated that if the situation did not
improve, the U.S. might cut non-humanitarian and non-trade-related assistance.
In October, the U.S. condemned the increase in political violence in advance of
national elections. The U.S. resettled about eight hundred Montagnard refugees
during the year.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Cambodia’s Commune Elections: Setting the Stage for the 2003 National Elections,
5/02
Repression Of Montagnards: Conflicts Over Land and Religion In Vietnam’s Central
Highlands, 4/02
CHINA AND TIBET
Preparations for the 16th Chinese Communist Party Congress and the
accompanying change in China’s top leadership colored human rights
practices in China in 2002. Concerned with maintaining economic and social stability
as the transition unfolded, leaders in Beijing appeared to calculate carefully
when to tread lightly and when to crack down hard.They responded to major,wellcoordinated,
and sustained worker protests in China’s northeast with only minimum
force; moderated the response to disclosures of their failure to tackle the
HIV/AIDS crisis effectively; and, when accused of abusing psychiatric science by
incarcerating political offenders in mental hospitals, expressed some willingness to
cooperate with the World Psychiatric Association.Chinese authorities continued to
reform the legal system and professionalize judicial personnel, and agreed to
include human rights training for law enforcement officials as part of a technical
cooperation program with the U.N.
The leadership moved unequivocally,however, to limit free expression and build
a firewall around the Internet, to destroy Falungong even beyond China’s borders,
and to eliminate dissident challenges. In Tibet, the government welcomed representatives
of the exiled Dalai Lama for the first time since 1993, even as it continued
to repress religious belief and expression. In Xinjiang, however, the regime
tightened all restrictions, citing alleged Uighur collaboration with al-Qaeda.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
As Chinese media outlets continued to proliferate and increasingly to challenge
government guidelines, propaganda authorities responded by obstructing the free
flow of information. They blocked major Internet search engines, closed publications,
harassed foreign and domestic journalists, tightened controls on satellite
transmission, and hampered the work of academics and activists. For two weeks in
September, officials blocked access to Google, a major search engine, and diverted
traffic to sites providing officially approved content. When access was restored,
users reported selective blocking. Chinese authorities appeared to be using packet
sniffers—devices that scan Internet transactions, including e-mail, to block text
with sensitive word combinations.
A second search engine, Altavista.com, was shut down for a day, but Yahoo’s
China site escaped blockage. Earlier in the year, along with some three hundred
other Internet companies,Yahoo had voluntarily signed a trade-association-sponsored
“Public Pledge on Self-Discipline for China Internet Industry,” committing
itself to removing any information that the government claimed could jeopardize
security, disrupt stability, break laws, or spread superstition.
The pledge mirrored Ministry of Information and Technology regulations that
went into effect in early 2002. They required Internet service providers to use only
domestic media news postings, to record information useful for tracking users and
their viewing habits, to install software capable of copying e-mails, and to immediately
end transmission of so-called subversive material.
Chinese authorities charged activists with subversion for using the Internet to
promote causes ranging from political change to worker rights. In August, a Gansu
court sentenced Li Dawei to an eleven-year prison term for downloading five hundred
“counterrevolutionary” essays and publishing them in book form. Lu Xinhua
and Wang Jinbo received four-year sentences for criticizing Jiang Zemin. Party
cadre Zhou Xiubao was detained in July for an Internet posting calling for “true
Marxists” in the CCP to join together. In August, public security officials detained
Chen Shaowen for articles on unemployment, legal defects, and social inequities.
By October 2002, courts still had not announced verdicts in the cases of five
activists tried for Internet-related offenses in August and September 2001.
A campaign to close unlicensed Internet cafés,begun in April,gained momentum
in June after a deadly fire in a Beijing café, and culminated in October with the promulgation
of new regulations. They banned small under-capitalized cafés, limited
hours of operation, banned users under sixteen, required identification card registration,
and permitted authorities to see Internet use records.Most cafés had operated
illegally due to restrictive licensing regulations and concomitant corruption.
Beginning January 1, Chinese authorities required foreign television outlets to
use a government “rebroadcast platform” to distribute their channels, thus enhancing
official censorship capabilities. A few weeks earlier, Beijing city authorities
ordered the dismantling of satellite dishes provided by cable television companies
to Chinese viewers. Revised “Provisions on Management of Satellite TV” required
universities, hotels, residences, and government institutions to reapply to view
overseas cable and satellite broadcasts. University departments had to prove
research need; hotels and foreign residence complexes had to prove 80 percent foreign
occupancy.
Restrictions on domestic print media escalated. Several Party circulars ordered
official newspapers to use caution when reporting on sensitive issues and not to
publish reports downloaded from the Internet. One circular reminded editors that
all stories related to central leaders and their families required approval from
“higher” authorities; that reports of major new policies must reference Xinhua, the
official news service; and that even “objective” stories that might affect stability or
incite the public to demand justice should not be published.
The official list of topics requiring caution included: Taiwan, Tibet, and East
Turkestan independence; religious extremists and Falungong; the military; social
stratification; the south-north water diversion project; advocacy of private ownership;
taxes and fees in rural areas; student loans; human genetic research; private entrepreneurs as Party delegates; lawsuits against the government; villagers who
sold blood; Forbes ranking lists; Confucian moral education in primary schools;
university rankings; the Qinghai-Tibet railroad; and major accidents. Authorities
also added restrictions on reporting legal cases.
In late 2001, after Securities Market Weekly published an article critical of wealth
amassed by National People’s Congress President Li Peng and his family, authorities
confiscated all copies of the issue. In March 2002, officials at the Ministry of
Propaganda ordered Nanfang Zhoumuo (Southern Weekend) to remove a feature
story about financial irregularities at Project Hope. The Communist Youth League
controls the foundation running the charity. In April, the magazine, under pressure,
fired three editors.The official Worker’s Daily came under fire for sympathetic
reporting on the plight of laid-off workers in China’s northeast. The Publicity
Department of the Chinese Communist Party warned against reporting on economic
restructuring and worker rights without considering the “overall national
interest”; conversely, the department ordered positive reporting on the government’s
efforts to help workers find new jobs.
In February, a Beijing district government office issued a directive, “Regarding
Strengthening the Management of Events Involving Interviews with Foreign Journalists,”
based on a Ministry of Foreign Affairs document. The directive stipulated
that only an official in good political standing could speak for a work unit; that a
written report to the district Foreign Affairs Office was required following an interview;
and that requests for conducting social surveys or opinion polls be refused.
The regulations prohibited interviews with Falungong “elements” or democracy
campaigners, and on matters related to ethnic minorities, religion, human rights,
and family planning. In November 2001, police officers detained a German crew
and a CNN cameraman filming a Falungong protest, and confiscated film, press
cards, residence permits, and equipment. In June, police held Chinese-Canadian
journalist Jiang Xueqin for two days for investigating labor unrest in the northeast.
Security officers beat a South Korean journalist covering a scuffle in the South
Korean consulate between South Korean diplomats and Chinese guards. The
guards had dragged away a North Korean man seeking asylum.
Authorities banned newsstand sales of Time for months after it published an
article about Falungong. In June, the Economist was taken off newsstands for publishing
an eighteen-page survey arguing for political reform in China. In July, officials
blacked out BBC World Service Television.
The publications and film industries were not spared. In January, officials from
the Party propaganda department and from six ministerial bodies announced a
crackdown targeting political publications. In September, the director of the State
Press and Publications Administration announced that “[a]ll possible measures
should be taken to ensure that the publications market will not air voices that challenge
the Party’s policies and unity.” A listing of banned books included best-selling
novels, a scholarly work on China’s income gap, one about peasants relocated
from the Three Gorges dam area, and a series through which intellectuals expressed
discontents. New regulations on film management permitted independent production
but only with approval from the relevant State Council (China’s executive
body) department.
In September, the People’s Daily warned cell phone spam mailers that political
rumor upset social stability.
Chinese authorities moved cautiously in stemming worker unrest, especially in
northeastern cities where, in March, tens of thousands of retired and laid-off
workers began the largest, longest, and best-organized campaigns since the 1989
pro-democracy demonstrations. They were protesting non-payment of back
wages and pensions, unilateral rollbacks of severance agreements, absence of a
social security safety net, and managerial corruption. In Liaoyang, security officers
attacked unarmed protestors, arresting four worker representatives, Yao Fuxin,
Pang Qingxiang, Xiao Yunliang, and Wang Zhaoming, on charges of “illegal
assembly, marches, and protests.” As of mid- November, prison authorities had
denied the men access to their lawyers. In Daqing, security forces threatened
employed workers with job loss if their relatives dared to protest. In all instances,
Chinese authorities flouted the right to free association guaranteed in China’s constitution
and in the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights which China has ratified. China also has ignored its commitments as a
member of the International Labor Organization (ILO) to respect the right of
freedom of association.
Other labor-related imprisonment occurred in 2002. On May 30, a Sichuan
province court sentenced Hu Mingjun and Wang Sen, members of the banned
China Democracy Party, to eleven- and ten-year terms, respectively, on subversion
charges for supporting striking workers. On June 1, Di Tiangui was detained in
Shanxi province on suspicion of subversion for trying to found a national organization
for retired workers.
In a developing trend, workers, migrant laborers, and environmental activists
began using the judicial system to seek redress. The Beijing-based Center for Legal
Assistance to Pollution Victims scored some successes.
Chinese authorities appeared conflicted as they grappled with an impending
HIV/AIDS epidemic in China, admitting to a growing number of cases and collaborating
on education and prevention with the U.N. and international agencies, but
also attempting to control information flows.The ambivalence was clearest in relation
to the detention and subsequent release of Dr.Wan Yanhai, internationally recognized
for establishing Aizhi Action, an AIDS information project, and for his
advocacy on behalf of AIDS-stricken villagers in Henan province. State security
officers seized Wan on August 24 for circulating by e-mail an internal government
document about the Henan epidemic. The document detailed how, after villagers
sold their blood at government-run health stations and workers extracted the
plasma, the workers injected villagers with the remaining pooled blood products,
creating a high risk of HIV transmission.Wan was released on September 20 following
an international outcry and a “confession” admitting that publishing the
report was a “mistake.” On September 13,Human Rights Watch and the Canadian
HIV/AIDS Legal Network presented Wan with the first “Award for Action on
HIV/AIDS and Human Rights,” an international award program established in
2002.He had been chosen as a recipient months before his detention.
Outspoken academics also continued to be targeted. In January, police in Anhui
detained retired professor Wang Daqi for refusing to cease publishing the journal Ecological Research.Wang,who had advocated the need for political reform to stop
environmental degradation, was still in detention as of mid-November 2002.
A three-month “strike hard” (yan da) campaign initiated in April 2001 to crack
down on criminal activity and speed the judicial process appeared to have become
a permanent feature of law enforcement in China.Targets for 2002 included organized
crime; corrupt officials; and those labeled terrorists, separatists, religious
extremists, or members of “criminal cults” such as Falungong practitioners.“Strike
hard” directives reward convictions, thus exacerbating due process violations such
as illegal detentions, hasty trials, severe sentences, and a meaningless appeal
process. In Shanghai,where a judge’s performance rating is based on the number of
cases handled, city officials revealed that courts reduced “unnecessary formalities
during interrogation, evidence presentation and court debates.”
Although the government made changes to law enforcement policies and procedures
aimed at bringing them closer to international standards, major discrepancies
existed between the policies as written and as implemented.Changes in 2002
included new disciplinary measures for corrupt or incompetent judges; new educational
and competency standards for would-be judges, prosecutors, and lawyers;
a code of ethics for prosecutors; the introduction of a chief prosecutor for each case
rather than a prosecution committee; a prohibition against firing judges without
proper legal procedures; and, as part of the effort to eliminate corruption, annual
internal disciplinary court inspections. But local cadres and Party officials still
interfered in the criminal justice system; criminal “confessions” elicited by torture
were admissible as evidence; and defense lawyers were routinely denied access to
their clients and to prosecution witnesses.
Public security and state security officials, charged with determining if sufficient
evidence existed for a case to be sent to the procuracy, a judicial agency responsible
for determining if sufficient evidence exists to indict a suspected criminal offender,
routinely ignored legal time limits and refused to tell family members the whereabouts
of suspects.Yang Jianli, a prominent dissident and permanent U.S. resident,
was detained on April 26 after having entered China a week earlier on a friend’s
passport. The Chinese government had refused to renew his own passport. As of
late October, Yang’s family was still unsure of his whereabouts. He had not had
access to a lawyer although he had been formally arrested on June 21.Without a
copy of the arrest warrant, which local authorities in Beijing refused to turn over,
no lawyer had been willing to take his case.
China’s National Bar Association reported that 70 percent of criminal defendants
were not represented, a reflection of lawyers’ fears that such cases jeopardized
their livelihoods and freedom. Lawyers working on civil cases also faced repression.
In December 2001, authorities in Shenzhen told Zhou Litai, whose practice was
registered in another city, that he could not continue to work in Shenzhen.He had
been representing injured and maltreated factory workers on a contingency fee
basis. According to the Lawyer’s Law, his license entitled him to practice anywhere
in China. In June, Zhang Jianzhong, head of the members’ rights committee of the
Beijing Lawyers’ Association, was arrested on suspicion of perjury. China’s Criminal
Law allows such a charge, which carries a prison term of up to seven years, if a
client’s statements in court contradict evidence obtained by public security officials. The perjury charge is permissible even if security officials used torture to
obtain the original “evidence.”
Chinese authorities continued to imprison China Democracy Party (CDP)
leaders and to prevent CDP members from working with overseas dissidents,
unemployed workers, or Falungong practitioners. At this writing, there had been
no further word about two leaders: Zhao Zhongmin, detained after a routine safety
check on a train revealed that he was carrying CDP materials; and Huang Shaoqin,
traveling with him, who managed to escape into hiding. Security agents also have
been on the lookout for overseas CDP members trying to enter China. In mid-June,
U.S. permanent residents Wang Bingzhang and Zhang Qi—a leader of the Zhong
Gong health and meditation group—and French-based former labor leader Yue
Wu,went missing in Vietnam.All three were believed to be CDP members.Vietnam
officials denied knowledge of the men’s whereabouts. The Chinese Foreign Ministry
also denied knowledge of the case after reports surfaced that the two were
being held in China.
At a major religious meeting in December 2001, President Jiang Zemin
announced that,“Under the current international and domestic conditions,we can
only strengthen, not weaken, the Communist Party’s leadership and the government’s
control over religion.”Premier Zhu Rongji added that cults were not religion
and must be eliminated. Falungong practitioners faced the most severe repression,
but through use of an expanded definition of “cult,” officials “legally” prosecuted a
wide range of groups and believers. In December 2001,“backbone”members of the
Mentuhui (a Christian group also known as the Society of Disciples) in Gansu were
administratively sentenced for organizing “home sects,”“cheating the people,” and
“disturbing social order.” Authorities announced the sentences at a public rally
called to “educate” the local population. In January 2002, a Fujian court sentenced
Hong Kong resident Lai Kwong-keung to a two-year term and a fine of approximately
U.S.$18,000 for importing bibles to China. Two codefendants from the
mainland, Lin Xifu and Yu Zhudi, received three-year terms. The charges against
Lai were reduced from “using a cult to undermine…the law” to “illegal trading”
after U.S. President George Bush expressed concern.All three men are members of
the “Shouters,” an evangelical Christian group made up of small congregations
without professional clergy. Little more than a week after sentencing, Lai was permitted
to serve his term at home under state surveillance. In April, the arrangement
was extended to Lin.
In February, members of the Holy Ghost Reform Church received seven-year
terms on charges of “using a cult to undermine . . . the law.” That same month,
police in Hubei province detained nine members of Wilderness Narrow Door for
setting up churches and meetings points,“recklessly praying,” and distributing cult
materials. In September, an appeals court overturned death sentences for Gong
Shengliang and four other leaders of another Christian group, the South Church,
on grounds of insufficient evidence. They had been charged with “fomenting an
evil cult.”At a new trial in early October lasting less than three days, the court sentenced
Gong and two others to life in prison; the remaining leaders received fifteenyear
terms. Within hours, the four who were acquitted received three-year
administrative sentences.
Falungong spokespersons reported that, as in previous years, practitioners died
in custody in 2002. (As of November 12, spokespersons claimed that since start of
the crackdown in 1999, 513 practitioners had died in custody.) Followers from
abroad detained in China, upon returning home, recounted tales of beatings and
torture. Courts continued to sentence core believers to long prison terms; public
security officials sent others directly to reeducation camps. In December, a Beijing
court sentenced six academics to terms of up to twelve years for distributing Falungong
materials. They were among some three hundred Qinghua University students
and staff detained at least temporarily in connection with the Falungong
crackdown. Nineteen Falungong members, tried for hacking into television stations
in Chongqing Municipality or Changchun, Jilin province to broadcast information
about the organization, received sentences ranging between four and
twenty years.
Relations between China and the Vatican remained tense. According to FIDES,
the Vatican news agency, fifty-three bishops and priests remained in custody or
under police surveillance in February 2002. In June, Religious Affairs Bureau officials
“took away” Father Chen Nailiang, the “underground” vicar general of Wenzhou,
Zhejiang province. In July, three priests from Baoding, Hebei province
received three-year terms for disturbing the social order; thirty people, most under
eighteen, were detained briefly in Fujian province for attending a secret catechism
class. Police interfered with two funerals for “underground” bishops by blocking
access roads.
China has not lived up to its obligation to refrain from returning refugees to
North Korea in situations where their lives or freedom would be threatened (the
obligation of nonrefoulement). It has refused permission for the U.N. High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) to visit its border with North Korea to assess the
situation, although in a handful of cases, it did permit UNHCR officials to interview
asylum-seekers in Beijing to determine refugee status. Instead, the government
responded to a spate of cases in which North Koreans sought asylum in
diplomatic missions in Beijing and Shenyang by tightening security around the
compounds and at the North Korean border, demanding that embassies and consulates
hand over the asylum-seekers, and prosecuting those who had helped North
Koreans to escape. Escapes have been to various countries—not just China. Some
140 North Koreans who managed to gain access to diplomatic facilities negotiated
safe passage to South Korea via a third country.
Tibet
Chinese government permission for a “private” visit to Tibet by personal representatives
of the Dalai Lama, and the release of seven high-profile Tibetan prisoners
before their terms expired opened a new chapter in China-Tibet relations. The
change in policy may have indicated a greater Chinese readiness for meaningful
dialogue, or it may have been meant to mute criticism from the international community
and remove a potential barrier to foreign investment.
For Tibetans, little changed.Authorities continued to arrest “political”offenders
and to place restrictions on religious practice. Even as representatives of the Dalai Lama met with local Tibetan government officials, the latter accused the Dalai
Lama of attempting to split the motherland and insisted that talks about his “individual
future” were predicated on his willingness to publicly state that Tibet and
Taiwan were inalienable parts of China.Throughout the visit, the Dalai Lama’s representatives
assured officials that he was seeking a “middle way,” not independence
but “genuine autonomy” for Tibet.
Authorities continued to deny access to Gendun Choekyi Nyima, the Panchen
Lama and second most important figure in Tibetan Buddhism.He was six years old
in 1995 when Chinese authorities seized him and his family. Chadrel Rinpoche,
who had been involved in the identification and selection of the Panchen Lama, was
released from prison, but was reported to be under house arrest. Nyima (Kelsang
Yeshe), Panam (Pema Namgyal), and Thubten, three aides to the eighteen-year old
Karmapa, another high ranking religious figure,were detained for aiding his escape
to India in 1999. In April, authorities seized Tenzin Delek Rinpoche, an influential
religious teacher, and several of his staff. Officials in Sichuan province continued to
demolish huts and evict residences from Serthar Buddhist Institute (Larung Gar),
a monastic encampment housing thousands of Buddhist students.
At a meeting in July of the heads of individual monasteries’ Democratic Management
Committees, the leader of the Regional Group for Monastery and Religious
Affairs, a local government body created by the Chinese, reportedly said that
monks and nuns should “boldly” expose the Dalai Lama and enhance their patriotic
awareness. In August, police detained five monks from Drepung monastery for
listening to pro-independence songs and for attempting to raise the banned Tibetan
flag. That same month, officials and neighborhood committee leaders told Tibetan
government workers in Lhasa that they were in danger of losing their pensions and
even their jobs if they traveled to Mount Kalish, a sacred site in western Tibet.
In July, authorities closed Tsang-Sul, a privately run school in Lhasa dedicated to
preserving the Tibetan language.
Xinjiang
Throughout 2002, China’s leaders reiterated their claims that Uighurs supporting
an independent East Turkestan were ipso facto terrorists aligned with an international
terrorist movement. On January 21, the State Council offered extensive
“evidence” of Muslim group terrorist activities. In May, regional Party committee
chairman Wang Lequan announced that one thousand Uighurs had fought with
the Taliban. The U.S. designation of the East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM)
as a terrorist organization and subsequent U.N. Security Council formal classification
of the group as such appeared to lend credence to China’s claims. Human
Rights Watch had no independent information on ETIM or its activities. Allegations
that the group advocated violent struggle against the Chinese, if true, would
distinguish it from most Uighur groups, which did not advocate violence.
Steps to curtail “ethnic splittists, religious extremists, and violent terrorists” in
Xinjiang included death sentences and extremely long prison terms. According to
reports, authorities executed two people and sentenced twenty-six others in Aksu
in November 2001 for “separatist” activities; arrested another nine people in December in the Byingolin Mongol prefecture for preaching illegally and translating
the Koran into local languages; arrested scores of people in March in Kasghar
for separatism and illegal religious activities; and in April in Hotan, sentenced several
more alleged separatists to seven- to twenty-year terms.
The clampdown also featured curbs on Uighur language, culture, and religious
practice. In January, after a jobless worker read a poem in the Xinjiang People’s Hall
in Urumqi that allegedly obliquely advocated a separate Uighur state, government
chairman Abulahat Abdurixit announced a purge of those who “openly advocate
separatism using the name of art.” In September, the Xinjiang Cultural Bureau and
Xinjiang Dance Troupe fired workers in charge of the program. A disciplinary circular
called the incident a “serious political event” from which officials must learn
a “deep lesson.”
In January, in what was billed as an attempt to prevent hostile foreign forces
from influencing opinion in the region, authorities in Yili prefecture cracked down
on illegal TV stations. They ordered increased surveillance of Muslim weddings,
funerals, circumcisions, and house moving rituals. In March, authorities closed
fifty-two of 118 state-controlled publications, citing “poor quality,” but there was
serious concern that those closed represented dissenting political viewpoints.
Reports surfaced in June of book burnings and tight censorship by the government-
owned Kashgar Uighur Publishing House. Titles destroyed included, A Brief
History of the Huns, Ancient Uighur Literature, and Ancient Uighur Craftsmanship.
Ideological campaigns for educators and religious leaders continued. In mandatory
“anti-separation struggle reeducation classes,”work teams admonished teachers,
particularly those in secondary schools, to pay more attention to politics. In
May,Xinjiang University encouraged using Chinese in courses previously taught in
Uighur or Kazakh. Mandatory classes for the region’s imams focused on political
indoctrination. Some two thousand were trained in 2002. To complement the
classes, authorities assigned ethnic cadres to specific mosques to engage in dialogue
with imams.
In late 2001, the U.N.Human Rights Committee ruled that Uighur scholar Tohti
Tunyaz had been arbitrarily detained. He was sentenced in March 1999 to an
eleven-year term for “inciting separatism” and “illegally acquiring state secrets”
after he returned to Xinjiang in connection with his research studies on ethnic
minorities at the University of Tokyo. In another prominent case, prison authorities
in Xinjiang continued to limit family visits to Rebiya Kadeer to once every three
months,breaching Chinese regulations that allow monthly prison visits.An Uighur
businesswoman, Kadeer had received an eight-year prison term in March 2000 for
sending newspapers to her husband in the U.S.
Hong Kong
In Hong Kong, government plans to introduce anti-subversion legislation overshadowed
other human rights issues. On September 24, Hong Kong’s Security
Bureau released a consultation document, “Proposals to Implement Article 23 of
the Basic Law,” outlining new laws on sedition, subversion, treason, and secession.
The document incorporated a three-month window for public comment. Critics questioned the Hong Kong government’s prior consultations with Beijing on the
proposed legislation, pointing to the provision in article 23 of the Basic Law (the
territory’s mini-constitution) that Hong Kong was to enact such legislation “on its
own.” They took issue with inclusion of subversion and secession, arguing that
existing laws on treason and sedition encompassed the two; and they expressed
concern that the document did not include the proposed wording of the new laws,
but used vague language that, if included in the final draft, could become severely
restrictive of basic rights.With Chinese courts in all probability having final jurisdiction
in cases involving subversion, opponents feared all political dissent would
be quashed. Specific concerns included: proposed police powers to search offices
and homes without warrants in cases of suspected crimes of subversion; outlawing
of groups affiliated with organizations which Beijing had banned on national security
grounds; the prohibition on giving support to organizations that Beijing had
labeled state security risks; a new offense called intimidation of the PRC government;
and broad language on theft of state secrets. Journalists expressed concern
that dissent could be interpreted as sedition, and that routine reporting on Hong
Kong mainland relations could be interpreted as a breach of the proposed state
secrets provisions.
Hong Kong authorities in 2002 also made it more difficult for opposition groups
to obtain permits for marches, demonstrations, and rallies. In the first such case
since the 1997 handover, two activists were charged with unauthorized public
assembly for organizing a rally. From April through September, police banned
protests on public order grounds, moved other rallies to locales where demonstrators
would be out of sight of the protests’ targets, and on at least one occasion seized
protestors’ bullhorns, arguing their use was disruptive.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Independent human rights monitoring organizations did not exist in China in
2002. Unregistered social organizations continued to be illegal by definition, and
the Civil Affairs Bureau (CAB), responsible for registering organizations, continued
to have the power to deny legal status to groups not meeting conditions set
forth in “Social Organization Registration and Management Regulations.” Such
conditions included alleged opposition to constitutional principles, damage to
national unity or the state’s interests, and lack of a government sponsor.Hong Kong
had a large and active nongovernmental organization (NGO) community, subject
to little government interference. There were reports of intrusive inquiries into
organizations with agendas the government disliked, but the affected groups continued
to function largely unimpeded.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
In 2002,China’s diplomacy succeeded in deflecting human rights criticism, preventing
attempts to censure China’s record at the U.N., and using the global antiterrorist agenda to justify its crackdown at home. As a new member of the World
Trade Organization with an attractive commercial market,China was able to ignore
international concerns about labor unrest and worker rights violations without significant
repercussions. Although Internet censorship created problems for some
major U.S.-based Internet companies, the business community failed to mount an
effective counter-strategy. China’s political use of psychiatric detention received
unprecedented international attention, but it was unclear whether the World Psychiatric
Association (WPA) would hold Beijing accountable to its commitment to
allow an independent WPA delegation visit to China.
United Nations
For only the second time since 1990, no country sponsored a resolution condemning
China’s human rights record at the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights meeting (March 18-April 26). The U.S. lost its seat on the commission
in 2002 and no European nation was willing to place China on the commission’s
agenda.
In August, then U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson
opened a U.N.workshop on judicial independence in Beijing at which she observed
that Chinese law and practice still falls short of international human rights standards.
In meetings with Vice-Premier Qian Qichen and other officials, Robinson
raised a number of individual cases, including Xu Wenli, Rebiya Kadeer, and those
of labor leaders in China’s northeast. She noted that the treatment of Tibetans and
Uighur Muslims was of particular concern and that China had used anti-terrorism
laws to crackdown on these groups.
In October, Secretary-General Kofi Annan emphasized the need for “complete
mobilization of society” to combat an escalating AIDS epidemic in China.
Chinese authorities continued to work with several U.N. agencies, among them
the U.N.Development Programme (UNDP), the U.N.Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
and the U.N. Education, Social, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Programs
included AIDS prevention, poverty reduction, health and hygiene improvement,
and rural education for girls.
China made no progress toward ratifying the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR), which it signed in October 1998.
In June, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) asked
the International Labor Organization’s (ILO) Committee on Freedom of Association
to take up the cases of the labor activists detained in the northeast. Although
the ILO is already involved in several technical assistance programs in China,
including development of a social security project,China still has not responded to
a June 2000 ILO request to send a direct contact mission to discuss freedom of association
European Union
The E.U. continued to stress engagement and dialogue, but refrained from overt
pressure on Chinese officials to improve human rights.
In March, the European Commission approved a strategy document setting out
a framework for E.U.-China cooperation over the next five years. Although it
focused on economic reform, the E.U. expressed concern over restrictions on civil
and political rights in China and the rights of ethnic minorities.
On March 5 and 6, the Spanish Presidency hosted an E.U.-China human rights
dialogue in Madrid. The General Affairs Council (E.U. foreign ministers) later
made several recommendations to China for improvement of human rights,
including ratifying the ICCPR; limiting the use of the death penalty while moving
toward its total elimination; working more closely with U.N. human rights mechanisms;
respecting the rights of prisoners and ending torture; respecting freedom
of expression, religion, and association; and respecting cultural rights and religious
freedom in Tibet and Xinjiang.
E.U. External Affairs Minister Chris Patten visited China in late March.He met
with President Jiang Zemin, and noted the E.U.’s concern about China’s human
rights practices, particularly its treatment of Tibet and the use of the death penalty.
A China-E.U. summit, hosted by the Danish Presidency and attended by Premier
Zhu Rongji, took place in Copenhagen on September 24, at the time of the
Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM).Despite the two sides’ agreement to “continue their
human rights dialogue on the basis of equality and mutual respect,” the meeting
was disappointing, laying out no concrete measures for improvement in China’s
human rights situation.The E.U. and China continued their human rights dialogue
in Copenhagen in November.
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Counter-terrorism was high on the agenda of the January Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) meeting. The five Central Asian members and China
agreed to step up campaigns against militant Muslim groups and “extremists” and
to form a regional counter-terrorism agency.
The Chinese embassy in Washington, D.C., in response to a Human Rights
Watch letter to all SCO governments urging inclusion of human rights issues on the
anti-terrorism agenda, said that China’s preservation of “national sovereignty and
territorial integrity” protected the human rights of its population from terrorists.
It also forwarded detailed accusations against Uighur groups allegedly involved in
terrorist activities.
India and Japan
In January, Premier Zhu Rongji made China’s first state visit to India in over a
decade. Human rights were not on the agenda of Zhu’s New Delhi meeting with
Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee. The two pledged cooperation on
counter-terrorism efforts and Zhu urged India to resume dialogue with Pakistan.
During a visit to Beijing by Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi in September,
Chinese officials agreed to schedule a bilateral human rights dialogue
meeting before the end of the year. The last such meeting had taken place in October
2000. Japan hoped to raise the dialogue talks to a higher level in the foreign ministry. During Kawaguchi’s visit, Japanese officials announced a likely reduction in
Japan’s Official Development Assistance (ODA) to China, a follow up to last year’s
25 percent cut. Japanese public and political opinion is strongly opposed to large
scale ODA to China in light of Beijing’s military build-up and its continued economic
growth. Yen loans to China in fiscal year 2001, ending March 31, 2002,
totaled U.S.$1.3 billion.
Australia and Canada
During his March visit to Australia, Chinese Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan
urged Australia to crack down on Falungong followers and to refuse to meet the
Dalai Lama during his upcoming May visit. Prime Minister John Howard and Foreign
Affairs Minister Alexander Downer did refuse to see the exiled Tibetan leader,
but other senior Foreign Affairs Ministry officials met with him. Downer declared
his meeting with Tang to be productive. Dialogue ranged from consular issues to
human rights.
Howard toured China only days after the Dalai Lama’s visit.Meetings with President
Jiang Zemin and other officials focused on business.
In mid-June,Canberra hosted Tibet’s Communist Party Secretary,Guo Jinlong,
on a one-week unofficial tour.Downer raised human rights concerns, in particular
Tibetan cultural identity and freedom of religion. He also noted Australia’s desire
to extend its human rights technical assistance program in China to Tibet.
Canada expected to continue its bilateral human rights dialogue at a November
meeting in Beijing.
United States
Human rights and religious freedom remained on the U.S. agenda, but terrorism
and China’s cooperation on strategic issues became the major issues.
Seeking to further stabilize political and economic relations, President George
W. Bush made his first official visit to Beijing in February. Bush focused heavily on
religious freedom in his private talks with Jiang Zemin, and later called on China to
embrace democracy and religious freedom in a speech at Qinghua University.Bush
said nothing publicly about China’s attempt to justify its crackdown in Xinjiang on
anti-terrorism grounds although when the two leaders met again in late October in
Crawford, Texas, he did comment on repression of ethnic minorities.
Jiang’s successor, Vice-President Hu Jintao, visited the U.S. in early May. In his
meeting with Hu, Bush reiterated his concern for religious freedom. There was
lengthy discussion about Tibet, with Hu reiterating the party line. The two agreed
on trade and terrorism. Hu snubbed congressional leaders by refusing to accept
four letters appealing for the release of political prisoners and for progress on
human rights. Secretary of State Colin Powell also raised human rights and Tibet
in a working session with Hu.
The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom in its annual report
in May issued a scathing assessment of the current state of religious freedom in
China,which later denied access to a commission delegation. The newly appointed Ambassador-at-Large for International Religious Freedom John Hanford visited
China in early August and met with government and officially sanctioned religious
groups.
In August, during Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage’s trip to Beijing,
the State Department added the East Turkestan Islamic Movement to its list of terrorist
organizations.The move was a major coup for China, expected to use the designation
to justify its broad repression of ethnic Uighurs.Armitage urged China to
“respect minority rights, particularly the Uighurs” and raised the cases of individual
political prisoners.
At the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) annual meeting in July
in Brunei, the State Department resisted pressure from Chinese Foreign Minister
Tang to resume the bilateral human rights dialogue until it saw tangible progress
resulting from the October 2001 session in Washington, D.C. Although China’s
response was minimal—a few prisoner releases and the Tibetan envoys’ visit to the
Tibet Autonomous Region—just days before the Bush-Jiang summit, the U.S. State
Deptartment announced that a dialogue meeting would be resumed the week of
December 16 in Beijing.
The Congressional-Executive Commission on China (CECC), established in
2000 to monitor human rights conditions in China and to make policy recommendations,
issued its first report in early October. It analyzed human rights trends
and made generally weak recommendations. The commission held two hearings
and several staff briefings during the year, but sent no congressional delegation to
China.
World Bank
Of the nearly U.S.$563 million the World Bank lent to China in fiscal year 2002
ending in June, $300 million went to tuberculosis control, sustainable forestry
development, and highway projects in western regions. The bank co-sponsored an
anti-corruption conference in Beijing in mid-April. In May, bank president James
Wolfensohn visited China.He urged China to improve corporate governance, and
in meetings with President Jiang Zemin, Premier Zhu Rongji, and the National
People’s Congress, he confirmed the bank’s commitment to help alleviate poverty
in the western regions.Wolfensohn met with various civil society representatives,
but did not initiate any new legal or judicial reform efforts or raise concerns about
Chinese Internet restrictions.
In November, the bank and the Chinese Ministry of Civil Affairs co-sponsored
an international seminar on nongovernmental organization (NGO) development
and regulation in Shanghai.Human Rights Watch asked the bank to privately intervene
with Chinese authorities on the detention of the HIV/AIDS activist Dr.Wan
Yanhai, but the bank declined.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Dangerous Meditations: China’s Campaign Against Falungong, 2/02
EAST TIMOR
East Timor became the world’s newest country on May 20 and was admitted
as the 191st member of the United Nations by the General Assembly on
September 27. East Timor’s new constitution included important human rights
protections and, with the support of the United Nations, the government took
important steps forward in a number of areas including policing. Despite the historic
changes, however, systemic problems remained in the criminal justice system,
and several critical issues, including the scope of a much discussed amnesty for past
abuses, remained unresolved.At this writing there were also still an estimated thirty
thousand East Timorese refugees in camps in West Timor. (See Indonesia.)
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
2002 was a year of political milestones in East Timor. On March 22, 2002, the
Constituent Assembly, elected in 2001, approved the country’s first constitution.
The constitution incorporated the protection of human rights as a state objective
and enshrined several basic political and civil rights in the text. These included the
right to a fair trial, criminal due process, freedom of expression, freedom of association,
and freedom of religion. The constitution also expressly forbid the death
penalty or life imprisonment, and included the rights to be free from torture, servitude,
and cruel or degrading treatment.
However, the constitution remained unclear on the position of minorities,
including non-citizens, and omitted some social and economic rights as well as the
right to be free from discrimination based on one’s sexual orientation.
On April 14, East Timor held its first presidential elections. The elections, generally
held to be free and fair by both the East Timor Independent Electoral Commission
and national and international observer groups, were contested by
Francisco Xavier do Amaral,who captured 17.3 percent of the votes, and Independence
leader Xanana Gusmao,who won with an overwhelming 82.7 percent of the
votes.
Finally, at 12:01 a.m. on May 20, 2002, pursuant to Security Council Resolution
1392 (2002), East Timor declared its independence in a ceremony attended by over
120,000 East Timorese, foreign dignitaries, and U.N. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan. Later that same day, East Timor swore in its first government and held an
inaugural session of parliament. The date also signified the end of the U.N. Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the start of its successor mission,
the U.N.Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).
Justice
Justice for atrocities committed under Indonesian rule and for continuing
everyday crimes raised some of the most pressing rights issues for UNTAET, for the East Timor Transitional Administration set up under its auspices, and for the independent
East Timorese government after May 20. On December 11, 2001, the
Special Panel for Serious Crimes of the Dili District Court (Special Panel) issued its
verdict in the first case to be tried in East Timor alleging crimes against humanity.
The Special Panel, consisting of two international judges and one East Timorese
judge, had been set up to hear cases from the Serious Crimes Investigations Unit
(SCIU), a body established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1272 to examine
incidents of mass killings and forced deportation as well as individual offences
of murder, rape, torture, and other crimes committed in East Timor between January
1, 1999 and October 25, 1999. It is estimated that at least one thousand civilians
were directly targeted and killed prior to and after the August 30, 1999
referendum in East Timor.Approximately 250,000 East Timorese were also forcibly
expelled to West Timor in September 1999. (The SCIU and the Special Panel continued
to operate in East Timor after independence, under the auspices of
UNMISET.)
In its December 11, 2001 verdict, the Special Panel found ten militia members
guilty of crimes against humanity on a number of different underlying charges,
including torture,murder, and forced expulsion. The cases, which alleged systematic
burning of homes and forced relocations of populations across the border into
Indonesian territory, as well as murders by members of the Tim Alpha militia in Los
Palos District in 1999,were significant in establishing that a state of armed conflict
existed in East Timor in 1999; that the local militia had been used by the Indonesian
army’s Special Forces (Komando Pasukan Khusus, Kopassus) in pre-planned,
systematic attacks on unarmed civilians following Indonesia’s defeat in the referendum;
and that Indonesian military and civil administrators were responsible for
the violence and forced expulsions.The Special Panel further found that the defendants
were aware of the systematic campaign against the population and must have
known that their actions contributed to it.
By September 2002, the Office of the General Prosecutor had filed thirty-nine
indictments involving 117 defendants, eight of them Indonesian nationals, for
crimes against humanity committed in East Timor.However, Indonesia continued
to refuse to cooperate with transfers of witnesses, suspects, and evidence, refusals
interpreted by UNTAET as a violation of the Memorandum of Understanding
between the Republic of Indonesia and UNTAET regarding co-operation in legal,
judicial, and human rights matters.
With its December 11, 2001 verdict, the Special Panel was believed to have
become the first court worldwide to apply laws originally formulated for the International
Criminal Court (ICC). (The ICC language had been incorporated into
East Timor’s criminal code.) On September 6, 2002, East Timor acceded to the ICC.
Although the verdict and indictments were important steps forward in East
Timor’s quest for justice, serious concerns remained about the work of the Special
Panel and the SCIU.The Los Palos case itself raised concerns regarding due process.
While prosecutors included experienced international criminal lawyers from the
SCIU, the defense was provided by staff members from East Timor’s drastically
under-resourced and inexperienced Public Defenders’ Office. In all, three international
lawyers and three East Timorese lawyers defended the ten accused, thereby
denying them access to separate defense counsel and raising potential conflicts of interest. Neither the East Timorese nor the international defenders had any previous
experience in crimes against humanity trials. There were additional problems
of continuity of representation: four of the accused had their final statements read
by someone who had not represented them at trial.
Systematic problems remained in other parts of the justice system. These
included a backlog of cases, inadequate and inexperienced defense counsel, lack of
resources, and unfilled vacancies for public defenders and judges. Judicial vacancies
slowed both trials and appeals. A lack of qualified interpreters exacerbated the
problem, contributing to delays, interruptions, and disputes over testimony during
proceedings.
There was also administrative mismanagement. On May 20, the contracts of a
number of judges and prosecutors expired. Renewals of appointment were originally
intended to be conditioned on satisfactory performance reviews, but those
reviews could not take place as there was neither a functioning review body nor had
relevant criteria been established to guide the reviews. A further complicating factor
was that the new constitution called for a judicial council to take over responsibility
for appointment of judges, but the council was not established until mid-July.
While the government argued that judges still had the authority to hear cases, a
number of judges argued that they lacked official jurisdiction, and the system effectively
ground to a halt from late May until mid-July.The matter was finally resolved
by a presidential decree stipulating the continuation of judicial appointments.
In early June, the entire court system shut down when all judges, prosecutors,
and public defenders were required to attend compulsory legal training on the constitution
and civil law issues. No personnel were available to review detentions.
Between ten and thirty suspects were released from Caicoli police station in Dili
alone, because they had been held beyond the seventy-two hour legal limit.
Concerns with the prison system also continued in 2002.Although physical conditions
for detainees were generally adequate, lengthy pre-trial detentions, illegal
detentions due to expired warrants, and overcrowding remained important concerns.
Civil society groups also expressed concern about government failure to
monitor individuals on conditional release to ensure that they were adhering to the
terms of their release.
Detained children continued to be housed with adults but had their own cell
blocks. There were complaints that children were at times held for lengthy periods
without justification.At this writing,one child reportedly had been held in pre-trial
detention since October 2001 for a traffic accident in which a young child was accidentally
killed.
Other serious crimes, including rape and domestic violence, consistently were
referred to traditional customary law mechanisms rather than to the courts. Such
mechanisms lacked basic due process protections and were criticized by a number
of East Timorese groups for failing to provide justice for victims, especially victims
of sexual violence.
The East Timorese Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
(CRTR) was established on January 21, 2002 when seven national commissioners
were sworn in. The commission was to work for two years to document human
rights violations committed between April 1974 and October 1999 in East Timor, and to facilitate community reconciliation. In April, thirty regional commissioners
were sworn in. A pilot project to take victim statements was undertaken on Atauro
Island and commissioners collected thirty-three statements from victims of murder,
torture, rape, and forced displacement.At the end of August, the CRTR carried
out its first community reconciliation program in Maumeta.
In July, a draft amnesty law for perpetrators of the 1999 violence was presented
to the parliament for debate. There was confusion over provisions defining who
would be eligible for amnesty and whether the law would treat members of the East
Timorese resistance more leniently than pro-Indonesia East Timorese, thereby
undermining the principle of equal protection under the law. At this writing, the
bill was stalled in parliament after much external and internal criticism of the draft.
Officers from the East Timorese Police Service (ETPS) gradually took over
responsibilities from U.N. Police (UNPOL) officers throughout the year, but continued
to be under-resourced. A growing number of complaints over the course of
the year against members of ETPS highlighted the urgent need for a mechanism to
investigate allegations of human rights violations by police officers and to impose
disciplinary measures where appropriate.At this writing, allegations of misconduct
continued to be investigated on an ad hoc basis by the UNPOL Professional Standards
Unit; recommendations regarding disciplinary action were the responsibility
of ETPS.
In January, East Timor Defense Force (FALINTIL-ETDF) troops replaced U.N.
peacekeepers in Lautem district. The transition appeared to go smoothly although
concerns remained about the lack of an internal disciplinary measure for soldiers
committing abuses. Several cases of alleged rape by newly deployed ETDF officers
were reported during the year.
At year’s end there were still approximately thirty thousand East Timorese
refugees in Indonesia, including approximately 1,500 reported missing and separated
children. (See Indonesia.)
The uncertain legal status of habitual residents (ethnically non-Timorese residents
who had lived in East Timor for five or more years directly proceeding the
popular consultation) became an issue several times during the year following
threats to returnee Indonesian families, who had fled or been forcibly removed
from East Timor to Indonesian territory following the referendum in 1999. Such
individuals received no legal status from the constitution, although a draft citizenship
bill contained provisions that would enable long-term non-Timorese residents
to stay in the country. Ethnic Timorese who returned from Indonesia in 2002
were generally well received with lower than expected levels of intimidation and
violence toward them.
During the year dozens of foreign nationals applied for asylum in East Timor.At
this writing, none had been granted refugee status by UNHCR in Dili. In the largest
case a group of fifty-eight Sri Lankans arrived in East Timor by boat on July 28.
Although they initially applied for asylum, all eventually decided to be repatriated
back to Sri Lanka by the International Organization of Migration (IOM). Most
rejected asylum claimants remained in East Timor with the status of undocumented
migrants. Although IOM offered assistance to those wishing to return to
their country of origin, some refused to do so, maintaining it was unsafe.With East Timor’s immigration services understaffed and under-resourced, it appeared that
such individuals, including at least six Russians, tens of Indonesians, and several
Vietnamese were destined to remain in legal limbo indefinitely.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
This year there were no attacks on human rights defenders in East Timor.
Human rights organizations and activists operated freely and continued to play an
active role in lobbying UNTAET, UNMISET, the Constituent Assembly, government
institutions, and the new parliament.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Following East Timor’s independence on May 20, the U.N. General Assembly
removed East Timor from its list of non-self-governing territories.U.N. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan named Kamalesh Sharma as the new special representative
(SRSG), and Sukehiro Hasegawa as deputy SRSG.
In August, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson made
her last official visit to East Timor. She announced plans for a two-year technical
coordination and cooperation program between the OHCHR and the East Timorese
government and signed a joint communiqué on human rights with Senior
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, José Ramos-Horta, and the chairperson
of the NGO Forum, Cecilio Caminha Freitas.
During her stay she also publicly denounced the verdicts in the first East Timor
trials from the Jakarta ad hoc tribunal and called for an international tribunal to be
set up to provide justice for the East Timorese.
The first act of East Timor’s new parliament was to reaffirm the U.N. Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. On September 27 East Timor became an official
member of the U.N.
On September 6, 2002, East Timor acceded to the Rome Statute of the ICC. In
response to U.S. pressure (which included withdrawal of three U.S. military
observers from UNMISET in July), however, foreign minister Ramos-Horta agreed
not to turn over U.S. government employees or nationals to the ICC. East Timor
was only the third nation to sign such a “Article 98” agreement with the U.S.At this
writing, the agreement had not yet been ratified by parliament.
World Bank
In May, a World Bank-sponsored donors meeting in Dili resulted in U.S.$360
million in foreign aid pledges from more than twenty-five participating countries.
Speaking at the conference, bank country director Klaus Rohland urged donors to
continue support for the next two to three years.
On August 28, a donor conference took place in Dili to assess the needs of East
Timor’s security forces, which were due to take over from U.N. peacekeepers in
2004. Australia, the U.S., New Zealand, South Korea, and Portugal had been the
main donors to the East Timor Defense Force.
Australia
True to Prime Minister Howard’s affirmation of the two nations as “partners in
this part of the world,” one of East Timor’s first acts as an independent nation was
the signing of a treaty with Australia to divide oil and gas revenues.Because income
from the deal, 90 percent of which will go to East Timor, was not due to begin to
flow until 2005, Australia together with other major foreign donors continued to
provide financial support for the new state. It allocated $19.75 million (Aus$36 million)
for the 2002-2003 fiscal year for poverty reduction and capacity-building programs
for government and public administration. Australians also constituted
roughly 25 percent of the United Nations peacekeeping force.
United States
The Bush administration gave strong financial backing to independent East
Timor but the administration did little to promote accountability by Indonesian
security forces for abuses in East Timor.
With strong bipartisan support from Congress, USAID funding for fiscal year
2002 totaled $25 million for economic and democracy programs; it requested $19
million for 2003.
Europe
The E.U. took the lead in negotiating a chairman’s consensus statement on East
Timor at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in Geneva in April. The statement
was congratulatory of the steps East Timor had taken to establish human
rights protections, including incorporating rights in line with the Universal Declaration
into the new constitution, and it encouraged further progress, notably
efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of the 1999 violence and cooperation
between East Timor and Indonesia.
The European Commission promised Û9 million (roughly U.S.$8.8 million) in
reconstruction assistance for 2002, as part of a three-year, 290 million euro contribution
to the World Bank-administered trust fund for East Timor.Additional allocations
totaled Û27 million (roughly U.S.$26.6 million) for the health system and
food aid. In late May, the commission adopted a five-year strategy for financial aid
to East Timor,prioritizing support of the health sector and rural development,with
Û46 million (roughly U.S.$45.4 million) in grants earmarked for the 2002-2004
period.
Portugal independently promised in December 2001 aid totaling Û100 million
(U.S.$98.7 million) to its former colony.
Indonesia
Reconciliation began slowly with the former occupier.Despite opposition from
some members of parliament, President Megawati traveled to Dili for the May
independence ceremony, in a clear symbolic gesture of support for normalized
relations between Jakarta and East Timor. After visiting the graves of Indonesian
soldiers killed during the occupation,Megawati briefly attended the independence
ceremony and, despite cheers from the crowd, looked uncomfortable as President
Xanana held her hand in the air. The presence of Indonesian naval vessels off shore
during the ceremony undercut the message of solidarity.
Japan
Japan continued to provide economic support to East Timor and pledged in
February to send 690 peacekeepers to East Timor to work primarily on engineering
and construction projects. Japan’s ambassador to the U.N. noted his country was
the largest direct assistance donor, with U.S.$120 million for development and
humanitarian aid, and a promise of $190 million over the next three years. Japan
also vowed to contribute $1 million to the new Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation, $19 million in emergency aid through the United Nations
Development Program’s Community Development and Rehabilitation (CDR)
projects, and $5.3 million to help East Timorese refugees in West Timor.
INDIA
In 2002, India witnessed its worst episode of communal violence in over a
decade, demonstrating the increasingly volatile consequences of a broad and
government-supported Hindu nationalist agenda in the country. In February and
March state-supported anti-Muslim violence in the northwestern state of Gujarat
claimed at least two thousand lives. As in Gujarat, attacks against historically discriminated
groups in other parts of the country, including Christians, Dalits (or socalled
untouchables), and tribals, were carried out with virtual impunity. Attacks
by militants continued to claim many civilian lives in the disputed region of Kashmir
and in the northeast.
The conflict in Kashmir persisted throughout 2002, as the safety of civilians and
political leaders came under regular attack by militant groups. Hundreds were
killed during, and in the weeks preceding, state assembly elections in September
and October. Moreover, heightened tensions between India and Pakistan once
again raised concerns of armed conflict, especially as both countries rapidly
deployed troops and refused diplomatic negotiation. Elections in Kashmir offered
some hope for a resolution to the crisis in the state.The new coalition government’s
action plan included a commitment to investigate allegations of human rights violations by Indian security forces, and a proposal to urge Delhi to hold peace talks
with Kashmiri groups.
The controversial passage of the draconian Prevention of Terrorism Act raised
concerns that, like its predecessor, the act would be used to target political opponents
and minorities in the name of the war against terrorism. HIV/AIDS continued
to spread rapidly around the country, while efforts by nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) to promote education and awareness were stymied by
extensive police harassment and abuse of outreach workers.
The United Nations increasingly recognized caste-based discrimination as a
violation of international law, calling for states parties to adopt legislative and constitutional
measures that would protect and uplift affected communities.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
On February 27, in the town of Godhra in Gujarat, a Muslim mob attacked a
train on which Hindu activists were traveling. The activists were returning from
Ayodhya, a town in Uttar Pradesh where they had supported the Vishwa Hindu
Party (World Hindu Council,VHP) campaign to build a Hindu temple on the same
site where Hindu militants had destroyed a mosque in 1992.Two train cars were set
on fire, killing at least fifty-eight people. In July, results of an official investigation
by the Ahmedabad-based Forensic Science Laboratory stated that the fire could not
have been set by the mob from the outside as had been alleged; the fire, it claimed,
was set from inside the train. Investigations into the attack were ongoing at this
writing.
The Godhra massacre was immediately followed by a four-day retaliatory killing
spree, in which over two thousand people, mostly Muslim, fell victim to mobs that
looted and burned their homes, destroyed places of worship and Muslim-owned
businesses, and gang-raped and sexually mutilated Muslim women and girls. In
some cases, pregnant women’s bellies were cut open and fetuses were pulled out
before the women were killed. In addition to the children who were direct victims
of the mobs, children were witnesses to horrifying violations and deaths of family
members.
Human Rights Watch’s investigations, and those of Indian human rights groups,
revealed that much of the violence was planned well in advance of the Godhra
attack and was carried out with state approval and orchestration.Gujarat is headed
by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), a Hindu nationalist party that also heads a
coalition government at the center. State officials and the police were directly
involved in the violence: In many cases, the police led the charge, using gunfire to
kill Muslims who got in the mobs’ way. The groups most directly responsible for
this violence against Muslims included the VHP, the Bajrang Dal (the militant
youth wing of the VHP), and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (National Volunteer
Corps, RSS), collectively forming the sangh parivar (or “family” of Hindu
nationalist groups).
Mobs arrived by the thousands in trucks, chanting slogans of incitement to kill,
and armed with swords, tridents, sophisticated explosives, and gas cylinders. They were guided by computer printouts listing the addresses of Muslim families and
their properties.While army troops had been flown in to quell the violence, state
officials refused to deploy them until after the worst violence had ended. In the
weeks that followed the massacres, Hindu homes and places of business were also
destroyed in retaliatory violence by Muslims.
In the aftermath of the violence, authorities embarked upon a cover-up of their
own role, and that of the sangh parivar, in the attacks against Muslims. While
numerous police reports filed by eyewitnesses specifically named local VHP, BJP,
and Bajrang Dal leaders as instigators or participants in the violence, the police,
reportedly under instructions from government officials, faced pressure not to
arrest them, or to reduce the severity of the charges filed. Top police officials who
had sought to protect Muslims were removed from positions of command.
Gujarat’s Chief Minister Narendra Modi, formerly a RSS volunteer and propagandist,
came under severe scrutiny for his role in the attacks.
At the time of this writing, efforts to bring perpetrators to justice were virtually
nonexistent. To the contrary, the state government appeared to have been emboldened
by the violence, calling for early Gujarat legislative assembly elections in October
that would have swept the BJP back into power, on a rising sentiment of Hindu
nationalism. The Electoral Commission, however, prohibited such a move, noting
that Gujarat was still devastated by the communal violence, and set December 12
as the election date.
The destruction, as well as enmity and insecurity left by the communal violence,
caused the forcible displacement of over one hundred thousand Muslims into over
one hundred makeshift relief camps throughout Gujarat, some located in Muslim
graveyards. The majority of these camps only remained open until June, when the
government unilaterally began to close them,forcing thousands of victims to either
enter unofficial relief camps or to return to villages where their security was continually
threatened. In October the government announced that the few remaining
camps would be disbanded by October 30. Throughout this period, the state government
failed to provide adequate and timely humanitarian assistance to the
internally displaced. Problems included serious delays in government assistance
reaching relief camps, inadequate state protection, and failure to provide medical
and food supplies and build sanitation facilities.Moreover, nongovernmental relief
workers seeking to assist victims of violence were limited by a lack of access and
protection.
On September 24, the violence began anew when gunmen stormed the Swaminarayan
Hindu temple in Gandhinagar,Gujarat, killing at least twenty-eight people
and injuring fifty-three. The Indian government responded swiftly, taking appropriate
steps to maintain law and order by deploying approximately three thousand
army personnel during a nationwide strike called by the VHP to protest the attack.
Critics of the government remarked that had it acted as quickly following the
Godhra massacre, many deaths could have been prevented. Indian officials also
called on citizens to end the cycle of violence by refraining from taking the law into
their own hands. The incident once again heightened tensions with Pakistan,
blamed by India for the attack.
The violence in Gujarat underscored the volatile consequences of rising Hindu nationalist sentiment, propagated by the sangh parivar. Training camps known as
shakhas continued to spread throughout the country, providing extensive physical
and ideological training to men as well as young boys targeted in recruitment
drives. This revivalist campaign included the “Hinduization” of education, including
the revision of history books to include hate propaganda against Islamic and
Christian communities. In September 2002 the National Council of Educational
Research and Training released new textbooks for Indian children in implementation
of a new educational framework, following the lifting of a stay by the Indian
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court had rejected public interest litigation that
argued the new framework would violate the constitutional requirement of secularism
given the introduction of “value education” into the curriculum, seen by
many as a means of injecting religious instruction into education. Connections
between the drafters of the new textbooks and Hindu nationalist organizations,
revealed only once the stay had been lifted, increased these concerns.
Member organizations of the sangh parivar also continued to distribute hate literature,
direct violent attacks, and mount conversion efforts against other minority
communities, most notably Christians and tribals. Attacks against Christians
included violence against nuns, priests, and missionaries, and the destruction of
religious sites.
On February 17, in the southern state of Karnataka, a church in the town of
Hinkal was attacked during morning mass. Seventy men, draped in the Hindu
nationalist signature saffron flags, descended on the church, armed with clubs and
hurling bricks and stones at the congregation. The police eventually arrived at the
scene, but did not protect the worshipers or immediately arrest the perpetrators
(the police later reported having arrested nine of the assailants). A similar incident
took place in the Koraput district of the eastern state of Orissa on April 29, when a
church with twenty worshippers was torched by fifty assailants.
Individuals were also the targets of religious violence. On June 5, in the western
state of Maharashtra, a pastor known for his active involvement with the Christian
Revival Center was assaulted in his home, along with his family, by a gang of sangh
parivar members who were reportedly upset with the regular Sunday worship services
in the area. The State Minority Commission subsequently ordered police protection
for the pastor, and the police were successful in apprehending the assailants.
Human Rights Watch continued to receive reports of Dalits falling victim to
caste-based violence, most often at the hands of upper castes who perpetrated these
crimes with almost complete impunity. In May three Dalits in the southern state of
Tamil Nadu were tortured by a village leader: two were branded with a hot iron rod
and forced to feed human feces to each other. The incident occurred after the three
victims publicly announced that the village president had yet to return money she
owed one of them.One of the victims was subsequently strangled and beaten by the
president’s husband and son.While the police eventually charged the perpetrators
with crimes under the Indian Penal Code and the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act (1989), Dalits complained that as a result of
the incident local upper-caste community members refused to give them work.
In September, the Center for Dalit Human Rights in Rajasthan, a northern state,
organized a two-day march, protesting community policies in the village of Chakwara that barred Dalits from using public ponds or entering village shops. An
upper-caste mob descended on the march, pelting stones and attacking both the
demonstrators and the police, injuring fifty people. The policies were put in place
in December 2001 when the village’s upper-caste community imposed a fine on
two Dalits who had used public bathing facilities.Despite lodging a complaint with
state authorities, Dalits continued to be excluded and to face threats of violence.
On October 16 in Jhajjar district, Haryana, five Dalit youths were lynched by a
mob, reportedly led by members of the VHP in the presence of local police officials,
following false rumors that the Dalits had killed a cow—an animal regarded as
sacred in the Hindu religion. Nearly a month later five people were arrested,
prompting a backlash by villagers who pelted police with stones and blocked off
roads for nearly a week. The VHP reportedly also forced shops, businesses, and
schools to close in protest of the arrests. The local leader of the VHP,Acharya Giriraj
Kishore, said he had no regrets over the incident and that the life of a cow was
worth more than that of five Dalits.
Dalit women and girls were often subject to sexual harassment and violence. For
example, on April 5 four upper-caste men abducted a fourteen-year-old Dalit girl
from her home just outside Jaipur, Rajasthan, and gang-raped her over a period of
three days. Upon her return to her village, the village’s upper-caste community
threatened to remove her family from the village if they reported the incident. On
November 3 a Dalit woman in Kishanganj, Bihar was paraded half-naked by a
group of people who wanted to teach a lesson to her family for not relinquishing
their claim to a piece of land.
The controversial Prohibition of Forcible Conversion of Religion Bill was passed
in the state of Tamil Nadu on October 31. The new law attracted widespread criticism
because it was feared it would make it more difficult for poor people, persecuted
minorities, and others ostracized under the caste system to convert from
Hinduism to another religion. Ordered by the AIADMK-ruling government of
Chief Minister Jayalalitha Jayaram, the bill found support with the federal government,
led by the BJP.
In a positive development, on May 9,Gujarat’s Allahabad High Court dismissed
a private action brought by a father against a man who had married his daughter in
an inter-caste marriage.The defendant claimed that his wife’s parents threatened to
kill him and his wife if they did not divorce.Although only reaffirming existing laws
on caste discrimination, the court’s ruling used strong language against the caste
system and such killings, and urged the police to intervene when such situations
arise.
In January, the state government of Madhya Pradesh adopted the landmark
Bhopal Declaration following a two-day conference titled “Charting a New Course
for Dalits for the 21st Century,” which was organized with the support of the
National Campaign for Dalit Human Rights. The declaration’s twenty-one point
agenda included the enforcement of living wages for agricultural laborers, the
restoration of alienated land for tribals, strict enforcement of the Bonded Labour
System (Abolition) Act (1976), honest implementation of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act (1989) and Rules (1985), and
the elimination of the caste-based practice of manual scavenging. 
The Indian government continued to exploit rhetoric surrounding the global
“war against terrorism” in order to target religious minorities and political opponents.
Most notably, the long debated anti-terrorism legislation, the Prevention of
Terrorism Act (POTA), was pushed through parliament on March 26. Its close
resemblance to the much misused and now lapsed Terrorists and Disruptive Activities
(Prevention) Act (TADA) of 1985 (amended 1987) foreshadowed a return to
the widespread and systematic curtailment of civil liberties.
POTA created an overly broad definition of terrorism, while expanding the
state’s investigative and procedural powers.Moreover,under POTA, suspects can be
detained for up to three months without charge, and up to three months more with
the permission of a special judge. Since its passage, POTA has been implemented
against political opponents in various parts of the country. On July 11 in the state
of Tamil Nadu,Vaiko, a leader of the political party Marumalarchi Dravida Munetra
Kazhakam (MDMK),was arrested for making remarks in support of the banned
terrorist group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). Only two weeks after
Vaiko’s arrest, P.Nedumaran, a leader of the Tamil Nationalist Movement, was also
arrested under POTA for making pro-LTTE remarks at a conference on April 13.
In Kashmir, the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) chairman, Yasin
Malik, was held under POTA on March 26, on charges of receiving smuggled
money from a Pakistan-based separatist group.Malik was released on bail for medical
reasons, but was immediately rearrested under a Jammu and Kashmir preventive
detention law, the Public Safety Act (PSA), for anti-national activity.
The former chairman of the All-Party Hurriyat Conference (APHC), Syed Ali
Geelani, suspected of funneling money to Pakistan’s Inter Services Intelligence, was
arrested and detained in the eastern state of Bihar following raids on his residence,
and charged under POTA and PSA on June 9.Both the JKLF and the APHC are separatist
parties that have advocated Kashmir’s independence from India, raising
concerns that the charges against their leaders were politically motivated.
Insurgency attacks and counterattacks by Indian troops continued to threaten
security and stability in the northeastern states. On August 20, twenty Indian paramilitary
soldiers were killed in an ambush in the state of Tripura. According to the
police, the ambush was carried out by the separatist group, the National Liberation
Front of Tripura (NLFT).
Civilians in the northeast also came under direct attack. On August 13, in a pre-
Independence Day attack, militants executed fifteen passengers traveling on a bus
through the state of Assam, and injured twenty other people. The strike was suspected
to be a joint attack by separatist groups, the United Liberation Front of
Assam (ULFA), the National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB), and the
Achik National Volunteer Council (ANVC). Indian soldiers also participated in
violence, raiding separatist hideouts, and in some cases summarily executing separatist
leaders.
On December 13, 2001, a five-man assault team, believed to be part of Lashkare
Taiba, an Islamic guerrilla group based in Pakistan, stormed Parliament in New
Delhi, killing fourteen people. The Indian government issued a sharp rebuke,
accusing Pakistan of failing to reign in the activities of terrorist organizations.Military
deployment following the attack included the emplacement of large numbers of anti-personnel and anti-vehicle mines along the border—apparently one of the
largest mine-laying operations worldwide in many years. The Indian press cited
numerous reports of civilian casualties along the border, as well as the killing and
injuring of Indian army personnel and border security troops as they planted the
mines.
In May, three gunmen hijacked a bus, killing seven passengers, and then raided
the residential quarters of a Kashmiri army base in Kaluchak.At least eighteen civilians
were killed in the raid on the residential compound. State police identified the
gunmen as residents of Pakistan’s Punjab province. In the days that followed the
attack, both India and Pakistan fully deployed army troops along the border, and as
exchange of artillery became heavier, the countries’ conflict was escalating.
On July 13, gunmen suspected to be part of the Lashkar-e Taiba launched an
attack on a shantytown in Jammu. Disguised as Hindu holy men, the group threw
grenades at a shop in Qasim Nagar, a migrant laborer colony, and then fired on
civilians who were standing nearby. The attack killed twenty-seven civilians, and
severely injured thirty more.
On May 21, Abdul Ghani Lone, a moderate Kashmiri separatist leader, was
assassinated by unidentified assailants during a memorial rally in Srinagar, the
summer capital of Jammu and Kashmir. Lone belonged to the APHC, but was
largely perceived as a pragmatist and peace advocate.
State assembly elections were held in Jammu and Kashmir in four phases from
September 16 to October 8. The election, which was marked by widespread violence
and allegations of vote rigging, left no party with a clear majority but resulted
in a decisive defeat for the National Conference party,which had held power in the
state for most of the preceding five decades. The People’s Democratic Party (PDP)
and the Congress party together won thirty-six seats and formed a coalition government,
headed by PDP leader Mufti Mohammad Sayeed. In a hopeful move, Sayeed
announced that the government would investigate all cases of custodial killings
and human rights abuses and punish offenders.He also committed to opening dialogue
for peace and to fighting cross-border and indigenous militancy. On November
11, a week after Sayeed was sworn in as chief minister, separatist leader Yasin
Malik was released from prison—one of numerous political prisoners whose
release was ordered.
The elections sparked an escalation of violence throughout the region, carried
out by both militants and Indian security forces. Between August 2, when the elections
were announced, and September 24,when the second phase of elections came
to an end, over five hundred people were killed. State Minister Mushtaq Ahmed
Lone was assassinated on September 11 while campaigning for re-election. On September
19, gunmen stormed a high school north of Jammu, killing a teacher and a
student, while security forces and militants engaged in a series of standoffs. The
third phase of elections brought renewed and heightened violence as well. On
October 1, as polls opened, three gunmen hurled grenades at a bus in the town of
Hiranagar, killing nine people and injuring ten others, while militants launched
grenade and rocket attacks at polling stations throughout the district of Anantnag.
Despite the violence, voter turnout was significantly higher than for national elections
in 1999.
Throughout India, women continued to be victimized by rape, trafficking, sexual
harassment, and domestic violence, often with little recourse to justice.
Although the government passed the Protection from Domestic Violence Bill
(2002), women’s groups asserted that it fell short of achieving meaningful reform.
In 2002, at least fifteen million children, most of them Dalits,worked as bonded
laborers in conditions of forced servitude. Most worked in agriculture; others
picked rags, rolled beedi cigarettes, packaged firecrackers, cleaned hotels, or wove
silk saris and carpets. Human Rights Watch investigations in 2002 revealed that in
the silk industry, bonded children worked twelve or more hours a day, six-and-ahalf
or seven days a week, producing silk thread and helping weave silk handloom
fabric. Both boys and girls suffered injuries and disease from fumes, machinery,
sharp threads, boiling water, or handling dead worms, as well as verbal and physical
abuse from their owners.
Despite increased public awareness about child labor, the child labor law continued
to be poorly enforced,with high-level officials advocating nonenforcement.
Certain states, the central government, and NGOs advanced schools to rehabilitate
child workers, a positive step but one that reached only a small fraction of working
children. Although the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) continued
with some success to pressure local and state governments to enforce laws outlawing
bonded labor and certain forms of child labor, the commission’s limited
resources and power required it to focus on only a few areas and industries. Elsewhere,
caste bias, sympathy to employers, corruption, and apathy contributed to
the government’s failure to free bonded laborers, rehabilitate them, and prosecute
their owners.
In 2002, the lower house of Parliament passed the 93rd Constitutional Amendment
giving all children ages six to fourteen a fundamental right to free and compulsory
education provided by the state. The amendment also placed a
constitutional obligation on parents and guardians to provide educational opportunities
to these children. Activists strongly objected to the exclusion of children
falling outside the age range prescribed by the amendment, and to the obligation
placed on parents. At this writing, the amendment was awaiting the president’s
endorsement.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Given the absence of government-coordinated relief efforts, NGOs and community
groups assumed much of the responsibility for delivering supplies and aid
to victims in Gujarat’s relief camps and establishing rehabilitative services such as
schools, trauma counseling, and legal assistance. In doing so, they faced limited
access to the relief camps and serious threats to personal safety. Police and members
of the city administration obstructed the work of NGOs and other organizations
attempting to deliver supplies to relief camps, denying access to transport
services and refusing the use of their own trucks. Moreover, government officials
refused to provide aid workers with the security and protection that they needed to
provide assistance. The National Human Rights Commission also highlighted the need for rehabilitation and justice efforts in Gujarat, sending a team to monitor the
situation shortly after the riots and issuing a set of recommendations to the central
and state governments.
Activists battling India’s growing HIV/AIDS epidemic also met considerable
resistance to their work, which included direct attacks on their security. India is
home to one of the largest and fastest-growing HIV/AIDS epidemics in the world.
As the epidemic has spread, the longstanding practice of stigmatizing high-risk
groups, such as women in prostitution and men who have sex with men, assumed
deadly proportions. NGOs conducting HIV/AIDS prevention programs for highrisk
populations reported severe harassment of their workers by the police.
An example was the abuse faced by SANGRAM/VAMP, a collective of women in
prostitution. The organization suspended its anti-AIDS operations in February
when violent thugs drove its members out of their homes in Nippani, Karnataka,
with the complicity of a local police official. Before this disruption,
SANGRAM/VAMP built up a program that delivered 350,000 condoms per month.
By year end, it managed to reestablish most of this work, but harassment by the
police remained a concern for many Indian NGOs working with women in prostitution
to fight back against AIDS. In November 2002, Human Rights Watch honored
Meena Seshu, the general secretary of SANGRAM, for her work in exposing
and stemming India’s growing HIV/AIDS crisis. In Kolkata, the sex worker organization
Durbar Mahila Samanwaya Committee (DMSC) faced similar abuse and
intimidation.When the DMSC filed a complaint about the beating of one of their
members, local thugs publicly beat up DMSC president Swapna Gayen in the presence
of police who had been called for help. This and other instances of intimidation
led to mass demonstrations by sex workers, and the arrest of two of the
perpetrators. At this writing, however, other key perpetrators remained at large,
and abuses against sex workers in Kolkata persisted.
The situation was equally challenging for organizations seeking to assist men
who have sex with men. Police harassment of these organizations, including outreach
workers focusing on HIV/AIDS prevention, is a chronic problem, but worsened
in early 2002. After the December 2001 attack on Parliament in New Delhi,
AIDS outreach workers from Naz Foundation (India) Trust (NFIT) reported
increased police scrutiny on the streets of the capital.Groups in Chennai and Bangalore
told Human Rights Watch that various security incidents, some perhaps
related to communal violence in other parts of the country, made the police nervous
and prone to harass AIDS workers.
Men who have sex with men are not only stigmatized but are effectively criminalized
by the “unnatural offenses” provision of the Indian Penal Code (section
377) that bans sex between men. In late 2001, NFIT, with the assistance of the
Lawyers Collective ofMumbai and New Delhi, brought a petition to the Delhi High
Court for the repeal of section 377.An affirmative ruling on the petition would dramatically
improve the climate for AIDS prevention work among men who have sex
with men in India.At this writing, the case was ongoing.
Individual human rights workers also came under direct threat. On June 19
Navleen Kumar, a land rights activist who helped tribals regain their land from
builders, was fatally stabbed.Kumar had long fought for the land rights of tribals as builders expanded development efforts to the outskirts of Mumbai, and was
repeatedly threatened for her continued work. On July 8 P.B.D’Sa, vice president of
the Karnataka state branch of the People’s Union for Civil Liberties, was stabbed
and sustained serious injuries. Police personnel reportedly were involved in the
attack. This was the second attempt on D’Sa’s life; the first was in 1988. The longawaited
State Human Rights Commission was formed in Uttar Pradesh with the
governor’s approval of its five members on October 7.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The communal violence in Gujarat and the conflict in Kashmir took center stage
in the international community’s political dealings with India. In April,British officials
in India issued a scathing internal report stating that the violence in Gujarat
was planned, possibly months in advance of the Godhra attack,with the support of
the state government. Responding to growing international scrutiny into the violence,
the Indian government stated that it “does not appreciate interference in [its]
internal affairs.”
United Nations
Despite strong international reaction to the communal violence in Gujarat, the
Indian government refused to solicit or accept the assistance of U.N. agencies, only
exacerbating already dismal conditions in relief camps. In September however, the
then U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights,Mary Robinson, issued a statement
asking the Indian government to ensure the protection of internally displaced
persons as they returned to their homes and to initiate prosecutions against those
who perpetrated the violence.
Following the momentum and mobilization that Dalit organizations achieved
at the 2001 U.N.World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR) in Durban, South Africa, the U.N. focused
on the issue of caste discrimination. In August, the sixty-first session of the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) included a thematic
discussion on descent-based discrimination. The Committee recognized castebased
discrimination as a form of descent-based discrimination and strongly condemned
its practice as a direct violation of the Convention on the Elimination of
all forms of Racial Discrimination. It further recommended that states parties
adopt legislative and constitutional measures that would prohibit all forms of
descent-based discrimination while ensuring measures to achieve internationally
guaranteed rights for affected communities.
United States
The U.S. put urgent priority on high-level diplomatic efforts to lower tensions
between India and Pakistan over Kashmir.U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell visited
India in January and July, and the U.S. took the lead in pressing other governments to intervene.Powell’s July visit to New Delhi was marred by a series of attacks
by suspected militants in Srinagar. In October senior U.S. official Richard Haas visited
the region in an effort to defuse tension and encourage India and Pakistan to
resume dialogue. However, India said a dialogue with Pakistan could only resume
when infiltration by armed separatists across the Line of Control (LoC) dividing
Kashmir stopped.
On October 10, the U.S. endorsed what it deemed the successful conclusion of
elections in Jammu and Kashmir despite violence and allegations of intimidation
and voting irregularities.The State Department applauded the efforts of the Indian
Election Commission and the courage of the candidates and the voters who participated
despite the violence and intimidation, though the U.S. condemned electionrelated
violence and voting irregularities.
In response to the Gujarat violence, the Bush administration sent a State
Department official to New Delhi in late May to meet with government officials and
the national commissions on human rights and minorities. But intensive lobbying
by members of the Indian-American community prevented introduction of a resolution
in the U.S. Congress condemning the violence. The U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) held a hearing in June on the violence
and the U.S. response. On September 30, USCIRF recommended for the first time
that the Secretary of State designate India among the twelve “countries of particular
concern”(CPC) under the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 (IRFA).
IRFA requires the president to oppose egregious and systematic violations of religious
freedom by taking specified diplomatic or economic actions.
The U.S. increased its military support of India. Secretary of Defense Donald
Rumsfeld went to New Delhi in June. Congress approved the sale of military
equipment, including $140 million in radar equipment, aircraft engines and submarine
and helicopter parts. In September, India announced the purchase of
another $100 million in U.S. defense equipment, including artillery radar.Cooperation
on counter-terrorism initiatives between the U.S. and India included intelligence
sharing, training, and anti-money laundering cooperation.
European Union
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on May 16 “strongly condemning”
the communal violence in Gujarat. It also called on the central and state governments
to investigate the killings, noting the overwhelming majority of Muslim
deaths. The resolution was followed by leaks of an internal E.U. report that found
evidence of state complicity and pre-arrangement by Hindu nationalist groups.
The E.U. welcomed the completion of assembly elections in Jammu and Kashmir.
While commending the efforts of the Indian Election Commission in its efforts
to promote free and fair elections, and condemning election-related violence and
the resulting loss of life, the E.U. also urged the Indian government to investigate
reports of election irregularities.
The third annual summit between the E.U. and India was held in Copenhagen,
Denmark on October 10. The resulting Agenda for Action included commitments
to further develop regular bilateral dialogue on democracy and human rights; cooperate to promote democracy, development, fundamental freedoms, and the
rule of law; and increase cooperation in counter-terrorism initiatives. India
remained the European Commission’s largest single recipient of E.U. aid in Asia.
Funding for 2002-06 was expected to total Û225 million (U.S.$219.6 million). The
commission identified poverty elimination as the guiding principle of aid activities,
with a focus on elementary education and basic health.Other funding priorities
included programs that incorporate the experience and needs of women and
other socially marginalized groups, as well as good governance programs.
Japan
Japan repeatedly urged both India and Pakistan to resume dialogue on Kashmir.
During a meeting of the Japanese and Indian foreign ministers at the ASEAN
regional forum in Brunei in August, a joint statement was issued on economic
cooperation announcing that Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi would visit India
(no date was announced). Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi also made an appeal
for “free, fair and inclusive” elections in the state assembly elections in Jammu and
Kashmir.
Koizumi reiterated Japan’s concerns about Kashmir when he met with Prime
Minister A.B.Vajpayee during the U.N. General Assembly in New York in September,
while also focusing on nuclear proliferation and bilateral aid.
In October 2001, Japan lifted sanctions against India imposed after its nuclear
tests in May 1998. Sanctions included a freeze on Official Development Assistance
(ODA) yen loans and grants, except for humanitarian purposes. By 2002, Tokyo
had significantly boosted aid to India, including nearly U.S.$500 million in ODA
for the Delhi Metro and the National Thermal Power Corporation plant in Andhra
for the Delhi Metro and the National Thermal Power Corporation plant in Andhra
Pradesh, plus over $20 million in grant aid. The assistance was given as part of
Japan’s emergency assistance to countries affected by the war against terrorism.
World Bank and Asian Development Bank
India continued to be one of the World Bank’s largest borrowers: it received
U.S.$2.1 billion from the World Bank in fiscal year 2002. The India country assistance
strategy for 2001-04 targeted aid for poverty reduction, including health and
education, HIV/AIDS programs, and rural development.
The Asian Development Bank provided loans totaling $1.5 billion in 2001 (latest
figures available), including loans for power project development and the
rebuilding of areas damaged by the earthquake in Gujarat in January 2001.Half of
the ADB’s lending was given to state-level projects.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Epidemic ofAbuse: Police Harassment of HIV/AIDS Outreach Workers in India, 6/02
“We Have No Orders to Save You,” State Participation and Complicity in Communal
Violence In Gujarat, 4/02
INDONESIA
On October 12, two car bombs exploded in Kuta, South Bali, killing at least
188 civilians. Most of those killed were foreign tourists but an estimated
quarter of the fatalities were Indonesian. The bombs and the aftermath dominated
national and international news for much of the remainder of the year. In response
to international pressure, mainly by the United States, President Megawati issued
two presidential decrees in lieu of legislation to address terrorism in Indonesia and
to facilitate the investigations into the Bali attack. Prominent Muslim cleric Abu
Bakar Ba’asyir was arrested in the wake of the attack but was charged for the separate
Christmas Eve bombings of 2000 and other crimes. The suspected terrorist
organization which many believe he heads, Jemaah Islamiyaah, was designated a
terrorist organization by the United Nations.
Despite restoring some political stability to Indonesia during its year and a half
in office, the administration of President Megawati Sukarnoputri failed to deal with
several major human rights challenges. These included continued violations of
international human rights law by the country’s military forces (Tentara Nasional
Indonesia, TNI), pervasive corruption, separatist conflict in Aceh and Papua, religious
violence in Maluku and Poso, and attacks on human rights defenders. These
failures stemmed in part from the administration’s lack of political will to resist former
supporters and beneficiaries of the Soeharto government, including the TNI.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The annual session of Indonesia’s parliament (Majelis Perwakilan Rakyat,MPR)
ended on August 11, after approving major changes to the country’s constitution.
The most significant amendment established direct presidential and vice-presidential
elections beginning in 2004. A second amendment established a bicameral
legislative system comprising of a House of Representatives and a Regional Representative
Council. This amendment also abolished the formal participation of the
military in civilian government by eliminating the thirty-eight seats previously
reserved for the armed forces.
The MPR rejected a constitutional amendment to include shari’a (Islamic law)
in the constitution.Three Muslim parties, the United Development Party, the Crescent
and Star Party, and the Daulatul Umat Party, had proposed the amendment. It
was defeated with the support of Indonesia’s two largest Islamic organizations, the
Nahdatul Ulama and Muhamadiyah.
Other amendments that would have created new institutions or strengthened
existing ones—such as the independent and permanent General Elections Commission
(Kursus Pengetahuan Umum, KPU), an anticorruption commission, the
National Commission on Human Rights (Komisi Nasional Hak Asasi Manusia,
Komnas HAM), and the National Ombudsman—were defeated.
At this writing, the legislature had not yet enacted enabling legislation to implement
the new constitution.
Corruption
As in previous years Jakarta courts and prosecutors showed little willingness to
take on major corruption cases.The Jakarta Supreme Court overturned the conviction
and three year jail term of Central Bank governor Syahril Sabirin,who had been
indicted for misuse of $80 million of bank funds in the 1999 “Bank Bali” scandal.
In September, speaker of the House of Representatives and chairman of the
Golkar party, Akbar Tandjung, was sentenced to three years in prison by the Central
Jakarta District Court, making him the highest public official ever tried and
convicted for corruption. Tandjung was found guilty of misappropriating roughly
U.S.$4 million (Rp 40 billion) in state funds from the State Logistics Agency
(Bulog), allegedly to fund Golkar’s 1999 election campaign.Tandjung continued to
hold both positions while appealing the decision.
In March, Hutomo Mandala Putra, better known as Tommy Soeharto, son of
former President Soeharto,went on trial for ordering the killing of Supreme Court
judge Syaifuddin Kartasasita in July 2001. Kartasasita, who was shot several times
by two gunmen,had previously upheld an eighteen-month jail sentence for Tommy
Soeharto on corruption charges. In an unexpected verdict at the end of July 2002,
Tommy was found guilty of paying two hit men to murder judge Kartasasita, possession
of illegal weapons, and fleeing justice. He was sentenced to fifteen years in
prison, while the two perpetrators of the shooting received life sentences.
In October, members of the Public Servants’ Wealth Audit Commission
(KPKPN) alleged that Attorney General M.A.Rachman had not properly disclosed
his acquisition of a new house.At this writing the investigation was ongoing.
Papua
The security situation in Papua (also known as Irian Jaya) deteriorated during
the year. Civilians and human rights defenders faced increased violence. The
decline in security came despite the passage of a “special autonomy” law for Papua
on October 23, 2001. The bill gave Papuans a say in provincial government and
allowed them to retain 80 percent of local forestry and fishery revenues and 70 percent
of oil, gas, and mining revenues. By the end of 2002, however, enabling legislation
had yet to be implemented to give effect to the new law.
Several civil society meetings were held in Papua with the aim of turning the
province into a zone of peace by reducing violence and providing a secure space for
groups to negotiate. The initiative had gained support from a cross-section of
Papuans, including the Free Papua Movement (Organisasi Papua Merdeka, OPM)
and religious leaders.However, the initiative failed to reduce the violence.
In July,West Papua Police Chief Made Mangku Pastika announced Operation
Justice (Operasi Adil Matoa).While allegedly directed at violent separatist organizations,
Papuans worried that non-violent groups, such as the Papuan Presidium
Council, would be targeted and banned.
A large influx of migrants and internally displaced persons from conflict areas
such as Maluku also created tension in the region, as did reports of infiltration by
large numbers of members of Laskar Jihad, a radical Muslim group from Java that
had been involved in the conflict in Maluku. Many Papuans feared that the TNI
would encourage the formation of pro-integration militias to combat calls for
Papua’s independence.
Investigations into the November 10, 2001, killing of Theys Hiyo Eluay, chairman
of the independence-seeking Papua Presidium Council, made progress in
2002, though no one had gone to trial as of mid-November. A government-backed
national investigation team announced its results in late April 2002, accusing nine
of the Army’s Special Forces (Komando Pasukan Khusus, Kopassus), including the
unit’s commander, Hartomo, as key suspects; two more Kopassus suspects were
later added. The suspects were to be tried for common rather than human rights
crimes before a military court, thereby eliminating the possibility of a trial by a
human rights court.
On August 31, 2002, one Indonesian and two American schoolteachers were
killed after their vehicles were ambushed by a group of unidentified gunmen, near
Tembagapura in Papua.All three victims were employed at an international school
for the children of employees of the Freeport gold mine in Papua. Ten other individuals
from the two-vehicle convoy were injured. The following day, Indonesian
government forces shot dead an unidentified Papuan male,whom they claimed was
both a member of the armed separatist group,OPM,and responsible for the attack.
The perpetrators of the ambush remained unknown, although police investigations
pointed to Kopassus involvement.
Aceh
The conflict in Aceh intensified,with an estimated 1,230 people killed during the
year.Military forces stepped up operations against the Free Aceh Movement (Gerakan
Aceh Merdeka, GAM), resulting in casualties on both sides. While Jakarta
stated a commitment to peace negotiations with GAM, military buildup in the
province contradicted government rhetoric. In February, against enormous local
opposition, President Megawati Sukarnoputri issued a decree to reestablish a military
command for the region of Aceh province (Komando Daerah Militer,
KODAM). In April, the government dispatched 1,850 police and army reinforcements
to Aceh. More forces arrived to secure Independence Day festivities on
August 17. At year’s end there were an estimated twenty-five to thirty thousand
security personnel in Aceh.
On January 1, the new “special autonomy” law for Aceh came into effect. It
renamed the province Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam (NAD) and introduced shari’a
(Islamic law) to the region. The enforcement of Islamic dress codes became effective
on March 15. Otherwise, no real economic or political change occurred, since
much of the new law remained unimplemented.
In a bid to find a non-military solution to the conflict, representatives of the
Indonesian government and GAM, facilitated by the Henry Dunant Humanitarian
Dialogue Centre (HDC), met in Geneva February 2-3. Further talks occurred on May 10,but neither session in Geneva produced tangible results.Military and GAM
casualties continued at a high rate. Just one day after the end of the May session,
Tgk. Zakaria bin Yahya (Ayah Sofyan), spokesperson for GAM, was shot dead by
police at his home near Banda Aceh, the provincial capital. Military forces had
already killed Abdullah Syafei, the GAM commander, in January.
On May 4, the Aceh chief of police banned a seminar organized by the Aceh Civil
Society Task Force in Banda Aceh. The one-day seminar was to discuss progress
made by the Geneva peace talks and ways to broaden the representation of civil
society in the peace negotiations.
GAM abuses against the local population continued with many incidents of
extortion and some kidnappings. Two high-profile kidnappings of schoolchildren
by GAM occurred in May and June; the children were later released.
Tengku Radak, GAM spokesman in Banda Aceh, claimed responsibility on
behalf of GAM for the detonation of several bombs in connection with Indonesian
Independence Day festivities on August 17.At least eleven people were injured after
a homemade explosive was thrown into a celebrating crowd in Banda Aceh. On
August 16, several bombs exploded and gunfights took place between security personnel
and GAM at separate locations in Banda Aceh and in Lhokseumawe.
Another bomb detonated in the office of the Syah Kuala subdistrict chief,while two
gunfights broke out between security personnel and rebels in separate locations in
Blang Bintang.
Despite increased GAM attacks, in August the Indonesian government unexpectedly
delayed its announcement of a heavier security regime for Aceh. It gave
GAM until the beginning of December to reconsider a compromise on autonomy.
The government’s offer would give Aceh control over part of the revenues from the
region’s oil and gas.However, the delay was undercut by the threat of harsher penalties
if the government perceived that GAM was negotiating in bad faith. Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono, coordinating minister for political and security affairs, said
in a press conference, “If by then they [GAM] have not shown a positive attitude
and conditions become uncertain and dangerous, the government will take stern
action, including intensifying military operations.”
Two high profile visits of U.S. military personnel to Jakarta and Aceh—one by
retired general Anthony Zinni and the other by Admiral Thomas B. Fargo, commander-
in-chief of the U.S. Pacific Fleet—are believed to have been instrumental
in persuading the Megawati government to delay any further military escalation in
Aceh.
GAM declared a unilateral ceasefire at the start of Ramadaan on November 4,
but this was broken days later when GAM and military soldiers exchanged gunfire
in North Aceh, leaving five people dead including one soldier.
In November, international observers started to arrive to monitor the peace
process in advance of an expected peace agreement to be signed by GAM and the
Government of Indonesia at the end of Ramadan.
No progress was made on investigations into the August 2001 massacre of
thirty-one people at a plantation, Bumi Flora, in East Aceh, despite a preliminary
investigation by Komnas HAM. Lack of security hampered a long awaited followup
investigation, underway in late July 2002.
Maluku
In February 2002, the Indonesian government facilitated a peace agreement
between Muslims and Christians in Maluku. The agreement, called Malino II, set
up a national human rights investigation team to look into violations committed in
Maluku. The presidential decree establishing the team was issued on June 6, but as
of this writing no investigations had taken place.Meanwhile, the violence continued.
On March 2, armed attackers set upon the marchers with machetes at a Muslim-
Christian peace rally. At least two victims were hospitalized with serious injuries.
Twelve Christians were then killed after their village, Soya, was attacked in the early
morning on April 28. The local church and dozens of homes were burned to the
ground during the attack by unknown perpetrators. On July 27, at least fifty-four
people were injured after a bomb exploded in the predominantly Christian area of
Kudamati, Sirimau subdistrict.
Two high-profile trials—one of a Muslim leader and one of a Christian leader—
commenced during the second half of the year. On May 4, Ja’far Umar Thalib, the
leader of the Laskar Jihad Islamic militia group, was arrested. He was accused of
inciting violence through a speech he gave in April and charged with insulting the
president, the vice-president, and the south Maluku governor. In a separate case,
Alex Manuputty, head of the Christian based Maluku Sovereignty Front (Front
Kedaulatan Maluku, FKM), was charged on April 25 with flying the banned flag of
the Republic of the South Moluccas.Both trials were ongoing at the end of the year.
On October 7, the executive board of Laskar Jihad decided to disband the group
and cease all activities.Over a thousand members of the radical Muslim group left
Maluku in the following weeks and returned to Java.
Poso
In Central Sulawesi, violence between Christian and Muslim communities continued,
although the first Malino Declaration, brokered by the central government
in December 2001, helped reduce the level of conflict. With the seven-month
implementation period of the Malino Declaration coming to an end on July 31,
2002, residents reported rumors of a new round of attacks as soon as the declaration
period ended and some army personnel withdrew. Even before the end of July,
however, violence had increased. Late May and June saw an increase in bombings
and unclaimed shootings, including fatal bus bombings on June 5 and July 12.
Then, on August 3, the body of a local Muslim leader was found in Tegalrejo subdistrict.
Early the next day a series of attacks on Christian villages prompted new
movements of displaced persons.Unknown attackers fired on a bus with automatic
weapons on August 8, killing an Italian tourist and injuring four other passengers
in South Pamona subdistrict. With the government unable to prevent attacks or
identify and prosecute attackers, the rise in violence over June, July, and August
raised fears the already fragile Malino Declaration would collapse.
There was no progress in prosecuting those responsible for earlier acts of violence,
such as the killings at Kilometer 9 in May 2000, the murders at Buyung Katedo in July 2001, or the leveling of villages in November 2001.Members of the
radical Muslim group Laskar Jihad, who arrived in July of 2001, remained in the
region at this writing.
Migrants, Asylum Seekers,
and Internally Displaced Persons
At the end of July,Malaysia enacted strict laws against illegal immigrants, causing
an exodus of undocumented Indonesian workers.An estimated three hundred
thousand workers returned to Indonesia, while another four hundred thousand
remained in Malaysia with no financial means to return or prospects for employment.
After a diplomatic row between the two countries, the Malaysian government
agreed to a one-month extension for the workers; those who remained faced disproportionate
penalties, including huge fines, up to five years imprisonment, and
caning. At least five Indonesians were sentenced to caning during the initial clampdown.
The Indonesian government was slow to address the needs of expelled workers
stranded at the Malaysia-Indonesia border in Borneo, while local authorities had
no capacity to deal with the unexpected influx of tens of thousands of workers with
no resources or job prospects that might induce them to return to their villages of
origin. In Nunukan, in East Kalimantan, at least fifty returned workers were
reported to have died in makeshift camps because of a lack of food, medicine, and
sanitation facilities. It was a month before the Indonesian government organized a
floating hospital ship to treat the sick.
While the international community neglected the rights and needs of 1.25 million
internally displaced persons in Indonesia, Australia exerted its diplomatic
influence to win funding for UNHCR refugee status determinations and IOMadministered
material assistance for the few thousand Afghan, Iraqi, and Iranian
refugees transiting Indonesia on their way to seek asylum in Australia. Australia
also provided border control enforcement assistance to the Indonesian authorities,
but paid little attention to training in the principles of refugee protection.
East and West Timor
The Indonesian government made only half-hearted attempts during the year to
hold accountable those responsible for TNI abuses in East Timor. Human rights
defenders inside and outside the country called for an international tribunal in
light of the failures of the Indonesian justice system.
On January 12, 2002, President Megawati appointed eighteen non-career judges
to sit on the Indonesian ad hoc human rights court for East Timor. Twenty-four
prosecutors were inducted on February 8. The office of the attorney general issued
the first charges against seven individuals on February 21.
The court tried the former East Timorese governor, Abilio Osorio Soares, for
crimes against humanity under Indonesian Law 26/2000. Prosecutors charged
Soares with responsibility for widespread and systematic human rights violations
perpetrated by subordinates under his effective control. The incidents cited in his indictment included the Liquica Church massacre of April 6, 1999, the attack and
killings at Manuel Carrascalao’s house in Dili on April 17, 1999, the September 1999
Suai Church massacre, and the September 1999 attack on Bishop Belo’s house.
Former East Timor police chief, Brigadier General Timbul Silaen, faced similar
charges of crimes against humanity. In addition to incidents listed in Soares’
indictment, the court charged Silaen in connection with an attack on the UNAMET
office in Liquica in September 1999.
Five other men went on trial together for the Suai Church massacre: former district
administrator of Suai, Herman Sudyono; former Suai district military commander,
Lieutenant Colonel Lili Kusardiyanto; former chief-of-staff of Suai district
military command, Captain Ahmad Syamsudin; former Suai military sector commander,
Sugito; and former chief of police in Suai, Lieutenant Colonel Gatot Subiaktoro.
Trials commenced in March, after government regulations on witness protection
and victim compensation were settled.Despite concerns about the implementation
of the witness protection programs and at least one allegation of
intimidation, four East Timorese witnesses traveled to Jakarta and gave testimony.
Not one U.N. staff member was called to testify.
Announced on August 14, 2002, the first verdicts from the trials triggered widespread
international and domestic criticism. Abilio Soares was found guilty of
crimes against humanity and sentenced to three years of imprisonment,well below
the legal minimum of ten years and the ten-and-a-half years requested by the prosecution.
The other defendants,named above,were acquitted. In November Colonel
Timbul Silaen was promoted to the rank of one-star inspector general and became
security assistant to National Police Chief Dai Bachtiar.
The outcomes of the trials had been expected. Although the judges had not
allowed the trials to be derailed, a presidential decision limiting the mandate for the
tribunals to a handful of cases that occurred in April and September 1999 hindered
the prosecution.Most significantly, the prosecutors failed to reveal in court the role
of the military and Indonesian officials in organizing and arming militia groups
and in orchestrating the violence.
The prosecutors’ indictments were weak. They charged defendants with “failure
to act,” rather than organizing and perpetrating atrocities. By portraying the 1999
violence in East Timor as a civil disturbance, rather than a systematic and widespread
terror campaign, the indictments made it more difficult to establish crimes
against humanity.
On January 19, 2002, the sentences of three persons convicted of killing three
international UNHCR staff members in West Timor on September 6, 2000, were
increased from ten-to-fifteen months to five-to-seven years, after international
outcry over the leniency of the initial sentences.
On March 7,Yacobus Bere was found guilty and sentenced to six years in prison
for the July 2000 murder of a New Zealand peace-keeping force soldier, Private
Manning. On March 20, the Central Jakarta District Court acquitted three other
men, tried separately for involvement in the murder.
On January 1, 2002, the Indonesian government ceased humanitarian assistance
to East Timorese refugees in West Timor. The cessation of aid spurred many refugees to return to East Timor in March and April, as post-harvest stockpiles of
food began to run out; and malnutrition, diarrhea, and malaria increased. Indonesia’s
announcement that it would end repatriation incentives at the end of August
also prompted refugees to return, with an estimated ten thousand refugees crossing
the border to East Timor in July and August.
An estimated thirty thousand refugees remained in West Timor at this writing.
UNHCR announced in May that the U.N. Refugee Convention would cease to
apply to all East Timorese remaining in Indonesia at the end of December 2002,
though individuals still retained their right to appeal this cessation of status.
The issue of missing and separated East Timorese children in Indonesia
remained unresolved. UNHCR and the International Rescue Committee (IRC)
made slow progress on an estimated 1,500 reported cases, with little help from the
government of Indonesia.While some reunifications occurred from West to East
Timor, children in other parts of Indonesia became increasingly isolated after three
years of separation. Most well-known were the cases of almost two hundred East
Timorese children taken to orphanages in Central Java by Octavio Soares, brother
of former East Timor Governor Abilio Soares. Their status remained unclear.
Requests for reunification of the children by the parents, UNHCR, and the IRC
were met with hostile resistance from Octavio.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Indonesia’s National Human Rights Commission (Komisi Nasional Hak Asasi
Manusia,Komnas HAM) had played a credible and important role in the final years
of the Soeharto period. During 2002, the commission was increasingly ineffective
and marginalized. Crucial investigations were half-hearted or incomplete, including
that into the Bumi Flora incident. (See above.) While parliament recommended
the appointment of new members, it rejected some highly qualified candidates. In
September, the commission elected its new chair,Abdul Hakim Garuda Nusantara.
Hakim’s appointment was generally well received, but doubts of the commission’s
future effectiveness remained given the reappointments of long-serving members
with military ties.
Indonesia continued to be a dangerous and difficult place for human rights
defenders. In June, the provincial police chief and the Indonesian military chief,
General Endriartono Sutarto, issued strong warnings to secessionist groups in
Papua. These alerts were followed by harassment of local civil society activists. In
addition, Yafet Yelemaken, a local representative of the Papuan Presidium Council
and director of the Civilian Custom Institute in Wamena, died in June; other
activists suspected poisoning. Benny Wenda, leader of the Koteka Tribal Assembly
(Dewan Musyawarah Masyarakat Koteka, DeMMAK), was arrested on June 8, on
charges that he owned two passports, one from Indonesia and one from Papua New
Guinea; that he had organized the attack on a police post in Abepura in December
2000; and that he was organizing new attacks on military and police posts in West
Papua. Amid fears for his physical security and reports of deteriorating health, he
disappeared from his cell in late October.
Other Papuan human rights defenders, including volunteers for ELS-HAM, a
prominent Papuan human rights organization, received death threats, while
lawyers representing political detainees and human rights activists working on the
Theys Eluay case and the killing and torture of students by security forces in
Abepura in 2000 suffered threats and intimidation.
The fear of violence, intimidation, and retribution by both the military and
GAM obstructed human rights defenders in Aceh. Many ceased monitoring and
reporting on human rights violations outside Banda Aceh.
On January 16, a Jakarta criminal court sentenced Faisal Saifuddin, head of the
Jakarta office for the Aceh Referendum Information Center (Sentral Informasi Referendum
Aceh, SIRA), to one year in prison for violating articles 154 and 155 of the
Indonesian criminal code, the notorious “spreading hatred” laws previously used
by the Soeharto government against critics and activists.
Seven human rights defenders from the Acehnese Democratic Women’s Organization
(Organisasi Perempuan Aceh Demokratik, ORPAD) were arrested while
staging a peaceful protest on July 16 in Banda Aceh. The next day all were released,
except for Reihana Diany,ORPAD’s chairperson.Diany was held under articles 134
and 137 of the Indonesian criminal code for insulting the head of state.
No progress was made in the investigation into the December 2000 killings of
three field workers for the nongovernmental organization, Rehabilitation Action
for Torture Victims in Aceh (RATA). An eyewitness had named four military
informers as the perpetrators, but they escaped from detention.
On August 19, 2002, two trade unionists were shot and seriously injured by
police in Bandung, the capital of West Java, during large peaceful demonstrations
against two proposed labor laws—one on industrial relations dispute settlements
and one on labor development and protection. The protesters claimed the bill
would curtail their rights to strike and was unfair in areas including dismissals,
wage standards, and contract labor. The Indonesian National Front for Labor
Struggles (FNPBI) organized the demonstrations. At least thirty-one other labor
rights activists were subsequently arrested and detained by the police.
On March 13, a group calling themselves the “Families of Cawang Victims 1998”
ransacked the Jakarta office of the Commission for Missing Persons and Victims of
Violence (Komisi Untuk Orang Hilang dan Korban Tindak Kekerasan, KONTRAS).
The attack occurred just two days after KONTRAS released its Human
Rights Report, which criticized both the Wahid and Megawati governments, and
two days after KONTRAS had demanded senior Indonesian military officers face
questioning in relation to the Trisakti killings of six pro-democracy student
activists in Jakarta in 1998. Several staff members were severely beaten during the
well-orchestrated attack. In April, seven defendants went on trial for the attack.
In March, a group of fifteen people, organized by the Urban Poor Consortium
(UPC),were hospitalized after being attacked at the Komnas HAM office in Jakarta
by a group calling themselves the United Betawi Forum (Betawi Rempug Forum,
FBR). The UPC group had arrived at Komnas HAM to seek support for a lawsuit
against the Jakarta Provincial Administration’s crackdown and seizure of pedicabs.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In a May meeting with Indonesian Foreign Minister Hassan Wirayuda,U.N.Secretary-
General Kofi Annan encouraged “effective and credible” trials for Indonesian
officers accused of abuses in East Timor.While an international tribunal was
not discussed, Annan spoke with Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri
about possible U.N. technical assistance to train judges and prosecutors involved
in the trials.Wirayuda also announced U.N. plans to send observers to monitor the
trials.
In November 2001, the Committee against Torture adopted conclusions and
recommendations after considering Indonesia’s initial report, submitted over a
year late.While noting efforts to reform the legal system, the committee expressed
concern regarding allegations of torture and ill treatment by police, the army, and
paramilitary groups, and regarding attacks on human rights defenders and other
human rights violations.
The U.N. representative on internally displaced persons submitted in February
an addendum on displacement in Indonesia. Calling the Indonesian government’s
plan to resolve the problem of internal displacement by the end of 2002 “unduly
optimistic,” the addendum urged the government to train appropriate officials on
the Guiding Principles of Internal Displacement, recommended that Komnas
HAM take a more active role in addressing the needs of internally displaced persons,
and encouraged the international community to expand assistance programs.
With funding from Belgium, Germany, and the Netherlands, the U.N.Development
Program coordinated a police reform program to train officers and regular
police in Indonesia.
In July, the U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers,
Dato’ Param Cumaraswamy, visited Indonesia.He noted “serious problems” in the
judiciary that were worse than expected and found “no political commitments to
fix [them].”
United States
The Megawati and Bush administrations focused their joint efforts on the fight
against terrorism. U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell used his visit to Jakarta in
early August to announce Bush administration plans for increased assistance to the
Indonesian military.This aid included U.S.$4 million for anti-terrorism courses for
TNI officers. An additional $400,000 was requested in the 2003 foreign aid budget
for International Military Education and Training (IMET). In addition, the administration
requested assistance for police training, $10 million of which was pending
approval as part of the fiscal year 2003 appropriations.The fiscal year 2002 anti-terrorism
bill included $8 million for a police counter-terrorism unit and $4 million
for police training.
In July, the U.S. State Department asked a federal judge to dismiss a lawsuit
against ExxonMobil Corporation for its alleged complicity in human rights abuses at its gas fields in Aceh. In a letter to the judge, the State Department contended that
Indonesia’s counter-terrorism efforts could be “imperiled in numerous ways if
Indonesia and its officials curtailed cooperation in response to perceived disrespect
for its sovereign interests.”
In September, twenty-seven members of Congress wrote to Representative Jim
Kolbe, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations,
urging that human rights restrictions on U.S. military assistance to Indonesia
be renewed. Previously, in July, Congress had turned down an administration
request for $8 million to set up a “domestic peacekeeping unit” to quell sectarian
and communal violence.
Congress was particularly concerned with events in the Papua region. Several
representatives wrote to President Megawati in November 2001 expressing “grave
concern” about the murder of Theys Eluay. Federal Bureau of Investigation officers
visited Papua following the killing of two Americans in Timika in August.
Europe
The European Commission sent an independent mission to Indonesia in January
to assess the potential for supporting conflict prevention. The group visited
Central Sulawesi, Maluku, and Papua and released a report in March detailing
causes of communal violence in those regions. The report recommended further
work to implement and develop long-term processes, including dialogue, political
compromise, accountability for past human rights abuses, and transforming highlevel
official positions to reflect grassroots perspectives.
The European Parliament met in May to discuss human rights issues in Indonesia.
A resolution signed by thirteen members called on Indonesia to “engage in a
genuine dialogue with the provinces” to resolve conflicts in Aceh, Maluku, and
Papua; to investigate the murder of Theys Eluay in Papua; and to “protect the civilian
populations from attacks by terrorist groups such as Laskar Jihad.”
In June, the European Commission adopted a five-year strategy for financial
assistance to Indonesia. Stressing good governance and sustainable management of
natural resources, the plan called for U.S.$213 million in aid during the 2002-2006
period.
In 2002,Russia announced that it would move forward with a contract to sell ten
military helicopters to Indonesia. In May 2002, the Czech Republic confirmed that
it sold small arms to Indonesia in 2001.
Japan
Indonesia’s largest aid donor announced at the November 2001 consultative
group meeting on Indonesia its intention to disburse U.S.$720 million (¥85.7 billion)
in projects and extend new Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) loans of
over $300 million (¥40 billion) for economic development in fiscal year 2002. Japan
began the year by giving $88,000 in humanitarian assistance to Aceh province.
Improving economic cooperation was the primary goal of Prime Minister
Junichiro Koizumi’s January trip to Jakarta. Intent on countering China’s influence with ASEAN members, Koizumi pressed President Megawati for a comprehensive
economic alliance centered on free trade between Japan and ASEAN, and the two
leaders agreed to promote the plan. Noting the importance of stability in Indonesia,
Koizumi expressed support for Indonesia’s retention of Aceh, but insisted that
problems in the province be approached with human rights in mind.He agreed to
aid Indonesia’s efforts at judicial and police reforms and pledged U.S.$10 million to
assist refugees in Aceh and West Timor and U.S.$3 million for education improvements.
A Japanese Ministry of Justice delegation visited Indonesia in January to
assess ways of helping with judicial reform. In July, Foreign Minister Yoriko
Kawaguchi reiterated Koizumi’s support and concerns in her meeting with Indonesian
Foreign Minister Wirajuda.
Japan further pledged in February to provide over U.S.$2 million from its Trust
Fund for Human Security to aid in the relocation of displaced people and the development
of education in Maluku, North Maluku, and Aceh. Japan also pledged to
send advisers to Indonesia as part of a two-year project of technical assistance to the
national police.
Australia
Amid objections from the Indonesian parliament,Prime Minister John Howard
made an official visit to Jakarta in February.Members of parliament accused Australia
of supporting pro-independence activists in Papua. In talks with President
Megawati, Howard sought to rectify tensions by denying support for separatist
movements and agreeing to help Indonesia fight terrorism.The two officials signed
a memorandum of understanding on counter-terrorism at the end of Howard’s
three-day visit. Howard projected the “gradual” resumption of military relations,
which were suspended following the 1999 post-referendum violence in East Timor.
Total aid flow to Indonesia in the 2002-2003 fiscal year was set at U.S.$66.7 million
(Aus$121.6 million) for poverty reduction, economic recovery, and democratization,
inclusive of an U.S.$8.2 million (Aus$15 million) plan to help refugees
throughout Indonesia,with U.S.$3.3 million (Aus$6 million) for East Timorese on
the West Timor border and up to U.S.$4.6 million (Aus$8.5 million) to assist those
affected by internal conflict throughout Indonesia.
World Bank
The World Bank strengthened its efforts to fight corruption in bank-financed
projects in Indonesia. It outlined a four-part strategy in its Country Assistance
Strategy for fiscal years 2001-2003 to ensure the appropriate use of bank funds, and
in July it held an Anti-Corruption Advisory Group Meeting in Jakarta.
In his exit speech in Jakarta in August, outgoing World Bank head Mark Baird
spoke of the need for structural reform of public institutions, especially in the civil
service and justice sectors, government accountability, and an end to corruption.
The Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI) meeting scheduled for October
was postponed until January 2003 in the aftermath of the Bali bombing.
PAKISTAN
In October 2002, Pakistan held its first parliamentary elections since the
October 1999 coup that brought President Pervez Musharraf to power.Measures
taken by Musharraf ’s administration in the months preceding the elections,
however, all but ensured a military-controlled democracy.Chief among them were
an April referendum that extended Musharraf ’s presidential term for five years, and
constitutional amendments announced in August that formalized the military’s
role in governance and extended restrictions on political party activities. Independent
observers reported extensive fraud and coercion during voting for the referendum,
and widespread poll-rigging and harassment of candidates preceding the
parliamentary elections.
The pro-Musharraf Pakistan Muslim League-Quaid-e Azam (PML-QA) won
the most seats though fell short of the number needed to form a government. The
dramatic and unprecedented rise to power of religious parties also signaled a defiant
rejection of Musharraf ’s pro-U.S. policies.
Internal groups coordinated and carried out attacks on foreigners and religious
minorities in Pakistan. Increasing attacks on Christian community members raised
concerns that they were being targeted because of Pakistan’s alliance with the U.S..
Refugees from Afghanistan suffered from a lack of humanitarian assistance and
faced increased hostility from authorities, while discriminatory laws continued to
limit women’s security and safety. Hundreds of women were killed in the name of
“honor.” Journalists faced heightened harassment, and in some cases arrest, for
reporting on government activities.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In early April, President Musharraf announced a nationwide referendum on a
five-year extension of his presidency. The referendum was preceded by a monthlong
campaign by Musharraf, while a ban on public rallies prevented political parties
from campaigning against the referendum.On April 15,police in Faisalabad led
a baton-charge against journalists who walked out on a speech by the Punjab
provincial governor,Khalid Maqbool,during a pro-referendum rally.The governor
had warned that journalists could face revenge from the public if they did not cease
their “misreporting.”
Official results for the referendum, held on April 30, showed a 97.5 percent vote
in favor of Musharraf. However, independent observers, including the Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) and Pakistani journalists, found evidence
of widespread fraud and coerced voting. Electoral rolls and national identification
cards were dispensed with, ballots were routinely stamped in the presence of, or
even by, polling officials, and observers reported cases of repeat voting. Police and
local government officials in all four provinces transported busloads of voters to polling stations. Both public and private sector employees reportedly said that they
had cast “yes” votes on the orders of their supervisors; polling stations had been
established in many places of employment, including factories.
On August 22, Musharraf promulgated the Legal Framework Order (LFO),
which included a controversial set of constitutional amendments. Taken together,
the amendments strengthened the power of the presidency, formalized the role of
the army in governance, and diminished the authority of elected representatives.
The amendments also significantly curbed freedom of association and the right of
individuals to stand for elected office.
The LFO restored article 58(2)(b) of the constitution, originally introduced
more than a decade earlier under the martial law regime of General Zia-ul-Haq but
repealed by an act of parliament in 1997. This article allowed the president to dissolve
the National Assembly—the lower house of Pakistan’s parliament—if a situation
arose in which government could not be carried out “in accordance with the
Constitution.” Employed frequently by the military in past years to dismiss successive
elected governments in Pakistan, the article formed a key element of what
Musharraf termed necessary “checks and balances” in the country’s system of government.
The amendments also created a National Security Council (NSC) to serve as a
consultative body not only on strategic matters, but also on “democracy, governance
and inter-provincial harmony.”Although the NSC included elected civilian
leaders—the prime minister, and the speaker, and opposition leader in the National
Assembly—ultimate authority appeared certain to rest with the military officers on
the NSC, including Musharraf, in his dual capacities as president and army chief of
staff; the heads of the navy and air force; and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff Committee.The NSC was to be a “super-cabinet”that would shadow the work
of the prime minister’s civilian cabinet.
Other amendments in the LFO included limiting candidates for election to the
National Assembly or Senate to persons who have attained a bachelor’s degree.
Given the country’s poor educational infrastructure and sharp social and gender
inequalities, the provision inevitably barred all but a small percentage of the citizenry
from holding parliamentary office. More immediately, the provision also
disqualified a number of regional political leaders from standing for office in the
October elections.
Criminal convicts, defaulters on loans and utility bills, and absconders from
court proceedings were likewise disqualified under the LFO from candidacy; the
criteria, in this case, appeared tailored to ensure the disqualification of former
prime ministers Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto, as well as politicians convicted
under the National Accountability Ordinance (NAO) promulgated after the coup.
Perhaps most significantly, the LFO summarily validated all orders and laws
promulgated by Musharraf, as well as all actions taken by persons acting pursuant
to them, and declared that they “shall not be called into question in any court on
any ground whatsoever.”The measure effectively precluded judicial review of cases
alleging military abuses, as well as constitutional amendments and laws promulgated
since the coup.
The government announced in August that the ban on political rallies, imposed shortly after the coup,would be lifted as of September 1, leaving political parties less
than six weeks to mount campaigns. Throughout the campaign period the government
maintained significant restrictions on where political meetings could be held
and prohibited rallies and processions on streets and roads and in railway stations.
Political parties were also required to get advanced permission from district and
provincial governments for holding such gatherings.
Leaders of the Alliance for Restoration of Democracy (ARD) and its constituent
parties also complained of efforts by the government to promote what was widely
termed the “king’s party”—a splinter-group of former Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif ’s Pakistan Muslim League (PML), known as the Pakistan Muslim League-
Quaid-e Azam (PML-QA)—as well as other pro-government parties and alliances.
In the weeks preceding the elections, human rights activists, Pakistani journalists,
and members of the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan
People’s Party (PPP) alleged extensive poll-rigging by the military
government. Allegations included the relocation of polling booths at the behest of
the PML-QA, the appointment of polling officers handpicked by the PML-QA, the
tearing down of campaign posters and banners, police raids on PPP and PML-N
offices, and police harassment of PPP and PML-N workers and candidates at the
behest of the government. On October 6, Punjab’s Jhelum district police forcibly
closed two election offices of the PPP and one of the PML-N and beat up their
workers. In response to various complaints, the Chief Election Commissioner of
Pakistan issued a statement on September 21 warning the police not to harass any
contesting candidate.
The make-up of the National Assembly that emerged from the elections was
markedly different from the make-up when the assembly last convened three years
earlier. Significant differences included the absence of a number of leading political
figures (barred in 2002 from contesting elections), the dominating presence of the
Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA), the prominence of an alliance of Islamist parties,
and the presence of more than seventy women, elected following the reintroduction
of reserved seats for women.While the PML-QA, a pro-Musharraf party,
emerged as the largest single faction, the dramatic rise of the MMA,opposed to U.S.
presence in the region and Pakistan’s participation in the war on terror, signaled
increasing rejection of Musharraf ’s domestic and foreign policies. At this writing,
the newly elected members of parliament remained divided on the status of Pakistan’s
constitution—that is,whether the LFO amendments would remain in effect.
On November 20 the National Assembly elected pro-military PML-QA party
member Mir Zafarullah Khan Jamali as the country’s new prime minister. Jamali
vowed to continue to pursue the policies and reforms of the Musharraf administration
but faced a delicate a balancing act between a pro-Western president and a
strong opposition led by the Islamist alliance, particularly on the issue of how much
power Musharraf should retain.At this writing, the new government had yet to be
formed.
With the government continuing to support U.S. efforts against al-Qaeda, sectarian
violence and attacks against foreign nationals increased.The kidnapping and
execution ofWall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl was perhaps the most public
example of a growing security threat to foreigners in Pakistan. Pearl disappeared from Karachi on January 23, while investigating a tip on the whereabouts of a religious
leader.The tip came from militant Sheikh Omar Saeed,who was convicted of
orchestrating both the abduction and killing of Pearl. Saeed was sentenced to death
on July 15, and three collaborators were sentenced to twenty-five years in prison.
The four men were suspected of belonging to growing network of militant groups
that coordinate with each other in planning attacks on minorities and foreigners in
Pakistan.
Several such attacks rapidly followed the abduction and murder of Pearl. In May,
a suicide car bombing killed fifteen people, including eleven French navy engineers,
in Karachi. In June a suicide bomber attacked the U.S. Consulate in Karachi.While
neither consulate staff nor foreigners were killed, eleven guards and policemen
died, and forty others were injured. Finally, on July 13 thirteen tourists, mostly Germans
and Austrians, were injured when an explosive went off while they visited an
archaeological site in the northwestern Pakistani town ofMansehra. In September,
police arrested twenty-three members of the Harakat ul-Mujahedeen Al-Almi, a
militant group suspected in the attacks.
Religious minorities, Christian communities in particular, also saw heightened
threats to their security in 2002. On March 17, two unidentified men threw six
grenades at the Protestant International Church in a diplomatic enclave in Islamabad,
killing five people and injuring forty others. On August 5, six Pakistani guards
were killed during an attack on the Murree Christian School, a missionary school
for foreign students forty miles east of Islamabad, when four gunmen stormed the
premises.The gunmen,who had escaped to nearby woods,blew themselves up with
hand grenades when they were found and surrounded by police. Only four days
later, unidentified attackers hurled grenades at a chapel in a missionary hospital in
Taxila, twenty-five miles west of Islamabad, just as the women of the congregation
were leaving from the daily morning prayer. Three nurses were killed in the blast,
as was one of the assailants, while twenty others were injured.
The violence extended to Christian humanitarian aid workers on September 25,
when two gunmen entered the Institute for Peace and Justice (IPJ) in Karachi, and
killed seven people by shooting them point blank in the head. All of the victims
were Pakistani Christians. The All Pakistan Minorities Alliance and the National
Commission for Justice and Peace condemned the attacks, asserting that Pakistan’s
Christians were being victimized for Pakistan’s alliance with the U.S. The massacre
was followed by a three-day mourning and protest, organized by Christian groups
in Pakistan. At this writing, no arrests of the killers had been made, but those
protesting had been detained.
In a positive development,on January 16 Musharraf abolished a sixteen-year old
system that created separate electorates for Pakistan’s religious minorities and for
the Muslim majority. Religious minorities have long claimed that a separate electorate,
introduced by General Zia-ul-Haq in 1985, effectively marginalized them
from mainstream politics, and welcomed the decision to restore joint elections.
Religious minorities also welcomed a decision by the Sindh high court that the constitution
did not bar a non-Muslim from serving on the high court. The court
denied a petition to remove Justice Rana Bhagwandas from the bench on the
ground that he was a Hindu.
Blasphemy laws continued to be used in 2002 to persecute religious minorities.
The laws, introduced by General Zia-ul-Haq in 1985, made it punishable by death
to make derogatory comments about the Prophet Mohammed or other holy
Islamic figures. Arrests under the law can be made upon complaint, even without
an investigation.
In July, a Christian man, Anwar Kenneth, stood trial for writing letters that
allegedly made sacrilegious comments about Islam.Despite concerns that Kenneth
suffered from psychiatric problems, he was found guilty and sentenced to death,
pending ratification by a higher court. On July 27, a judge sentenced twenty-sixyear-
old Wajihul Hassan to death for allegedly having made phone calls and written
letters to the complainant that contained derogatory remarks about the Prophet
Mohammed. Both human rights activists and non-Muslim religious groups condemned
Pakistan’s blasphemy laws as tools for persecution of religious minorities.
In August, however, the Supreme Court took a positive step when it overturned
the 1998 conviction of Ayub Masih, a Christian man accused of blasphemy. In its
decision, the court noted that the complainant had been engaged in a land dispute
with Masih, and shortly after Masih’s arrest in 1996, had moved onto the disputed
land and secured a transfer of title into his name.Masih was released after serving
six years in prison but reportedly did not get back his land.
In November, Pakistan amended the Anti-terrorism Act, increasing the term of
detention from one month to up to a year without charge or trial, and granting the
police and security forces the power to investigate the assets and bank accounts of
the relatives of suspects. Although a person retained a right to appeal his or her
detention,human rights groups asserted that such laws were prone to abuse and did
not solve the problems of militancy or terrorism.
Women also continued to be victims of discriminatory laws and harmful customary
practices in 2002.According to the HRCP,more than 150 women were sexually
assaulted in the first six months of the year in the southern Punjab province
alone, while in the first four months of the year, 211 women were murdered in the
name of “honor”by male family members who believed that the women had transgressed
cultural norms on female behavior. Such violence was exacerbated by laws,
such as the Hudood Ordinance and the Qisas and Diyat Ordinances,which allowed
perpetrators of crimes against women to avoid accountability; prevented victims of
sexual assault from seeking redress by exposing them to prosecution for adultery or
fornication; gave the testimony of women half the evidentiary weight of that of
men; and allowed crimes of “honor” to be pardoned by relatives of the victim.
The harm caused by the Hudood Ordinance was highlighted internationally
when a Pakistani rape victim,Zafran Bibi, was charged with adultery and sentenced
to death by stoning. Pakistani women’s rights groups rallied around the case and
formed an alliance for the repeal of discriminatory laws, especially the Hudood
Ordinance. After an active campaign led by national women’s rights groups, the
Federal Shariat Court of Pakistan overturned the sentence and acquitted Zafran
Bibi in June on a technicality.However, the law that led to her conviction remained
in effect and continued to be a major source of abuse against women victims of violence.
A positive development was initiated by the National Commission on the Status ofWomen (NCSW), an independent statutory body set up in July 2000,which succeeded
in persuading the government to amend the Citizenship Act of 1951 to
enable Pakistani women to confer nationality on their children regardless of the
nationality of the father. Despite this success, women’s rights groups continued to
urge that the NCSW be given greater independent authority to ensure implementation
of its policy and legislative recommendations.
Customary and extra-judicial practices were also a source of abuse of women.
On June 22, a tribal council in southern Punjab ordered the gang rape of
Mukhtaran Bibi, a thirty-year-old woman. Four men, including one of the tribal
council members, raped Bibi in the presence of a large number of villagers. The
rape was intended as “punishment” for the alleged conduct of her twelve-year-old
brother,Abdul Shaqoor,who was accused of an “illicit” relationship with a woman
from another tribe. In fact, the brother had been sexually attacked by members of
the other tribe, and the accusations of an affair were a cover-up for the attack on
him.Mukhtaran Bibi accused the police of asking her family for a bribe before they
released her brother from police custody.
It was not until the incident was reported in the media that an official investigation
began under the orders of the Supreme Court. The government eventually
paid Bibi U.S.$8,300 as compensation, and local authorities arrested and imprisoned
the perpetrators. On August 31, four men were found guilty of rape and two
others,who were part of the tribal council,were found guilty of aiding and abetting
the crime. The guilty were sentenced to death by hanging, but are appealing their
sentences. Although the authorities were prodded to investigate this case by the
media attention it had received, at this writing there had been no sustained effort
to monitor and reform the tribal council system to eliminate discriminatory practices
against women.
Intimidation of journalists continued throughout 2002. One example was that
ofMuzaffar Ejaz, an editor of the daily Jasarat,who reported harassment following
publication of a controversial article on faction politics in the Muslim League.
According to the daily Dawn,on July 25, days after the piece was published, Ejaz was
abducted by members of the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), and interrogated
about the source of the article. He was not released till the next morning. The
Council of Pakistan Newspaper Editors condemned the incident.
The U.S. attack on al-Qaeda and the Taliban prompted tens of thousands of
Afghans to flee towards Pakistan’s borders, attempting to escape the long-term
effects of drought, anti-Pashtun violence, bombing, and general insecurity in
Afghanistan. In February 2002, however, Pakistan closed its southern border crossing
at Chaman, trapping an estimated twenty to forty thousand refugees, at least
half of whom were ethnic Pashtuns fleeing harassment, between the borders of
southwestern Pakistan and southeastern Afghanistan. There they struggled to survive
in scorching temperatures and grim conditions with limited water, shelter, and
medical care; such individuals often faced harassment by Afghan soldiers and the
local population. This was a gross violation of Pakistan’s obligation not to return
refugees to places where their lives and freedom are threatened—the fundamental
principle of nonrefoulement.
Physical conditions for refugees within Pakistan were also often desperate and their status as persons in need of protection was often not legally recognized. A
public order issued in January 2001 continued to be used by police to detain and
deport both newly arrived and undocumented Afghans already in Pakistan.
In late 2001,Human Rights Watch documented daily incidents of police harassment
and detention, particularly for refugees living in urban areas. Refugees usually
spent a few days in jail, and paid bribes to be set free. In some cases, refugees
were deported, again violating the principles of nonrefoulement. In May, the police
rounded up more than four hundred Afghan refugees after two local policemen
were shot dead by suspected Afghan refugees in the town of Rawalpindi, near
Islamabad.
Conditions in camps also rapidly declined in 2002. Pakistan has been unwilling
to officially recognize Afghan refugees since 1999, preventing UNHCR from registering
or providing for new refugees. Consequently, the camps overflowed with
new refugees who crowded into their neighbors’ or relatives’ shelters. Food shortages
were chronic,while Pakistani police running the food and assistance distributions
randomly beat desperate refugees.Women-headed households suffered more
than others, as women were unable to negotiate the male-dominated patronage
networks or face the random beatings at the distributions site to collect food for
themselves and their children.
Starting in November 2001, in an attempt to improve some of these conditions,
refugees were transferred to camps located in Pakistan’s Federally Administered
Tribal Areas (FATA). UNHCR insisted that the relocation should occur on a voluntary
basis, but in the first week of the relocation Human Rights Watch documented
serious problems including inadequate information regarding conditions in FATA,
family separation during relocation, and security problems in the new camps.After
the relocation of tens of thousands of refugees, violence flared up near the new
camps, as did incidents of hostility targeting Western humanitarian or U.N. agencies
assisting the refugees. Basic infrastructure, including roads, adequate water
supply, and sanitation were limited, but were still an improvement upon humanitarian
conditions faced by refugees before the relocation.
As part of the military buildup that began in December 2001, Pakistan placed
large numbers of anti-personnel and anti-vehicle mines on its border with India.
There were reports of numerous civilian casualties as a result. This was reportedly
one of the largest mine-laying operations anywhere in the world in many years.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The killing of seven humanitarian aid workers at the Institute for Peace and Justice
(IPJ) on September 25 marked an escalation in the threat to Christians in Pakistan,
as well as a rising concern for the safety of human rights workers. IPJ had been
based in Karachi for the past thirty years,working with impoverished communities
in order to secure basic worker rights, as well as to organize with local human rights
groups.
The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan continued to be the standardbearer
in calling for the restoration of democracy in Pakistan and in October issued a report on pre-poll rigging during the parliamentary elections. Following the
killing of Christian humanitarian aid workers in September, HRCP stated that an
investigation into the attack was critical to preventing future incidents. In November
2001,Human Rights Watch honored Affrasiab Khattak, the head of HRCP, for
leading the organization’s work and for his commitment to protecting the rights of
Afghan refugees in Pakistan.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United States
The Bush administration showered President Musharraf with praise and economic
and military assistance because of Pakistan’s role as a “key partner in the
global coalition against terror,” while downplaying concerns about Musharraf ’s
moves to undercut democracy. Following a February meeting, U.S. President
George W. Bush went further and called Musharraf “a leader of great courage and
vision.” In August, when asked about Musharraf ’s constitutional amendments,
Bush stated that “President Musharraf is still tight with us” in the fight against terrorism
and “we want to keep it that way.”When Bush and Musharraf met again at
the U.N. in September, Bush told Musharraf that “adherence to democracy is key,”
but did not discuss in any detail Musharraf ’s constitutional amendments or link
U.S. additional aid to democratic and human rights reforms. Bush called on Pakistan
to clamp down on militant violence in Kashmir.
In August, the U.S. signed an agreement with Pakistan to consolidate and
reschedule U.S.$3 billion of debt.Under the program, $2.3 billion will be repayable
over a period of thirty-eight years, while $700 million will be repaid over a period
of twenty-three years. The foreign aid bill for fiscal year 2003, which at the time of
this writing was pending in Congress, would give $200 million in economic support
to the government, plus $50 million each for development assistance and military
aid. This funding was in addition to $640 million in emergency economic
support for Pakistan since 2001.
A meeting of the U.S.-Pakistan Defense Consultative Group took place in late
September for the first time since the imposition of sanctions following Pakistan’s
nuclear tests in 1998. Talks on terrorism and possible joint military exercises were
led by U.S. Undersecretary of Defense Douglas Feith and Defense Secretary Gen.
Hamid Nawaz. The U.S. authorized the sale of several aircraft, Harpoon missiles,
and other equipment totaling about $400 million, and more weapons deals were
expected.
On September 30, the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom
recommended that the secretary of state designate Pakistan among the twelve
“countries of particular concern”under the International Religious Freedom Act of
1998.
Despite severe election-related abuses and Musharraf ’s consolidation of power
in the months leading up the election, the U.S. hailed the October elections as an
important step in Pakistan’s transition to democracy.The U.S. reportedly tried, but failed, to convince the other “Community of Democracies” summit co-hosts to
invite Pakistan as an observer at the November 2002 meeting in Seoul, South Korea.
European Union
A European Union delegation sent to monitor the October elections concluded
that actions taken by Pakistani authorities resulted in “serious flaws”in the electoral
process, adding that the Election Commission was partial to pro-Musharraf candidates
and limited other parties’ campaign time. The head of the delegation also
expressed reservations about whether power genuinely would be transferred to the
elected government.
On November 24, 2001, the E.U. and Pakistan signed a cooperation agreement,
following an E.U. mission to Islamabad on September 25, 2001. The agreement
noted Pakistan’s support for the “war against terrorism,” and the desire for a
strengthened relationship between the European Union and Pakistan.Accordingly,
the agreement developed a cooperation plan in the areas of trade, economic and
social development, environmental management, and economic capability building,
citing the Universal Declaration on Human Rights as an essential element of
the cooperation plan.
The formation of the cooperation agreement was followed by an announcement
in May that the European Commission had launched a five-year, Û50 million
(U.S.$49.8 million) financing agreement. The agreement would assist Pakistan in
developing financial sector reforms, as well as support Pakistan’s poverty reduction
strategies.Other measures included trade concessions for clothing and textiles, and
aid for educational reform programs.
Commonwealth of Nations
In December 2001, during the Seventeenth Meeting of the Commonwealth
Ministerial Action Group (CMAG) on the Harare Declaration, members noted
Musharraf ’s commitment to restoring democracy, as well as welcomed the Commonwealth
secretary general’s plans to provide technical assistance to the government
of Pakistan. To that end, Pakistan gave permission to the Commonwealth in
July to send a team of monitors to observe the election, and to determine whether
conditions existed for a free and democratic election. In its report, the Commonwealth
team concluded that the elections were flawed and represented an “incomplete
democratic process.” Subsequently, Commonwealth foreign ministers
decided to maintain Pakistan’s suspension from the organization’s meetings citing
the “limiting” effect of measures introduced by President Musharraf prior to the
polls.
Japan
Japan repeatedly urged Pakistan to return to constitutional, civilian rule, but
refrained from public criticism of the April referendum extending Musharraf ’s
presidential term. In September, at the time of the U.N. General Assembly, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi met with Musharraf and announced plans to send
election monitors to Pakistan in October.Musharraf asked for Japan’s help in urging
India to resume dialogue on Kashmir.
Koizumi said Japan would “offer as much cooperation as possible” with the
building of a tunnel in northwestern Pakistan (a project Japan previously
financed), in addition to providing U.S.$300 million in economic assistance by
October 2003. Japan had suspended all new loans following Pakistan’s nuclear tests,
but restarted assistance in October 2001 to reward Pakistan’s role in the anti-terrorism
effort.
World Bank and Asian Development Bank
The World Bank provided Pakistan U.S.$800 million in loans during the fiscal
year ending on June 30, 2002. This included credit to support economic reforms
and a three-year debt reduction strategy, and projects aimed at rural development
and poverty reduction. The bank praised Pakistan’s government for progress on
economic reforms, but said that it still faced major challenges in order to bring
about the country’s “fundamental transformation—politically, economically,
socially and with respect to gender—to a modern state.”
The bank was preparing a project to assist with delivery of health services and
education for HIV vulnerable populations in support of the government’s national
HIV/AIDS strategic framework.
After the September 11 attacks, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) boosted its
funding to Pakistan to a record U.S.$957 million in 2001.The ADB president,Tadao
Chino, went to Pakistan in November 2001 and met with President Musharraf. Its
projects targeted access to justice, reproductive health, agriculture, urban reform in
Northwest Frontier Province, and support for a government action plan on curbing
child labor.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Closed Door Policy: Afghan Refugees in Pakistan and Iran, 2/02
VIETNAM
Despite promises by the general secretary of the Vietnamese Communist
Party (VCP) to accelerate the process of reform and promote democracy,
Vietnam’s human rights record continued to deteriorate during 2002. National
Assembly elections conducted in May continued Vietnam’s tradition of single party
rule,while proponents ofmulti-party democracy,human rights, and religious freedom
were arrested or closely monitored.
The government continued to stifle free expression and restrict the exercise of
other basic human rights.Authorities destroyed thousands of banned publications,
restricted press coverage of a key corruption scandal, increased the monitoring of
the Internet, denied the general public access to international television programs
broadcast by satellite, and arrested or detained dissidents who used the Internet or
other public fora to publicize their ideas. The year saw the death of Vietnam’s most
well-known dissident, Tran Do, and the trial of Li Chi Quang, one of an emerging
group of younger pro-democracy advocates in Vietnam.
Officials continued to suppress and control the activities of religious groups,
including ethnic minority Christians in the northern and central highlands, members
of the banned Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam, and Hoa Hao Buddhists
in the south. Authorities made a new round of arrests of indigenous minority
church leaders and land rights activists in the Central Highlands, the site of widespread
unrest in 2001.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The year saw an intensified crackdown on freedom of expression and use of the
Internet. In January, the Ministry of Culture and Information (MoCI) instructed
police to confiscate and destroy banned publications. On January 16, more than
seven tons of books were burned in Ho Chi Minh City, including pornographic
magazines, books published abroad, and books written by Vietnamese dissidents.
In July, authorities in Hanoi destroyed 40,780 compact discs, 810 videotapes, 3,000
books, and six kilograms of other publications, including pornography and foreign-
published books.
Two editions of the Far Eastern Economic Review, published in Hong Kong,were
banned in Vietnam: a July edition covering a major corruption scandal, and an
August edition that reviewed a biography of Ho Chi Minh, which mentioned the
leader’s alleged love affairs.
The MoCI’s Press Department refused to renew the press credentials of three
editors at Tuoitre (Youth) newspaper, citing a “serious error in propaganda work.”
This appeared to be a reference to the publication of a survey of youth idols published
by the paper. In the survey, U.S. President Bill Clinton scored higher than
Prime Minister Phan Van Khai. The government destroyed 120,000 copies of the
offending edition.
In April, the VCP Central Committee stated that publications and books with
“wrongful” or “bad” contents would be banned and that party members whose
words and actions were contrary to party principles would be dealt with severely.
Government officials were instructed to list the classified information and state
secrets that each official was responsible for safeguarding.
Domestic newspapers, and television and radio stations remained under government
control. On June 18, the prime minister signed a decree restricting access
to international television programs broadcast by satellite exclusively to government
officials, state media, and foreigners. On June 20, the chief of the VCP’s Central
Ideology and Culture Board announced that the media should not “expose secrets, create internal divisions, or hinder key propaganda tasks” in its coverage of
the controversial Nam Cam corruption case, which was slated to go to court by
year’s end.Among the 151 people arrested in conjunction with the case,Vietnam’s
largest trial ever in terms of numbers of defendants, were twelve police officers,
three former prosecutors, and two journalists.
In September, the government confiscated the passport of Vietnamese actor
Don Duong, who was denounced by state media as a “lackey of hostile forces”
because of his roles in two recent American films banned in Vietnam. In October,
Vietnamese writer Duong Thu Huong was called a “national traitor” by Cong An
Thanh Pho (Ho Chi Minh City Police) after she published an article in a Vietnamese
newspaper in Australia stating that the war in Vietnam had not made its citizens
more wise or bold in exercising their rights, but more cowardly.
In October, the MoCI issued a stern reprimand to Vietnam’s state-operated
printing houses for publishing books with anti-Communist content or that distorted
Vietnam’s history, and by re-printing dissident books originally published
abroad.
In June, the prime minister instructed the MoCI to tighten up controls at Vietnam’s
four thousand public Internet cafés to prevent customers from accessing
“state secrets,”pornography, or “reactionary”documents.The government blocked
approximately two thousand websites, including those of Vietnamese dissident
groups based overseas.
In August, the MoCI ordered the closure of ttvonline.com, a popular web site
operated by a Hanoi-based company, for operating an Internet site without official
permission and publishing articles “contrary to the spirit” of the Press Law. On
August 16, the MoCI stated that penalties would be imposed on Internet café owners
who allowed customers to view web sites harmful to national security or that
displayed “depraved” or “reactionary” content. In addition, Internet café owners
would be required to obtain licenses and background checks before going into
business.MoCI instructed Vietnam’s only Internet gateway, the state-owned Vietnam
Data Communications Co., to obstruct subversive web sites, based on lists of
banned sites compiled by government ministries. In October, the MoCI ordered
Vietnam’s state-owned Internet service providers (ISP) to block politically and
morally unacceptable web content.
Several dissidents and pro-democracy activists were arrested or harassed during
the year after issuing public critiques of the government, some of which were circulated
on the Internet. Several arrests occurred after dissidents visited the China-
Vietnam border or publicly criticized recent bilateral border agreements between
the two countries. Former army officer Nguyen Khac Toan, forty-six, was arrested
on January 8, a day after meeting prominent dissident Nguyen Thanh Giang. On
January 12, poet Bui Minh Quoc, 62, was put under administrative detention in
Dalat on charges of possessing anti-government literature after he made a trip to
the China-Vietnam border.
Li Chi Quang, thirty-two, a young lawyer whose essay “Beware of Imperialist
China,” was distributed on the Internet, was arrested at an Internet café in Hanoi
on February 21. On October 28, he was sentenced to four years in prison after a
half-day closed trial in Hanoi, on charges of disseminating propaganda against the socialist state.Other dissidents and members of the foreign press corps were barred
from observing the trial.
On March 10, scholar and anti-corruption activist Tran Van Khue, sixty-six, was
arrested and placed under two years of administrative detention after he published
a critical letter to Chinese President Jiang Zemin,which was circulated on the Internet.
Then on March 27, police arrested Pham Hong Son, thirty-four, after he translated
an article titled “What is Democracy,” and sent it to his friends and senior
Vietnamese officials. In addition, he had written an open letter, which was published
on the Internet, protesting the fact that his house had been searched and his
computer and documents confiscated.
With National Assembly elections slated for May, a growing number of dissidents
called for multi-party reforms to counter Vietnam’s one-party system. The
electoral process is currently controlled by the VCP,which screens and approves all
electoral candidates. In February, former VCP member and respected military veteran
Pham Que Duong applied to run in the election. Local VCP officials rejected
his candidacy, charging that he was a “dangerous element” and guilty of twenty
crimes. Only fifty-one of the 498 National Assembly seats were won by non-VCP
candidates.
In July and August, groups of prominent dissidents sent petitions to the government
protesting the arrest and harassment of fellow dissidents and calling for
democratic reforms, establishment of an anti-corruption body, creation of a constitutional
court to examine violations in constitutional law, and publication of
Vietnam’s border treaties with China. On July 19, police detained one of the signers,
Nguyen Vu Binh, thirty-four, and searched his house. Formerly a journalist at
the Tap Chi Cong San (Communist Review), Nguyen resigned his position in 2000
and announced plans to form an independent political party. Nguyen was arrested
in Hanoi on September 25 and expected to go to trial by year’s end.
On September 20, public security officials raided the Ho Chi Minh City home of
human rights advocate Nguyen Dan Que, confiscating his papers and documents
and pressuring him to leave with the police for further questioning. Que refused to
leave when the police could not produce a court order for his arrest. Ten security
officials were subsequently stationed outside his home.
Five Vietnamese writers received Hellman/Hammett awards from Human
Rights Watch in 2002 in recognition of the courage with which they faced political
persecution: Le Chi Quang, Nguyen Dan Que, Nguyen Vu Binh,Ven. Thich Quang
Do, and Tran Van Khue.
Religious Repression
Repression against the banned Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV)
continued during the year. UBCV Supreme Patriarch Venerable Thich Huyen
Quang, eighty-three, remained under tight surveillance at a pagoda in Quang Ngai
province, where his health continued to deteriorate. Venerable Thich Quang Do
remained under administrative detention in Ho Chi Minh City. UBCV monk and
former political prisoner Venerable Thich Tri Luc, who fled to Cambodia in April,
was “disappeared” from Phnom Penh in July, shortly after receiving refugee status
from the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in Cambodia. The U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights and international rights organizations expressed
concerns about the safety of Thich Tri Luc who was feared to have been forcibly
returned to Vietnam and imprisoned.
Members of the Hoa Hao sect of Buddhism, one of the six officially authorized
religions in Vietnam, continued to face problems. In January, the An Giang provincial
court sentenced Hoa Hao Buddhist member Bui Van Hue to three years in
prison for violating a 1999 administrative detention order and illegally leaving
Vietnam after being extradited from Cambodia. In April,Hoa Hao Buddhist monk
Le Minh Triet was placed under two years’ administrative detention after completing
an eight-year prison sentence in Thuan Hai province. Le Quang Liem, the
leader of the Hoa Hao sect, remained under administrative detention in Ho Chi
Minh City. In November, police officers dispersed a two-week protest by Hoa Hao
followers at Quang Minh Tu temple in An Giang province, who had resisted an
order to remove the gate to their temple. Several Hoa Hao Buddhists were reportedly
beaten and briefly detained in a confrontation with police.
Evangelical Protestants, particularly those worshipping in house churches,
remained under surveillance. In July, Protestant house church leader Nguyen Dang
Chi was detained in Dong Nai province in the south, reportedly for preaching without
official approval. After villagers protested outside the police station where he
was being held, police released Nguyen.
Ethnic Hmong and Tai Christians in the north, particularly in Lai Chau and Lao
Cai provinces, were beaten, detained, and pressured by local authorities to
renounce their religion and cease Christian gatherings. In February, reports were
received that the security presence had been increased in border communes in
Muong Lay District, Lai Chau, where Hmong Christians were prohibited from
gathering for religious ceremonies and some chapels were dismantled. On August
7,Hmong Christian Mua Bua Senh died in Dien Bien Dong District, Lai Chau, after
numerous beatings by police officers for refusing to renounce his religion. In October,
the officially-recognized Evangelical Church ofVietnam (North) admitted several
hundred Hmong Christian churches, providing some measure of protection
against persecution. Nonetheless, at least twelve Hmong Christians remained in
prison for their religious beliefs during the year.
Central Highlands
Conditions worsened for indigenous highlanders (known as Montagnards) in
the Central Highlands. In March, a tripartite agreement between Vietnam, Cambodia,
and the U.N. to voluntarily repatriate some one thousand Montagnard
refugees who fled to Cambodia crumbled when Vietnam refused to permit U.N.
monitors access to the Central Highlands. More than four hundred highlanders
were deported from Cambodia to Vietnam in April and May alone, when Cambodia
closed its borders and refused to admit asylum seekers. (See Cambodia.)
In June,Vietnamese authorities launched a new crackdown in the Central Highlands,
even as the deputy prime minister publicly attributed the troubles in the
Central Highlands to mistakes by the nation’s leadership. More than six hundred
“fast deployment” military teams were dispatched to the region during the year,
which largely remained off limits to international observers. Authorities closed down hundreds of churches lacking official authorization—more than three hundred
in Dak Lak province alone. In November the official Phap Luat (Law) newspaper
reported that dozens of evangelical Christians had been forced to confess to
having preached illegally and more than 2,700 Christians had severed connections
with “bad elements who abuse religious issues to sow divisions in national unity.”
Between June and November, dozens of arrests were carried out against Protestant
church leaders, land rights advocates, and individuals suspected of guiding
asylum seekers to Cambodia. In late August, district officials in Mdrak, Dak Lak,
arrested at least thirty Ede villagers on the grounds that they were planning a
demonstration for Vietnam’s National Day. The charges and place of detention of
the majority of those arrested were not made public.Dozens of highlanders disappeared
or went into hiding.
A number of highlanders were tried and convicted during the year. On January
25, four highlanders in Chu Se District, Gia Lai, were sentenced to prison terms of
up to six and a half years for “organizing illegal migrations.” The state media
reported that the men had been deported from Cambodia in April and May 2001.
In October, Rlan Loa, an ethnic Jarai from Krong Pac District, Gia Lai, was sentenced
to nine years in prison for having “illegally migrated abroad.” Rlan Loa was
part of a group of 167 highlanders deported from Cambodia to Vietnam in December
2001. On October 22, three Ede men, Y Tim E Ban, Y Coi B Krong, and Y Tho
Mas E Ya,were sentenced to eight years in prison on charges of inciting local people
to flee Vietnam. State press reported that on October 24, two Ede men, Y Su Nie,
and Y Khai, had “surrendered’ to the police in Mdrak District, Dak Lak.On November
15, two Jarai, Ksor Dar and Rahlan Phyui,were sentenced to three and two years
respectively for allegedly having guided Montagnard asylum seekers to Cambodia.
Public demonstrations continued to be strongly discouraged throughout Vietnam,
although a group of women from the countryside were allowed to conduct a
small rally against corruption in front of VCP General Secretary Nong Duc Manh’s
home in Hanoi in February. In May,Manh stated that demonstrations timed with
the National Assembly elections showed that “our democracy has become excessive.”
There were increasing numbers of reports of conflicts over state confiscation of
farmers’ land. In February more than one hundred villagers protested in Ninh Binh
province over a land dispute. The leader of the demonstration and eleven others
were sentenced to up to thirteen years in prison after a four-day trial in October. In
September, Pham Trong Son and Nguyen Thi Thai were sentenced to three years
and twenty months, respectively, on charges of disrupting public order after they
circulated a petition and organized a protest against inadequate state compensation
after their land was confiscated in Ho Chi Minh City. In October, eleven people
were injured during a demonstration in Hai Duong City near Hanoi by hundreds
of villagers protesting their evictions and inadequate compensation for a new highway
and trade center. In Ha Tay province in November, hundreds of villagers
clashed with police after authorities forced 190 people to move for the construction
of an industrial zone.
In March, the prime minister instructed the Public Security Ministry to upgrade
prisons and detention facilities.However, lack of food and medical care in prisons continued to be widespread. Human Rights Watch received reports of prisoners
being subjected to police torture in detention or during interrogation, solitary confinement
in dark cells, and shackling.Vietnamese state media reported in January
that two police officers were to be tried for torturing a man to death during interrogation.
In May, farmers in southern Binh Dinh province blocked traffic and
threw rocks at police after a villager died in police custody, allegedly a suicide. In
September and October, President Tran Duc Luong approved the early release of
more than nine thousand prisoners in an amnesty to mark Vietnam’s National Day.
No known religious or political prisoners were included in the releases.
Administrative detention without trial continued to be used against suspected
dissidents, including minorities in the Central Highlands, under the 1997 Decree
31/CP. The death penalty continued to be widely used for a wide range of offenses,
including corruption and drug trafficking.
Trafficking and HIV/AIDS
Criminal networks that often operated with the tacit support of government
and police officials trafficked hundreds of Vietnamese women and girls for prostitution,
domestic work, and forced marriage both internally and to other Asian
countries, particularly Cambodia and China.Vietnam was also a transit country for
women being trafficked from other countries in Asia.
Some sentences were handed down during the year under Vietnam’s law against
trafficking in women and children. In May, the People’s Court in Hanoi convicted
five Vietnamese people for trafficking women to China and sentenced them to up
to fourteen years in prison. In September, the court in Ho Chi Minh City sentenced
the operator of a prostitution ring to eight years in prison.
The problem of HIV/AIDS continued to grow,with the Ministry of Health estimating
that 154,000 people were infected with HIV. The Ministry of Labor, War
Invalids and Social Affairs estimated that one-quarter of Vietnam’s estimated
14,600 sex workers were HIV positive.
Officials adopted an increasingly harsh stance towards high-risk groups for
AIDS, such as drug users and prostitutes, who were deemed “social evils.” In late
2001, the government announced plans to send all ofVietnam’s one hundred thousand
registered drug addicts to compulsory drug detoxification centers for up to
two years.As many as seventy-five thousand drug users remained in detention during
the year in seventy-one crowded drug detoxification camps.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The government continued to prohibit independent human rights groups from
operating in Vietnam, restricted the access of U.N. officials seeking to monitor
repatriated refugees, and denied permission for international human rights organizations
such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International to conduct official
missions to Vietnam.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
At the annual Consultative Group meeting conducted in December 2001, international
donors pledged U.S.$2.4 billion in assistance to Vietnam. Most of Vietnam’s
donors were circumspect regarding pressure on Vietnam to improve its
human rights record. A number of donors supported Vietnam’s ambitious ten-year
Legal Reform Strategy.
Vietnam, which continued in its membership in the U.N. Commission on
Human Rights, maintained an edgy relationship with UNHCR. In February,Vietnamese
officials interfered with and then barred UNHCR officials from conducting
site visits in the Central Highlands, despite the tripartite agreement for
voluntary repatriation of Montagnard refugees.
In August, the U.N. Human Rights Committee issued its concluding observations
in regard to Vietnam’s report on its implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The committee expressed concerns about
reports of harassment and detention of religious leaders; restrictions on public
meetings, demonstrations, and freedom of expression; the situation of ethnic
minorities; capital punishment; prison conditions; the continued application of
administrative detention under decree 31/CP; and the lack of an independent judiciary.
The U.N. special rapporteur on disability visited Vietnam in September. He
commended the government’s policies in regard to disabled people but called for
more active implementation of rehabilitation, education, and employment programs.
Asia and Australia
Relations with China thawed a bit with the February visit of Chinese President
Jiang Zemin to Vietnam. Jiang praised the improvement in political and economic
ties between the two countries. The visit came amidst a criticism from dissidents
about controversial border agreements between Vietnam and China.
Relations with Cambodia remained cooperative. During a February visit to
Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese deputy prime minister, Cambodia and Vietnam
agreed to implement a repatriation agreement calling for return of all Montagnard
refugees to Vietnam by April 30. Cambodian border police reportedly cooperated
with Vietnamese officials in forcibly deporting hundreds of Montagnard asylum
seekers back to Vietnam during the year.
Australia held its first human rights dialogue with Vietnam in June in Hanoi.
The Australian government reportedly raised concerns about arbitrary detention,
freedom of association, and capital punishment.
European Union
The European Union remained Vietnam’s third largest donor. In talks with
Prime Minister Phan Van Khai in Brussels in September, the European Commission president expressed E.U. support for increased bilateral trade and Vietnam’s
membership in the World Trade Organization, while raising concerns about
human rights and religious freedom. In July, the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency approved a three-year U.S.$840,000 study on corruption
in national and local government.
In April, the European Parliament issued a resolution about treatment of the
highlanders in Vietnam and closure of the refugee camps in Cambodia. Hanoibased
E.U. diplomats conducted several short visits to the Central Highlands,
although they were reportedly denied access to highlanders in detention and
refugees who had been repatriated from Cambodia.
United States
Bilateral political and economic relations between the United States and Vietnam
continued to slowly improve, despite Vietnam’s strong reaction to U.S. pressure
on human rights and religious freedom. In April,Vietnam reacted defensively
to the annual report of the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom
(USCIRF), which condemned Vietnam’s “grave violations” of religious freedom
and designated it as a country of particular concern. A USCIRF delegation, which
visited Vietnam in March, expressed concerns about the detention of religious dissidents
and the government’s suppression of both unregistered as well as officially
recognized religious organizations. In August, the U.S. ambassador for religious
freedom visited Vietnam.
In September, the U.S. pledged up to $20 million for a five-year plan to reduce
the rate of HIV/AIDS in Vietnam among high-risk groups. In announcing the
grant,U.S.Ambassador Raymond Burghardt stressed that HIV/AIDS is a virus, and
not a “social evil.”
In April, Vietnam’s state media called the U.S. offer to resettle Montagnard
refugees from Cambodia a “scheme to sabotage repatriation, ignite a new rash of
illegal border crossings and cause instability in both the Central Highlands and
throughout Vietnam.” Burghardt visited the Central Highlands in late March,
where he discussed land rights issues with local people and explored aid and investment
opportunities for the United States.
During the annual U.S.-Vietnam human rights dialogue, conducted in Hanoi in
November, the U.S. proposed that Vietnam open up access to the Central Highlands,
release political prisoners, and authorize return visits by the U.N. special rapporteurs
on religion and ethnic minorities, and by the U.N. Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention. Few concrete commitments were secured.
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA OVERVIEW
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Introduction
The continued expansion of European institutions in 2002 marked significant
economic and political progress in many parts of the region. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), a quintessential Cold War institution, once again
stretched across old divides to extend membership invitations to the three former
Soviet Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, as well as to Bulgaria, Slovenia,
Romania, and Slovakia. The European Union (E.U.) and ten candidate countries
made rapid progress toward their proposed 2004 admission to the E.U.
The remarkable pace of European integration could not mask continued serious
human rights problems throughout the region, however. In fact, it accentuated the
increasing disparity between the progress in Central and Eastern Europe and the
deteriorating rights situation in much of the former Soviet Union.Continued integration
also brought new human rights challenges to Western European states
adjusting to their growing multicultural reality.Even as the European Union poised
itself to become more diverse, it became less friendly to migrants and certain
minority communities. The popularity of political parties touting anti-immigrant
and nationalistic agendas drove more moderate politicians to embrace increasingly
restrictive asylum and immigration policies that threatened the fundamental rights
of migrants, asylum seekers, and refugees at both the national and the European
Union level.
In some cases integration got ahead of reform, as when NATO offered to partner
with Russia in a NATO-Russia Council, notwithstanding continued violations
of human rights and humanitarian law committed by Russian troops in Chechnya.
In a similar fashion, the Council of Europe admitted Bosnia and Herzegovina
although it had achieved few of the conditions originally set for its admission. Such
premature integration promised to strain European institutions and the principles
on which they were founded.
Throughout the Europe and Central Asia region, repressive governments justified
violations as necessary for the United States-led global fight against terrorism.
Russia fought its abusive war in Chechnya,Uzbekistan continued its violent crackdown
against independent Muslims, and Belarus gave its police Stalinesque powers
of surveillance, all in the name of combating terrorism. Even former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic sought advantage in the anti-terrorism discourse,
defending himself against war crimes charges at the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) by arguing that his troops had been combating
Muslim terrorists in Kosovo.
A Region Divided
While the prospect of European Union membership secured substantial
improvements in candidate states, especially Turkey, progress in other parts of the
region stalled, or reversed. The year saw a widening gap between those countries
choosing European integration and democratization, and those—particularly
among states of the former Soviet Union—opting for the brutal and repressive
practices of the past.
Russia seemed to embrace reform with the entry into force of a new criminal
procedure code, but this positive step was completely eclipsed by continued atrocities
committed in Chechnya, which remained the region’s most intense human
rights crisis. Throughout the year, Russian troops brutalized Chechen civilians in
the course of sweep operations. Purportedly searching for rebel fighters, Russian
troops rounded up and detained thousands of civilians, many of whom faced torture.
Hundreds last seen in Russian custody simply “disappeared” during the year.
Some prosecutors opened inquiries into alleged abuses, but only a handful of servicemen
were the subject of serious investigations or trial. Russia also made an
unprecedented push to force persons displaced by the conflict out of their tent
camps in Chechnya and Ingushetia. In June, the Russian authorities closed one
camp, offering their inhabitants no viable alternative shelter and effectively forcing
them to return home to the war zone.As this report went to press, Russian officials
were threatening additional camp closures.
Chechen rebels also failed to respect the laws of war, shocking the world with the
October hostage taking of seven hundred civilians in a Moscow theater. The Russian
government’s rescue operation left 128 dead from the consequences of inhaling
a gas pumped into the theater to incapacitate the hostage-takers.The government’s
failure to provide victims adequate medical treatment raised questions about
whether it had met its obligation to minimize the loss of civilian life. But no mishandling
by the Russian authorities could obscure the severity of the crime against
humanity committed by the hostage-takers.
The war in Chechnya spilled over into neighboring Georgia,where several thousand
Chechen civilians sought refuge. Chechen rebels hid in their midst in the
Pankisi Gorge, which they used as a rest and re-supply base in their military campaign
against Russian armed forces. Under United States (U.S.) and Russian pressure,
Georgian security forces undertook operations to counter Chechen rebel
activity in the Pankisi Gorge. As of mid-November, Human Rights Watch had
received reports of a number of arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions and deportations,
as well as one extrajudicial execution, committed in the course of these
operations.
The year also saw a deepening human rights crisis in Central Asia. The U.S. and
its allies in the war in Afghanistan sought critical logistical support from the repressive governments in the region,which in turn found new excuses to disregard their
human rights commitments.
Turkmenistan remained one of the most repressive states in the world. The government
tolerated no political opposition, no independent media, and no independent
human rights activity. At this writing, there were grave fears of an
impending intensified crackdown after a late-November assassination attempt
against President Saparmurad Niazov.
In early 2002, Uzbekistan took a few halting positive steps, including the registration
of one independent human rights organization and the trial and conviction
of several law enforcement officers for two deaths in custody. In March,Uzbek President
Islam Karimov visited U.S. President George W. Bush in Washington and
signed an ambitious agreement to uphold human rights. But after that, forward
progress appeared to halt, and human rights abuses continued unabated.Hundreds
of independent Muslims were arrested, tortured, convicted, and sentenced to ten to
twenty years in prison. In particular, the government targeted members of Hizb ut-
Tahrir (Party of Liberation), a non-violent Islamic group that sought to establish a
Caliphate, or Islamic state, in Central Asia. As of this writing, five people had died
of injuries from apparent torture in Uzbek prisons during the year, and six human
rights defenders were in prison or pre-trial detention, while a seventh was held in
forced psychiatric hospitalization.
In Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan the governments demonstrated increasing intolerance
of opposition views. Leading Kyrgyz and Kazakh opposition figures, journalists,
and human rights defenders faced physical attacks, harassment, detention,
arbitrary or spurious criminal charges, and imprisonment after unfair trials. Tajikistan’s
political opposition also faced obstruction,with repression focused particularly
in the north of the country, where the government imprisoned a former
governor and eighteen others after a closed trial. Uzbekistan’s intolerance of Hizb
ut-Tahrir seemed to catch on with Kazakh, Kyrgyz, and Tajik authorities, who
stepped up their repression of the group, arresting, trying, and convicting dozens
of members for distributing its leaflets and other non-violent activity.
Human rights continued to deteriorate in Belarus, as President Alexander
Lukashenka sought to consolidate his power by relentlessly persecuting his political
opponents, independent civil society, and the media. Hopes of a thorough
democratic transition also seemed to recede in Ukraine, as the government tightened
its grip on independent media through arbitrary tax inspections and licensing
procedures, censorship, harassment, and violence. The killings of three
journalists in the past two years remained unsolved, and journalists faced repeated
threats and beatings, in at least one case with police involvement.
The threat of instability posed by poor governance in the former Soviet Union
became apparent during the year when security forces clashed with demonstrators
in both Kyrgyzstan and Azerbaijan. In both countries, citizens who lacked other
legitimate avenues for the expression of their grievances took to the streets, and
governments intolerant of public criticism reacted with violence and repression. In
Kyrgyzstan, police opened fire on demonstrators protesting the apparently politically
motivated detention of a popular member of parliament; in Azerbaijan the
police fired on protestors seeking improved economic conditions.During the year, the authorities in Belarus, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine broke up similar demonstrations
and jailed participants; in Armenia, protesters faced arrest, fines, and detention
after demonstrations.
Stalled Peace Building in the Balkans
The Balkan states did not follow the course of many former Soviet countries
backward toward the authoritarianism of the past, but neither did they unequivocally
choose the rule of law, respect for human rights, and European integration. In
contrast to much of the past decade, the year saw sustained peace in the Balkans,
but disappointing progress on human rights. The continued failure of governments
in the region to come fully to terms with the crimes committed during the
wars of the Yugoslav break-up was a major problem, with a detrimental impact on
refugee return, reconciliation, and political normalization.
In Croatia, President Stjepan Mesic argued forcefully for war crimes accountability
and cooperation with the ICTY.Mesic had little authority to pursue cooperation,
however, and the government adamantly refused to arrest two former senior
Croatian generals sought by the ICTY.
More than half of the twenty-four individuals publicly indicted by the ICTY
who were still at large in the region were believed to be harbored in Republika Srpska—
the Bosnian Serb entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina—which continued to
refuse to cooperate with the Hague tribunal. NATO troops arrested four indictees
in Bosnia during the year, but Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic
remained at large there, and the Republika Srpska president and prime minister
condemned NATO operations aimed at apprehending him.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (F.R.Yugoslavia) also flouted its obligations
to cooperate with the ICTY.Under pressure of a cut-off in U.S. aid, F.R.Yugoslavia
arrested and transferred one indictee to The Hague and adopted a law on cooperation
with the tribunal. This law contained a number of loopholes, however, and in
a November statement to the United Nations (U.N.) Security Council, ICTY Prosecutor
Carla Del Ponte complained that F.R. Yugoslavia was harboring Bosnian
Serb wartime military commander Ratko Mladic and continuing to block access to
documents she had requested.
The trial of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic for crimes committed
during the wars in Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo began in February. Defending
himself,Milosevic used the opportunity to advance a nationalist version of the war
to the court of public opinion in F.R.Yugoslavia, and current Yugoslav and Serbian
government leaders failed to offer the public an alternative version.
Other than the Milosevic trial, progress on accountability for war crimes committed
in Kosovo was also limited. Although the ICTY had opened investigations,
it failed to indict any Kosovo Albanians for crimes committed during the war.
Neither the U.N. Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) nor the Serbian government took
effective steps to hold lower-level Serbs accountable for war crimes. And when the
U.N. began arresting Kosovo Albanian rebel leaders for crimes committed during
and after the war, the Kosovo government protested that the arrests were politically
motivated.
Finally, in Macedonia, under pressure from the U.S. and the E.U., the government
adopted an amnesty for all crimes relating to the 2001 conflict other than
those that would be prosecuted by the ICTY. Because the tribunal had limited
capacity to pursue prosecutions in Macedonia, the practical effect of the law was
immunity for serious violations committed by both sides during the conflict.
The authorities in Bosnia,Croatia, and Serbia all conducted local war crimes trials
during the year, but in all three countries those proceedings were seriously
flawed by evident witness tampering and a biased judiciary.
In sum, it became abundantly clear in 2002 that the Balkans was a region unreconciled
to its wartime past. The result was a grave injustice to the thousands of victims
of war crimes committed during the Yugoslav wars. It also had a profound
effect on the region’s reconstruction, reintegration, and political development.
With each ethnic population still holding the others collectively responsible for
wartime abuses, refugees and the internally displaced remained reluctant to return
home to communities where they would be in the minority. Even if the displaced
did not fear their neighbors, they often had no home to which to return. The lack
of accountability for violations committed during the war helped sustain laws that
stripped some refugees and internally displaced of their pre-war property rights,on
the presumption that they had abandoned their homes voluntarily, rather than out
of fear. As the year came to a close, more than 1.5 million refugees and internally
displaced persons remained unable or unwilling to return to their pre-war homes
in the region, and much of the wartime ethnic cleansing seemed increasingly irreversible.
The Challenges of European Union Expansion
At their December 2001 council meeting in Laeken (Belgium), E.U. heads of
state agreed to convene a “Convention on the Future of Europe.” Throughout the
year, convention delegates from member state governments, parliaments, the European
Parliament, and the European Commission debated how to restructure the
E.U. to improve its effectiveness and pave the way for its planned expansion in 2004.
The prospect of a larger and more thoroughly integrated E.U. continued to have
a profound effect on the human rights situation in both E.U. member and applicant
states. Perhaps most remarkable were the developments in Turkey during
2002. After two years during which the draw of E.U. membership had had limited
impact on the human rights situation in Turkey, the Turkish government seemed
to get serious about showing the E.U. its reformist stripes in 2002. Significant
reforms adopted in February and August included repeal of the death penalty,
removal of some significant restraints on the use of the Kurdish language, and steps
to address the persistent problem of torture by restricting the length of time
detainees could be held without access to a lawyer.While these were welcome steps,
much remained to be done to implement them and address other serious problems,
including the plight of hundreds of thousands of Kurds displaced from the formerly
war-torn southeast and continued restrictions on free expression that landed
scores in jail for peaceful expression of their views.
On the eve of its December summit in Copenhagen, it was unclear whether the E.U. would set a date for membership negotiations with Turkey. E.U. officials
acknowledged the significant strides Turkey had taken in 2002, but nonetheless
noted accurately that Turkey still did not meet the Union’s political criteria for
membership, a prerequisite for negotiations to begin. Some European leaders
voiced other objections, suggesting that the European Union would never welcome
a predominantly Muslim country into its midst. Most significantly, in November
the president of the Convention on the Future of Europe,Valéry Giscard d’Estaing,
gave an interview in which he was reported to say that the admission of Turkey
would be “the end of the European Union,”alluding to Turkey’s Muslim population
and distinct culture. E.U. officials scrambled to distance themselves from his comments
and emphasize that Turkey was a candidate on equal footing with others, eligible
for admission upon satisfaction of the conditions set for all applicant states.
By introducing other cultural and political considerations into what should have
been a transparent assessment of human rights progress, Giscard d’Estaing’s comments
threatened to undermine the Turkish authorities’ confidence in the process
and distract them from pressing forward on critical reforms.As this report went to
press, a newly elected government with Islamist roots was working hard to establish
its Western-oriented credentials. With the appropriate encouragement from
the European Union, it appeared likely to continue to progress toward greater
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Giscard d’Estaing’s remarks on Turkey’s E.U. candidacy also highlighted the
most significant human rights challenge the E.U. itself faced: ensuring tolerance
and respect for the rights of minorities in a growing and increasingly multicultural
community of states.Throughout the E.U. and its candidate states, minorities continued
to suffer serious violations of their rights. In the countries of Central and
Eastern Europe, Roma in particular faced persistent problems of police abuse,
racist violence, and official discrimination in obtaining access to housing, health
care, education, and other public services. The European Union continued to press
for progress in the treatment of Roma in applicant states, but often failed to apply
the same scrutiny within the Union, where their situation also often fell short of
international standards.
The year also saw an alarming growth in incidents of anti-Semitic violence in
Western Europe,with widespread reports of harassment,personal attacks, and vandalism
of Jewish property. Synagogues were torched in Belgium and France. Initial
responses from a number of governments were disappointing. Local authorities
stepped up security, opened investigations, and promised to hold those responsible
accountable, but national and regional bodies were slow to exercise political leadership,
or develop a coherent policy, to respond to the problem. French officials in
particular seemed at least initially to explain the violence as the understandable
response of Arab immigrants to the Middle East conflict.
The most worrying expressions of growing xenophobia in Europe came in the
field of immigration. As hundreds of thousands of migrants and refugees continued
to arrive in Western Europe in 2002, the region saw a surge of “Fortress Europe”
politics, with far-right political parties using virulently anti-immigrant platforms
to garner increasingly broad support at the polls. Governments throughout the
region adopted rhetoric of intolerance toward migrants and pushed through new immigration laws with restrictions threatening refugees’ and migrants’ rights at
both the national and E.U. level.
In many cases, officials conflated the policy debate on immigration control with
discussion of terrorism, drug trafficking, and crime—fueling public perceptions of
immigration as a major factor in many social ills. Indeed, both security and migration
ranked top on the Spanish E.U. Presidency’s agenda for the Seville summit in
June, where governments pressed forward to develop common E.U. border controls
and decided to link the E.U.’s aid and trade relationships to governments’
cooperation in controlling migration.
E.U. member states continued to back away from their commitments under the
1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, with a number of justice and
home affairs ministers openly calling for a redrafting of the convention. As this
report went to press, E.U. member states were close to agreement on a proposed
common interpretation of the convention. Refugee advocates expressed concern
that in the context of the global anti-terror effort, the E.U.would adopt a common
interpretation that would broaden the scope of those who could be excluded from
refugee protection on national security grounds, and would erode protections
against refoulement.
Even where the letter of the law on immigration controls met international standards,
practice often fell far short.Detention conditions for migrants and refugees
in a number of Western European countries remained substandard, despite
repeated criticism from the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and
the U.N.Committee against Torture.To illustrate this widespread problem,Human
Rights Watch reported on the detention of migrants under severely substandard
conditions in an old airport terminal on the Canary Islands. The Spanish authorities
regularly detained more than three hundred migrants in the facility, which the
Red Cross said was fit for fifty. Sanitation and health care was grossly inadequate,
and opportunities for the migrants to get fresh air and exercise were non-existent.
The Spanish authorities argued the arrangement was a temporary, emergency
response to a new migration phenomenon, but took no meaningful steps to
improve the conditions.Violations suffered by migrants in detention were not limited
to substandard conditions. A September 2002 report by Amnesty International
and the International Helsinki Federation (IHF) stated that migrants and asylum
seekers detained in holding centers in Greece faced threats, beatings, and sexual
abuse by law enforcement officers.
Throughout the region, the deportation of migrants was characterized by persistent
rights violations, including inadequate information and translation services,
insufficient access to legal representation during detention, and lack of judicial
oversight or opportunities for migrants to appeal their expulsions. Following the
Seville summit, the E.U. undertook an explicit policy of linking its aid to countries
to their willingness to enter into readmission agreements committing them to
accept the return of migrants who had entered the union through their territory.
The web of readmission agreements effectively shifted the burden of immigration
control and refugee protection from E.U.member and applicant states to their eastern
and southern neighbors,which had markedly fewer resources to devote to it.As
evidence of the concerns raised by these readmission agreements, Human Rights Watch documented the regular expulsion from Spain of migrants, including unaccompanied
children, by the Spanish police pursuant to an ad hoc procedure that
seemed to turn on the whims of the local authorities. Thousands of migrants were
returned to Morocco on the basis that they were Moroccan or had transited
Morocco to Spain,with little regard for the Moroccan authorities’ capacity or willingness
to absorb the migrants, provide adequate services and protection for unaccompanied
children, or protect refugees against return to a country where they
faced a threat of persecution.
While member states pursued migration policies and practices that violated
international standards, E.U. joint action to combat immigration failed to specify
any concomitant joint obligations to respect migrants’ rights. The European Commission’s
Green Paper and Communication proposing a community return policy
merely suggested that detention conditions and return procedures were subjects on
which the E.U. might choose to articulate common standards in the future. The
resultant E.U. Return Action Plan adopted in late November prioritized operational
cooperation in returning unwanted immigrants through measures such as
closer contacts among member state law enforcement agencies and deportation
operations via joint charter flights. It neglected the need for common standards for
such operations, putting the development of such standards off to the indefinite
future.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights activists continued to experience the brunt of much of the persistent
authoritarianism in the region. Repression in Turkmenistan was so severe
that activists remained largely underground.Defenders in Kazakhstan,Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkey, and Uzbekistan worked under the constant threat of harassment,
violent attack, arrest, torture, and imprisonment on trumped-up charges. In
Georgia, defenders were beaten by a paramilitary mob.And in Azerbaijan, Belarus,
and Ukraine, the authorities erected significant obstacles to human rights work in
the form of onerous and sometimes arbitrary registration, licensing, funding, or
taxation rules and procedures for defender organizations. Although human rights
defenders in the Balkans operated relatively freely, some of their activities drew
exceptionally hostile commentary from government officials in Albania, Croatia,
Macedonia, and Serbia.
Against the backdrop of these challenges, the strength, resilience, and creativity
of the human rights movement was again evident in the region in 2002, as groups
forged new alliances to support one another and confront new challenges. For
example, international human rights organizations joined together to provide constructive
commentary on the Council of Europe’s draft human rights guidelines for
the war against terrorism. Some fifty human rights, democracy, and conflict prevention
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) came together to offer a submission
to the Convention on the Future of Europe, identifying ways in which the
convention should address human rights within the E.U. and strengthen the E.U.’s
global role.More than fifty groups campaigned together around plans of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) for its 2003 annual meeting
in Tashkent. (See below.) At their November general assembly, the International
Helsinki Federation network of human rights groups throughout the region
adopted an “Action Plan on Chechnya” aimed at keeping the abusive conflict high
on the international agenda in 2003.And on two occasions during the year, the IHF
convened activists in the region to support Turkmen dissidents and strategize on
promoting change in that most closed society.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Once again, Russia’s conduct in Chechnya proved one of the most controversial
issues before the U.N.Commission on Human Rights, but for the first time in three
sessions, the commission failed to adopt a resolution condemning this conduct.
The resolution came to a vote only after E.U.-led negotiations on a consensus-based
chairman’s statement failed (by one vote, with twenty-two states abstaining). The
E.U. and U.S. blamed each other for the resolution’s failure, but in fact both contributed
richly to the outcome. The E.U. was clearly reluctant to see the resolution
go to a vote, even when the Russian government refused to cooperate on the chairman’s
statement.Hoping to maintain maximum flexibility to withdraw the resolution,
the E.U. discouraged other states from co-sponsoring the resolution and
excluded them from discussions about Chechnya. The U.S., for its part, used its
non-membership in the commission as an excuse to sit on the sidelines, and waited
until the day before the vote to co-sponsor.
U.N. treaty bodies provided some of the only official documentation of human
rights abuses in the former Soviet Union, making apparent the need for greater
U.N. engagement in the region. Georgia was one of the few countries of the former
Soviet Union to issue standing invitations to U.N. human rights monitoring mechanisms;
meanwhile, citing security concerns, the Russian government postponed a
scheduled visit of the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women and the
special representative of the secretary-general on internally displaced persons to
Chechnya. Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s trip to Central Asia reinvigorated the
Uzbek government’s promise to invite the special rapporteur on torture to visit the
country. But the secretary-general’s silence on human rights during a visit to Turkmenistan
was a bitter disappointment to many.
The U.N. continued to play a significant role in peace building in the Balkans.
After facing criticism for mismanagement and inefficiency, in 2002 the ICTY took
steps to improve its performance and aim to wind up its work by 2008. Its efforts
were substantially undermined, however, by the continued failure of the authorities
in the former Yugoslavia to cooperate, as well as NATO’s failure to apprehend
indictees who remained at large in Bosnia. Pressure mounted on the ICTY to consider
referring cases back to national courts for trial. In a June report, the ICTY
accepted in principle that it could refer cases involving middle-ranking commanders,
but it identified reforms that would first be necessary to ensure fair trials in national courts. By year’s end, little progress had been made by the international
community or regional governments to undertake those reforms.
The U.N. continued to face significant challenges in Kosovo, which essentially
functioned as a U.N. protectorate. During the year, UNMIK arrested a number of
former commanders of the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army on charges of
wartime crimes, as well as several Serbian extremists charged with post-conflict
attacks against the U.N. and interethnic violence. These efforts came late, however,
and were as yet insufficient to fully restore the faith of Kosovars in the rule of law
and the authority of the U.N. justice system.
International Financial Institutions
The international financial institutions were actively engaged in Central Asia
notwithstanding the lack of political and economic reforms in the region.The decision
by the EBRD—unique among financial institutions for its embrace of political
pluralism and the rule of law as a condition for engagement—to hold its 2003
annual meeting in Uzbekistan dramatically exposed this deficit of reform. This
year,Human Rights Watch joined fifty-three other NGOs in a campaign to urge the
bank to press the Uzbek government for specific human rights improvements as a
condition for the 2003 meeting, arguing that failure to do so would grant the Uzbek
government undeserved political prestige and financial benefit.
Challenged with the apparent breach of bank principles, EBRD President Jean
Lemierre stated that Tashkent’s selection was “an incentive to make progress, and
not an endorsement.” As of this writing, though, Human Rights Watch was not
aware of any specific efforts by the bank to encourage such progress in advance of
the meeting.
The EBRD was more forthright in its response to Belarus and Turkmenistan.
Bank strategies for both countries made clear that engagement would be strictly
limited to the private sector until they made progress on political pluralism,human
rights, and market reforms.
During his visit to Central Asia,World Bank President James Wolfensohn met
with civil society leaders but otherwise did little to publicly acknowledge the
region’s stunning lack of reform. The World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), and several donor states promised an aid package of U.S.$700 million
to Kyrgyzstan,without apparent regard for the deteriorating rights situation there.
The IMF, under apparent pressure from the U.S. government, returned in 2002 to
Uzbekistan (having suspended lending in 1996 and essentially withdrawn in 2001),
even though no reform standards had been met.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continued to
play an important role, though its impact on human rights conditions often
seemed to fall short of its potential. The performance of its missions continued to
vary widely, with the mission in Kosovo setting the best example through its thorough
and publicly available reports on minority rights and the judiciary. Though operating on a more confidential, low-key basis, the Assistance Group in Chechnya
also did important proactive monitoring and reporting, which OSCE member
states unfortunately made little use of in their multilateral and bilateral dialogues
with Russia. OSCE election monitoring missions continued to provide an important
check against electoral abuses, including through a first-ever mission to Turkey
for the November elections. The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights (ODIHR), the high commissioner on national minorities, and the representative
on freedom of the media all continued their efforts to articulate human
dimension standards and develop specific recommendations to member states on
how to meet those standards. ODIHR was particularly active in efforts to combat
trafficking in human beings and received high marks for this work from NGOs in
the region.
Unfortunately, the recommendations flowing from the OSCE’s missions, election
monitors, and human dimension institutions were ignored more often than
not, as noncompliance had limited consequences for offending states. While the
E.U., the U.S., and the EBRD rhetorically conditioned aid relationships on compliance
with OSCE norms, these linkages were not effectively or consistently enforced,
particularly where they competed with other political, economic, and military
agendas.
Perhaps more than any other international organization, the growing variance
in human rights conditions across the region strained the OSCE,which purports to
unite the countries in the region through common commitments in the politicomilitary,
economic, and human dimensions of security. Countries of the former
Soviet Union that were on the receiving end of much human rights scrutiny and
criticism from the OSCE were increasingly emboldened to attack the organization
as disproportionately preoccupied with its “human dimension,” particularly in the
eastern half of the region. The organization responded by appropriately increasing
its scrutiny of human rights problems in the more developed democracies ofWestern
Europe and North America, but also by increasing its economic and politicomilitary
dimension activities, unfortunately too often neglecting important
linkages to respect for human rights and the rule of law. In particular, the OSCE
highlighted its role in the global effort to combat terrorism, the theme of both its
2001 and 2002 ministerial meetings as well as regular smaller seminars and official
gatherings throughout the year. As an organization committed from its beginning
to addressing human rights as an essential element of security, the OSCE was
uniquely positioned to ensure that the war against terrorism was conducted in a
manner that comported with and promoted human rights. Although OSCE officials
and member states made repeated reference to the importance of respect for
human rights in the war against terrorism, much remained to be done to mainstream
and implement human rights monitoring, reporting, and promotion
within the organization’s expanding anti-terror agenda.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Undertaking an historic step toward expansion eastward during 2002, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) had an important opportunity to promote respect for human rights and democratic principles in the region. Its impact was
most keenly felt in the states invited to join in November.For example,Bulgaria and
Slovakia were eager to meet E.U. and NATO standards and took steps to tighten
their weapons trade controls, albeit more work remained to be done. In states outside
the 2002 expansion, however, NATO seemed to fall short of its potential to
effect change. The most glaring lapse was the creation of the NATO-Russia Council,
according Russia a special relationship notwithstanding Russian troops’ ongoing
serious humanitarian law violations in Chechnya. At year’s end, it remained to
be seen whether the council would become an effective forum for addressing the
substandard conduct of the Russian military in Chechnya.
NATO continued to play an important role in peace implementation in the
Balkans.The NATO-led Stabilization Force in Bosnia apprehended four war crimes
suspects during the year, but its continued failure to bring Radovan Karadzic and
other at-large indictees to justice was a disappointment.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe continued its expansion, even as its institutions were
strained by the demands of monitoring, promoting, and enforcing standards in
states previously admitted despite having seriously substandard human rights
records. In June, Bosnia and Herzegovina became the council’s forty-fourth member
state, although key conditions on cooperation with the ICTY and the return of
refugees remained unfulfilled. In September, the Parliamentary Assembly (PACE)
recommended that the council also admit the F.R. Yugoslavia, which agreed to
undertake a long list of reforms upon admission.The Committee ofMinisters postponed
Yugoslavia’s formal admission until its constituent republics Serbia and
Montenegro ratified a new constitutional framework.
Meanwhile, Council of Europe institutions were busy attending to the serious
human rights problems in a number of its newer members, including Russia,
Ukraine, and the southern Caucasus states. Nearly all Council of Europe institutions
remained actively engaged on Chechnya,but to no tangible result.The human
rights work of Council of Europe experts in Chechnya continued to depend on the
Russian authorities who essentially served as their hosts. The Council of Europe
experts’ mandate was enlarged to include education and judicial reform, raising
fears that the expansion would come at the expense of efforts to promote accountability
for human rights abuse.
Council of Europe engagement on the southern Caucasus was principled and
courageous.Representatives of the PACE monitoring committee refused to be bullied
by the Azerbaijani government into backing away from their trenchant reporting
on the human rights situation there. Several Council of Europe institutions
took the Georgian government to task for its indulgence of religious violence.
Council of Europe institutions also remained actively engaged with Turkey’s
human rights problems in 2002. The Committee for the Prevention of Torture visited
the country twice, and its observations and recommendations served as an
important benchmark for progress Turkey needed to make to advance its E.U.
application. A PACE rapporteur examined the plight of Turkey’s internally displaced population and his recommendations were reinforced by new judgments
against Turkey at the European Court of Human Rights. In November, at the invitation
of the government of Turkey, the Council of Europe sent its first-ever election-
monitoring mission to Turkey.
European Union
The E.U. replicated its poor performance on Chechnya at the U.N.Commission
on Human Rights in its bilateral relations with Russia. Throughout the year European
heads of state muted nearly all criticism of Russia’s conduct of the war in
Chechnya.
The E.U. confined its human rights engagement in Central Asia and the Caucasus
to forthright statements at such venues as the OSCE Permanent Council. Casting
itself in a role secondary to the U.S. in the region, it effectively forfeited
important opportunities for leverage, such as its Partnership and Cooperation
Agreements and its voice at the EBRD.
The E.U. remained intensively engaged in the Balkans, which was an important
arena for proving the capacity of its Common Foreign and Security Policy. Its
takeover of the international policing operation in Bosnia from the U.N. in 2003
was seen as a significant pending test of E.U. capabilities. The E.U. was increasingly
insistent that the governments of Bosnia, Croatia, and F.R. Yugoslavia cooperate
with the ICTY, but it continued to refuse to link its aid program for the region
directly to such cooperation.
As mentioned previously, the E.U. accession process proved an important catalyst
for reform in Turkey, although nagging questions about whether the E.U. was
genuinely committed to the process threatened to undermine that important
opportunity for change.While the E.U. had in recent years focused considerable
attention on Roma rights in candidate states, it remained to be seen whether this
scrutiny would continue as the candidate states neared E.U. membership, highlighting
the need for E.U. scrutiny of conditions for Roma in member states as well
as beyond.
United States
The Bush administration made repressive governments in the former Soviet
Union allies in the global campaign against terrorism, without a consistent policy
for checking their proclivity for human rights violations. The U.S. established a
military presence in Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, and it pressed for
greater support of these countries with international financial institutions. In
recognition of their cooperation,President Bush met with the leaders of three Central
Asian states, an unprecedented amount of attention to what was once a U.S. foreign
policy backwater. The region’s new prominence opened new avenues for
effective U.S. engagement on human rights issues. Yet it seemed increasingly likely
that the United States would find it hard to dissociate itself from its new allies’
abuses.
In some cases, particularly Uzbekistan, the U.S. pressed for specific improvements, such as the registration of human rights organizations and political parties
and the release of political prisoners. But in approving aid recently conditioned by
the U.S. Congress on human rights progress, the Bush administration exaggerated
the impact of small, positive steps made by the Uzbek government.Overall the U.S.
failed to take full advantage of many opportunities to use its influence with Central
Asian governments. Concerns were raised diplomatically. But with few exceptions,
such as the cancellation of a trade delegation to Kyrgyzstan over its reluctance to
allow an independent printing press, the United States did not make clear that there
would be consequences for failure to make real improvements.
In Georgia,U.S. military ties expanded to include in situ anti-terror training for
Georgian forces. And yet the U.S. expressed no outward concern about the arbitrary
or brutal methods used by Georgian security agencies in anti-terror operations
and detentions in and around the Pankisi Gorge.
The Russian government repeatedly cast its war in Chechnya in the rhetoric and
imagery of the U.S.-led war on terrorism. This should have prompted the U.S. to
speak and act unequivocally about continuing abuses. At times, the U.S. government
did so, but many opportunities were missed to take a strong stand, particularly
at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.
In the Balkans, the U.S. undermined its longstanding significant investment in
building the rule of law when it apprehended six terror suspects in Bosnia in January,
circumventing formal extradition proceedings and disregarding the rulings of
Bosnian courts. Likewise, there were reports of extralegal extraditions of terror suspects
from Georgia to U.S. territory; the Bush administration would neither confirm
nor deny the allegations. To some in Georgia, the U.S. approach to the issue
contributed to an atmosphere in which “disappearances”were tolerated. A similar
dynamic emerged when U.S. efforts to promote the jurisdiction of the ICTY in the
Balkans were undermined by the pressure it put on governments in the former
Yugoslavia to agree that they would not surrender U.S. soldiers to the International
Criminal Court.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Throughout the year,Human Rights Watch investigated the persistent and deepening
human rights problems in the former Soviet Union. In three missions to
Ingushetia, we documented and reported on the alarming pattern of “disappearances”
in neighboring Chechnya and the Russian government’s utter failure to bring
those responsible to account.We also closely monitored the government’s efforts to
pressure displaced Chechens to return home from Ingushetia, although the security
conditions in Chechnya remained perilous.We took our reporting on Chechnya to
relevant international bodies and Russia’s bilateral partners, including the OSCE,
the Council of Europe, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the U.N. Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the U.N. Committee
on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, the E.U., and the U.S. administration. In
numerous letters and in-person briefings, we urged these international actors to
step up monitoring and reporting in Chechnya and to insist that Russia rein in its troops and hold those responsible for abuses accountable. Seeing the war in Chechnya
begin to slip from the international spotlight, in 2002 we made extra efforts to
raise awareness of our findings among members of the press.We issued a statement
unequivocally condemning the Chechen hostage-taking in October, underscoring
that no amount of suffering by civilians in Chechnya could justify such an atrocity.
Human Rights Watch also monitored the fallout of this tragedy,documenting a significant
increase in harassment of Chechens and members of other ethnic minorities
in Moscow and a new abusive crackdown by Russian troops in Chechnya.
Chechnya was not Human Rights Watch’s only focus in Russia, however.During
the course of the year we commenced a multi-year investigation into abuses suffered
by soldiers in the army, and we published a subset of our findings in a November
report on the annual forced conscription of hundreds of young men, arbitrarily
detained in Moscow and St. Petersburg and then immediately shipped off to the
army.We also looked into trumped-up charges of espionage pressed by the Russian
security services against several academics and a journalist.
The year saw our first ever investigation into human rights conditions in
Ukraine,where we documented the presidential administration’s campaign to control
the television media through informal censorship of news broadcasting.
Human Rights Watch researchers also visited Belarus for a preliminary investigation
in anticipation of a more substantial research project in 2003.
Our Tbilisi office actively monitored a range of issues in the southern Caucasus.
Our chief priority was documenting the Georgian government’s indulgence of
dozens of violent attacks against religious minorities. We repeatedly pressed the
Georgian government to curb the violence and raised our concern with international
actors, especially the U.S. ambassador at large for international religious freedom
and the U.S.Commission on International Religious Freedom, both of which
committed to follow developments in Georgia closely. We asked the Council of
Europe to track the issue more closely as well. Throughout the year we monitored
the trial of Vasili Mkalavishvili and Petre Ivanidze, the only people indicted on
charges of religious violence.
In March,Human Rights Watch wrote to the U.N.Human Rights Committee in
anticipation of its review of Georgia’s implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, highlighting in particular our concerns
about religious violence and widespread and persistent torture. In April, we held a
press conference, jointly with three Georgian human rights NGOs, to publicize the
committee’s concluding observations, which took the extraordinary step of giving
Georgia one year to report back on measures it had taken to improve its deplorable
treatment of prisoners and detainees. In meetings with Georgian government officials
we continued to press for criminal procedure code reform that would advance
human rights protections.
Our work on Armenia and Azerbaijan also focused on abuses by law enforcement
agencies. In late 2001,we investigated government efforts to hold accountable
those responsible for beating to death Poghos Poghosian, killed in a Yerevan
nightspot in September after he allegedly insulted Armenian President Robert
Kocharian. Several of Kocharian’s bodyguards were implicated in the killing, but
only one of them faced a relatively minor involuntary manslaughter charge after investigators characterized the death as an accident. In a December 2001 statement,
Human Rights Watch decried the investigation, saying it sent “a chilling message to
the Armenian people that state security personnel can kill with virtual impunity.”
In response to the June 3-4, 2002 police shootings in Nardaran, Azerbaijan,
Human Rights Watch wrote a letter to President Heidar Aliev, calling upon the government
to refrain from using unnecessary or disproportionate force in response
to public protests.
Central Asia remained a major priority for Human Rights Watch. Our office in
Tashkent was on the front line of responding to the Uzbek government’s crackdown
on independent Muslims. Our staff there documented hundreds of cases of abuses,
sought legal counsel for political and religious prisoners, monitored trials, and
briefed the international community resident in and visiting Tashkent.
A mid-year research mission in Kazakhstan documented the human rights
aspects of the burgeoning HIV/AIDS epidemic in Kazakhstan, to be detailed in a
2003 report. U.N. AIDS experts had reported that the spread of the disease in the
former Soviet Union was the fastest growing AIDS problem in the world. Human
Rights Watch found that, even more clearly than in other parts of the world, the epidemic
in Central Asia is driven by human rights abuses that prevent vulnerable
populations, primarily injecting drug users, from obtaining the information, protection,
and treatment they need. In Kazakhstan,Human Rights Watch also monitored
and reported on the increased repression of the independent media,
particularly the harassment and mistreatment of journalist Sergei Duvanov. In
Kyrgyzstan, we monitored the state reaction to a wave of public demonstrations
and called on the government to account for police use of excessive force that
resulted in the shooting deaths of five civilian protesters in the south.
In September, we raised the alarm when Turkmen opposition figure Gulgeldi
Annaniazov was detained in Kazakhstan pending imminent deportation to Turkmenistan
where he would have most certainly faced persecution. Our intervention
with U.S. officials in Washington and Almaty, with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), and—through collaboration with the Norwegian
Helsinki Committee—with the Norwegian government, helped block the
deportation and secure Annaniazov refuge in Norway.
Throughout the year, Human Rights Watch sought opportunities to bring the
human rights situation in Central Asia to the attention of international actors and
to encourage them to press the governments in the region for specific reforms.We
worked with sympathetic members of Congress to craft legislation that conditioned
U.S. aid to Uzbekistan on progress toward implementing the human rights
commitments President Karimov made to President Bush in February, and we
urged that the U.S. link security assistance to Uzbekistan to concrete improvements
in its human rights record. In the same vein, we called on the U.S. to press the governments
of Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan to improve their performance on religious
freedom or face censure under the U.S. International Religious Freedom Act.
Such U.S. conditionality did in fact yield the only bright spots in Uzbekistan’s
record during the year—the registration of one human rights NGO in late 2001 and
a visit by the U.N. special rapporteur on torture in late 2002.
The international financial institutions were also increasingly a focus of our advocacy on Central Asia.We briefed World Bank President Wolfensohn on human
rights in the region prior to his April visit, and we worked with his staff to identify
civil society representatives with whom he should meet there. In May, a Human
Rights Watch team, including our Tashkent-based researcher, attended the annual
meeting of the EBRD in Bucharest, and, on behalf of fifty-four NGOs from most of
the bank’s shareholder states, we launched a campaign to press for reform in
Uzbekistan in advance of the May 2003 annual meeting to be held in Tashkent. In
meetings with EBRD President Lemierre, bank board members, and staff,Human
Rights Watch argued that prior to the 2003 meeting the bank should seek specific
reforms in Uzbekistan in order to avoid embarrassment. In follow-up meetings at
the EBRD in London in September,we updated President Lemierre and his staff on
the human rights situation in Uzbekistan and elaborated ideas for promoting more
openness in Uzbekistan in the lead-up to and during the May 2003 meeting. In particular,
we emphasized the importance of unfettered civil society participation in
the meeting, and an agenda for the meeting that emphasized the bank’s mandate to
invest only in countries committed to multi-party democracy.
In the Balkans,Human Rights Watch remained focused on the imperative of justice
for war crimes. In June, former Human Rights Watch researcher Fred Abrahams
testified in the Milosevic trial about Human Rights Watch’s investigation into
war crimes in Kosovo.He told the court that during the war Human Rights Watch
had repeatedly sent Milosevic information about the crimes being committed
under his command—a crucial link in the prosecutor’s case that Milosevic had
command responsibility for those crimes. Our staff regularly monitored the Milosevic
trial and provided valuable background information and analysis to journalists
trying to explain the proceedings to the public in the Balkans and beyond. Our
Belgrade-based researcher published a number of editorials and letters to the editor
in the Belgrade press, excoriating the media to report on the Milosevic proceedings
in a balanced and accurate manner, and urging the Serbian political elite
to publicly embrace the tribunal proceedings as an important part of Serbia’s effort
to put the Milosevic era definitively behind it.
In November,Human Rights Watch published a report on trafficking of women
and girls to Bosnia and Herzegovina for forced prostitution. The report documented
corruption among local police and complicity by certain actors within the
international community as significant aspects of the trafficking problem.
Throughout the year we monitored continued impediments to minority return in
Croatia and at the year’s end were finalizing a substantial report on that subject.
In Kosovo, we conducted a three-week investigation into impunity for wartime
and post-war ethnic and political violence. Our findings—due for publication in
2003—highlighted important lessons learned about how NATO and the U.N.
might better ensure security and the rule of law in post-war settings.
In June,we released a major report highlighting serious violations of media freedom
in Albania, including harassment, threats, and violence against journalists,
often with police involvement; discriminatory allocation of government advertising
and subsidies; and crippling criminal and civil defamation suits brought against
journalists by government officials subjected to critical media attention. We
released the report in a press conference in Tirana and presented our key recommendations to relevant government and international officials there. Throughout
the rest of the year, we sought opportunities to raise our concerns further with relevant
international actors, including the European Commission, European Parliament,
and the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Monitoring Committee.
Turkey was the focus of intensive research and advocacy in 2002, as we sought to
capitalize on the human rights demands put on Turkey as part of its E.U. membership
bid. Human Rights Watch’s researcher on Turkey made regular trips to Brussels
to brief E.U. officials on human rights developments and to urge them to
champion several specific significant reforms.Curbing torture was a major focus of
these efforts and in numerous letters to E.U. and Turkish officials, editorials, and
press releases, we emphasized the importance of amending Turkish law to give
lawyers access to all detainees from the first moments of detention. Our efforts were
rewarded when, on the eve of the E.U.’s publication of its annual report on applicant
states, the Turkish government prepared a new draft law on access for lawyers.
In November, Human Rights Watch honored Turkish freedom of expression
activist Sanar Yurdatapan at its annual dinners in New York City, Los Angeles, and
San Francisco. The dinners and the attendant media attention and meetings with
U.S. government officials gave us an important opportunity to outline human
rights priorities for the new Turkish government, particularly in the realm of free
expression.
The expansion of NATO and the E.U. presented an important opportunity to
press for arms trade reforms in candidate countries, which we did with particular
vigor in 2002.Through the work of our Arms Division,we monitored, encouraged,
and reported on reform efforts in Central and Eastern Europe, and also highlighted
continued areas of concern. In meetings, letters, and briefing papers, we encouraged
E.U. and NATO decision makers to use their leverage to maximum advantage
to secure needed improvements in candidate countries.We focused efforts to promote
change in particular on Slovakia, carrying out new research in the country in
April,May, and October.
In Western Europe, we focused our monitoring and advocacy on Spain, which
had the E.U. presidency in the first half of 2002, and on Greece, which was due to
have the presidency for the first half of 2003. In Spain, we published three reports
based on research carried out in late 2001. They addressed extremely poor conditions
of detention for migrants in the Canary Islands; mistreatment of unaccompanied
children arriving in the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla; and arbitrary
implementation of Spain’s new immigration law. The reports, which were widely
covered in the Spanish media, were the subject of several Human Rights Watch
meetings with responsible Spanish government officials.
In Greece,we monitored developments relating to its efforts to combat trafficking
in human beings and offered written comments on draft anti-trafficking legislation,
urging that it be amended to include protections for victims.We submitted
information on Greece’s anti-trafficking efforts to the U.N. Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,which was due to review Greece in 2003.We also
continued to gather information regarding Greece’s treatment of migrants and asylum
seekers, the subject of three reports we had published in 2000 and 2001.
At the E.U. level,we drew on our country research to draft critiques of E.U. proposals on a common short-term residence permit for trafficking victims and on a
common policy for returning migrants to the countries from which they have
come.We formally submitted our concerns about the return policy to the European
Commission and European Parliament at a July hearing. In November,we met with
commission and council officials to discuss our recommendations further and how
they could be addressed through implementation of the action plan on return that
member states were expected to adopt at the end of November.
ALBANIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Following a series of political crises, by mid-year Albania entered a period of
what appeared to be more stable and inclusive governance.Nonetheless, impunity
for police abuse, failures of various government branches to uphold the rule of law,
trafficking in human beings, and widespread violations of children’s rights continued
to be major concerns. The government’s desire to cast Albania as part of the
European mainstream made it unfortunately more reluctant to acknowledge and
address the country’s human rights problems.
In early 2002, political life was dominated by a dramatic split within the governing
Socialist Party (SP), triggered by chairman Fatos Nano’s campaign against
what he described as the party’s “moral crisis” of corruption, nepotism, and criminal
connections. Nano’s attacks focused on then-Prime Minister Ilir Meta and his
top ministers,who reciprocated by making similar allegations against Nano and his
faction. The scathing cross-accusations led to Meta’s resignation in January 2002.
The tensions within the SP, and the return of the opposition Democratic Party
(DP) to Parliament despite its continuing refusal to recognize the outcome of the
2001 parliamentary election, shaped a situation that led to Prosecutor General
Arben Rakipi’s impeachment. Meta’s parliamentary faction accused Rakipi of
abusing his powers to support Nano’s campaign, and the opposition, which had
long been demanding Rakipi’s resignation, joined votes to initiate his impeachment.
Acting on Parliament’s proposal—adopted at the end of a swift, one-day
debate, without even giving Rakipi a chance to respond—the President of the
Republic dismissed Rakipi and quickly appointed a new prosecutor general.Rakipi
took the case to the Constitutional Court, claiming violations of his rights to be
informed of the charges and to defend himself. The court ruled that the impeachment
had indeed run afoul of constitutional due process and remanded the case to
Parliament “for reconsideration.”
The ruling was met with strong criticism, including from the president,
parliamentary speaker (who resigned in protest), and opposition leaders, some of
whom went as far as calling for the Constitutional Court’s dissolution. Parliament
took no action whatsoever to comply with the ruling, dealing a severe blow to the ALBANIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Following a series of political crises, by mid-year Albania entered a period of
what appeared to be more stable and inclusive governance.Nonetheless, impunity
for police abuse, failures of various government branches to uphold the rule of law,
trafficking in human beings, and widespread violations of children’s rights continued
to be major concerns. The government’s desire to cast Albania as part of the
European mainstream made it unfortunately more reluctant to acknowledge and
address the country’s human rights problems.
In early 2002, political life was dominated by a dramatic split within the governing
Socialist Party (SP), triggered by chairman Fatos Nano’s campaign against
what he described as the party’s “moral crisis” of corruption, nepotism, and criminal
connections. Nano’s attacks focused on then-Prime Minister Ilir Meta and his
top ministers,who reciprocated by making similar allegations against Nano and his
faction. The scathing cross-accusations led to Meta’s resignation in January 2002.
The tensions within the SP, and the return of the opposition Democratic Party
(DP) to Parliament despite its continuing refusal to recognize the outcome of the
2001 parliamentary election, shaped a situation that led to Prosecutor General
Arben Rakipi’s impeachment. Meta’s parliamentary faction accused Rakipi of
abusing his powers to support Nano’s campaign, and the opposition, which had
long been demanding Rakipi’s resignation, joined votes to initiate his impeachment.
Acting on Parliament’s proposal—adopted at the end of a swift, one-day
debate, without even giving Rakipi a chance to respond—the President of the
Republic dismissed Rakipi and quickly appointed a new prosecutor general.Rakipi
took the case to the Constitutional Court, claiming violations of his rights to be
informed of the charges and to defend himself. The court ruled that the impeachment
had indeed run afoul of constitutional due process and remanded the case to
Parliament “for reconsideration.”
The ruling was met with strong criticism, including from the president,
parliamentary speaker (who resigned in protest), and opposition leaders, some of
whom went as far as calling for the Constitutional Court’s dissolution. Parliament
took no action whatsoever to comply with the ruling, dealing a severe blow to the Impunity also seemed to be the rule in the case of the former Elbasan police
chief, Edmond Koseni—a police commander with one of the worst human rights
records in Albania.After years of victim complaints, Koseni was fired and indicted
for torture in late 2001. By April 2002, however, the office of the Tirana prosecutor
had closed the case without filing charges and without notifying the victim or his
defense lawyer at the Albanian Human Rights Group (AHRG). The case was reopened
only after Koseni himself publicized the dropping of the charges (reportedly
hoping to rejoin the police), and the AHRG called on the new prosecutor
general to intervene. The case was then assigned to another prosecutor, who as of
late October had yet to conclude the investigation. Such cases of prosecutorial failure
indicated that the prosecution service required systematic monitoring and support.
Violations committed by Albania’s police force also marred its efforts to support
the global war on terrorism. On September 12, 2001, the police and Intelligence
Service detained Ilir Hajrullai and his pregnant sister, Aishe, whose Kuwaiti husband
was under investigation for alleged links to al-Qaeda. The two were kept
incommunicado for twenty-one days, during which they were subjected to threats,
psychological pressures, and polygraph tests carried out by a foreign intelligence
officer. On February 6, Ilir Hajrullai was re-arrested. Only five days later was he
brought before a judge, who then ordered his indefinite detention, without giving
him the opportunity to be defended by a lawyer of his choice.
Albania continued to be a major point of transit and origin in the regional web
of trafficking in human beings.Most victims were women and girls trafficked for
forced prostitution and children trafficked into forced labor.The Albanian government
did begin to take some encouraging steps to address the problem. In December
2001, Parliament adopted an anti-trafficking strategy and set up a special
anti-trafficking police unit.The government also agreed to refer all illegal migrants
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which did a
first screening for trafficking victims. The prosecutor general also issued instructions
that trafficking victims should no longer be charged with the crimes of prostitution
and illegal border crossing. These steps caused the U.S. Department of
State to move Albania, in its 2002 report on trafficking in human beings, up to the
class of countries not yet in compliance with international standards but making
significant efforts to meet the minimum standards for combating trafficking.
Progress notwithstanding, there remained many obstacles to the implementation
of the government’s anti-trafficking strategy. Particularly problematic was the
government’s reluctance to recognize that Albania continued to be a major country
of origin. This attitude was mirrored by the police and courts, which often viewed
trafficking as an issue of illegal migration rather than a serious human rights violation.
Prosecution of traffickers continued to be the weakest link in the system: only
a small fraction of those arrested by the police were successfully prosecuted and
tried. Even when traffickers were found guilty, they received prison sentences that
were generally much lower than the new statutory minimum of seven years. Police
corruption and the absence of a witness protection system also hindered investigations.
According to the Department of State report, “10 per cent of foreign victims
trafficked through Albania reported that police were directly involved.”
In 2002, new evidence emerged about the plight of thousands of trafficked
Albanian children subjected to forced labor, prostitution, use in criminal activities,
adoptions, and possibly organ donations. Despite a few arrests, traffickers continued
to prey upon vulnerable children and babies who were kidnapped or bought
from their indigent parents and smuggled to Italy, Greece, and elsewhere in Western
Europe.Child labor and school dropout rates remained very high, especially in
rural areas. In northern Albania, where a blood feud tradition was allowed to reemerge
in the 1990s, hundreds of children continued to live locked up in their
homes, fearing for their lives.
Albania’s Roma community continued to suffer from pervasive discrimination,
miserable living conditions, and inadequate access to basic social services,which in
turn reinforced their social exclusion.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights groups were generally able to operate freely, even though the
authorities were at times hostile or non-cooperative. The Albanian Human Rights
Group was active in documenting and reporting serious violations, including
police violence, interference with media freedoms, and abuses in the government’s
anti-terrorist campaign. The Group’s Complaint Center represented victims in
legal actions, despite threats by perpetrators and stonewalling by judicial authorities.
The Albanian Helsinki Committee directed significant resources at providing
commentary on draft legislation, such as a police code of ethics and regulations on
detention facilities. The committee also set up a network of correspondents in
seven townships. The Albanian ombudsman made good progress toward the consolidation
of that new institution, engaging various branches of government in
human rights dialogue and focusing his activities on promoting freedom of information,
privacy rights, and effective judicial remedies. However, a disturbing
November 2001 decision of the Constitutional Court appeared to severely restrict
his ability to initiate judicial review of legislation.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Since acceding to all major human rights treaties between 1992 and 1994,Albania
had not submitted a single report, initial or periodic, on its compliance with
treaty obligations. Fourteen reports were long overdue as of June 2002.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) called on
Albania to implement its recommendations for electoral reform and offered assistance
to the parliamentary committee established for this purpose. It also pushed the authorities to draft a comprehensive strategy for judicial reform and step up
prosecution of traffickers and corrupt officials.However,human rights monitoring
and reporting by the mission in Albania continued to suffer from political constraints,
including pressures by senior Albanian government officials to downsize
the mission and redefine its mandate.
Council of Europe
The impact of the Council of Europe on Albania’s human rights situation was
generally disappointing. A delegation of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture
(CPT) visited Albania in October 2001 to look into the treatment of detainees
and follow up on its earlier recommendations regarding the Vlora psychiatric hospital.
As of this writing, the government of Albania had not authorized the CPT to
publish its findings, which made Albania one of only three countries that had not
authorized publication of any CPT reports. A joint program of the Council of
Europe and European Commission continued to support Albanian legal system
reforms; activities under this heading included workshops on freedom of expression
and privacy rights for judges and prosecutors. The impact of such trainings
appeared to be limited, however. The European Court of Human Rights had yet to
hear its first Albanian case.
European Union
Political instability and concerns over the election of the new president delayed
until October the opening of E.U.-Albania negotiations for a Stabilization and
Association (SA) Agreement, the early precursor to the E.U.’s accession process. In
April, the European Commission issued the first annual SA report, which laid out
the challenges Albania faced to meet the SA requirements. The report’s analysis of
serious human rights problems, such as police abuse, media freedom violations,
and the judiciary’s failure to uphold fundamental rights, was disappointingly
superficial. Following its most recent committee meeting with Albania in September,
the European Parliament called on the commission to condition the conclusion
of a SA agreement on an improved human rights record in law enforcement
and a genuine commitment to free media. Italy,Greece, and Germany were slow to
deliver on their pledges to support the operations of a new anti-trafficking center
in Vlora.
United States
The U.S. Department of State reports on human rights practices (March 2002)
and trafficking in persons (June 2002) gave a largely accurate picture of the Albanian
human rights situation. The U.S. administration failed, however, to exert pressure
on the Albanian authorities to address key human rights concerns in areas
such as police violence and press freedoms. The U.S. reportedly pressured the
Albanian government to delay ratification of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
ARMENIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
With presidential and parliamentary elections slated for the first half of 2003,
President Robert Kocharian consolidated his ascendancy over a fragmented opposition.
A broad range of scheduled criminal justice reforms was delayed by parliament’s
reluctance to outlaw the death penalty.
As the 2003 elections approached, two television channels that did not cover
politics from a pro-government standpoint lost their broadcasting licenses. Following
the September 2001 shutdown of the Noyan Tapan television channel, the
A1+ television channel was taken off the air in April, immediately after losing a
government-organized tender. The closure sparked a series of protest rallies in the
capital,Yerevan, kept up until June by a group of opposition parties that used them
to call for Kocharian’s resignation or impeachment. In the days following such rallies,
police detained protesters at their homes in Yerevan or in the regions, or summoned
them to local police stations.Dozens were fined or given terms of up to two
weeks of imprisonment, in what resembled a concerted action directed at deterring
further participation in the continuing rallies.
The April tender was administered by a commission appointed by the president,
as provided for in the October 2000 law on television and radio. Ironically, the law’s
avowed purpose was to comply with Council of Europe requirements on promoting
pluralism and independence in the broadcast media. Also in April the government
had to withdraw a draft law on the media it had published in February, after
Council of Europe experts criticized it. The draft had proposed the establishment
of an oversight body from which all media outlets would have to seek an operating
license renewal every year; it also required journalists to pay government officials
for information. In October the entire run of the opposition newspaper Aravot vanished
the day it published corruption allegations against associates of the prime
minister. Also that month, independent journalist Mark Grigorian was injured by
a grenade thrown at him on the street.
Parliament ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and
the European Convention on Human Rights. Respectively, the ratifications paved
the way for the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture to inspect
Armenian detention facilities, and for Armenian citizens to file complaints with the
European Court of Human Rights.
Police torture continued, however, facilitated by several factors. Human rights
defenders in Yerevan and Vanadzor asserted that widespread and routine police torture
and ill-treatment went largely unreported due to victims’ well-grounded fear
of retribution, which deterred them from filing complaints or permitting human
rights groups to work on their cases.
Lack of legal reform served to perpetuate incommunicado detention, another
key condition facilitating torture.Police appeared to exploit a loophole in the criminal procedure code that leaves witnesses without the right to an attorney: individuals
would be summoned as witnesses, denied counsel, and then charged as suspects
hours or days later. Police also detained people on misdemeanor charges
under the administrative code for up to fifteen days, exploiting the code’s failure to
allow those detained under it access to counsel; typically charges involved insulting
a police officer or failing to obey a police officer.Meanwhile, the incommunicado
period allowed police to abuse the detainee and work up more serious criminal
charges. The administrative court system appeared to be little more than a “pocket
court” for police, as it was served by judges from courts of first instance, known for
their lack of independence, and misdemeanor detention proceedings lacked regulation
by a procedural code. At hearings where judges sanctioned administrative
detentions the defendant almost always either had no counsel or was absent altogether;
often, police would send the papers for signature to the judge at home after
work hours.
In general, judges continued to display subservience to executive authorities,
and did not, as a rule, challenge the procuracy or police. Monitoring of over fifty
cases by the Armenian Helsinki Association, collated in a report issued in January,
found that trial judges often handed down arbitrary decisions, tended to intimidate
witnesses offering testimonies “disliked” by the procuracy, and generally ignored
defendants’ claims of physical abuse or procedural violations.
The trial of the individuals allegedly responsible for the October 1999 murders
in Parliament entered its second year.At least two individuals were criminally prosecuted
for expressing the belief that Kocharian was behind the murders. In June,
Janik Adamian and his typist were detained after he posted throughout the town of
Ararat a poem in which he wrote of an unnamed “dishonest dog”who had a hand
in the murders. The prosecutor dropped the charges when the case went to trial in
September. In late 2001, police detained Musheg Saghatelian, an opposition politician
and former prisons chief, after he accused Kocharian of masterminding the
murders. A court sentenced Saghatelian to seven years of imprisonment, reduced
on appeal in July to six years. Among the various charges leveled against him were
counts for the 1995 beating ofMinistry of Interior officers who had been alleged to
have been plotting a coup against then-President Levon Ter-Petrossian.
While Saghatelian deserved to answer for torture and ill-treatment, both his
conviction and the authorities’ failure to seek murder convictions for the September
2001 killing of Poghos Poghossian by presidential bodyguards demonstrated
the selectiveness with which law enforcement agencies and courts treated cases
involving the interests of the executive. Poghossian had died in the restroom of a
Yerevan nightspot minutes after he had addressed an impertinent greeting to
Kocharian. Compelling testimonies and forensic evidence made available to
Human Rights Watch showed that a group of security personnel, including
Kocharian’s bodyguards, had beaten Poghossian to death. Yet after a two-month
investigation the procuracy charged just one bodyguard on a count of involuntary
manslaughter, for which a court in February handed him a one-year suspended
sentence.
Although the defense minister claimed a decline in non-combat deaths in the
army— from two hundred in 1998 to ninety-two in 2001—no serious reform was undertaken to reduce brutality in the military. In November 2001 the former head
of the Defense Ministry’s inspection commission alleged that the military prosecutor’s
office systematically thwarted investigation of beatings and killings of conscripts
by older soldiers.
With many young men emigrating or extending their studies, often to avoid
conscription, military authorities rode roughshod over the law in order to keep
conscript numbers up. They reportedly intimidated or tricked refugees into draft
enrolment, although the 1999 Law on Refugees confirmed their exemption from
compulsory conscription. In November 2001, students demonstrated when their
draft deferments were arbitrarily canceled. The following month eleven who took
the Defense Ministry to court to challenge their conscription orders were drafted
and delivered to military bases the day before their scheduled hearing. Artiom
Sargsian, a leader of the November 2001 student protests, was beaten and kicked to
death in February in army barracks in Vanadzor, two months after he was drafted.
Parliament delayed the adoption of a law to allow alternative civilian service,and
in September adopted a law setting cash fees for draft deferments or waivers,
including a U.S.$15,000 bond for any young man enrolling privately for study
abroad. The authorities continued to prosecute and imprison conscientious objectors,
most of whom were Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The prime minister included the deputy defense minister in a re-established
government Council for Religious Affairs, and at its September meeting called for
new curbs on nontraditional faiths, claiming they endangered national security.
The procuracy appealed the acquittal of Levon Markarian, a Jehovah’s Witness
tried in 2001 for having led prayer meetings at which families with children were
present. In April, the Supreme Court, to its credit, upheld his acquittal.
Parliament passed amendments to the electoral code in July that reversed
reforms of December 2000 by reducing the number of parliamentary seats allocated
to party lists in favor of single-mandate constituencies. In the current political
context, this change was seen to favor the pro-presidential Republican Party, as
wealthy businessmen with links to the government have tended to win single-mandate
constituencies. The amendments also placed the majority of appointments to
all election commissions in the hands of the president and of parties allied with
him. A national survey conducted by the International Foundation for Election
Systems during 2001 and published in 2002 revealed deep public disillusionment,
with 62 percent of respondents considering that Armenia did not function as a
democracy.
The opaque way in which the government privatized powerful monopolies such
as the electricity grid and Yerevan’s Zvartnots airport raised questions, and the tariff
policies of the privatized telephone network,Armentel,provoked public demonstrations.
Marginalized populations were particularly vulnerable to government
privatization policy: In February and April the government auctioned off the lease
of remote pastures that Kurdish Yezidis, an ethnic and religious minority, had used
for decades for grazing their sheep and cattle. Because municipal border gerrymandering
in the early 1990s had deprived many Yezidi herders of a share in land
privatization, with the recent auctions many Yezidis lost their land rights and their
livelihood.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Nongovernmental human rights organizations were generally able to carry out
their work without government interference.
Sadly, the Presidential Human Rights Commission lent its weight to the procuracy’s
prosecution of Levon Markarian by issuing a statement in May expressing its
regret at his acquittal. The commission claimed that Markarian had deprived the
twelve children present at his service “of their right freely to practice their national
religion and derive benefit from their people’s culture,” misstating guarantees
under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In August the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
reviewed Armenia’s amalgamated third and fourth periodic reports. The committee
criticized the government for describing Armenia as a “mono-ethnic” state,
despite the existence of several ethnic and national minorities, and for failing to
provide concrete information on their socioeconomic situation and on the implementation
of minority rights legislation. The committee also expressed concern at
the government’s failure to respond to allegations of governmental discrimination
against the Yezidi minority.
The U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
after considering Armenia’s second periodic report in August, expressed concern
that Armenia lacked legislation on domestic violence and trafficking in persons and
that penalties for rape remained light. The committee urged the government to
ensure prosecution of violence against women.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe intensified its scrutiny of Armenia’s post-accession obligations
and exerted pressure on the government to implement reforms on a wide
front, ranging from the abolition of administrative detention to the establishment
of an ombudsman.
In September the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE)
adopted a resolution threatening to suspend the Armenian delegation’s credentials
should the government fail to abolish the death penalty fully by 2003. The resolution
expressed “shock” that the Armenian parliament had adopted in first reading
a draft criminal code that included the death penalty for aggravated murder.
The PACE Monitoring Committee criticized unjustified delays in the elaboration
of a new constitution and criminal code, and noted that the authorities used
each in turn as an excuse for failing to ratify Protocol No. 6 of the European Convention
on Human Rights, which outlaws the death penalty in all circumstances.
Forceful Council of Europe expert opinions on the government’s draft media
law compelled its withdrawal.Noting the controversial tenders that saw independent
television stations taken off the air in April, in its September resolution the
PACE pointedly referred the government to its stated commitment to offer new
frequencies to tender by late October.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Office in
Yerevan commissioned several Armenian nongovernmental organizations to monitor
and produce a range of reports on the functioning of the criminal justice system,
and one on the extent of abusive conscription of exempted refugees,
publishing them on the internet (at http://www.osce.org/yerevan/).
United States
The U.S. State Department’s second Trafficking in Persons Report, published in
June,described Armenia as a country of origin for women and girls trafficked to the
United Arab Emirates, Turkey, Russia, Greece, and Germany for sexual exploitation.
The report criticized the government for failing to develop a national plan or
take significant steps to counter trafficking. The government began drafting a
national plan in October.
The State Department’s second International Religious Freedom Report, published
in October, described the restrictive registration regime instituted for
minority faiths since 1991, and chronicled the authorities’ maneuvers over years to
deny registration to Jehovah’s Witnesses.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
The NATO Summit and Arms Trade Controls in Central and Eastern Europe,
11/02
The Cost of Speech: Violations ofMedia Freedom in Albania, 6/02
AZERBAIJAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The government resumed its practice of attempting to suppress public expression
of social discontent without alienating the Council of Europe and other international
partners. This balancing act broke down on June 4, when police opened
fire on demonstrators in the village ofNardaran, killing one. International criticism of Azerbaijan peaked in September, after the government staged a referendum that
was clearly aimed at ensuring that eighty-year-old President Heidar Aliev could
appoint his son as acting president should he step down.
The government moved forward in adopting reform legislation, such as that
introducing an ombudsman institution and ratifying the European Convention on
Human Rights. But its continued poor human rights practices—the continued
detention of political prisoners, harassment of independent media, and repression
of social and political movements—drew criticism, particularly from the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE).A September PACE resolution
stated that it was “disturbed and shocked”by violations of basic freedoms.The government
tried unsuccessfully to bully the PACE by demanding—unsuccessfully—
that one of the PACE Monitoring Committee’s rapporteurs assigned to monitor
Azerbaijan be replaced.
On June 4, police killed one and wounded dozens of others while attempting to
quell demonstrations in Nardaran, about twenty-five kilometers north of Baku, the
capital. The shooting culminated months of public discontent over deteriorating
social and economic conditions in the village. Significantly, protesters had not been
deterred by the example the government had set in 2000 and 2001, when in Baku
and several provincial towns it used force to disperse protesters calling attention to
social issues, and prosecuted individual protesters. In January (shortly after a stinging
PACE resolution), the government responded to public demands by improving
the electricity supply and public transportation, and by promising new jobs. But
public trust crumbled in May, and the town elders led more protests, driving Nardaran’s
Baku-appointed mayor out of office.
On the morning of June 3 the authorities arrested eight Nardaran elders they
had invited to discuss the appointment of a new mayor and simultaneously sent a
large detachment of police and Interior Ministry troops into Nardaran. In the
evening security forces exchanged blows with a large crowd that had gathered on
Nardaran’s main square to protest the detentions. Reportedly, they attacked
demonstrators with truncheons, and the latter threw stones. Security forces fired
automatic weapons as a means of crowd control. One demonstrator was killed, a
dozen sustained serious bullet wounds, and fifty more reportedly suffered minor
bullet injuries. The security forces withdrew, making apparently random arrests as
they quit Nardaran.
Instead of acting to calm the situation, the government issued a statement on
June 5 that blamed all violence on the demonstrators, claiming that they had
opened fire on the police, and failed to acknowledge any use whatsoever of firearms
by the security forces.
In the following weeks, security forces controlled movement to and from the village,
but rarely ventured in. Several waves of further arrests, primarily outside the
town, inhibited Nardaran men from leaving its bounds. On July 29 police allegedly
detained Vasif Aliev as a hostage, to induce his father, a protester, to give himself up.
On September 20, plainclothes officers arrested Nardaran elder Jebrail Alizade and
members of his family.His son alleged that officers secured Alizade’s compliance by
putting a pistol to the temple of his five-year-old grandson. The authorities held
two to three dozen arrested men from Nardaran in incommunicado detention for various periods. Several of them on release claimed they had been tortured. As of
October, fifteen remained in detention.
Nardaran has a reputation for devout religiosity, and the authorities in retrospect
claimed the protests were the first step in a foreign-backed bid by Islamic
“radicals” to take over the country. The government adamantly dismissed social
and economic deprivation as its driving factor.
During the year the government acted against several manifestations of Islam
that fell beyond its control, restricting some independent mosques and impounding
imported religious literature.The Interior Ministry refused identity documents
to Muslim women who insisted on being photographed in headscarves
Nontraditional Christian groups also came under pressure. In October, the head
of the State Committee for Work with Religious Organizations announced his
intention to revoke registration of the Jehovah’s Witnesses.
On November 15, 2001,Baku police beat and detained journalists protesting the
banning of Milletin Sesi (The People’s Voice) and Bakinskii Bulvar (Baku Boulevard)
newspapers. A month later President Aliev held a roundtable with representatives
of the opposition and independent media, and subsequently the
government eased restrictions and pressure on such outlets by allowing some
regional television stations to resume broadcasts and improving economic conditions
for newspapers.
The respite, however, was short-lived. Punitive libel prosecutions of newspapers
and journalists continued. The long-banned magazine Monitor, after briefly
resuming publication in April, was immediately sued by the Defense Ministry and
denied further printing by its printing press. Journalists who investigated alleged
abuses by the customs service risked physical reprisals. The authorities continued
to tear down kiosks run by Gaia, a private newspaper distribution company, eliminating
outlets for independent press in the regions.After protests from newspaper
editors,Aliev softened some provisions of a draconian September decree that made
editors responsible for preserving state secrets,which a flawed 1996 state secrets law
allowed the government to define arbitrarily.
With President Aliev determining to stand in presidential elections slated for the
end of 2003, on August 24 the government staged a referendum on constitutional
changes.The referendum proposed changes that would give President Aliev the discretion
to appoint his son Ilham as acting president should he step down, and that
would scrap parliamentary mandates based on proportional representation in
favor of single mandate constituencies.Few in Azerbaijan or the international community
took at face value government statements that the referendum aimed to
bring the constitution into line with Azerbaijan’s Council of Europe commitments.
The referendum passed,with more than 96 percent approval, as the government
employed massive fraud and intimidation and ignored opposition boycotts and
objections from the international community. Government claims of 88 percent
voter turnout defied both feasibility and the headcounts by independent and opposition
observers, who concluded that less than 30 percent of the electorate participated.
Pressure for a yes vote was applied through the ranks and dependent
relationships of Azerbaijan’s large state sector, particularly the education system.
There were many reports of falsified votes and arrests and intimidation of polling station commission members and opposition observers who refused to acquiesce
in ballot stuffing.
The change in the future distribution of parliamentary seats threatened to
exclude opposition parties from Azerbaijan’s political system. The referendum galvanized
support for a newly united group of opposition parties, which had called
for a boycott of the vote and mustered tens of thousands at protest rallies held in
Baku in September and October.
In October the pro-government parliamentary majority threatened to legislate
new restrictions upon opposition parties and their newspapers, and the education
minister warned teachers and students not to participate in opposition rallies.During
the year, on several occasions police arrested opposition party activists prior to
rallies, securing their detention for five to fifteen days for alleged public order misdemeanors.
In February and April respectively the authorities forcibly broke up rallies in
Sumgait staged by the opposition Azerbaijan Democratic Party and the Musavat
(Equality) party. In September 2001 authorities had detained three local leaders of
the Adalat (Justice) party; on February 9 they released two, shortly after the third
had died in custody.
In September, five supporters of former President Aiaz Mutalibov were handed
prison sentences of five to ten years, for allegedly plotting a coup, a charge for which
the authorities presented little evidence.
As of this writing hundreds of men whom Azerbaijani human rights groups
considered to be political prisoners remained in prison, although several presidential
mass pardons during the year had reduced their numbers.After demands from
the Council of Europe,prominent prisoners Rahim Gaziev, Iskender Hamidov, and
Alikram Gummatov were granted retrials, yet the authorities conducted them
inside prisons, and with procedural violations (the retrials were ongoing at this
writing).
Azerbaijan reported 10 percent growth in gross domestic product, but few benefited
from it, due to extensive official corruption and to monopoly control by the
ruling party of the most profitable sectors of the state economy.
Conscripts were the targets of economic exploitation in the army.Defense Ministry
officials levied informal charges for draft exemptions, deferrals, or deployments
to units in the least risky areas. In some units officers siphoned off supplies
or surreptitiously used conscripts as unpaid laborers on construction projects.
Eight conscripts died in one July week alone, from sunstroke.
In June the government allocated U.S.$75 million from the State Oil Fund to
build housing for the population of five camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons, and began providing microcredit to internally displaced persons from a
World Bank loan. This signaled a welcome change in the government’s treatment
of people displaced since 1993-4 from territories overrun by Karabakh-Armenian
and Republic of Armenia forces.Many observers had criticized the government for
failing to integrate the half million internally displaced into local economies and
communities.
Nonetheless, there were instances when local authorities grossly abused groups
of displaced persons. At the end of May, two hundred riot police and a demolition crew were sent to a settlement near Lake Ganli Gel outside Baku, where, in several
incidents over three days,police beat several women and bulldozed seventeen of the
sixty-two houses built there by internally displaced persons since 1995. In the
exclave of Nakhchivan, the regional authorities reportedly mounted an intimidation
campaign in late 2001 to force displaced persons to return to insecure border
villages near Sadarak, which were now overlooked by Armenian army posts.
The government refused to recognize as refugees up to ten thousand people who
had fled the war in Chechnya. It did not provide for them, admit their children to
schools, or prevent their harassment by police.The government also complied with
Russia’s requests for the extradition of some Chechens,without considering threats
to their life and safety in Chechnya.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In the absence of an impartial official inquiry a group of human rights nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) conducted and published their own detailed
investigation into the Nardaran violence of June 3. The authorities responded by
issuing an official warning to the NGO commission’s forensic specialist Ilgar Altai,
on the pretext that the commission was prejudicing the official investigation.
Regressive amendments to the law on grants passed in June spurred protests
from NGOs, international donor organizations, and the diplomatic community.
The amendments made NGOs’ receipt of donor funds contingent on the approval
of local executive authorities, and subject to registration.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe became an increasingly effective source of pressure for
human rights improvement. Successive PACE resolutions provided a framework
for legislative and institutional reform,while the PACE also insisted on implementation
of existing legislation, particularly in its strongly-worded September resolution.
The PACE correctly resisted pressure from the Azerbaijani delegation for the
removal of one of its rapporteurs on Azerbaijan’s implementation of its Council of
Europe human rights obligations.
The PACE’s Committee on Migration, Refugees and Demography’s June report
on the situation of refugees and displaced persons in the South Caucasus, and the
comments of Council of Europe Human Rights Commissioner Alvaro Gil-Robles
during his September visit to Azerbaijan conveyed to the government that it had a
responsibility to elaborate and implement durable solutions including integration
for its internally displaced without further delay, and to refrain from using them as
an argument for political aims.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Office in
Baku organized roundtables and sponsored a series of television and radio broadcasts
on the upcoming August referendum, on human rights themes, and on
reform of the electoral code, thereby creating frameworks and channels for public
engagement and debate, particularly between the government and opposition, that
were otherwise absent.
In a public statement the office declared that the authorities’ conduct of the constitutional
referendum failed the “credibility test,” accused the Central Election
Commission of “creat[ing] obstacles to wider observation and transparency of the
process” and observed that reports of fraud and intimidation were too numerous
and from such a wide variety of sources to be dismissed.
United States
The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2001,
published in March, stated that the Azerbaijani government’s human rights record
“remained poor,” and that it “continued to restrict citizens’ ability to change their
government peacefully.” In its International Religious Freedom Report 2002, the
State Department noted that the authorities harassed and abused some Muslim
groups due to concern about their possible links to terrorism.
However, the U.S. government allowed the effect of these criticisms to be undercut
as it consolidated partnership with the Azerbaijani government in energy projects
and the war against terrorism.
BELARUS
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Belarusian government policies in 2002 aimed to crush the political opposition
and served to further isolate the country internationally. The government continued
its crackdown on the opposition,nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), the
independent media, and religious groups.
The September 9, 2001 presidential elections, in which incumbent President
Alexander Lukashenka was the victor, received widespread criticism and briefly
made the poor human rights situation in Belarus a focal point of international concern.
But when the events of September 11 and their aftermath again pushed
Belarus far from the international spotlight, Lukashenka did not miss the opportunity
to repress civil society without fear of diplomatic consequences.
Throughout the year, Lukashenka sought retribution against those who challenged
him during the election, and their supporters. Vladimir Goncharik, the united opposition candidate in the presidential elections, had to leave his post as
leader of the Federation of Trade Unions (FTU) in December 2001 after it received
credible reports that Lukashenka would sign a decree nationalizing the FTU’s property
unless Goncharik resigned.Goncharik subsequently moved to Russia.His election
campaign manager,Valentina Polevikova, was also forced to leave her job at the
FTU.Members of the Belarusian Women’s Party,which she chairs, received threats
that they would be fired unless they left the party.
One of Lukashenka’s major opponents, former Prime Minister Mikhail Chigir,
was sentenced in July 2002 to three years in prison for tax evasion, with the execution
of the sentence postponed for two years. In 2001, the government had prevented
Chigir from running for president by launching politically motivated
charges of abuse of office and imprisoning him.
Anatoly Lebedko, chair of the opposition United Civic Party (UCP), was
charged in July with “defaming the Belarusian President”after he published an article
citing foreign media reports that the president supplies “rogue” states with military
equipment. His party also received an official warning, which put the UCP
under threat of liquidation.
Harassment of youth opposition activists continued throughout the year. Two
Youth Front leaders were respectively fined and briefly imprisoned for their role in
organizing an unsanctioned demonstration in February. In March, members of
another youth opposition movement, Zubr, were fined for “publicly insulting the
president,” for their street performance satirizing Lukashenka prior to the 2001
elections.
After a series of tax raids and confiscation of equipment and publications that
accompanied the election campaign in 2001,Belarusian authorities moved to a new
level of intimidation of the media by launching criminal libel suits against journalists.
On June 24, a court sentenced Pavel Mazheiko, a journalist for the independent
weekly Pahonia (The Emblem), and the weekly’s editor,Mikola Markevich, to
two and two and a half years of forced labor respectively for libeling Lukashenka;
the sentences were reduced to one year on appeal. On the eve of the 2001 elections,
Pahonia had published an article suggesting Lukashenka’s involvement in the “disappearances”
of political leaders.After confiscating the entire print run of the issue
and giving an official warning, the authorities shut down Pahonia in November
2001.
On September 16, Victor Ivashkevich, editor of Rabochii (The Worker) was
found guilty of “attempted libel and insulting the president” and sentenced to two
years of forced labor. The charges stemmed from an article accusing Lukashenka
and his administration of corruption.
The authorities also aggressively pursued civil defamation suits against newspapers
that allegedly insulted state officials, freezing the publications’ accounts,
searching their headquarters repeatedly, and compelling them to pay prohibitive
damages. Among the targets was Nasha Svaboda (Our Freedom), which a court
ordered to pay U.S.$55,000 in libel damages to a state official.The paper also had to
retract the offending article, which alleged that the official had complained to
Lukashenka about the prosecutor general’s professional conduct. The authorities
confiscated the newspaper’s equipment; with its bank account frozen, the paper
was not able to publish after August 6.
With the media under fire, public demonstrations remained the sole means for
public critical expression. Authorities either banned protests or authorized them
only in remote locations, and responded to unauthorized demonstrations with
arrests and prosecutions.
On March 15,Ministry of Internal Affairs troops dispersed a march held to mark
the eighth anniversary of the 1994 constitution of independent Belarus. March
organizer Nikolai Statkevich, leader of the Social Democratic Party Narodnaya
Hramada, was later sentenced to ten days of imprisonment.
Also in March, more than eighty people were arrested and given brief prison
terms, fines, or official warnings after police broke up a Freedom Day rally.Another
hundred people were arrested and about forty injured in clashes with police in
April during an unauthorized protest against living conditions in Belarus. Protest
organizers and participants were sentenced to up to fifteen days in jail; others were
fined.
In line with its effort to control all spheres of social life, Belarusian authorities
sought to restrict religious freedom. In October, Parliament adopted a new law on
religion that, if signed by the president, would ban organized religious activity by
communities of fewer than twenty members, and would practically outlaw religious
confessions that have had representation in Belarus for fewer than twenty
years. It would also introduce censorship for religious literature under certain circumstances
and require the leaders of all religious organizations to be citizens of
Belarus.
Meanwhile, authorities continued to persecute non-Orthodox religious groups.
In August, demolition crews backed up by police destroyed a new building of the
Belarusian Autocephalous Orthodox Church in a small village in Grodno province.
Police violently dispersed parish members and their supporters who tried to prevent
the demolition; many were arrested and sentenced to brief jail terms and fines.
Members of Hare Krishna and Hindu communities were regularly detained and
fined for meditating in public places, chanting religious hymns in the streets, or
protesting repeated refusals to register their community.
The 1999 and 2000 “disappearances” of opposition figures Yury Zakharenka,
Viktor Gonchar, Anatoly Krasovsky and journalist Dmitri Zavadsky remained
unresolved. In March, a court found two former officers of the “Almaz” special
police unit guilty of abducting Dmitri Zavadsky, but the verdict did not satisfy his
family, whose lawyers saw the officers as mere scapegoats for higher-level authorities
involved in the “disappearance.” For stating this view publicly, one of the
lawyers, Igor Aksenchik, lost his license to practice, was charged with slander, and,
in October 2002 was sentenced to eighteen months in prison,with the execution of
the sentence postponed for two years.
Belarusian authorities also banned the broadcast of a new documentary on
Zavadsky’s and other “disappearances” entitled “Wild Manhunt-2,” shot by Zavadsky’s
friend and colleague Pavel Sheremet.
In November 2002, parliament declined the request of the Belarusian Helsinki
Committee to carry out parliamentary investigation into the disappearances.
For the second year in a row,Belarus received the lowest rating possible from the
U.S. State Department for failing to combat trafficking in persons.The report noted
that Belarus was a country of origin and transit for women and children trafficked abroad, but that the government failed to prosecute traffickers or train law
enforcement officials to recognize trafficking. Corruption also hindered attempts
to implement anti-trafficking provisions in the criminal code.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The authorities continued to widely use Presidential Decree No.8 (adopted in
March 2001) to obstruct the work of human rights organizations. The decree bans
foreign aid to organizations involved in any political activities, and requires governmental
approval for the use of any foreign funding; security service and tax
authorities cited these provisions in measures they took against NGOs.
On January 25, a court fined Victor Kornienko, head of a local branch of Civic
Initiatives, a human rights NGO, about U.S.$625 for alleged violation of the decree
and ordered confiscation of the organization’s computer equipment. In November
2001, a regional tax committee had fined it $3,750.
Civic Initiatives may well share the fate of Vezha, a prominent human rights
organization liquidated in March by a court order. Vezha had previously received
two official warnings, which constitutes sufficient grounds for liquidation according
to Belarusian law.
In addition to closing existing organizations, the government prevented the
founding of new ones, making use of excessively burdensome registration regulations.
Referring to “certain inaccuracies” in registration documents, authorities
denied registration to “Association XXI,” as well as other NGOs.
Activists with Viasna, another prominent human rights NGO, were repeatedly
harassed throughout the year, and denied access to court hearings and detention
facilities. One of them, Vladimir Malei, was sentenced to fifteen days of imprisonment
in January for holding a protest commemorating the anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights the previous month.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In May, the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child examined Belarus’s second
periodic report. The committee recommended the Belarusian government to
address the problem of increased child morbidity and HIV/AIDS among newborns;
to combat violence against children; eliminate child trafficking and sexual
exploitation; and to ensure that all children have access to health care, education,
and other rights specified in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The same month, the U.N. high commissioner for human rights publicly
expressed concern about the deterioration of the human rights situation in Belarus.
The U.N.’s annual Human Development Report, released in July, listed Belarus
among those countries where free and fair elections are not being held and citizens
are disaffected from politics.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Relations between the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and Minsk further deteriorated. Belarusian authorities, long dissatisfied
with the OSCE’s efforts to publicize the human rights situation in the country,
repeatedly accused members of the OSCE Advisory and Monitoring Group (AMG)
of interfering with the country’s internal affairs and called for a revision of the
AMG mandate. Since December 2001, the government refused to extend visas for
four AMG diplomats, thereby forcing them to leave the country.The AMG mission
was effectively shut down in October 2002, after the authorities refused to extend
the last remaining member’s diplomatic accreditation, thereby compelling her also
to leave the country. Negotiations on the further relations between the OSCE and
Belarus were entered into immediately but had borne no results as of this writing.
The OSCE Parliamentary Assembly refused to restore Belarus’s special guest status
until the country normalized its relations with the OSCE.
Council of Europe
A Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) delegation that visited
Belarus in June expressed concern about the continuous attacks on freedom of
speech and denounced the prosecution of the Pahonia journalists.
Noting that the conflict with the OSCE had a corrosive effect on Belarus’s relations
with other international institutions, the PACE announced that it would not
restore the country’s special guest status until its relationship with the OSCE was
normalized.The PACE Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights also decided
to establish an ad hoc sub-committee to examine political “disappearances” in
Belarus.
A resolution adopted during the PACE’s September session expressed “growing
concern regarding freedom of expression and of the media,” terming recent convictions
of journalists “unacceptable,” and concluded that special guest status, let
alone full membership for the country, could not be considered.
European Union
The E.U. criticized the Belarusian leadership for obstructing the work of the
OSCE AMG. In August, the E.U. also urged the Belarusian Parliament not to adopt
the draft law on religion, noting that it may serve as a basis for religious discrimination.
A September declaration by the presidency urged the Belarusian authorities
to engage in “constructive negotiations with the OSCE on the future of the AMG in
Belarus,” and expressed overall concern about the “situation of democracy and
human rights in Belarus.”
International Financial Institutions
In April, the World Bank approved a three-year Country Assistance Strategy that
envisions U.S.$140 million in loans to Belarus. The Bank may expand lending to $270 million if economic reform is implemented.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development took a more critical
stand, and in May approved a two-year country strategy that made clear that its
involvement would remain limited to the private sector until the Belarusian
authorities take steps to promote civil society and carry out market reforms.
United States
In a number of public statements, U.S. officials condemned Belarus’s role in its
conflict with the OSCE, as well as the government’s harassment of journalists and
its restraints on freedom of expression. In numerous statements, U.S. officials also
made clear that the bilateral relationship with Belarus would not move from the
current standstill unless the country demonstrates its commitment to universal
principles of democracy and human rights.
U.S. officials repeatedly expressed concern about reports that the Lukashenka
government sold weapons and provided military training to Iraq and other states
suspected of supporting terrorism.
In June,Christopher H. Smith, co-chairman of the Commission on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, introduced the Belarus Democracy Act of 2002 in the
House of Representatives. The bill proposes increased assistance for democracybuilding
activities in Belarus, suggests sanctions against the Lukashenka government,
including the denial of entry into the U.S. to high-ranking officials, and
encourages executive directors of international financial institutions to vote against
financial assistance to Belarus.
Russian Federation
Since Russia and Belarus signed a union treaty seven years ago, President
Lukashenka’s government has relied heavily on Russia’s support both to keep the
Belarusian economy afloat and to rebut criticism from the West.
In 2002, however, Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed skepticism about
the future of the union and made clear that Russia would not sacrifice its economic
interests to support Belarus. Instead, Putin advanced two proposals for unification—
one that would effectively absorb Belarus into Russia, subjecting it to Russian
economic policies and possibly removing Lukashenka from office, and the
other suggesting a suprastate formation similar to the E.U.; Lukashenka rejected
both proposals.BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Bosnia and Herzegovina made some progress toward the return of displaced
persons, accountability for war crimes, and constitutional protection of its citizens
regardless of their ethnicity. In each of these areas, however,much remained to be
done before the country could be considered a stable democracy genuinely respectful
of human rights.
In April, constitutional amendments entered into force giving the three major
ethnic groups the status of constituent peoples on the whole of the territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The amendments established mechanisms for protection
of the so-called vital national interests of each constituent people, such as those
pertaining to education, religion, language, promotion of tradition and cultural
heritage, and a public information system. In addition, they provided for ethnically
balanced representation in the entity parliaments and highest courts, based on the
1991 census taken prior to wartime forced changes in the ethnic composition of
various parts of the country. Implementation of the new constitutional rules
remained a challenge.
Elections were held on October 5 for the Bosnian central Parliament and presidency,
as well as for the assemblies in the Bosniac- and Croat-controlled Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Serb-controlled Republika Srpska. For the first
time since the 1992-95 war, after six rounds of previous elections arranged and
supervised by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), a
permanent Bosnian election commission organized the elections. The election
campaign was mainly devoid of the ethnic violence seen in recent past elections.
Bosniac, Serb, and Croat nationalist parties won the most votes in the parliamentary
elections, and their candidates were elected to the Bosnian three-member presidency.
The year saw continued incremental progress toward war crimes accountability.
The NATO-led Stabilization Force (SFOR) arrested four Bosnian Serbs indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY): Momir
Nikolic (on April 1), Darko Mrdja (June 13), Miroslav Deronjic (July 7), and
Radovan Stankovic (July 9). On February 28 and March 1, SFOR troops twice
attempted to arrest Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic in remote
mountain villages in the east of the country. On August 14 and 15, SFOR conducted
a new operation in the area, purporting to investigate the network of persons who
were helping Karadzic hide. In falling short of bringing Karadzic to justice, however,
SFOR efforts drew criticism from the ICTY Prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, who
characterized them as “public relations operations.” Pasko Ljubicic, a Bosnian
Croat accused of persecution of Bosniacs in central Bosnia in 1993, surrendered
voluntarily to the tribunal on November 21, 2001. Wartime prison commanders
and guards in Serb-run camps near Prijedor,Dusan Fustar,Momcilo Gruban, and Dusan Knezevic also surrendered on January 31,May 2, and May 18, 2002 respectively.
The authorities in Republika Srpska continued to refuse to cooperate with the
ICTY. They denied having knowledge of the presence of Radovan Karadzic or any
other Bosnian Serb indictee in the entity’s territory. Republika Srpska President
Mirko Sarovic and Prime Minister Mladen Ivanic condemned the SFOR actions in
eastern Bosnia in March and August. In the beginning of September, the Republika
Srpska Government Bureau for Liaison with the ICTY issued a report concerning
the 1995 events in Srebrenica, during which the Bosnian Serb Army was believed
responsible for the killing of more than seven thousand Bosniac men and boys.The
report claimed that only one hundred Bosniacs were killed in violation of law, and
1,900 died in combat or of exhaustion.
Domestic war crimes trials continued in the Federation, sometimes marred by
judges’ ethnic bias and inadequate witness protection measures.No war crimes trials
were conducted in Republika Srpska, but in November the ICTY authorized
Republika Srpska authorities to proceed in a case against eighteen Bosnian Serbs on
war crime charges. In both entities, public prosecutors initiated dozens of war
crimes cases against persons belonging to the local ethnic minority.
Between January and the end of August, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) registered 69,550 minority returns to pre-war
homes, a 30 percent increase over the same period in 2001. The year also saw
improvements in the return of property to its pre-war owners. As of the end of
August, housing authorities had solved 62 percent of property claims in the Federation
and 54 percent in Republika Srpska, while at the end of 2001 the respective
figures had been 49 and 31 percent.
Property rights violations remained widespread, however.Many people, including
public officials, continued to occupy others’ property.Authorities in Republika
Srpska encouraged or tolerated Serb construction of houses on land owned by displaced
non-Serbs.
Violent incidents against returnees in Republika Srpska continued. In Prijedor,
Zvornik,Doboj, Bratunac,Derventa,Modrica, and other locations, unknown perpetrators
planted bombs under returnees’ cars or hurled explosives into their yards
and houses. A sixty-six-year-old Bosniac returnee to Srpsko Gorazde was shot at on
September 16.Also in September, during a celebration of a Yugoslav national team
victory at the World Basketball Championship, local Serbs vandalized houses and
business premises of Bosniac returnees in Prijedor and Bijeljina. During the year,
unknown perpetrators planted explosives or threw bombs at Muslim religious
shrines in Bijeljina, Gacko, and Kozarska Dubica. In most cases the police failed to
identify and arrest the perpetrators.
Although freedom of expression was largely respected, independent journalists
faced defamation suits and threats from public officials and other individuals.
Between February and September, the Free Media Help Line, operated by the international
community’s high representative, registered forty-eight cases of abuse suffered
by journalists, in line with rates in 2000 and 2001.
Roma continued to suffer discrimination and other forms of abuse, while the
authorities failed to undertake adequate measures to address these problems. The
newly established National Advisory Commission on Romani Issues, a body consisting of representatives of relevant ministries, the Romani community, and international
organizations to elaborate a coordinated response to problems faced by
Roma, had the potential to bring about some positive change, but it was too early
to assess its effectiveness as of this writing.
Trafficking of people into Bosnia continued unabated in 2002, as did the corruption
that allowed it to flourish. The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) de-authorized eleven local police officers in October for
using sexual services in nightclubs. In several of the cases the officers had tipped off
bar owners to upcoming raids; one of the officers, a team leader in the anti-trafficking
force, faced one month’s imprisonment for using his position to sexually
abuse a number of women. In a letter submitted to a United States (U.S.) Congressional
committee on the eve of an April hearing on United Nations (U.N.) complicity
in trafficking into Bosnia, the U.N. admitted that eighteen officers of the
International Police Task Force (IPTF, part of UNMIBH) faced repatriation for
“incidents of sexual misconduct.” In February, a U.N. spokesman announced that
an Office of Internal Oversight report found no evidence of “widespread or systematic
involvement of U.N. police monitors in trafficking activities.”Nongovernmental
organizations criticized the U.N.’s public pronouncements on the report for
failing to address allegations that a small number of police monitors had purchased
trafficked women from brothels. The report was not publicly released.
A new demining law was approved in February 2002.With donor mine action
funding of U.S.$16.6 million, demining operations in 2001 cleared 5.5 to 6 million
square meters, and surveyed 73.5 million square meters.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Refugee associations and human rights groups continued to be active. The
ombudsmen of the Federation and the Republika Srpska continued to receive
thousands of requests for assistance, the majority relating to violations of the right
to housing; discrimination complaints ranked second. The Human Rights Chamber,
Bosnia’s human rights court, had over ten thousand cases pending as of October
2002. On January 17, the chamber issued an injunction to halt removal of six
Algerians sought by the U.S. for alleged involvement in terrorism, but the Bosnian
government ignored the chamber decision and handed over the six on January 18.
(See also below.) The Bosnian human rights movement suffered a blow when differences
over the surrender to the U.S. led to a split in the Helsinki Committee for
Human Rights.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Office of the High Representative
On May 27, Paddy Ashdown succeeded Wolfgang Petritsch as high representative
overseeing civilian aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement.While the priorities
of the former high representative had been accelerated refugee return, institution building, and economic reform, the new high representative declared that the fight
against organized crime and regeneration of the Bosnian economy would be his
main areas of focus.
United Nations
On June 30, the U.S. vetoed U.N. Security Council renewal of the UNMIBH
mandate. The veto followed failed U.S. demands for a Council resolution that
would exempt U.S. peacekeepers from the jurisdiction of the nascent International
Criminal Court (ICC). On July 12 the mandate was extended until December 31,
along with a resolution that suspended for one year any ICC investigation or prosecution
of U.N. peacekeepers from countries such as the U.S. that have not ratified
the ICC treaty.
UNMIBH continued the certification process for Bosnian police.The procedure
involved a check of police officers’performance, wartime conduct, and housing status,
as well as verification of their citizenship and academic qualifications. Between
November 2001 and September 2002, UNMIBH withdrew authorization for 130
police officers, due in nearly half of the cases to their wartime conduct. By the U.N.
secretary-general’s own admission, however, the officers often moved to administrative
positions outside the authority of UNMIBH, or to positions in public companies.
UNMIBH also continued its efforts to increase minority representation
within the police.As of May, however, only 15.5 percent of the police in the Federation
were minorities, and the respective percentage in Republika Srpska was 4.9.
In a report presented to the U.N.Commission on Human Rights in March, Jose
Cutileiro, special representative on the situation of human rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (F.R. Yugoslavia), described
Bosnia’s human rights progress as “slow and limited.”Cutileiro concluded that genuine
inter-ethnic reconciliation in the country had not taken place, and that there
would be no real progress while the country depended on foreign civilian executives
and foreign military to hold it together.
On April 19, the Commission on Human Rights passed a resolution on the situation
of human rights in parts of southeastern Europe, welcoming progress and
urging the states in the region to effectively enforce minority rights. The commission
also called on the authorities in Bosnia, particularly in Republika Srpska, to
cooperate fully with the ICTY.
In February, the ICTY commenced the high-profile trial of former Yugoslav
President Slobodan Milosevic, facing charges including for crimes against humanity
and genocide committed during the Bosnian war.
On June 12, the ICTY Appeals Chamber upheld the convictions and sentences of
Bosnian Serbs Dragoljub Kunarac,Radomir Kovac,and Zoran Vukovic for rape, torture,
and enslavement committed in Foca during the war. On October 17, the tribunal
sentenced Milan Simic, a Bosnian Serb, to five years in prison for crimes against
Bosniacs in 1992 in the area of Bosanski Samac. The sentence followed Simic’s May
15 guilty plea to two counts of torture charged as crimes against humanity.
In June, the tribunal devised a plan to focus on prosecuting only the highestranking
political and military figures, while referring cases of the lower-ranking accused to national courts. A report by the Office of the Prosecutor, the Judges, and
the Registrar concluded that Bosnia and Herzegovina was the only country in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia to which the tribunal could consider referring
such cases.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) organized international
monitoring of the October 5 elections and concluded that they were “largely in line
with international standards.”
The OSCE Bosnia mission tackled areas of persistent discrimination, embarking
in July on a project on fair employment practices aimed at promoting principles
of equal opportunities regardless of national origin, gender, political
affiliation, or a person’s status. The OSCE also acted as a coordinator for education
matters in Bosnia.
Council of Europe
On January 22, the Parliamentary Assembly gave a favorable opinion on Bosnia’s
application for membership in the Council of Europe. The assembly’s decision was
conditioned on Bosnia’s acceptance of an exhaustive set of post-accession commitments,
including implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement, cooperation
with the ICTY, ratification of a number of international conventions, respect for
human rights, legislative reform, and the proper functioning of state institutions.
On March 20, the Committee of Ministers invited Bosnia to join, and accession
took place on April 24.
European Union
In February, E.U. foreign ministers decided that in January 2003 the E.U.would
deploy a police mission to Bosnia to take over the international policing operation
in the country. The E.U. planned a mission of five hundred officers, whereas the
U.N.-led IPTF it would replace numbered 1,800 in 2002. In an April 4 Stabilization
and Association Report, the European Commission assessed that Bosnia was yet to
satisfy ten out of eighteen conditions—including four of the five human rights conditions—
identified in the commission’s March 2000 Road Map toward European
integration. The commission donated Û71.9 million (U.S.$70.2 million) in 2002 to
finance democratic stabilization, administrative capacity building, socioeconomic
development, environmental protection, and justice and home affairs. It continued
to be the principal donor for the reconstruction of housing destroyed in the war.
United States
After seven years of laudable efforts on the part of the U.S. to foster peace and
the rule of law in Bosnia, some of its actions in Bosnia during 2002 seriously undermined the rule of law. In January, the U.S. put intense pressure on Bosnia to hand
over six Algerians sought for alleged links to terrorism. Bosnia revoked the citizenship
of five of the six suspects and turned over all six, although a day earlier the
Supreme Court of the federation had ordered the release of the detained suspects
due to lack of evidence, and the Bosnian Human Rights Chamber had made an
interim order halting their removal from Bosnian jurisdiction.The U.S. transferred
the six to its detention camp at Guantánamo Bay.
At the end of August, the U.S. submitted a formal proposal to the Bosnian
authorities to sign an agreement to exempt U.S. citizens from transfer from Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the International Criminal Court.Bosnian officials declined to
either reject or accept the offer. Both the U.S. and Bosnian officials emphasized in
public that the U.S. was not threatening withdrawal of the three thousand U.S.
troops in the eighteen thousand-member peacekeeping force, should Bosnia refuse
to sign the agreement.
On a visit to Banja Luka on April 19,U.S.Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes
Issues Pierre Prosper warned Republika Srpska leaders that the entity was facing
isolation because of its failure to meet international obligations to surrender war
crimes indictees to the ICTY. During the year, the U.S. carried out a “Rewards for
Justice” program, offering a monetary reward for information leading to the arrest
of Radovan Karadzic and other war crimes suspects.As part of the initiative, SFOR
airplanes distributed leaflets in Republika Srpska in mid-March, and in September,
Republika Srpska state television began broadcasting U.S. government advertisements
seeking information leading to arrests.
DynCorp, Inc., the U.S. contractor responsible for employing IPTF officers and
SFOR contractors, lost one lawsuit and settled a second relating to allegations of
wrongful termination of two employees who exposed human trafficking-related
activities in Bosnia.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Hopes Betrayed: Trafficking Of Women And Girls To Post-Conflict Bosnia And
Herzegovina For Forced Prostitution, 11/02
The NATO Summit and Arms Trade Controls in Central and Eastern Europe, 11/02
CROATIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Ensuring minority rights remained Croatia’s biggest human rights challenge in
2002. The government remained reluctant to lend strong support to the return of
Serb refugees and backed away from its previous record of cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). At the same
time, the government was increasingly committed to pursuing domestic trials to
establish accountability for abuses committed against Serbs during the 1991-95 war.
The government failed to enact a long-pending constitutional law on minority
rights. In February, the cabinet rejected a draft produced by a working group that
included minority representatives. The cabinet then established a new working
group, this time without minority representation. As of November, the group had
not presented a new draft.
Seven years after the Dayton Peace Agreement brought peace to the region, by
the close of 2002 most of the 350,000 displaced Croatian Serbs had still not
returned home. Between January and August, 7,800 Serbs returned (primarily elderly
persons returning to villages), increasing the total number of returnees to
110,000, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). An unknown number of returnees had departed again for F.R.
Yugoslavia or Bosnia and Herzegovina after a short stay in Croatia. Property issues
remained the principal impediment to sustainable return, with thousands of
returnees finding their pre-war homes destroyed or occupied by others. Lack of
employment opportunities, often resulting from oblique discrimination, also
impeded return.
On July 12, the Croatian Parliament set a December 31 deadline for the government
to issue administrative decisions on return of occupied private properties to
their owners. For property not returned by this deadline, the government obliged
itself to pay compensation to owners who had filed property claims. The amendments
disbanded the inefficient local housing commissions and vested the State
Prosecutor with the authority to file lawsuits against temporary users who refused
to vacate occupied property. The amendments left in place, however, a number of
obstacles to repossession of property. Most significant among these was the
requirement that before evicting temporary occupants the authorities must provide
them with alternative accommodation,which often proved difficult.The right
to alternative accommodation applied even to temporary occupants who could
afford to obtain other housing and to occupants who had previously lived within a
single household but since the war had multiple homes thanks to their occupancy
of Serb houses.
While eviction of illegal occupants of Serb properties was legally mandated, in
most cases in which they refused to vacate the property, the competent housing
commissions had not sought court-ordered eviction.Only at the beginning of 2002
did the Supreme Court abandon its earlier position and rule that owners, as well as
the local housing commissions, could sue to evict illegal occupants. Even where
courts had rendered final decisions in favor of the owner, however, the judgments
rarely led to actual repossession.
The situation was even more hopeless for those who had pre-war tenancy rights
in apartments. Deputy Prime Minister Zeljka Antunovic stated in November 2001
that during the war Serbs had left their apartments voluntarily, and accordingly, they
had as a matter of law lost their tenancy rights. Lovre Pejkovic, head of the government’s
Directorate for Expelled Persons, Returnees, and Refugees, stated in March
2002 that the government had no obligation to former tenancy rights holders.
Roma continued to suffer discrimination in all fields of public life. The Law on
Citizenship required citizenship applicants to have five years of permanent residence
and excellent Croatian language skills, preventing many Roma from obtaining
citizenship. Romani children were segregated into separate and educationally
inferior Roma-only classes. On April 19, a group of fifty-seven Romani children
assisted by the European Roma Rights Center filed a lawsuit against the Ministry of
Education, the Medjimurje county local government, and four primary schools,
charging them with segregation. In October, the municipal court in Cakovec dismissed
the lawsuit, arguing that racial and ethnic origin of the Roma children was
not the reason for the segregation.Roma in Croatia also continued to face discrimination
in obtaining access to housing, health care, and employment.
The judiciary continued to suffer from a large inherited backlog of pending
cases, inexperienced judges and staff, and political influence at the local level, particularly
among judicial appointees of the late President Franjo Tudjman.
In a step back from its previous cooperation with the ICTY, the government
failed to arrest and transfer former general Ante Gotovina to the custody of the tribunal.
Gotovina was indicted in July 2001 for crimes during and after the 1995
Operation Storm.On August 23, 2002, the tribunal prosecutor indicted retired general
Janko Bobetko for war crimes committed against Croatian Serbs in 1993. The
government refused to surrender Bobetko to the court, arguing that the indictment
contravened the Croatian constitution.
In a welcome development, the authorities accelerated domestic prosecution of
ethnic Croats suspected of war crimes committed during the 1991-95 war. Serious
concerns remained about the quality of these proceedings, however. Judicial bias
and witness tampering characterized some trials, including the high-profile trial in
Split for crimes committed in 1992 in the Lora military prison. The witnesses were
scared to speak openly in the courtroom about the crimes, and the presiding judge
demonstrated bias in favor of the accused Croatian soldiers. The trial had not been
completed as of mid-November.
The central government generally did not interfere with the independence of the
media. In February 2002, the state-owned television station declined to air a program
prepared by a renowned journalist on the contemporary heritage of the
Ustashas, the Croatian World War II allies of Nazi Germany. In March, the Zagreb
District Court upheld two lower court libel decisions imposing fines amounting to
U.S.$24,000 on the satirical weekly Feral Tribune (distinguished for debunking
nationalistic myths and researching war crimes against Croatian Serbs). In one of
the judgments, the judge faulted Feral Tribune for publishing “cosmopolitan opinions
and views.”
Croatia continued to be a transit country for international trafficking, but it was
also increasingly a country of destination for a growing number of women and
children trafficked for sexual exploitation from Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
countries of the former Soviet Union.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Robust and professional human rights organizations were active, particularly in
the urban centers of Zagreb, Karlovac, Split, Osijek, Vukovar, Knin, and Rijeka. In
February 2002, a group of leading civil society groups prepared a shadow report for
the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD). In
March 2002, the parliamentary ombudsman submitted its annual report. The
complaints received by the ombudsman mostly pertained to property and housing
rights of Serb returnees, and to pension, disability and medical insurance, and
social welfare. The report noted that ministries and administrative bodies continued
primarily to ignore the ombudsman’s communications.At the July 9 session of
the Parliamentary Commission for Constitutional Issues, a representative of the
ruling coalition, tacitly supported by other coalition members, strongly criticized
the ombudsman for his critiques of the human rights situation in the country.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
On November 30, 2001, the U.N.Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights issued its concluding observations and recommendations on Croatia’s
implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights. The committee noted that many post-independence transitional measures
were being amended or superseded by new laws that better conformed to international
human rights principles. The committee nonetheless criticized continued
discrimination, mostly affecting Roma and displaced Croatian Serbs.
In its March 19 concluding observations, the U.N. CERD welcomed Croatia’s
efforts to promote equality.The committee expressed concern at the continued segregation
of Romani children in education and at reports of discrimination against
Roma in access to employment, health, political representation, and citizenship
rights. The committee also urged Croatia to take effective measures to prevent discrimination,
especially against Croatian Serbs, as regards the restitution of their
property, tenancy rights, access to reconstruction assistance, and rights to residency
and citizenship.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The six-month report of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Mission to Croatia presented on May 24 welcomed several important
government policy statements on property repossession, judiciary reform,
regional cooperation, and minority legislation. The report also pointed out the
main areas of concern, including return of refugees and property repossession, the
issue of tenancy rights, and the state of the judiciary and the rule of law. The mission
attempted to develop a dialogue with the government while issuing reports
critical of its return-related practices.
Council of Europe
In a March 1 decision in the case Kutic v.Croatia, the European Court ofHuman
Rights (ECHR) addressed a Serb applicant’s claim for compensation for property
destroyed during the 1991-95 war.The case was typical of thousands of compensation
claims filed by Serb property owners in Croatian courts, which had simply
stayed the proceedings and failed to act on the claims. The ECHR held that there
had been a violation of the right of access to courts and ordered Croatia to pay the
applicant Û10,000 in non-pecuniary damages. In several other cases, not related to
return of Serb refugees, the court also found violations of the right to a fair hearing
within a reasonable time and the right to an effective remedy.
On February 6, the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the
Protection of National Minorities published its April 2001 opinion on Croatia.The
committee found that implementation of the Framework Convention had
improved regrettably slowly and singled out employment as the area in which the
protection of the Serb and Roma minorities merited urgent attention. In its
response, the Croatian government invoked the consequences of war as a factor
affecting the rights of minorities, and listed legislative and policy reforms underway
to improve its record.
On September 27, Council of Europe Secretary General Walter Schwimmer
recalled that full co-operation with the ICTY was one of the commitments that
Croatia undertook upon accession to the Council of Europe.He called for a swift and
unconditional surrender of the recently indicted General Bobetko to the tribunal.
European Union
Croatia and the E.U. signed a Stabilization and Association Agreement in late
2001. Pending ratification by all E.U. member state parliaments, an Interim Agreement
on the trade-related provisions of the agreement was in effect as of January 1,
2002. In its April 4 Stabilization and Association Report, the European Commission
identified the continuing weakness of the judiciary and nationalistic pressures
in Croatia as the most far-reaching potential threats to the return of refugees, cooperation
with the ICTY, and the achievement of overall economic, political, and
social reform. At the beginning of October, Javier Solana, E.U. high representative
for common foreign and security policy and Danish Foreign Minister Per Stig
Moeller, acting on behalf of the E.U. Presidency, called separately on Croatia to
hand over General Bobetko to the ICTY. On October 21, the Council of the European
Union “strongly encouraged”Croatia to cooperate fully with the ICTY.
United States
During a July 2002 visit to Croatia, United States Ambassador-at-large for War
Crimes Issues Pierre Prosper supported the Croatian government’s efforts to conduct
domestic war crimes trials and take over cases from the ICTY. Prosper’s statements
left it unclear whether the U.S. considered it a priority that such domestic
trials meet international standards.
In July, the United States requested that Croatia enter into an agreement
exempting U.S. citizens from transfer from Croatia to the International Criminal
Court. A spokesman for the Croatian Ministry of Interior expressed a negative
opinion of the proposed agreement,while the president and prime minister linked
Croatia’s response to the E.U.’s position. U.S. Ambassador Lawrence Rossin stated
in September that U.S. support for a possible Croatian application for NATO membership
might depend on whether Croatia signed the agreement.
In October,Ambassador Prosper publicly reminded the government of Croatia
of its commitment to cooperate with the ICTY and urged the government to surrender
General Bobetko.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
The NATO Summit and Arms Trade Controls in Central and Eastern Europe,
11/02
GEORGIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The Georgian government accepted United States (U.S.) military assistance and
pursued a pipeline project to transport Caspian oil and gas to western markets.
These initiatives accelerated Georgia’s shift toward strategic alignment with the
U.S. and Western Europe, and brought escalating tension with Russia.The U.S. and
Russia branded Georgia’s Pankisi Gorge—home to several thousand Chechen
refugees—a terrorist haven, respectively citing the presence there of al-Qaeda and
Chechen rebel fighters. The U.S. “Train and Equip” program to strengthen Georgia’s
counter-terrorism efforts in Pankisi got under way, but Georgia rebuffed Russia’s
repeated demands to conduct its own military operations in the area.
The government did not match its geostrategic repositioning with any significant
reform or improvement in its human rights record. Leading reformers left
the governing Citizens’ Union (CUG) and founded opposition parties, which
eclipsed the CUG in June local elections. The government issued a decree to crack
down on religious mob violence, and created a commission to devise reforms to
end corruption and abuses in law enforcement, and yet indulged such abuses in
practice.
In the context of the war on terrorism, international focus on the Pankisi Gorge
resulted from the Georgian government’s failure since 1999 to enforce the rule of
law there. Allegedly, officials from security and law enforcement agencies had
shared the profits from weapons and drug trafficking and kidnapping rings in the
region. The same agencies, under new leadership since November 2001, now took action in the Pankisi Gorge to gain and maintain U.S. assistance, and to stave off
Russian intervention.
Several thousand refugees who fled renewed armed conflict in Chechnya from
1999 lived in the Pankisi Gorge.To its credit, the government resisted pressure from
Russia to forcibly return them. Yet some of the measures it took in Pankisi in the
name of anti-terrorism were arbitrary or brutal. On March 22 the National Security
Ministry detained two Georgian ethnic Chechen activists who worked with
refugees in the gorge, Islam Saidaev and Zurab Khangoshvili, on suspicion of association
with al-Qaeda, based on no evidence other than the fact that they were the
only Georgian citizens to make the pilgrimage to Mecca in 2002. The ministry
secured their pre-trial detention for three months by falsifying the date of their
arrest, to avoid their compulsory release under habeas corpus deadlines.They were
released in June, but the investigation continued. On April 28 three men of Arab
origin “disappeared” after a uniformed military detachment detained them.Witnesses
reported that the troops handcuffed the men’s driver, Vizuri Khangoshvili,
shot him fatally in the stomach, and left him in a ditch. No criminal investigation
followed. On September 25 Chechen refugee Hussein Yussupov “disappeared”
while in Security Ministry detention.
For at least the first half of the year, reports persisted of official involvement in
criminality in the Pankisi Gorge.Against a background of allegations that weapons
were being illegally traded through the Pankisi Gorge to rebels in Chechnya, the
authorities showed little interest in interviewing or protecting Aiub Paikaev, a
Chechen arms trader who claimed that arms transfers were made under Ministry
of National Security patronage. Paikaev had collaborated with the investigative television
program 60 Minutes, which in March broadcast hidden camera footage of
a former Georgian army colonel negotiating with him a weapons purchase from a
Russian peacekeepers’ base in the breakaway Georgian region of South Ossetia.
Days later, unknown assailants beat Paikaev on the street in Tbilisi, the capital.
Police promptly arrested him for having wounded a passerby during the struggle.
At this writing Paikaev was in detention for attempting to flee the country with a
false passport.
Kidnappings continued. In December 2001 two Spanish businessmen held
hostage for more than a year in the Pankisi Gorge were released, after payment of
substantial ransoms. The media published allegations that senior Georgian law
enforcement officials had colluded with the kidnappers. After the June 2002 kidnapping
of British banker Peter Shaw, two government ministers acknowledged
that law enforcement agents were most likely responsible. As of mid-November
none of his kidnappers had been arrested in the wake of his November 6 escape.
Under public pressure to end the kidnap of the brother of a popular soccer player,
police used electric shocks to torture Badri Khundadze, an acquaintance of two suspects,
in a vain attempt to discover their whereabouts.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs in January introduced a telephone hotline for
torture complaints, but it did not appear to reduce the frequent occurrence of
police torture. The Ministry of Justice forensic bureau confirmed that the police
continued to use wind-up military field telephones as electric shock torture
devices. Beginning in January, the Ministry of Justice instituted systematic medical forensic monitoring of detainees transferred from police stations throughout eastern
Georgia to its Tbilisi pre-trial detention facility.This provided the first basis for
quantifying police torture and ill-treatment and violations of habeas corpus deadlines.
Despite these advances, impunity for police torture and extortion remained
widespread. Investigation into the death of Temur Mikia—a young man beaten and
thrown from an upstairs window of the Poti police station in July 2001—was
stalled, and the officers alleged to have killed him remained in their jobs. In June, 60
Minutes exposed corruption in the Ministry of Internal Affairs narcotics department,
but as of October a criminal investigation had not produced any results. The
program had shown hidden camera footage of the department chief instructing an
informant to plant narcotics on persons from whom bribes could be extorted.
On September 27 more than twenty police officers reportedly raided a local television
station in Zugdidi, beating staff and smashing equipment. The station had
cooperated with 60 Minutes on a report about police involvement in gasoline
smuggling from Abkhazia. On the same day, police allegedly mistreated the mother
and ten-year-old son of the program’s Zugdidi correspondent, Emma Gogokhia,
when they failed to find her at home. A group of neighbors reportedly prevented
police from taking the boy away.After an internal investigation the deputy regional
police chief was dismissed in November.
Law enforcement agencies and courts continued to afford de facto impunity to
groups of civilian militants who intimidated and assaulted members of non-
Orthodox religious faiths, particularly Jehovah’s Witnesses, Pentecostals, and Baptists.
The authorities did nothing to counter a growing campaign of vilification and
hostility against such faiths. In February a senior cleric of the Georgian Orthodox
Church called for members of religious “sects” to be killed. A member of parliament,
Guram Sharadze, mobilized a movement of supporters throughout the
country to pursue a range of ultranationalist causes by demonizing Jehovah’s Witnesses,
issuing a constant stream of bizarre and unfounded accusations against
them.
In January, Vasili Mkalavishvili, a defrocked Orthodox priest, and Petre
Ivanidze—responsible for organizing dozens of attacks on religious minorities in
and around Tbilisi since 1999—were at last brought to trial, but for just five attacks.
To date though, the trial disappointed hopes that justice would be served. Mkalavishvili’s
followers were allowed to dominate the courtroom and intimidate the
victims, primarily Jehovah’s Witnesses, who consequently feared attending subsequent
hearings, until security was improved in October. In February the authorities
had threatened to detain and forcibly bring victims to the trial, despite failing
to ensure courtroom security. The trial was repeatedly postponed and, at this writing,
proceedings on the merits had not commenced. In April a Tbilisi court lifted a
restraining order on Mkalavishvili even though he and his supporters had perpetrated
new attacks just prior to the trial and between hearings.
In one of their worst attacks, on December 23, 2001, Mkalavishvili and Ivanidze
led more than one hundred followers in an assault on the evangelical “Word of Life”
church, as it was meeting in central Tbilisi. The assailants beat people and stole
equipment,money, and personal documents.Although police arrived quickly, they
made no attempt to stop the beatings and thefts and made little attempt to investigate. On January 25 Mkalavishvili and supporters massed outside the Stereo 1 television
station, forcing it to withdraw an evangelical religious program, and on
February 3 they burned thousands of bibles and other religious books after breaking
into the Tbilisi warehouse of the United Bible Society. On July 1 Mkalavishvili’s
supporters were allowed to roam freely inside a Tbilisi police station and to assault
a Jehovah’s Witness and his son,whom they had falsely accused of throwing stones
at their church.
Local authorities pressured Jehovah’s Witnesses to cancel conventions scheduled
to take place in August in Kaspi and near Gori. There were anonymous nighttime
arson attacks on both convention sites, and on August 15 a mob raided the
sites, vandalizing and looting buildings, making bonfires of religious literature, and
badly beating a Jehovah’s Witness. Police and civilian militants maintained a joint
road blockade around Kaspi on August 16 to ensure the Jehovah’s Witnesses’ convention
there did not proceed.
In several instances priests of the Georgian Orthodox Church also harassed religious
minorities. On three successive days in early July two priests directed a crowd
that laid siege to a house in Tbilisi where the congregation of a Pentecostal church
was attempting to hold its regular service. On July 3 three carloads of men attacked
a group of Catholics near the town of Kvareli an hour after two priests had
demanded that the group leave the area. In September a priest in Sachkhere
received Patriarchate backing in preventing a deceased Jehovah’s Witness from
being buried next to her husband in the town cemetery. Near Ozurgeti, priests
allegedly exhorted a crowd to assault a breakaway Orthodox congregation that was
building an alternative village church. A crowd destroyed the church on October 6.
The Georgian government offered a draft law on religion as an unconvincing
remedy for religious violence.However, the draft provided for further discrimination
against religious minority groups through a restrictive registration regime and
a clause outlawing “improper proselytism.” Police throughout the country who
attended human rights seminars made clear that they expected the new law to give
them legal grounds to restrict such religious groups as the Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Against a background of growing poverty, and in contrast to its indulgence of
popular mobilization against religious minorities, the government did little to
encourage genuine participation in the political process.Registers used for the June
2 local elections were still uncomputerized and in a deplorable state, opening the
way for widespread fraud. Recounts of the Tbilisi vote were still unresolved in
November. The elections were strongly criticized by local and international monitors.
Human Rights Watch’s observation of polling in the town of Marneuli found
flagrant fraud, facilitated by low voter participation at most precincts.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
July saw one of the fiercest assaults on a nongovernmental human rights organization
(NGO) in Georgia since independence. On July 10 a group of about ten
attacked the Tbilisi office of the Liberty Institute, a Georgian human rights NGO
prominent in opposing religious intolerance. They severely beat its director, Levan Ramishvili, and other staff, and smashed computers, furniture, and other equipment.
The government consulted with NGOs in designing a law enforcement reform
program, but otherwise its attitude toward them grew less benign. In August the
chairman of the government’s audit chamber accused “certain NGOs and suspicious
entities”of “blasphemous and anti-orthodox intentions.”In a speech on April
24, President Eduard Shevardnadze implied that Georgian NGOs might be
financed by international terrorists. Such tactics were used to justify the need for a
law enabling government oversight of foreign grants to NGOs. Finance Minister
Zurab Noghadeili’s refusal to support this initiative is reported to have been a factor
in his dismissal in early May. On September 24 the new finance minister established
a unit to monitor foreign grants to Georgian NGOs.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Georgia was one of the few countries of the former Soviet Union to issue standing
invitations to U.N. human rights monitoring mechanisms. In March the U.N.
Human Rights Committee reviewed Georgia’s second periodic report. Chiefly, the
committee expressed concern at the large number of deaths in police and prison
custody, including from suicides and tuberculosis; widespread police torture; and
criminal procedure that facilitated arbitrary detention and prevented suspects
from filing a torture complaint with a court prior to trial. The committee set an
extraordinary twelve-month deadline for Georgia to report on measures taken to
rectify these abuses, including progress toward establishing an independent
authority to investigate all complaints of ill-treatment.
Although the committee expressed deep concern about the treatment of religious
minorities, it classified the violence against them merely as “harassment,”and
did not include it in the list of issues the Georgian government had to report on
within twelve months.
Council of Europe
A report by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) on its
May 2001 visit to Georgian detention facilities,published in July 2002, exposed how
loopholes both in the criminal procedure code, and in its implementation, facilitated
ill-treatment and torture. The committee also cited Tbilisi’s pre-trial facility
No. 5 for unacceptable dilapidation, failure to prevent the spread of tuberculosis,
and basement punishment cells that were uninhabitable. By September 2001 the
government had implemented the committee’s requirement that the facility’s basement
cells be de-commissioned.
During his April visit to Georgia the Lithuanian chairman of the Committee of
Ministers publicly took the government to task for its failure to end religious violence.
In April the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance published
its first report on Georgia, covering events up to June 2001. It blamed the authorities
for permitting religious violence to win significant public support, and specifically
criticized the Supreme Court’s February 2001 decision to annul the
registration of the Jehovah’s Witnesses as “an encouragement” for extremists “to
persevere in their attacks on religious minorities.”
The Directorate of Strategic Planning published a report on its December 2001
mission to Georgia. The report combined with other efforts by the Secretary General’s
office to promote electoral and criminal procedure reform, and to remind
Georgia of its obligation to provide for voluntary repatriation ofMeskhetian Turks,
deported from Georgia by Stalin in 1944.
Council of Europe observers made a strong statement expressing disappointment
at the chaotic conduct of the June 2 local elections, and judging them “unable
to provide for the basic conditions for electing genuine democratic local governments.”
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) observers stationed
along Georgia’s border with the Russian republics of Chechnya and
Ingushetia confirmed that Russia had bombed Georgian territory, in an August 23
raid that killed one and injured seven Georgian villagers
The OSCE Mission to Georgia sponsored a pilot torture prevention project in
Tbilisi, linking telephone hotlines in police stations to a rapid reaction group
formed by the ombudsman’s office.
European Union
The European Commission assigned Georgia Û1.9 million (U.S.$2 million)
within the framework of its revamped “European Initiative for Democracy and
Human Rights” program, and in September called for project proposals in a range
of thematic areas.
The commission’s vehement reaction to the December 2001 murder in Tbilisi of
Gunther Beuchel, its human rights project manager for Georgia, prompted the
government to establish a new police department for combating crime against foreigners.
United States
As part of its campaign against terrorism, the U.S. provided the Georgian military
with U.S.$64 million in assistance under the “Train and Equip” program to
support counter-terrorism operations in the Pankisi Gorge. As of October, at least
sixty U.S. troops were based in Georgia.
The U.S. government did not sufficiently question the arbitrary or brutal means
and methods used by Georgian security forces in detentions and operations in the
Pankisi Gorge. The U.S. failed to object to the detention on terrorism charges of Islam Saidaev and Zurab Khangoshvili, although the sole basis for their arrest was
information about their pilgrimage to Mecca, contained in a letter the U.S. embassy
sent to the Ministry of National Security. TIME Magazine reported that Georgian
forces carried out the April 28 illegal detention of three men and apparent extrajudicial
killing of a fourth on the basis of intelligence provided by the U.S. Neither
government refuted October reports that Georgia was extra-legally extraditing al-
Qaeda suspects to the U.S.
At worst, these acts of commission and omission undermined other U.S. activity
directed toward consolidating good human rights practices. At best, they
amounted to a lost opportunity, as security assistance to Georgia made the government
more sensitive to scrutiny by the U.S. of the situation. For example, criticism
in the State Department’s annual Country Reports on Human Rights Practices
helped prompt a brief flurry of Georgian government activity, including a presidential
decree on human rights in May.
The U.S.Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe’s May 15 letter to
Shevardnadze, urging him to end religious violence, had a significant public
impact.The commission maintained pressure by holding a hearing on the problem
in September. To its credit, from mid-year the U.S. embassy in Tbilisi began making
vigorous statements urging the Georgian authorities to act against religious
violence, and to promote freedom of religion.
The State Department’s second Trafficking in Persons Report,published in June,
described Georgia as a country of origin and transit for women trafficked primarily
to Turkey and Greece, failing to mention that surveys revealed the U.S. as the
third most common trafficking destination. The report wrongly concluded that
Georgia had made significant efforts to combat trafficking in 2002, citing in support
government anti-trafficking initiatives that existed on paper only.
The U.S. Department of Justice provided valuable financial support for two
potential catalysts for positive change in the criminal justice system: the forensic
bureau of the Ministry of Justice and the secretariat of the presidential commission
for reform of law enforcement agencies.
Russian Federation
Beginning in February, the Russian government attempted to pressure Georgia
to forcibly return Chechen refugees living on Georgian territory, despite the likelihood
that they would face torture, “disappearance,” and other persecution if they
returned.
On several occasions through the year, aircraft emanating from and returning to
Russian airspace bombed Georgian territory. On August 23 one of these attacks
killed a villager south of the Pankisi Gorge and wounded seven others. In a statement
on September 11 Russian President Vladimir Putin cited an October 2001
U.N. Security Council resolution requiring states to deny safe haven to terrorists, in
justification of possible further military action against Georgia. The statement was
the boldest to date in Russia’s opportunistic endeavor to link the Russian operation
in Chechnya and the global fight against terrorism, and deflect international attention
from the political aspects of the Chechnya conflict.
KAZAKHSTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The human rights situation in Kazakhstan generated alarm as the government
in 2002 struck out at critical media and opposition politicians in an apparent effort
to shield itself from pressure for reform.
Kazakh government repression of independent media reached crisis proportions,
as journalists were attacked and beaten, threatened with death, and jailed.
Media outlets connected to President Nursultan Nazarbaev’s political rivals, and
journalists who attempted to expose official corruption, were particular targets of
the crackdown.
In May, the twenty-five-year-old daughter of independent journalist Lira Baiseitova
“disappeared” the day after the journalist published a controversial piece in
the newspaper SolDat (Let Me Speak) regarding personal Swiss bank accounts
allegedly held by the Nazarbaev family. In June, police informed Baiseitova that her
daughter, Leila, had been arrested for heroin possession, but did not grant the two
a visit. Days later, Leila Baiseitova died in police custody; Lira Baiseitova received
conflicting reports about the cause of death, including a police claim that her
daughter had hanged herself in her cell. Lira Baiseitova had herself been the victim
of physical attacks in 2000 and 2001.
On August 28, unknown assailants beat independent journalist Sergei Duvanov
unconscious; he was hospitalized for head trauma and other injuries. The attack
was clearly aimed at silencing Duvanov and intimidating other independent journalists.
On May 6, an Internet publication had posted a controversial article by
Duvanov about corruption on the part of President Nazarbaev and his close circle.
On July 9, officers of the National Security Committee (KNB) interrogated
Duvanov about his Internet article and filed criminal charges against him for “violating
the honor and dignity of the President.” By October, a police investigation
had failed to identify the assailants. On October 28, police arrested Duvanov on
charges of sexual assault of a minor. Duvanov had been scheduled to leave the following
day for the United States (U.S.), where he was to have given a series of lectures
on the state of media freedoms in Kazakhstan.
The August assault on Duvanov came twelve days after a similar attack on Artur
Platanov, a television reporter, who was beaten outside his home and suffered
injuries requiring hospital treatment. Human rights groups reported that police
identified the assailants as three former police officers. Platonov’s recent reporting
had addressed allegations of government corruption and the suspicious circumstances
surrounding the death of Leila Baiseitova.
In May, unknown intruders to the SolDat premises beat and seriously injured
employees, stole equipment, and threatened a repeat attack if the paper continued
publishing. Authorities blamed “drug addicts” for the crime, and at this writing
Human Rights Watch was not aware of any further state investigation into the incident. The paper is said to be affiliated with the opposition Republican People’s
Party, led by former Prime Minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin.
The same month a firebombing destroyed the offices of another newspaper,
Respublika.Police reportedly failed to investigate the incident seriously, and instead
briefly detained the paper’s co-founder, Muratbek Ketebaev, on charges—later
dropped—that he had hired people to carry out the firebombing; the case remains
under investigation. Prior to the attack, the newspaper’s editor, Irina Petrushova,
had received a funeral wreath with her name on it, and had found a decapitated dog
hanging outside the newspaper’s office reportedly bearing a note saying “there will
be no next time.” Respublika journalists had been investigating allegations of government
corruption, including the Nazarbaev family Swiss bank accounts story.
On July 4, Petrushova, who is not a citizen of Kazakhstan, received an eighteenmonth
suspended prison sentence for working in Kazakhstan illegally.Work permit
rules for citizens of most countries of the former Soviet Union are usually
enforced only with regard to sensitive government posts, and violations punished
by a fine. According to the Reuters news agency, Petrushova left Kazakhstan at the
end of August.
Also in 2002, the seven-year-old Rifma radio station, the first independent radio
station in Aktiubinsk province, was closed after government officials successfully
petitioned to have the broadcaster’s license revoked for “deliberately and blatantly”
violating the law on languages. By law, at least 50 percent of a station’s programs
must be in Kazakh. Authorities suspended the license of private television station
Tan in March for alleged violations of the language law as well as “technical problems.”
Opposition politician Mukhtar Abliazov, named in media reports as a shareholder
and co-founder of Tan, and one of the co-founders of the nascent Democratic
Choice of Kazakhstan (DVK) opposition party established in November
2001, was arrested on March 28.He was sentenced on July 18 to six years in jail on
charges of abuse of office while serving as minister of energy from 1997 to 1999.
Galymzhan Zhakianov, the other DVK co-founder, was sentenced on August 2 to
seven years of imprisonment for alleged abuse of office while serving as governor
of Pavlodar province. The two men and their supporters argued that the government
fabricated the cases against them to remove them as serious challengers to
Nazarbaev.Others viewed the case as another example of the selective prosecutions
that target the dissident elite.
Senate elections held October 8 were allegedly marred by procedural violations.
Authorities denied registration to the DVK candidate from Pavlodar, Gennadi
Bondarenko.
President Nazarbaev continued to consolidate economic and financial power
while severely curtailing public inquiry into the alleged misuse of government oil
revenues. Government harassment of the independent media was partially attributed
to revelations in late 2001 and early 2002 that the government secretly held
approximately U.S.$1.4 billion in a Swiss bank account under Nazarbaev’s control.
After repeated government denials, on April 4 Prime Minister Imangaly Tasmagambetov
confirmed the existence of the account and explained how it was
used.However,Tasmagambetov did not respond to parliamentary questions about the existence of personal Swiss accounts in the name of Nazarbaev and his relatives.
A U.S. federal judge ruled on September 9 that the Kazakh government could
not prevent a federal grand jury from reviewing some three hundred thousand
pages of documents related to a corruption investigation involving Kazakh government
officials and James Giffen, a close associate of Nazarbaev and financial
advisor to the Kazakh government. The government had requested that the documents
be suppressed on the grounds of sovereign immunity. The investigation
stemmed from information that the U.S.Department of Justice (DOJ) had received
from Swiss authorities in 2000 regarding the “alleged use of U.S. banks to funnel
funds belonging to certain oil companies through Swiss bank accounts and shell
companies… for ultimate transfer to… high-ranking officials of Kazakhstan.”The
DOJ documented transfers totaling almost U.S.$115 million from March 1997 to
September 1998 allegedly from several international oil companies through Giffen
to the president and former government officials.
The Kazakh government removed some of the most restrictive language in its
law on religion, bringing it closer to international standards. For example, the registration
requirement for those seeking to conduct missionary activity was lifted for
Kazakh citizens.
However, police and prosecutors sought to punish those who engaged in religious
activity but were affiliated with unregistered religious groups. For example,
on February 15 police reportedly arrested Tursunbai Auelbekov for distributing
Baptist literature in a market. The prosecutor intended to bring charges against
Auelbekov, but desisted upon learning of his poor health; he was subsequently
released.While in the majority of cases Baptist believers from unregistered groups
were penalized with administrative fines, in October 2001 authorities sentenced
Pastor Valeri Pak to five days of imprisonment for ignoring an earlier order to halt
his church’s activities. In a particularly disturbing case, on October 27, 2001 police
in Kyzl-Orda province beat Asylbek Nurdanov, the leader of an unregistered Baptist
church, and forcibly committed him to a mental institution; he was released on
November 16.
Some of the harshest government action to repress religious freedom was
reserved for members of Hizb ut-Tahrir (Party of Liberation) a non-violent group
that advocates the re-establishment of the Islamic Caliphate or state. At least two
dozen members of the group were detained in Kazakhstan in late 2001 and 2002 for
distribution of Hizb ut-Tahrir leaflets. Uzbek citizens arrested for membership in
the group were extradited to Uzbekistan,where they were sentenced to long prison
terms.Others were fined or given prison sentences of up to four years, according to
press reports. One alleged member, Kanat Beiembetov, died in custody as a result
of ill-treatment by KNB agents on November 6, 2001, eleven days after his arrest.
The officers responsible for his death were reportedly dismissed.
Kazakh courts continued to sentence people to death. As of June some forty
people were reportedly on death row awaiting execution.
The government took several steps during the year to address a rapidly escalating
HIV/AIDS epidemic, including a directive abolishing the long-standing practice
of compulsory HIV testing for all persons in pre-trial detention.Unfortunately,
by October the Ministry of Internal Affairs—which oversees such facilities—still had not implemented this directive. Injecting drug users—the most heavily AIDSaffected
population group in the country—and commercial sex workers continued
routinely to face police abuse and lack of due process. These factors contributed to
their lack of access to preventive HIV services. Persons living with HIV/AIDS continued
to experience severe discrimination in access to health care, housing, and
employment.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In September 2002, the government created an ombudsman’s office to monitor
and take steps to remedy human rights violations.The potential effectiveness of the
office appeared to be undermined from the outset, however, as founding legislation
specified that the ombudsman would be prohibited from “interfering” in court
proceedings or the routine operation of law enforcement agencies.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Kazakhstan remained the only country in the region that was not a state party to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights or to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights expert advisory panel on freedom of
religion or belief reviewed Kazakhstan’s new law on freedom of religion and religious
associations and was successful in improving its protection of religious freedoms.
Cooperation between the government and OSCE was commendable in this
area.
The OSCE representative on freedom of the media issued a report in June
expressing alarm at attacks on the media in Kazakhstan.He also spoke out strongly
against the assault on Sergei Duvanov, calling for his attackers to be brought to justice.
European Union
In July, the E.U. reported that its 2002 Cooperation Council meeting with Kazakhstan
had emphasized respect for human rights as an “essential condition” for
Kazakhstan-E.U. cooperation. The E.U. statement mentioned violent attacks on
the media, and expressed concern regarding “the number of court cases against
non-governmental media and opposition.” It also noted the need for a “transparent”
judicial system to address the problem of corruption.
The E.U. encouraged Kazakhstan to ensure broader political pluralism, but the
Kazakh government took no discernible action in response.The E.U. used an OSCE
Permanent Council meeting in late July to express concern about the new law on
political parties, saying that it “pose[d] a threat to political pluralism” and would
“impede the full development of political parties in all sectors of Kazakh society.”
United States
U.S. President George W. Bush reportedly raised human rights issues during his
December 2001 meeting with President Nazarbaev. But since the White House
made no public statement to this effect, Nazarbaev was able to use the meeting to
show that he had unqualified U.S. support.At the close of the visit, the Bush administration
promised to seek Kazakhstan’s “graduation” from the Jackson-Vanik
amendment to the U.S. Freedom Support Act, which denies “most favored nation”
trade status to countries that restrict freedom of emigration.
As the crackdown against the Kazakh media and political opposition intensified,
the Bush administration’s frustration with the Kazakh government appeared to
grow. In August, a State Department spokesman stated that “recent developments…
pose a serious threat to the country’s democratic process” and promised
that the U.S.would “raise these concerns at the highest levels with the Government
of Kazakhstan.”
The U.S. risked sending mixed signals to Kazakhstan, however, by simultaneously
pursuing closer military ties, culminating in a July agreement giving U.S. aircraft
landing rights at Almaty airport.
In September, U.S. government officials took the lead in an international effort
to convince Kazakh authorities not to extradite Gulgeldi Annaniazov, a Turkmen
dissident in Kazakh custody, to Turkmenistan.Annaniazov was granted refugee status
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and was
able to travel to Norway for medical treatment in early October.
KYRGYZSTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The events of 2002 provided further evidence that the government of President
Askar Akaev had abandoned human rights commitments. It used lethal violence to
break up demonstrations, jailed the president’s political rivals and independentminded
Muslims, and attempted to dismantle media freedoms.With its increasingly
close relationship to the U.S. and heightened international profile, the
government appeared confident that repressive measures would have no diplomatic
consequence.
At least five demonstrators were killed and some ninety people injured, including forty-seven police officers,when violence erupted during a protest on March 17
and 18 in the Aksy district of Jalal Abad province in southern Kyrgyzstan. Protesters
demanded the release of Azimbek Beknazarov, a popular member of parliament.
(See also below.) According to eyewitnesses, police and security forces
opened fire on an unarmed crowd of hundreds to halt the demonstration,without
first allowing sufficient time for those gathered to disperse. The Ministry of Internal
Affairs claimed that demonstrators initiated the violence by throwing stones,
and originally said that no charges would be brought against the officers. The use
of live ammunition on unarmed civilians was explained as being due to a lack of
supply of rubber bullets.
Parliament introduced a bill that would amnesty those responsible for the violence
in Aksy, including officers who opened fire on demonstrators. In August,
Akaev sent the bill back to parliament for revision. Following domestic and international
pressure for accountability, a case was eventually opened. The trial of six
police officers and local administrators accused of abuse of power for their role in
the March Aksy incident began September 30 but was postponed the same day.Relatives
and supporters of the policemen staged large-scale protest rallies demanding
the defendants’ acquittal and that the court instead try the officials who gave the
order to fire on the protesters.The hearing was repeatedly delayed until October 22,
when a judge remanded the case for further investigation.
High-level government officials who supervised the forces—including the minister
of internal affairs and the National Security Service (SNB) chief—were promoted
to posts in the presidential administration following the shootings.
Persecution of Akaev’s political rivals continued. As of November, the government
failed to release Feliks Kulov, former vice-president of Kyrgyzstan who was
excluded from running against Akaev in the 2000 elections.He had been sentenced
in 2001 to seven years in prison on politically motivated charges of abuse of office.
In May 2002 he was convicted on additional charges of embezzlement and his sentence
increased to ten years. On October 11, an appeals court in Bishkek upheld the
sentence.Kulov’s imprisonment continued to generate public outrage and international
protest in 2002, as did the arrest in January 2002 of Azimbek Beknazarov.The
charges against Beknazarov stemmed from his alleged failure to investigate a murder
in 1995, when he worked as a prosecutor in Jalal Abad province. Opposition
activists believed his arrest was motivated by the government’s interest in silencing
Beknazarov’s criticism of the decision to cede to China land that had been the subject
of contention between the two states for years.
After the demonstrations in Jalal Abad province, Beknazarov was released from
custody and, on May 24, a court handed down a one-year suspended sentence and
stripped him of his seat in parliament. In June, an appeals court upheld the conviction
but annulled the sentence, restoring his parliamentary mandate. Upon his
release, Beknazarov reportedly stated that police had beaten him in custody and
that his earlier denial of ill-treatment on national television had been coerced by
security officials.
Police forcibly dispersed numerous protests in the capital,Bishkek, and detained
peaceful demonstrators, including rights defenders and journalists observing the
gatherings.Dozens of protestors were given short jail terms or forced to pay fines.
In a strike against media freedoms, in January Akaev issued Decree 20,which set
out a series of bureaucratic obstacles to independent press and publishing. It was
annulled on May 27, after an international outcry.While it was in effect, the decree
required that all printing equipment, broadly defined to include even copy
machines, be registered with the state and strictly monitored by state agencies.
The Kyrgyz government continued to make use of criminal libel laws and other
politically motivated criminal charges to punish journalists for criticism of government
policies or officials. In June, the Supreme Court upheld a 2001 verdict sentencing
television journalist Samagan Orozaliev and his driver to nine and eight
years in prison respectively on hotly contested charges of extortion and illegal
weapons possession. Orozaliev had been investigating local corruption for a documentary
film at the time of his arrest in 2001.
In May 2002 authorities also briefly detained Zharkyn Temerbaeva, a reporter
for Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) just prior to a planned protest she
had come to observe. According to a report by PEN International, government
authorities opened a criminal case against poet Asanbai Jusupbekov on February
21 for “spreading false information” for informing RFE/RL, after visiting Azimbek
Beknazarov in detention, that the latter had been beaten in custody. PEN reported
that Jusupbekov had gone into hiding.
The government intensified efforts to eliminate Muslim groups whose religious
practices fell outside narrow state controls.Decree 20 appeared to be aimed also at
restricting the exchange of information by members of such groups. The decree’s
preamble stated that it was intended “to prevent subversive ideological and propagandizing
activities by various extremist religious centers and [to prevent] . . . their
informational impact . . . .” To this end, the decree called on certain state agencies
to regulate the number of religious groups and to counter the “unlawful activities
of various religious movements.”
Police arrested and harassed dozens of independent Muslims, targeting in particular
members of Hizb ut-Tahrir (Party of Liberation), a non-violent Islamic
group that seeks to establish a Caliphate, or Islamic state, in Central Asia. The
majority were charged under legal provisions prohibiting incitement of racial, ethnic
or religious enmity and sentenced to several years in prison. On July 4,Abdulla
Abduraulov and Shakat Islambaev, who had been detained for distributing Hizb
ut-Tahrir leaflets in Osh province,were convicted on such charges and sentenced to
five years in prison.
Authorities also conducted numerous search-and-seizure operations, during
which they confiscated the group’s books, brochures and leaflets, and audio- and
videocassettes.During one search in early February in Osh province,police claimed
to find a cache of weapons in the home of a Hizb ut-Tahrir member Adkham
Baltabaev, who was later released and fined 10,000 som (U.S.$208). The weapons
possession charge was presumably dropped.
In early September SNB chief Kalyk Imankulov made several unfounded statements
attempting to link the Jalal Abad protests to the work of Hizb ut-Tahrir
activists and accused the organization of destabilizing the country.He also claimed
that the SNB had recently prevented a series of “terrorist acts” by confiscating a
cache of weapons it allegedly found in a “hiding place” along with Hizb ut-Tahrir leaflets. There were no known cases under investigation on these charges as of
October 2002.
The government of Kyrgyzstan also continued to pursue its relentless campaign
against the country’s Uighur minority. Uighur activists and local rights groups
accused the Kyrgyz government of conducting a baseless smear campaign to brand
Uighurs “terrorists” and “extremists.”
In past years, Kyrgyz authorities charged several groups of Uighur men with
responsibility for violent acts, including a 1998 bus bombing. In an unusual twist,
in late 2001 Kyrgyz authorities charged that an Uzbek man was in league with
Uighur separatists when he allegedly shot to death a businessman prominent in
Kyrgyzstan’s Uighur community. The Uzbek, Otabek Akhadov, was sentenced to
death and three other men were sentenced to prison terms in what rights groups
believed was a politically motivated case. In May 2002, two citizens of China were
arrested for the same crime and handed over to Chinese authorities for prosecution
in China.
Uighur separatists were initially blamed for the shooting deaths of an official
from the Chinese embassy in Bishkek and his driver in June. At least one Uighur
with Kyrgyz citizenship was briefly detained following the incident. In July, Kyrgyz
authorities arrested and charged two Uighur men with the crime, but said they
found it was in fact not political but the consequence of a commercial dispute.
The government of Kyrgyzstan took some steps to counter the trafficking of
humans abroad. A government council on trafficking met for the first time in July.
However, local press reports indicated that trafficking and specifically the use of
companies registered in Kyrgyzstan as fronts for trafficking remained serious problems
in 2002.
Following a June 2001 decree on mine clearance and mine awareness, the Kyrgyz
Ministry of Emergency Situations began conducting mine awareness programs
among high-risk populations in affected areas.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
State agents took an aggressive stance against rights defenders, subjecting them
to harassment, intimidating surveillance, and arbitrary arrest and detention.
In January 2002, police searched the home of Bakhodir Akhmedov, deputy
director of the Committee for the Rights of Muslims, and arrested him on charges
that he had sixteen bullets in his oven. Akhmedov’s work, based in Jalal Abad
province, focused primarily on defense of ethnic Uzbeks and non-violent independent-
minded Muslims, a particularly unpopular group in Kyrgyzstan’s current
political climate. In the months that followed his arrest, as the government intensified
its campaign to arrest members of such groups, the charges against Akhmedov
became increasingly outrageous. According to Russian rights group Memorial, in
August, when state prosecutors were faced with a deadline to file charges against
Akhmedov, they charged him with membership in the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, a militant group that had invaded Kyrgyz and Uzbek territory in years
past.Akhmedov’s lawyer reported that the only support for the new allegations was the testimony of ex-convicts from Uzbekistan. As of this writing, Akhmedov
remained in custody awaiting trial.
Tursunbek Akunov, chair of the Human Rights Movement of Kyrgyzstan, was
reportedly a particular target of police harassment during the Aksy protests in
March, when police grabbed him from the crowd of demonstrators. Shortly after
the shootings, the minister of internal affairs publicly blamed Akunov for the
deaths of protestors.
Police again detained Akunov when they broke up a May 2002 protest outside
parliament. Other defenders detained in that incident included Ramazan Dyryldaev,
chair of the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), and Alexander
Fomenko, Mamasadyk Jakyshev, and Kachkyn Bulatov, also of the KCHR. Dyryldaev
also reported in September that he was under intensive and intimidating surveillance
by authorities.
Among seven civilians charged in relation to the holding of the Aksy demonstrations
was Kadyrkul Omurbekov,who had been working to defend the rights of
victims and their relatives. After twelve days in custody, Omurbekov was released
on September 19, pursuant to a government agreement to drop all charges against
the demonstrators and their advocates.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Several Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) seminars
and conferences took place in Bishkek. A conference on freedom of belief and
expression held February 15-16 focused on the need for greater dialogue between
authorities and religious confessions in Central Asia, and for interfaith tolerance as
a means to maintain stability.
OSCE leaders played a positive role by advocating increased dialogue between
the Kyrgyz government and political opposition.During his visit to the country in
May, Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) Director
Ambassador Gérard Stoudmann called on the Kyrgyz leadership to promote tolerance
and build public confidence. The OSCE chairman-in-office also traveled to
Kyrgyzstan in July for talks with President Akaev as well as meetings with civil society
groups, including independent media outlets, human rights groups, and the
leaders of opposition parties.
European Union
The E.U.-Kyrgyzstan Cooperation Council met in July to discuss implementation
of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA).An E.U. statement following
the meeting did not indicate whether the E.U. had directly challenged
Kyrgyzstan on its rights record. It noted only that respect for human rights was a
necessary condition for cooperation and that freedom of expression was among the
factors of democracy, and “took note of the measures taken by the Government of
Kyrgyzstan in the wake of the events in Aksy.”
United States
The U.S.-Kyrgyz relationship changed significantly in late 2001 and 2002 as Kyrgyzstan
agreed to host about one thousand U.S. troops—along with one thousand
troops from other countries—at Manas airbase to facilitate military operations in
Afghanistan.Now an important U.S. ally,Kyrgyzstan reportedly received U.S.$49.9
million in assistance in 2002, including $12 million for security programs, none of
it tied to progress on human rights.The U.S. continued to provide Kyrgyzstan with
non-lethal equipment and military training, and as the year progressed, security
concerns dominated its relationship with Kyrgyzstan.
At the same time, U.S. policy-makers criticized Kyrgyzstan’s backsliding on
human rights, calling it, in the words of U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
Lynn Pascoe, a country that “retreated from its early promise.” When President
Akaev visited Washington,U.S.officials reportedly told him privately that his cooperation
against terrorism did not give him a green light to undermine democracy.
The joint statement issued at the close of Akaev’s visit said that the two countries
“reaffirm”their “mutual commitment”to promote human rights.At the same time,
the U.S. failed to insist that Kyrgyzstan show tangible progress, such as the release
of Feliks Kulov, prior to the visit, and reportedly failed to ask for specific human
rights improvements during meetings between Akaev and President George W.
Bush.
The United States also provided funds for the establishment of a printing press
in Kyrgyzstan designed to help the country’s independent media resist government
harassment. As of November, however, the Kyrgyz government had refused to
authorize the printing press.
China
Kyrgyzstan’s relations with China deeply affected the domestic political situation.
In particular, the Kyrgyz government’s controversial decision to cede a three
hundred-square-mile strip of land to China sparked objection from parliamentarians
and became a focal issue for mass protests across the country.China’s influence
with Kyrgyz authorities was particularly apparent in the Kyrgyz government’s policy
toward Uighurs. China reportedly encouraged Kyrgyz officials to use a firm
hand with the Uighur minority and to pursue a series of arrests to quash any manifestation
of Uighur separatism or ambitions for self-determination in China’s Xinjiang
province.
China and Kyrgyzstan undertook counter-terrorism training exercises along
their border on October 1 under the auspices of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(the joint security group previously known as the Shanghai Five).
MACEDONIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Implementation of the August 2001 Framework Agreement for Peace (known as
the Ohrid Agreement) brought Macedonia considerable change, including an
amnesty for the insurgents, emergence of new political parties, and general elections
that replaced the government of Prime Minister Ljubco Georgievski.Reforms
required by the peace agreement began in earnest only in late 2001 with Parliament’s
approval of constitutional amendments recognizing Albanian as an official
language and guaranteeing proportional access for ethnic minorities to public sector
jobs, including in the police. Parliament adopted a further set of reforms giving
ethnic Albanians and other minorities the right to use their own languages in state
institutions.However, prior to its departure from office, doubts about the commitment
of Georgievski’s government to the Ohrid process affected overall stability for
much of 2002, and the government’s record was marred by its assaults on press freedom,
harassment of human rights organizations, impunity for abuses committed
during the conflict, and evidence of widespread corruption.
Although generally declining during the year, there was an upsurge in inter-ethnic
and political violence and intimidation in the weeks preceding the mid-September
2002 general elections, underscoring the fragility of the peace deal. The
elections took place with few incidents, however, and resulted in the “Together for
Macedonia” coalition ousting the ruling parties. Led by the Social Democratic
Union’s Branko Crvenkovski, the coalition took 40.4 percent of the national vote,
while the recently established Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), led by former
Albanian rebel leader Ali Ahmeti,won the bulk of the ethnic Albanian vote. In
early November, Parliament approved the new multiethnic government, headed by
Crvenkovski and including five DUI cabinet members.
Mutual distrust still permeated relations in some communities, strained further
by several isolated but serious attacks. Shootings, bombings, and kidnappings took
place during the year, in particular in the northwest. One of the more serious incidents
occurred in late August, when ethnic Albanian extremists kidnapped seven
people, demanding the release of three suspects in the killing of two policemen that
same week. Due to intervention by international mediators, all seven abductees
were freed within a few days.
Macedonia’s record on accountability for rights abuses remained poor,with the
Georgievski government failing to address impunity for abuses committed during
the 2001 conflict. The authorities flatly rejected the possibility that members of the
security forces could be tried for serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Meanwhile, in March, Parliament passed an amnesty law that covered all
“criminal acts related to the 2001 conflict,” including those committed by combatants
of the ethnic Albanian insurgent group, the National Liberation Army (NLA). 
Most ethnic Albanians detained or convicted on charges related to the conflict were either pardoned by President Boris Trajkovski or released under the amnesty. The
international community gave strong support to the amnesty, which they saw as
important for inter-ethnic peace and reconciliation. However, the law barred
domestic courts from trying war crimes committed during the conflict, and therefore
appeared to violate Macedonia’s obligations under the Geneva Conventions.
Human rights groups argued that the law’s prohibition on domestic trials would
ensure impunity for many serious violations, since the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) would be able to pursue only a few high
profile cases.
Following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks against the United States, the
Macedonian government repeatedly used anti-terrorist rhetoric, invented threats
to score political points, and raised the specter of Islamic fundamentalism among
Macedonia’s Albanians. After police shot and killed seven foreign men on the outskirts
of Skopje in March, the government cast the incident as a thwarted “terrorist
attack”on Western embassies in the capital.The Ministry of the Interior attempted
to link the men with the NLA and al-Qaeda, and called them “mujahideen” fighters.
Suspicions emerged when official versions of the incident changed, and the
ministry rejected a request for international forensic experts to examine the bodies.
The Wall Street Journal later reported that the victims were Pakistani and Indian
migrants traveling to Greece to seek employment. The government continued,
however, to label them “terrorists.”
During the year, journalists suffered threats and violent attacks, including a September
9 shooting in the Global newspaper’s printing offices and the bombing of
the newspaper editor’s car a day later.Macedonia’s first newspaper printed in both
Macedonian and Albanian, Global had reported on corruption and incompetence
among government officials. No one was injured in either attack, which editor
Ljupco Palevski attributed to members of the Democratic Party of Albanians, an
allegation that was denied by a party spokesman. Also in September, the Ministry
of the Interior filed criminal libel charges against reporter Marjan Djurovski of
Start magazine, which had published an article claiming the government might
start a war in order to delay elections. Earlier that month, Interior Minister Ljube
Boskovski had threatened to detain any editors for “spreading western scenarios in
order to destroy the government.” Other journalists were physically attacked in
what they believed to be attempts to suppress their investigations into shady government
practices. One of the most serious incidents took place in late September
when persons suspected of being members of the “Lions,” a special police force,
attacked journalist Zoran Bozinovski late at night in the Tumba radio station.Bozinovski
sustained a concussion, lacerations to the head, and several broken fingers.
One person was subsequently arrested for his part in the attack. Investigation of the
perpetrators was ongoing at the time of writing.
Police continued to perpetrate racially motivated abuses against Roma with
impunity, and there were several reports of violent attacks against Roma by nonstate
actors. Discrimination against Roma in various fields of public life remained
widespread. Refugee Roma from Kosovo were particularly vulnerable to abuse.
The government took steps against trafficking in human beings by passing a law
criminalizing trafficking and signing an agreement with the International Organization for Migration (IOM) for the pre-screening of female undocumented
migrants to identify victims of trafficking. The Ministry of the Interior opened a
shelter for trafficked women and girls,which reportedly provided good accommodation
but no information to the women on their legal rights. In addition, the shelter
received only those willing to return to their country of origin. Those who did
not participate in the IOM program were liable to deportation and renewed exposure
to the trafficking cycle.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The Macedonian Helsinki Committee (MHC) and other organizations became
targets of government-orchestrated intimidation campaigns. The publication of
MHC’s 2001 annual report, which included accounts of violations by the Macedonian
police, triggered accusations of treason and lack of patriotism by the government-
controlled media. A statement from the Ministry of the Interior labeled
Mirjana Najcevska, the MHC chairperson,“state enemy no.1” and “anti-Macedonian.”
In September,Najcevska was also verbally attacked by Minister of the Interior
Boskovski following an MHC statement expressing doubts about the political
impartiality of the police.Boskovski launched a similar smear campaign against the
Brussels-based International Crisis Group and the author of its report on official
corruption in Macedonia.
The Civil Society Resource Center (CSRC) provided free legal representation to
150 asylum seekers, including in three cases before the European Court of Human
Rights. It also provided legal aid to victims of torture, police abuse, and other
human rights violations. A network of nongovernmental organizations coordinated
by the CSRC worked with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to find solutions to the situation of thousands of former
Yugoslav citizens (including many ethnic Albanians) who had not been granted
Macedonian citizenship after independence, despite their established residence in
the country.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The international community continued to monitor closely and react to threats
to peace and stability in Macedonia. Unfortunately, considering only short-term
security, it repeatedly sacrificed justice and accountability for the serious crimes
committed by both sides in the armed conflict. The international community
should have supported and monitored fair domestic war crimes trials in Macedonia,
as a complement to international justice before the ICTY.
United Nations
In late 2001, the ICTY initiated two separate war crimes investigations into the
Macedonian conflict and in 2002 opened three new investigations. The ICTY had
not issued any public indictments as of this writing.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) supported
reforms required by the Ohrid Agreement. The organization trained a multiethnic
police force: as of mid-year, over six hundred police cadets had completed basic
training under the program. The OSCE’s Skopje mission was reportedly taking
steps to enhance its limited human rights monitoring capacity. In the largest election
observation mission ever deployed in Europe, the OSCE sent approximately
eight hundred international observers to Macedonia for the September 15 elections.
The observers judged the elections to be largely free and fair.
Council of Europe
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) visited Macedonia in July
to assess the treatment of persons detained by law enforcement agencies. The
country also remained subject to the Parliamentary Assembly’s post-monitoring
dialogue and a delegation of parliamentarians visited the country ahead of the September
elections. In contrast to the majority of international bodies, the Council of
Europe expressed reservations about the amnesty law, noting that an amnesty preventing
domestic prosecutions for violations of international humanitarian law
would be counter-productive.As of this writing, the Macedonian government was
almost four years overdue in submitting its initial report under the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.
European Union
The E.U. was supportive of the reform process but expressed concern at the preelection
violence. The E.U. warned the Macedonian government that the increased
violence cast doubts on Macedonia’s ability to form closer ties with the E.U. and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). A Û530,000 (U.S.$520,000) grant
from the European Commission supported a national census sought particularly
by ethnic Albanian political leaders, who claimed government figures understated
the real size of their community. Resolving this long-standing controversy was a
critical element of the Ohrid Agreement, providing for the proportional representation
of minorities in public administration and other areas of public life. Disagreements
between Greece and Turkey continued to delay the establishment of the
E.U.’s European Rapid Reaction Force (ERRF) and thus postponed the ERRF taking
over the Macedonian mission from NATO. An April report on Macedonia’s
implementation of its commitments under the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the E.U. listed several human rights concerns. Among “key areas
needing attention in the next twelve months,” the report identified improved
implementation of the Ohrid Agreement, including the census; stronger legal and
constitutional guarantees on free expression; intensified police training in human
rights; and promotion of civil society.
United States
The U.S. government supported the reforms enacted pursuant to the Ohrid
Agreement, particularly the return of multiethnic police to former conflict areas
and the passing of a new local government law. The U.S. also resumed its bilateral
multiethnic police training program in the country. In the aftermath of September
11, the U.S. special envoy to Macedonia warned the authorities not to exploit international
anti-terrorism efforts in order to renege on their Ohrid commitments.
The U.S. State Department’s 2002 trafficking in persons report moved the country
from a Tier Two standing to Tier One,denoting general compliance with minimum
standards for the elimination of trafficking.
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Russia’s new criminal procedure code entered into force in 2002, marking a fundamental
break with the Soviet legacy in due process rights. But serious human
rights problems eclipsed this important achievement. Federal forces continued to
brutalize civilians in the ongoing armed conflict in Chechnya, now in its fourth
year. In late October, Chechen rebel fighters took more than seven hundred people
hostage at a Moscow theater, demanding the withdrawal of Russian troops from
Chechnya. Three days later, Russian special forces liberated over six hundred
hostages in a raid that resulted in the deaths of 128 hostages and about fifty hostage
takers.
Freedom of expression came under attack, with the government undermining
the independent media and the security services persecuting journalists and scientists.
State authorities did little to address racist assaults, and in some areas regional
authorities led attacks on ethnic minorities. The government also failed to make
any advances in addressing police torture and endemic abuses in the armed forces.
Little changed in the dynamics of the Chechnya conflict, with the Russian government
insisting it was winding down but media reporting an average of twentyfive
Russian soldiers killed each week. Chechen rebel forces assassinated dozens of
local civil servants and religious leaders for their cooperation with the Russian government,
and in numerous sweep operations Russian troops committed serious
human rights violations. In a worrying departure from earlier years, the Russian
authorities pressured several thousand internally displaced Chechens to return
home, sparking fears that up to one hundred thousand remaining internally displaced
persons (IDPs) would soon face the same fate.
New rounds of Russian sweep operations affected central and eastern Chechnya
in late 2001 and early 2002, with some villages targeted repeatedly over several
months. During these operations, Russian troops detained numerous men, often arbitrarily, and looted civilian homes. Detainees routinely faced ill-treatment and
torture, and many subsequently “disappeared.”
The operation in Starye Atagi in early March was particularly notorious. Russian
forces detained dozens of men and drove them off in military vehicles with
obscured number plates; ten of the detainees subsequently “disappeared.”While
the sweep was ongoing, villagers discovered seven burned corpses. Investigators’
failure to conduct a full forensic examination of these bodies left relatives of the ten
“disappeared” not knowing whether their family members were among them.
In response to renewed international criticism, on March 27 the commander of
the United Group of Forces in Chechnya issued an order instructing soldiers to
identify themselves when entering houses on sweep operations, and requiring military
vehicles to have clearly marked identification numbers. The order also said
that local officials must be present during sweep operations to ensure that they
were conducted properly.This was meant to provide better protection for civilians
during sweep operations, but during subsequent such operations commanders
made no attempts to enforce it. During an April 11-15 sweep in Alkhan-Kala,
Russian troops denied repeated requests from the head of the village administration
to observe the operation. According to the Russian human rights group
Memorial, troops detained, tortured, and then released at least fifteen men. The
next day, officials pressured the head of the Alkhan-Kala administration into signing
a statement that the operation had been conducted without violations.
Another day later, the soldiers returned to search for the fifteen people they had
detained earlier: They extrajudicially executed two of the men on the spot; the
others went into hiding.
In March and April, five women told Human Rights Watch about sexual violence
they suffered during military operations. Three of the women attempted to
report the assaults to the authorities, only to have local police and prosecutors
refuse to investigate their complaints.
Russian troops detained a Chechen applicant to the European Court of Human
Rights (ECHR), who then “disappeared.” On June 2, about thirty soldiers searched
the home of Said-Magomed Imakaev in Novye Atagi and detained him. Imakaev’s
wife immediately started a search, but the authorities denied ever detaining him.
The “disappearance”happened four months after Imakaev and his wife had filed an
application with the ECHR regarding the “disappearance” of their son, Said-Khussein,
in 2000.
The Russian government continued to resist establishing a meaningful
accountability process for abuses committed against civilians in Chechnya, and
the majority of investigations into such abuses remained suspended. In an
unprecedented disclosure about how such investigations are conducted, the Russian
government informed the ECHR of steps taken to investigate the “disappearance”
of Said-Khussein Imakaev. Investigators questioned two individuals, one of
whom was his mother, and wrote three letters to police and security officials
requesting information about the case.When the latter replied that they had no
information, officials suspended the investigation. The procuracy’s work on this
case substantiated fears that its other investigations into “disappearances” were
equally superficial.
The only trial of a high-ranking officer, Yuri Budanov, dragged on throughout
the year. Budanov was charged with the April 2000 murder of Kheda Kungaeva, an
eighteen-year-old Chechen woman. In July, prosecutors asked the court to drop
murder charges against Budanov, citing a finding by a forensic psychiatrist that
Budanov had been temporarily insane at the time of the murder.The court ordered
a new psychiatric examination, and the trial resumed in October.
In July, local officials cut off gas, electricity, and water supplies at two IDP camps
in Znamenskoe,Chechnya, and took down the tents.The IDPs were told they could
resettle in temporary facilities in Grozny and other cities,many of which at the time
were uninhabitable. After the resignation as president of Ingushetia of Ruslan
Aushev, who had championed the rights of the internally displaced, security conditions
for them in Ingushetia worsened. Police in Ingushetia started detaining
IDPs on suspicion of rebel collaboration, and several of them subsequently “disappeared.”
In June, authorities cut off electricity, gas, and rations in smaller settlements
for IDPs in Ingushetia in an attempt to pressure them to return to Chechnya.
In September, officials warned they would close the Aki-Yurt camp by October 31,
giving the two thousand IDPs living there the option of either living in uninhabitable
shelters in Ingushetia, or returning to Chechnya.
Chechen rebels staged a mass hostage taking at a Moscow theater in October,
threatening to kill all seven hundred hostages if Russia refused to withdraw its
troops from Chechnya. In the three days before Russian special forces launched
their rescue operation, the rebels killed several hostages. In planning and executing
the rescue raid,Russia’s leadership did not ensure adequate medical care to released
hostages, leading many to believe that some of the 128 hostage deaths could have
been prevented.
Rebel fighters were also thought to be responsible for dozens of assassinations of
civil servants and others who cooperated with the Moscow-appointed administration
of Chechnya.Mines laid by rebel fighters on roads claimed the lives of federal
soldiers and also of numerous civilians.
Despite repeated government statements in support of a free press in Russia,
independent media continued to face significant pressure, which limited ordinary
Russians’ access to information. Several critical independent media outlets faced
libel suits and financial and legal challenges over ownership in which the federal
government denied playing a role. A number of journalists were murdered or otherwise
physically attacked.
In late 2001, a minority shareholder of TV-6, an opposition-minded national
television station owned by exiled industrial magnate Boris Berezovskii, filed suit
to liquidate the television station’s parent company.A Moscow court ruled in favor
of the plaintiff, and by the end of January TV-6 went off the air. The shareholder
was LUKOIL-Garant, a major Russian oil company partially owned by the Russian
government. A year earlier, Gazprom, another partially government-owned company,
had used its stake in the popular independent television station NTV to force
a change of its editorial staff.Many of NTV’s journalists had subsequently moved
to TV-6.
Later in the year,TV-6 returned to the airwaves after it won a new license.Media
observers, however, pointed out that in order to get the license TV-6 had entered into an alliance with establishment politicians that could threaten the station’s
independence and objectivity.
Two libel suits threatened the survival of Novaia Gazeta, a twice-weekly newspaper
known for its aggressive investigative journalism. The newspaper published
a disclaimer regarding the disputed articles to avoid paying U.S.$1.5 million in
damages, which would have forced it to close. One of the articles implied that a
judge was corrupt; the other involved a bank,which claimed it lost a lucrative business
deal as a result.
According to the Glasnost Defense Foundation, a press watchdog, fifteen journalists
had been murdered, and sixty-eight had survived violent attacks, as of late
September; in the vast majority of cases, the circumstances surrounding the attacks
were unclear.The organization also estimated that at least several small local papers
had to close because of new burdensome tax regulations or their inability to pay
damages awarded in libel suits.
Several journalists and scientists remained in custody, charged by the Federal
Security Service (FSB) with espionage. The charges were based on secret regulations
and related to work the accused had done with open sources. In a worrying
new development, the Supreme Court in two instances ruled in favor of the FSB
and failed to protect the rights of the defendants.
In December 2001, a Vladivostok military court sentenced military journalist
Grigorii Pasko to four years in a maximum security prison for espionage.The court
had thrown out nine of the ten charges,but found Pasko guilty of intending to hand
the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun handwritten notes he had taken at a closed
meeting at the headquarters of the Far East Fleet in 1997. On appeal,Pasko’s lawyers
argued that their client was convicted on the basis of secret regulations, and that
investigators had failed to provide any evidence of the alleged intent. In June, the
Supreme Court upheld the conviction. In previous years, Pasko had published articles
on nuclear waste dumping and other controversial issues.
Igor Sutiagin, an arms researcher for the USA and Canada Institute, remained in
custody throughout the year. In December 2001, the Kaluga Province Court found
that the FSB’s charges against him were not specific and that Sutiagin had thus been
deprived of his “constitutional right to defend himself,” but instead of acquitting
Sutiagin the court remanded the case to the FSB for further investigation. The FSB
had arrested Sutiagin in October 2001 and charged him with eight counts of espionage.
Sutiagin maintained he used only open sources in his work.
In 2001, the FSB charged Valentin Danilov, a physicist from Krasnoyarsk university,
with espionage for allegedly giving documents divulging state secrets to a
Chinese company. Danilov’s lawyers and colleagues maintained that the documents
had been declassified ten years previously and that the FSB’s charges were
based on secret regulations. In September 2002, Danilov was released from custody
due to a serious heart condition, but the charges against him remained.
In September 2001, a group of attorneys appealed to the Supreme Court to challenge
one of the secret decrees that the FSB has used in several groundless espionage
cases. In March 2002, the court struck down the decree as unconstitutional, but in
May the Supreme Court’s presidium reinstated it.
Severe abuses remained endemic in Russia’s armed forces, as illustrated by thousands of complaints conscripts sent to soldiers’ mothers organizations.While the
government announced plans for a long-term, radical overhaul of the military, it
failed to take steps to address current abuses.
Throughout the armed forces, second-year conscripts humiliated, ill-treated,
and sometimes tortured first-year conscripts through violent hazing. Because officers
tolerated hazing and other abuses, throughout the year hundreds—if not
thousands—of conscripts with nowhere to turn for redress fled their units to
escape harm.In a typical case, soldiers at a base near St.Petersburg forced nineteenyear-
old Aleksei Dryganov to beg for money and wait on them, and beat him when
he refused. Dryganov suffered a head injury when an older soldier hit him with a
fire extinguisher.After attempting suicide, he fled the base.
In many units, conscripts were systematically undernourished. Fed mainly on
watery cabbage soup and porridge, many conscripts received meat, fresh vegetables,
or fruit during their service only if sent by their families.Frequently, conscripts
were given too little time to eat and could not finish meals. Few conscripts received
adequate medical care in their units.Many had problems gaining access to military
doctors, and care was often inadequate and not timely. Numerous conscripts told
Human Rights Watch that fellow soldiers threatened them with abuse if they
sought medical help. Conscripts being treated in sick bays and military hospitals
were not spared from hazing.
As reports of abuses in the armed forces made many young men wary of performing
military service, draft boards in Moscow encountered difficulties meeting
conscription quotas. As a remedy, throughout the year they detained perceived
draft dodgers and forcibly brought them to military recruitment offices. Draft
boards sent them on to military units on the day of detention, effectively stripping
them of their right to appeal the conscription.
In July,Russia adopted a law regulating conscientious objection.Delayed in parliament
for years, the law set out a three-and-a-half-year period of alternative service,
and a three-year period for those willing to perform alternative service on
military bases; conscripted military service is for two years.The law was set to enter
into force on January 1, 2004.
In December 2001,President Vladimir Putin signed into law a new criminal procedure
code that had been stalled in parliament since the mid-1990s. The code,
which entered into force on July 1, transferred from the procuracy to the courts
authority to issue arrest and search warrants,which many expected would result in
better protection against arbitrary detention. Although the code initially deferred
this provision’s entry into force until 2004, the Constitutional Court ruled that it
had to be implemented immediately.
The new code also eliminated provisions that had allowed courts to remand
criminal cases to the procuracy for additional investigation,which often resulted in
defendants spending years in pre-trial detention. In an important step toward ending
torture practices, the new code stipulated that testimony obtained during pretrial
investigation in the absence of defense counsel is not admissible evidence if not
confirmed in court. The code further gave defense lawyers the right to independently
collect evidence, and envisaged the introduction of jury trials across Russia
from January 1, 2003.
However, certain provisions of the new code gave rise to concern. Detainees
must still obtain a referral from an investigator or judge for a forensic medical
examination—a requirement that complicates securing medical evidence of police
torture. Given the prevalence of police torture, the introduction of a simplified
form of plea bargaining raised fears that police and prosecutors would abuse it by
compelling detainees to sign confessions, or by promising release from appalling
conditions in pre-trial detention.
The government again failed to adopt a comprehensive plan to address police
torture. It also blocked attempts by several lawmakers to define torture as a distinct
crime in the criminal code, and to introduce a draft law allowing for unannounced
inspections of detention facilities by independent monitors. A coalition of Russian
nongovernmental organizations stated in a May submission to the United Nations
(U.N.) Committee against Torture that they continued to receive numerous credible
complaints about torture and ill-treatment at police precincts, and argued that
the courts continued to rely heavily on such evidence; that the procuracy did not
duly investigate allegations of torture and prosecuted few police officers for it; and
that victims did not receive proper redress.
Prisoners’ rights groups reported that the total number of inmates in Russian
prisons and pre-trial detention facilities decreased, but that overcrowding, unsanitary
conditions, and disease epidemics remained a severe problem. The AIDS
Foundation East-West estimated that almost thirty-five thousand of Russia’s
950,000 inmates were living with HIV, a drastic rise from fifteen thousand in 2001.
The year was also marked by an explosion of skinhead attacks on ethnic minorities,
and an ugly campaign against them by the authorities in the southern region
of Krasnodar. Skinheads killed several members of ethnic minorities and beat
dozens of others in Moscow and other Russian cities. In a particularly egregious
assault in September, a group of skinheads in St. Petersburg beat an Azeri watermelon
vendor to death with iron bars. As of this writing, it was unclear what
progress police had made in the investigation. Police generally did not take adequate
steps to investigate such crimes, denying racial motivation unless presented
with strong supporting evidence such as video footage of the crime. In May, a
booby-trapped sign reading “Death to Jews”exploded near Moscow when a woman
tried to remove it. In subsequent weeks numerous similar signs were found
throughout Russia.
In Krasnodar, governor Alexander Tkachev announced a campaign against ethnic
minorities and said he would create such an intolerable atmosphere for them
that they would leave of their own initiative. The Center for Development of Democracy
and Human Rights and Memorial reported that regional officials repeatedly
threatened to deport ethnic minorities, and actively sought to strip them of income
and access to medical care and education.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
There were several attacks and cases of kidnapping of human rights defenders
and representatives of humanitarian organizations. On July 23, armed men wearing masks abducted Nina Davydovich, head of the humanitarian group Friendship,
from her car in Chechnya. On August 12, masked gunmen pulled Peter-Arjan Erkel
of Médecins sans Frontières from his car in the outskirts of Makhachkala, Dagestan,
and took him away. As of October 2002, the fate and whereabouts of both aid
workers were unknown. On September 1, a group of ten Ingush policemen in
Karabulak, Ingushetia, assaulted Imran Ezhiev, chair of the Russia-Chechnya
Friendship Society. Luiza Betergerieva, an activist with the same group, was killed
at a checkpoint near Argun on December 13, 2001 when Russian forces opened fire
on her vehicle.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In January, U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Ruud Lubbers visited
Ingushetia to inspect living conditions of internally displaced Chechens. Following
his trip, he called on the Russian government to improve security inside Chechnya
by ending sweep operations and by cutting the number of roadblocks. He also
called on the Russian government to start peace talks with the Chechen leader,
Aslan Maskhadov.
That same month, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women criticized Russia for failing to conduct proper investigations into,
or hold perpetrators accountable for, rape and other sexual violence against women
in the armed conflict in Chechnya. The committee urged Russia to investigate and
punish sexual violence against women and girls in custody, adopt human rights
education programs for the armed forces, and implement swift disciplinary measures
for military and law enforcement personnel.
For the first time in three sessions,Russia escaped formal criticism of its conduct
in Chechnya at the U.N.Commission on Human Rights. A resolution, brought to a
vote when European Union-led negotiations about a consensus-based chairman’s
statement failed, was narrowly defeated.
The Committee against Torture considered Russia’s third period report in May.
It expressed deep concern over “numerous and consistent allegations of widespread
torture …by law enforcement personnel,” reports of widespread hazing and other
forms of torture and ill-treatment in the armed forces, a “persistent pattern of
impunity” for torture, and reports of torture and ill-treatment in Chechnya. It recommended
a series of steps to address these problems, including incorporating the
definition of torture into domestic law.
In June, Olara Otunnu, the U.N. secretary-general’s special representative for
children and armed conflict visited Chechnya. Following his trip, he stated that
more than three thousand children had died as a result of the conflict and that
many more were falling victim to landmines.He called on both sides of the conflict
to end the use of landmines, and on Russia to observe the principle of voluntary
return of displaced persons, approximately half of whom were children. The Russian
government on several occasions canceled long-overdue visits by the special rapporteur on violence against women and the representative of the secretary-general
on internally displaced people, citing security concerns.
The Russian government again failed to invite the special rapporteurs on torture
and extrajudicial executions to visit Chechnya.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Assistance
Group continued to work in Chechnya throughout the year, receiving victims of
human rights violations at its offices in Znamenskoe and making on-site visits to
gather information about abuses. The Assistance Group filed confidential biweekly
reports to OSCE member states.
Inexplicably, in December 2001 the OSCE Permanent Council acceded to Russian
demands to change the open-ended nature of the Assistance Group’s mandate.
Set to expire December 31, 2002, as of this writing it remained unclear whether the
Assistance Group would continue to work in Chechnya beyond that date.
Council of Europe
Most Council of Europe institutions continued to monitor the situation in
Chechnya, but their efforts yielded few tangible results.
The Council of Europe’s agreement with Russia to second experts to the office
of the Russian president’s special representative for human rights in Chechnya was
extended throughout the year. However, as the position of special representative
remained vacant for months, the experts spent several months of the year at Council
of Europe headquarters in Strasbourg. An extended mandate for the experts
which the Council of Europe managed to agree on with Russia covered areas such
as cooperation in the field of education and reform of the judiciary, raising concern
that the crucial accountability component might become diluted as a result of these
changes.
The Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) continued to monitor closely the situation
in Chechnya. In January, it asked the Russian government to provide by April 10 a
detailed list of investigations into violations against civilians; toward the end of
April the Russian government provided partial statistical information of only limited
use. PACE rapporteur Lord Judd carried out several trips to the region, repeatedly
criticized Russia for continuing abuses and the lack of accountability, and
expressed concern about the forced IDP return.
Human Rights Commissioner Alvaro Gil-Robles issued a constructive report in
May which expressed concern about continuing reports of forced “disappearances”
and about the near-total lack of access to justice for those detained during sweep
operations. The report recommended that the procurator general take steps to
remedy this situation.
Various Council of Europe institutions responded to the June 2 “disappearance”
of ECHR applicant Said-Magomed Imakaev. The court immediately
requested information about the “disappearance” from the government. The secretary
general’s office raised concern about the case in a letter to the Russian authorities, and the PACE rapporteur raised it in meetings with Russian officials
in July.
The ECHR issued its first ruling in a case filed against Russia. In Burdov v. Russia,
the court found that Russia had failed to execute a domestic court ruling to pay
compensation, and awarded the applicant compensation. In a second,momentous
ruling, in Kalashnikov v. Russia the court found that conditions in pre-trial detention
may amount to degrading treatment: The conditions at issue were severe overcrowding
and an unsanitary environment in detention combined with the length
of the period of detention.
European Union
The E.U. again failed to take a strong united stance on abuses in Chechnya. Poor
preparation by the Spanish Presidency (first half of 2002) and an apparent lack of
political will in a number of member states gave the E.U. a false start at the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights. As a result, commission action on Chechnya
started far too late.When negotiations with the Russian side on a chairman’s statement
backfired and a resolution was finally introduced, the E.U. failed to make the
necessary efforts to seek support for the resolution from third countries before it
went to vote.
In August, French President Jacques Chirac, previously a strong critic of the
Chechnya war, appeared ready to mute his criticism after an informal meeting with
President Putin. Increasingly close relations between the Russian president and the
leaders of the United Kingdom, Italy, and Germany also undermined a strong joint
E.U. position on Chechnya.
United States
President Putin’s repeated attempts to justify his policies in Chechnya by casting
them as part of the U.S.-led war on terrorism presented the U.S.with a special obligation
to speak unequivocally about continuing abuses there.At times, the U.S. government
did so, but many opportunities were missed to take a strong stand, and the
U.S. increasingly allowed the war on terrorism to interfere with a consistent, principled
policy. In his final summit meeting with President Putin in 2001, President
George W. Bush stated: “I emphasized to Vladimir Putin that the war on terror is
not, and cannot be, a war on minorities. It’s important to distinguish between those
who pursue legitimate political aspirations and terrorists.”In January, State Department
spokesman Richard Boucher stressed that “massive human rights violations”
were taking place. But in subsequent meetings with Putin, Bush failed to press publicly
for an end to human rights abuses in Chechnya. In June, he described Putin as
someone “who understands the threat of terror, because he has lived through terror,”
a statement widely interpreted as an endorsement of Russia’s official view that
the war in Chechnya is primarily a fight against terrorists. The Bush administration
continued to emphasize alleged links between Chechen fighters and al-Qaeda, but
also the need for the Russian government to seek a political solution to the conflict.
The increasing tendency to show solidarity with Russia’s imputed aim of “fighting terrorism” in Chechnya, instead of stressing the essentially political nature of
the conflict, was reflected in the administration’s reluctance to allow Russia’s abusive
conduct to have any consequence either in bilateral relations or in international
fora. Nowhere was this more evident that at the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights, where, in contrast to 2001, the U.S. failed to make necessary efforts to garner
support for a resolution on Chechnya introduced by the E.U.
To its credit, the administration took a strong position on media freedoms in
Russia, raising the issue at every opportunity.During his May trip to Moscow,Bush
met with civil society and human rights leaders, stressing U.S. support for the rule
of law, a strong, independent media, and ethnic and religious tolerance.
The U.S. government ranked Russia as one of nineteen countries in the world
failing to take effective measures to combat trafficking in persons. Lacking a law on
trafficking, the Russian government did not prosecute traffickers or vigorously
investigate trafficking cases. The ranking set Russia up for a suspension of all nonhumanitarian
aid to the country in 2003 if its record did not improve.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Conscription Through Detention In Russia’s Armed Forces, 11/02
The NATO Summit and Arms Trade Controls in Central and Eastern Europe,
11/02
Briefing Paper for the United Nations Committee against Torture Regarding Torture
in the Russian Federation, 5/02
Last Seen…: Continued “Disappearances” in Chechnya, 4/02
Memorandum to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights on the
Human Rights Situation in Chechnya, 3/02
Swept Under: Torture, Forced Disappearances, And Extrajudicial Killings During
Sweep Operations In Chechnya, 2/02
TAJIKISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Tajikistan’s new role in the global campaign against terrorism drew greater
international concern to the country and created opportunities for some important
human rights reforms. But it also strengthened President Emomali
Rakhmonov’s de facto single-party rule.While the government took some positive
steps in response to international pressure, it also kept the political opposition
under tight rein.Authorities partly used the pretext of the war against terrorism to
marginalize the northern province of Sugd and to increase control over peaceful
religious believers and leaders.
Restrictions on freedom of expression eased in August when authorities granted
operating licenses to three independent radio stations based in the capital,
Dushanbe: Asia-Plus, Asia FM, and Vatan. In June, the procuracy announced that
it would drop criminal charges—including public slander of the president and
sedition—against exiled Charogi Ruz (Light of Day) editor Dodojon Atovullo.
Authorities assured international organizations and Atovullo that he would be permitted
to return safely to Dushanbe and resume publication of his newspaper,
known for its unrelenting criticism of the Rakhmonov government.
Despite these changes, the majority of severe media restrictions remained firmly
in place. The sole state-owned publishing house in Dushanbe conducted pre-publication
censorship, authorities threatened and harassed journalists following publication
of material considered critical of government policy or influential
government figures, and cumbersome licensing procedures for media outlets continued
to be enforced. In September, state television Kuliab correspondent Suhrob
Farrukhshoev was fired after publishing a freelance article on the spread of typhoid
in Kuliab, President Rakhmonov’s home region. Television management told Farrukhshoev
that they were following orders issued to them by the Kuliab local
administration. Journalists also continued to practice consistent self-censorship,
sometimes to an extreme degree. The May 31 edition of the Russian-language
Biznes i Politika, for example, appeared with a blank space when two paragraphs
reportedly critical of the work of law enforcement agents were removed. Newspaper
employees explained that they themselves had expunged the paragraphs to
avoid potential problems with law enforcement.
On October 28, three journalists working for independent television stations
SM-1 and TRK-Asia in Khujand were forcibly conscripted by local military officials
after the airing of a program that claimed that the military employs gangs to fulfill
draft quotas. The journalists were Akram Azizov and Nasim Rahimov, SM-1
employees, and TRK-Asia collaborator Yusuf Yunusov.
Sugd province was a particular target of repression. The government, citing the
war against terrorism,persecuted its opponents, subjected religious leaders to more
intense surveillance, and handed down lengthy prison sentences to members of
Hizb ut-Tahrir, an organization that advocates re-establishment of the Islamic
Caliphate, or state, by peaceful means.
On June 11, former governor of Leninabad (now Sugd) province Abdujalil
Hamidov was sentenced, along with eighteen others, to fifteen years of imprisonment
during a closed trial on charges including embezzlement and attempted
assassination of Rakhmonov.The prosecution linked some of the defendants to the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU), and the trial was the government’s latest
attempt to eliminate Hamidov’s family as a political force.Hamidov is a relative of
Abdumalik Abdullajonov, former prime minister of Tajikistan and former leader of
the northern-based opposition National Revival Movement (NRM). In exile since
the mid-1990s, Abdullajonov stands accused of masterminding an unsuccessful
1998 rebellion in Sugd; his brother, Abdugani, was unfairly convicted in 1999 on
charges of having participated in the 1998 rebellion, and another brother,
Abdulkhafiz Abdullaev, was sentenced to death in a closed 1998 trial for attempted
assassination of the president, and reportedly executed. Hamidov’s trial was conducted mostly in prison, international observers were denied access to it, and many
sources reported that, stricken with cancer,Hamidov had made a confession under
duress. Death sentences were passed on at least four of Hamidov’s co-defendants,
despite unclear charges surrounding their convictions.Diplomatic and other international
sources reported the death in detention of another of the nineteen defendants
during the trial, although official medical documentation of the cause of
death—allegedly cancer—was unavailable.
Following the lead of other Central Asian governments, Tajik officials in 2002
claimed that Hizb ut-Tahrir had previously been financed by al-Qaeda and the Taliban,
and they referred increasingly to the group as a major security threat.The government
maintained that a majority of Hizb ut-Tahrir members resided in Sugd,
where Tajikistan’s Uzbek minority is primarily based. Media and diplomatic
sources reported increased numbers of arrests of Hizb ut-Tahrir members compared
to previous years, with up to sixty arrests since the beginning of 2002. Local
monitors and journalists alleged that Hizb ut-Tahrir members had unfair trials and
were abused in detention. Trials produced sentences of up to eighteen years of
imprisonment.
More pressure was directed at Sugd in July, when during a visit there
Rakhmonov explicitly noted that three Tajik citizens detained by the United States
(U.S.) at Guantánamo Bay were Sugd residents. He subsequently criticized local
authorities for failing to curb the activities of “extremist” Islamic groups, including
the construction of unsanctioned mosques. He also accused the Islamic Renaissance
Party (IRP) of propagating “religious extremism.” Shortly afterwards, governmental
religious and Islamic councils were for the first time instructed to assess
Islamic leaders’ knowledge of Islam and of state religion laws. By October, the
authorities had shut down at least thirty-three of a reported 152 mosques in Isfara
district in Sugd, and had dismissed numerous imams allegedly on grounds of IRP
membership (the IRP enjoys significant support in Isfara district). Rakhmonov
further announced in July that the law on religion would be revised to require reregistration
of mosques.
Authorities took steps to identify and hold accountable perpetrators of political
killings, but resultant trials mostly led to death sentences. In May, eighty-two members
of the armed band of former United Tajik Opposition (UTO) field commander
Rakhmon Sanginov were brought to trial for murder, hostage taking,
banditry, and robbery. One of the group’s members, Rakhmatullo Tagoev, was on
July 22 sentenced to death during a closed court session. On March 27, four men
charged with the 2001 murder of Deputy Interior Minister Habib Sanginov were
sentenced to death, and three others to prison sentences ranging from sixteen to
twenty-five years.Human Rights Watch obtained eyewitness testimony of the torture
in detention and coerced confessions of three of those convicted, including
Kiomidin Mirzoev. In August, the Supreme Court sentenced to death Umedjon
Davlatov for the 1998 murders of local and international United Nations officials
and of Garm district chairman Sergei Davlatov in 2000; two co-defendants received
respectively sixteen and twenty years of imprisonment.
The government continued to deliver death sentences at an alarming rate, with
an average of at least five per month during the first half of 2002.Amnesty Internacrimitional
charged that death sentences were handed down in unfair and secret trials,
and executions often conducted in secrecy. Local and international organizations
gathered information on the consistent use of torture to extract testimony from
criminal suspects, in particular those charged with capital crimes.
The government maintained political control by obstructing the registration
and activities of opposition political parties,denying registration altogether, and by
refusing to register opposition election candidates. In October, the Democratic
Party of Tajikistan (DPT) announced a boycott of Sugd province by-elections after
the Central Electoral Commission denied an independent candidate, a member of
the DPT, registration on the grounds of faulty registration documents. The DPT
claimed that electoral commissions frequently registered only members of the
presidential People’s Democratic Party of Tajikistan (PDPT).When the PDPT candidate
received an overwhelming majority of the vote against the remaining IRP
candidate, the IRP rejected the results and accused local authorities of obstructing
its candidate’s campaign efforts. The newly-founded Unity Party of Tajikistan submitted
registration documents to the Ministry of Justice in April, but at this writing
was still not registered, and the Social Democratic Party also continued to be
denied registration, for a third year.
On a positive note, in July jurisdiction over penal institutions was transferred
from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Ministry of Justice. And in August, the
right to freedom of movement was enhanced when the government abolished the
exit visa requirement for travel abroad.
By September,more than 9,200 displaced Afghans who since late 2000 had been
living on the Pianj river islands on the border with Afghanistan were “returned” to
Afghanistan proper. They had endured harsh and sometimes life-threatening conditions
on the islands, after the Tajik government had denied them entry at the
frontier. Despite protests from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and diplomatic missions in Dushanbe, the Tajik authorities
forcibly repatriated nine Afghan men in August and September 2002.Eight of them
were deported on grounds of holding insufficient documentation.
In September, the Tajik government stated its intent to comply fully with its obligations
as a state party to the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty. Its noncompliance hitherto
involved failing to submit annual transparency reports and, most importantly,
acquiescing to the planting of antipersonnel mines inside Tajikistan by Russian
forces. Uzbek-laid antipersonnel mines continued to kill and injure civilians and
livestock in Tajikistan in 2002.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In March, the government established a national Human Rights Commission,
headed by Deputy Prime Minister Saidamir Zuhurov, a former minister of security.
Zuhurov’s background raised doubts about whether the commission would provide
genuine human rights protection; in September, for example, Zuhurov
asserted that Hizb ut-Tahrir, targeted for severe repression throughout the region,
represented a greater threat to the country than external invasion.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Tajikistan granted the use of airports in Dushanbe and Kuliab to the international
coalition against terrorism for military operations in Afghanistan; in
response, international aid—including to the military—grew, as did attention to
the country. The U.S. and France deployed troops to Dushanbe and to Kuliab airport,
while the United Kingdom, France, and Japan opened embassies.At the same
time, international attention to human rights problems lessened.When high-level
political leaders and donors made repeated visits to the country, they referred to
Tajikistan’s new political stability, but neglected to highlight torture and ongoing
political and religious persecution. This international policy only served to
embolden the government’s repression.
The European Commission (E.C.) Technical Assistance to the Commonwealth
of Independent States (TACIS) project resumed work in the country after a fouryear
suspension following the 1997 death of a European Union (E.U.) expatriate
employee in a hostage release operation. TACIS was to devote particular resources
to Tajikistan’s eventual ascension to the World Trade Organization.Taken together,
credits promised by the U.S., the E.U., the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development rose from U.S.$51 million
in 2001 to $322 million in 2002. Switzerland also tripled its aid to just under $9
million.
United Nations
The U.N. Office of Peace-Building (UNTOP) brought together government
officials, political parties, journalists, and others in political discussions in fiftyseven
districts and towns. The office’s human rights program included support for
national capacity building and human rights education, but human rights monitoring
continued to be excluded from the human rights officer’s brief. At the time
of writing,UNTOP was to begin police training programs. The office continued to
devote significant resources to attracting international aid for Tajikistan, including
for the reintegration of former combatants into civilian life.
In at least four cases during the year Tajikistan carried out death sentences
despite the U.N.Human Rights Committee having requested a stay of execution. In
addition to facilitating the return of more than 9,200 Afghan displaced persons to
Afghanistan, UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration facilitated
the voluntary repatriation of close to seven hundred Afghan refugees, and the
return of some 250 Tajik refugee students from Pakistan to Tajikistan
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) maintained
offices in Dushanbe, Khujand, Shaartuz, Dusti, Kurgan-Tiube, and Garm. Their
work throughout the year included human rights training for law enforcement personnel,
training on human rights monitoring, conferences on international criminal justice standards and discrimination against women, and a project on human
trafficking. The OSCE conducted limited trial monitoring of cases involving
torture.
United States
With U.S. troops deployed in Dushanbe and Kuliab in support of the counterterrorism
campaign, the U.S. consequently pledged long-term support, and provided
military and military-technical cooperation. On January 9, as a reward for
Tajikistan’s assistance in the war on terrorism, the U.S. State Department
announced the removal of arms sales restrictions imposed on Tajikistan in 1993.
The State Department said it would review requests to buy arms on a “case-by-case
basis.” Numerous high-level governmental officials paid visits to the country, but
avoided references to human rights violations in their public comments. The U.S.
appeared to minimize attention to human rights in Tajikistan, in contrast to other
Central Asian countries.The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices for 2001 gave a generally accurate account of the human rights situation,
however.
The U.S. delivered credits totaling a minimum of just over $29 million in food
aid and agricultural supplies, monies for infrastructure projects in Khatlon
province and the Rasht (formerly Garm) Valley.
International Financial Institutions
Following the delivery of aid tranches in 2001, the International Monetary Fund
in February rebuked Tajikistan for providing incorrect data to the fund on the
country’s external debt, but continued to hold discussions with the government to
increase its support to Tajikistan.The ADB gave U.S.$2.9 million for poverty reduction,
$5.3 million for earthquake disaster recovery, and $5 million for landslide
relief. In May, the E.C., in recognition of Tajikistan’s worst drought in seventy-five
years, gave Û10 million (U.S.$9.85 million) for drought assistance.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Dangerous Dealings: Changes to U.S.Military Assistance After September 11, 2/02
TURKEY
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
At last European Union (E.U.) pressure for Turkey to meet its political and
human rights criteria for membership began to produce substantial results. In February
and August, the government passed legislative packages that provided
improved access to legal counsel for police detainees, abolished the death penalty,
and permitted broadcasting and education in minority languages. The August legislation
was pushed through by the then-ruling coalition partners Democratic Left
Party and Motherland Party, but fiercely opposed by the third partner, the extreme
right-wing Nationalist Action Party, which condemned the E.U.’s demands for
change as identical to those of illegal armed organizations. The legislative changes
left serious constraints on free expression unaddressed, however, and torture continued
to be widespread.
In November, the conservative and religious Justice and Development Party
(AKP) won the general election. AKP party leader Recep Tayyip Erdog˘an was
excluded from the election and could not be appointed prime minister because he
had been stripped of political rights after serving a ten-month prison sentence
imposed for a non-violent speech made in 1997.
The state of emergency was lifted in the provinces of Tunceli and Hakkari in July,
and in the last two provinces, Diyarbakır and Þırnak, in November. The mainly
Kurdish southeast had been under martial law or state of emergency since 1978.
In August, the Turkish parliament voted to abolish the death penalty for peacetime
offences. The sentences of eighty-seven prisoners on death row were commuted
to life imprisonment. Turkey carried out its last judicial execution in 1984.
Parliament tentatively reformed laws inhibiting freedom of expression, but
courts still imprisoned those who insulted state institutions or addressed sensitive
questions about Kurdish minority rights or the role of the military or religion in
politics. Ahmet Ünlü was imprisoned on a two-and-a-half-year sentence in January
for “incitement to religious hatred” for comments he made describing the 1999
earthquake as a “heavenly warning” to a society that had departed from Islamic
principles. Kurdish villager Tayyar Taß was arrested in July for “insulting” the military
by accusing them of burning his village.He was released in September but his
trial continued.
Minority languages, particularly Kurdish, were a controversial issue. From
December 2001 onward, police detained more than a thousand school and university
students for submitting petitions calling for optional courses in Kurdish. Prosecutors
indicted hundreds of the students on charges of supporting an armed gang,
claiming the students’ campaign for Kurdish language courses was run by a new
illegal movement called Kurdistan Freedom and Democracy (KADEK), formed in
April out of the dissolved Kurdish Workers’ Party (PKK). In April,Diyarbakır State
Security Court handed down a suspended sentence of forty-five months of imprisonment to minibus driver Sulhattin Önen for repeatedly playing a cassette tape of
a song in Kurdish. The court was unswayed by the fact that the tape was legally
authorized for publication.
The August legislation lifted restrictions on minority language courses and
broadcasting, including in Kurdish. The change seemed to represent a new respect
for linguistic diversity, but the reforms were hedged with qualifications that could
block effective implementation.Kurdish still could not be taught in universities, or
broadcast by independent radio or television stations.
Restrictions on other aspects of free expression remained. Governors throughout
the country continued to ban plays, films, and exhibitions,while courts confiscated
many newspapers and scores of books for “separatism.” State educational
institutions continued to apply the ban on women wearing the headscarf for religious
reasons.Thousands of female students were denied access to high school and
university education because they wore the headscarf. Teachers and doctors were
also dismissed for wearing the headscarf on duty.
Torture and ill-treatment remained widespread in police stations and gendarmeries,
facilitated by the continued practice of holding detainees without access
to legal counsel. Those detained for common criminal offenses had a legal right to
see a lawyer throughout police custody but this was commonly denied. The provision
that those detained for offenses under the jurisdiction of state security courts
could legally be held without access to a lawyer for four days was in place until February,
when this was reduced to two days.
Even after this change, many detainees reported torture by beating, sexual violence,
death threats, hosing with cold water, and electric shocks. Blindfolding also
continued unchecked. Victims included people detained for common criminal
offenses and women, many of whom reported rape or other sexual violence. One
detainee, accused of supporting an illegal organization, reported that during four
days’ interrogation without access to legal counsel at Istanbul Police Headquarters
in March, she was blindfolded, stripped naked, sprayed with cold water through a
hose forced into her vagina, and forced to sit in excrement. In the same month,
another female detainee reported that during interrogation for her alleged links
with an illegal armed organization police officers at the Anti-Terror Branch of
Mardin Police Headquarters stripped her naked, hosed her with cold water, and
inserted a truncheon in her anus.Medical reports were consistent with her allegations
of torture.
Again, victims of torture and other human rights violations encountered many
obstacles to obtaining a remedy through Turkish courts. In January, the public
prosecutor dismissed formal complaints made by eight male prisoners that gendarmes
anally raped them with truncheons on arrival at Kandıra F-type Prison in
December 2000.According to the plaintiffs’ lawyer, the prosecutor did not question
some of the plaintiffs or consult medical reports. Several potential prosecutions
were blocked under the Law on the Prosecution of Civil Servants, permitting local
governors, even though they are not members of the judiciary, to halt prosecutions.
Courts continued to prefer to convict torturers on the less serious charge of illtreatment.
In April, Istanbul Criminal Court found two Istanbul Anti-Terror
Branch officers guilty of hanging Abdurrahim Demir by the arms and squeezing his testicles, beating him on the soles of the feet, and giving him electric shocks. The
court decided that this was merely ill-treatment. Since convictions for ill-treatment
(unlike those for torture) were covered by a conditional amnesty, the officers had
their sentences suspended.
Tension continued in the new F-type prisons,where prisoners remanded or sentenced
for offenses under state security court jurisdiction were held in one- and
three-person cells, replacing the large ward-based prisons traditional in Turkey’s
prison system. Prisoners continued to hunger-strike in protest against killings by
security forces during the original violent transfers in December 2000, the strict
regime in F-type prisons, and the restricted opportunities for association with
other prisoners. At the time of writing, fourteen hunger-strikers had died during
2002, bringing the total number to sixty-four since the 2000 transfer. Relatives and
lawyers reported that prisoners were suffering health problems associated with
small group isolation, including sensory loss, skin complaints, tinnitus, stomach
disorders, and severe mental disturbance. The Justice Ministry announced but
failed to implement a program in F-type prisons of out-of-cell activities and a
weekly period of five hours’ association.
Violence by armed illegal political organizations continued to abate, but there
were isolated reports of attacks on civilians. In June, the Workers’ and Peasants Liberation
Army of Turkey (TIKKO) reportedly abducted and killed Muharrem Hız
from Sırçalı village, Tokat province.
Most villagers forcibly displaced from their homes in the southeast during the
1990s were unable to return, despite increased stability in the region. In some cases
local governors obstructed returns, villagers were turned back by gendarmerie, or
found that neighboring paramilitary village guards had occupied their lands. The
government’s Return to Village and Rehabilitation Project moved so slowly and was
so poorly designed and funded that it offered little benefit to the displaced.
Asylum seekers arriving in Turkey were frequently denied proper protection.
Under a geographical reservation to the 1951 Refugee Convention, Turkey continued
to recognize only refugees from Europe. Non-European asylum seekers were
required to register with the police,who were then supposed to carry out an assessment
to determine whether their claim to require asylum was well-founded. The
assessment did not include the minimum safeguards required by international law
for fair refugee status determination. Only those who passed this police assessment
were referred to the offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), and those who were recognized as refugees by UNHCR then had to
await resettlement to a third country, sometimes for lengthy periods during which
many remained at risk.During 2001, the Turkish authorities reported that they had
arrested ninety-four thousand migrants who were transiting or being smuggled
across the country, at great hazard to their own lives, including many would-be asylum
seekers entering from Iran and northern Iraq and heading toward the more
secure protection afforded by Western European states. According to the United
States Committee for Refugees, many such migrants, often arrested during urban
sweeps, were summarily returned to Turkey’s neighbors, and around a hundred
clear cases of refoulement (forced return to a country where one’s life or freedom
is threatened) were documented during 2001.
The August reform legislation added Turkish criminal code provisions that
imposed heavy prison sentences for the smuggling or trafficking of persons, but
Turkey continued to lack services for victims. Turkey provided no shelter or protection
to trafficking victims, deporting all foreigners found in commercial sex
work without screening to identify trafficked persons. Turkey signed the Trafficking
Protocol supplementing the Convention Against Transnational Organized
Crime, but at this writing, the government had not ratified the protocol. Despite a
1998 law creating protection orders, domestic violence continued unabated.
Women for Women’s Human Rights, a nongovernmental organization in Turkey,
called violence against women “one of the most widespread violations of human
rights in Turkey.” Honor killings also threatened women throughout Turkey. In
March, twenty-year-old Pınar Kaçmaz died when her father and brother riddled
her with bullets in a southeastern Turkish city.According to news reports, the police
had arrested Kacmaz’s father after she had reported that he threatened her life, but
he was released pending trial.
Landmines laid by the government along the borders, and by both sides in the
conflict between the security forces and the PKK, killed eleven people, including
four children. Following Turkey’s 2001 declaration that it would join the Ottawa
Convention banning antipersonnel mines, it took important steps toward accession
but had not completed procedures by late October.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Turkish human rights defenders still faced numerous hazards in their work.
They were subjected to a hail of judicial investigations and prosecutions under the
repressive and unwieldy law on associations, as well as the Anti-Terror Law, the Law
on Demonstrations, and various articles of the criminal code.At this writing, Istanbul
Human Rights Association (HRA) members faced eighty-eight ongoing trials,
most relating to press statements protesting violations. The lawyer Osman Baydemir,
president of Diyarbakır HRA, faced thirty-one ongoing trials carrying a possible
total of nearly ninety years of imprisonment. Police and local governors
repeatedly prohibited or intervened to disperse meetings and peaceful demonstrations
by human rights organizations.
In June, Dr. Alp Ayan and Mehmet Barındık of the Izmir Treatment Center of
the Turkish Human Rights Foundation were sentenced to a year’s imprisonment
for making a press statement critical of the Justice Ministry’s handling of the F-type
prison crisis. The defendants appealed.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Several years after his first request for a visit, U.N. Representative of the Secretary-
General on Internally Displaced Persons Dr. Francis Deng, was finally permitted to visit Turkey in May. In a brief public statement in June, Dr. Deng called on
the government to formulate a clear, transparent policy on return and encouraged
the government to involve intergovernmental organizations and civil society in the
process.
The special rapporteur on extrajudicial, arbitrary, and summary executions,
Asma Jahangir, published a report on her February 2001 visit to Turkey, noting that
there were violations of the right to life even while she was in the country. The rapporteur
made inquiries into the “disappearance” of Serdar Tanıß and Ebubekir
Deniz, officials from the People’s Democracy Party (HADEP) after they had presented
themselves at the Silopi district gendarmerie in Þırnak in January 2001, and
she reported that she “did not get a sense that the civil authorities had sufficient
power to investigate the District Gendarme Commander.”
With respect to “honor” killings, the special rapporteur criticized the provisions
of the penal code reducing the sentence of the perpetrators of such crimes to a
token punishment if the court considers that there was “grave provocation.” She
noted that the longstanding conflict in the southeast had overshadowed and marginalized
the issue of women’s right to life in that region.
The rapporteur concluded that state agents had been able to commit extrajudicial
executions, confident that their crimes would not be investigated. She recommended
that the government set up a high-level commission with strong powers to
undertake fact-finding in cases where people have allegedly been killed by the security
forces.
Council of Europe
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) visited Turkey in March
and September, and maintained its vigilance concerning conditions in F-type prisons
as well as torture in police custody. In its report on the March visit, the CPT criticized
the Justice Ministry’s decision to make access to weekly association
conditional on participation in the program of out-of-cell activities and recommended
that the link be dropped. In September, the justice minister removed the
formal condition, but problems in implementation persisted.
The CPT indicated that it had received “a considerable number of allegations of
ill-treatment” in Diyarbakır during its March visit and attributed this in great part
to police interference with detainees’ right to legal counsel. The CPT discovered
that almost all of those detained at the Anti-Terror Branch and the Narcotics Section
at Diyarbakır Police Headquarters in the nine months prior to its visit
(amounting to hundreds of detainees) were recorded as having waived their right
of access to a lawyer.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) issued judgments against
Turkey in more than forty cases.The cases involved the imprisonment of people for
their non-violent opinions or after unfair trials, as well as unlawful killings and
arbitrary house destruction by the Turkish security forces.
In May, the Committee ofMinisters publicly and strongly urged Turkey to comply
with its “repeated demands” to respond to the July 2001 ruling of the ECHR,
which found that Kurdish former parliamentary deputies Hatip Dicle, Orhan Dog˘an, Selim Sadak, and Leyla Zana had been sentenced to fifteen years of imprisonment
in 1994 after an unfair trial. The government of Turkey failed to comply
with the committee’s demands. In fact, a provision of the August legislation deliberately
blocked the possible release of the deputies. The new legislation required
Turkish courts to review verdicts that the ECHR finds violate the European Convention
on Human Rights, but a proviso denied this right to past applicants to the
ECHR, who included the four jailed former parliamentarians.
In July, the Committee of Ministers adopted a further resolution calling on
Turkey to take steps to respond to the succession of judgments at the ECHR concerning
killings, torture,“disappearances,” and destruction of property committed
by the Turkish security forces.
The Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) retained its human rights monitoring
mechanism for Turkey. In March, John Connor, the rapporteur of the PACE Committee
on Migration,Refugees and Demography, published his report on his October
2001 visit to Turkey to examine the situation of internally displaced people.The
rapporteur called for the government to increase the pace of returns and to involve
the displaced, as well as international humanitarian organizations and local municipalities,
in preparing and implementing return and reintegration projects. Connor’s
recommendations broadly reflected the committee’s 1998 recommendations,
which the Turkish government had largely ignored.
European Union
The process of Turkey’s accession to the E.U. remained the most important catalyst
of reform in Turkey. The E.U.’s progress report for 2001 had made it clear that
Turkey was lagging behind in its efforts to meet the E.U. accession conditions of
“democracy, the rule of law, human rights and respect for and protection of
minorities.” Civil society bodies ranging from human rights organizations to the
employers’ federation, TUSIAD, as well as President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, put considerable
pressure on the government to produce results.Parliament finally enacted
the February and August legislation in order to maintain the credibility of its candidacy
for E.U. membership. The E.U. Presidency gave a warm welcome to the
August abolition of the death penalty and language reforms, but on an appropriate
note of skepticism, added that Turkey should implement the changes as soon as
possible in order to demonstrate the genuine character of the reforms. The October
regular report on Turkey’s progress toward accession pointed to the need for
further progress in protecting freedom of expression, combating torture, and
reducing the influence of the military.
United States
Turkey remained a critical U.S. ally in the war against terrorism, taking the lead
of international peacekeeping forces in Afghanistan. The U.S. was a strong public
supporter of Turkey’s application for membership in the E.U. and persistently used
quiet diplomacy to encourage the reforms necessary for that application to 
progress.
The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2001 surveyed
continuing abuses, including restrictions on speech, the press, and the wearing
of the headscarf; “disappearances”; and extrajudicial killings. The report stated
that torture remained widespread, attributing slight declines to the decreased use
of incommunicado detention and the reduction in the number of detentions.
Human Rights Watch’s inquiries and those of the CPT cited above suggested that
detention without access to counsel remained the general rule.
Turkish Justice Minister Hikmet Sami Turk responded to the State Department
report saying that it contained “extremely unfair allegations” and said that the Foreign
Ministry would take initiatives to correct suggestions that some minorities
were exposed to discrimination.
The State Department’s annual trafficking in persons report gave Turkey its
lowest ranking, concluding that Turkey made almost no efforts to combat trafficking.
In August, however, the U.S. ambassador to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) described the new anti-trafficking law,which contained
no measures to protect adult or child victims of trafficking, as “a major step
forward in the Turkish government’s anti-trafficking policy and enforcement.”
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Turkey: Close Scrutiny of Elections Warranted (Briefing Paper), 10/02
Displaced and Disregarded: Turkey’s Failing Village Return Program, 10/02
Hits and Misses on Turkey’s E.U.Accession Targets: Backgrounder on the European
Union Regular Report on Turkey, 10/02
Questions and Answers: Freedom of Expression and Language Rights in Turkey,
4/02
Human Rights Watch Analysis of the 2001 Regular Report on Turkey, 12/01
TURKMENISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Turkmen authorities continued to violate basic rights, crush all dissent, and further
isolate the country from the rest of the world.
President-for-life Saparmurat Niazov did not relent in his total control over politics
and society. A significant development in this regard was the government’s
unprecedented campaign promoting the Rukhnama (Book of the Soul), authored
by Niazov. Study of the Rukhnama became compulsory in all state institutions and
schools, and knowledge of it became an entry requirement for university students
and a certification requirement for teachers, doctors, and other professionals.
In a new manifestation of Niazov’s personality cult, the names of months were changed to, among others, Rukhnama, Gurbansoltan-eje (after Niazov’s mother),
and other names honoring Niazov.
In late 2001 and early 2002, a number of high-level officials went into exile and
declared their opposition to Niazov. In response, in January Niazov launched a
campaign against corruption among the elite, a thinly-veiled attempt to root out
real and imagined opposition to him.Members of the newly exiled opposition were
charged in absentia, including former Foreign Minister Boris Shikhmuradov.
Inside the country about two hundred people, most of whom had worked in management
or accounting in the civil service or state enterprises, were arrested, some
on fabricated charges.
In February,Niazov signed a decree excluding state officials convicted after 1999
from pardon or amnesty for five years after their conviction. As a result, dozens of
civil servants who had been amnestied in the past two years were returned to
prison.
On March 4, Niazov announced the creation of a commission to investigate
crimes and human rights violations committed by agents of the Committee for
State Security (KNB, or secret police). By May, the commission had uncovered five
murders, sixty-nine cases of arbitrary detention and searches, twenty-two cases of
torture, and many instances of crimes such as extortion, embezzlement, and drug
trafficking. According to government sources, more than sixty KNB officials—
including most of the central leadership and heads of regional departments—were
forced to resign, and twenty-two were prosecuted.Among them were former KNB
Chair Mukhamet Nazarov and two of his deputies, who received prison sentences
of eighteen to twenty years.
On September 27, Russian police arrested Murat Garabaev, a former Central
Bank of Turkmenistan official accused of embezzling U.S.$41 million, in response
to an extradition request from Turkmenistan. In the following weeks, police in the
capital,Ashgabad, arrested Garabaev’s mother, sister, and uncle, and confiscated his
mother’s house; as of this writing they remained in custody. Russian authorities
extradited Garabaev, who holds Russian citizenship, on October 24. Authorities
also arrested family members of two other suspects in the case, Arslan Kakaev and
Annadurdy Khojiev.
On April 12, Niazov signed a decree amending the criminal procedure code to
transfer to the Cabinet ofMinisters sole authority to issue arrest warrants.The government
explained this extraordinary perversion of due process as necessary to
combat abuse by law enforcement agencies.
The campaign against the KNB had no impact on the human rights situation, as
the government continued to suppress all other civic freedoms. Mukhammetkuli
Aimuradov, sentenced in 1994 to eighteen years of imprisonment on groundless
charges of attempting to overthrow the government, remained in prison in a highsecurity
facility in Turkmenbashi.
On November 15, 2001, the authorities introduced limits on local access to certain
Russian-language web sites, and from December 2001 through February 2002
the government further tightened control over Internet use as the opposition-inexile
posted several new websites. According to local activists, in September 2002
the KNB began to check computers at all governmental and some nongovernmental
institutions to ferret out opposition material.They arrested Batyr Kurbanov, the owner of a computer store in Ashgabad who had distributed among friends materials
about Turkmenistan downloaded from foreign web sites; as of this writing he
remained in custody.
In March, customs officers at Ashgabad airport confiscated part of a delivery of
the Russian newspaper Komsomolskaia Pravda, which contained a travel story
about Turkmenistan, and KNB agents also allegedly attempted to confiscate the
issue in question from subscribers who had already received it; failing that, the
agents attempted to compel subscribers to sign statements promising not to reveal
the article’s contents. In May, subscription to Komsomolskaia Pravda was prohibited.
According to Russian media, in mid-July Turkmen authorities stopped deliveries
of all Russian periodicals, claiming they were too costly.
On July 6 and 7, the Russian television company Ren-TV aired a show critical of
Turkmenistan that was carried by local cable television providers. In response,Niazov
ordered a shake-up at Turkmen cable providers, especially with regard to program
content. For a period from July 15, cable television was almost entirely shut
off, and when later restored it carried no further Ren-TV programs.
In May, the daily newspaper Neitralnyi Turkmenistan (Neutral Turkmenistan)
canceled its employment contract with its Dashauz correspondent, Elena Mitiaev,
after learning that she had intended to attend a seminar in Sweden on democracy
and journalism.
As in previous years, the Russian Orthodox Church and Sunni Islam were the
only religions permitted in Turkmenistan. Responding to international pressure,
on January 8 authorities released Shageldy Atakov, a Baptist minister sentenced in
1999 to four years of imprisonment on trumped-up criminal charges. Secret police
subsequently banned him from meeting with other Baptists and from leaving the
Kaakhka city limits.
Atakov’s release did not signal a letting up of government persecution of unregistered
religious organizations. On November 15, 2001, police detained forty-one
people gathered for a Word of Life church service.Nearly all the worshippers were
fined, two were given brief prison terms, and three—including Word of Life Pastor
Vladimir Shamrai—were deported to Russia.
From November 2001 through February 2002, police dispersed Adventist, Baptist,
and Jehovah’s Witness prayer gatherings in Ashgabad, Nebitdag, Khazar, and
Turkmenabad. Dozens of worshippers were interrogated and faced verbal abuse
and threats by police while in custody; several were beaten.
Authorities threatened to confiscate the homes of worshippers who made them
available for prayer gatherings by unregistered religious groups. In at least one case
they carried out the threat, evicting Marina Izmakeva, an Adventist, from her apartment;
she subsequently left for Russia.
In May, after a protestant group in Denau received a delivery of religious materials,
the KNB called group members for questioning. They were compelled to
renounce their faith and swear on the Rukhnama their loyalty to President Niazov.
After at least three refused, gas and electricity to their homes was cut off, and
authorities threatened to cancel their residence permits. In July, the KNB attempted
to compel two Baptist families in Turkmenbashi to leave the country, claiming their
residence permits had expired in 2001.
On July 2, a court again sentenced Nikolai Shelekhov, a Jehovah’s Witness, to an eighteen-month prison term for conscientious objection to military service. Sheleknov
had been convicted under the same charge but released under an amnesty in
2001.
At least four Jehovah’s Witnesses continued to serve prison sentences handed
down between 1999 and 2001 on trumped-up charges. Two of them—Kurban
Zakirov and Iazmumed Annamamedov—were transferred to a prison with harsher
regime.According to Jehovah’s Witness sources, in August Annamamedov was hospitalized
for injuries he sustained from constant beatings.
Prison conditions in general remained harsh, and the government used
amnesties to relieve overcrowding. About nine thousand of Turkmenistan’s estimated
18,500 prisoners were released under a December 2001 amnesty.By summer
2002, though, the prison population again reached seventeen thousand. Niazov
announced his intention to release the majority under a prison amnesty to be
issued in December.
Ethnic minorities faced worsening discrimination, particularly in education.
Russian- and Uzbek-language school instruction was drastically reduced. The government
continued to forbid ethnic minorities from forming cultural or other
public organizations.
Travel to and from Turkmenistan remained strictly limited, as did freedom of
movement within the country. Beginning January 1, citizens no longer required
exit visas for foreign travel,but some individuals were arbitrarily banned from travelling
abroad.Border officials repeatedly told these individuals that authorities had
compiled a list of 2,500 people forbidden from foreign travel.
The government introduced a number of measures aimed at limiting cross-border
travel, including the levy of a U.S.$6 fee for Turkmen citizens wishing to cross
the borders to Uzbekistan and Iran. In January, protesters in Dashauz district
demanded an end to the new restrictions, and on February 22 hundreds of Uzbek
citizens blocked railroads to protest the new visa fee, which was prohibitively high
by local standards.Turkmen authorities also began using live ammunition on those
illegally seeking to cross the border. In December 2001, border guards in northern
Turkmenistan threatened to use firearms to disperse some two hundred people
attempting to cross the border to visit a cemetery.
To carry out Niazov’s reconstruction plan for Ashgabad, authorities continued
to bulldoze residents’ homes arbitrarily and without adequate compensation. On
January 10, police threatened to arrest about a hundred women to stop them from
holding a protest against continuing demolitions. In one Ashgabad neighborhood,
the homes of six relatives of exiled opposition leader Avdy Kuliev were destroyed;
no other homes in the neighborhood were affected.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The repressive environment in Turkmenistan continued to prevent nongovernmental
human rights organizations from forming.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Turkmenistan has failed to file a single report to U.N. treaty bodies. In March,
the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination reviewed Turkmenistan’s
implementation of the convention relying exclusively on information
from various intergovernmental and nongovernmental sources. The committee
acknowledged Turkmenistan’s grave violations of civil and political rights, as well
as social, economic, and cultural rights. It expressed concern that the state’s policy
of promoting Turkmen identity leads to discrimination against ethnic minorities,
while religious minorities face discrimination because of the state’s refusal to register
religions other than Russian Orthodox Christianity and Sunni Islam. The
committee called on the government of Turkmenistan to cooperate with the U.N.
by providing the long overdue reports.
As of October, the Office of the U.N.High Commissioner for Human Rights was
still awaiting a response from Turkmen authorities to its March 2002 proposal for
an assessment mission to the country.
Turkmenistan made available to the U.N. its air space and land corridors for the
delivery of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. Subsequently, President Niazov called
on the U.N. to support his proposal for a gas pipeline through Afghanistan.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s visit to Turkmenistan in October 2002
yielded no public comment on the state of human rights in the country.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
For the fifth year in a row, the Turkmen government failed to sign a substantive
Memorandum of Understanding with the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, on
the conditions under which the OSCE had agreed in 1998 to establish a center in
Ashgabad.
The OSCE welcomed the January 2002 abolition of Turkmenistan’s exit visa
regime, a step that then-OSCE Chairman-in-Office Mircea Geoana had pressed for
during his meetings with President Niazov in June 2001. In April, the OSCE
severely criticized Turkmen authorities for harassment of the media. In a letter to
Foreign Minister Ravshid Meredov, the OSCE representative on freedom of the
media denounced the “absolute lack of any freedom of expression in your country,
a situation unseen in the OSCE region since the establishment of this Organization.”
The OSCE continued its series of informational seminars, held in Ashgabad and
other cities, aimed at making the people of Turkmenistan better acquainted with
the OSCE’s activities and projects in the country.
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
In July, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) adopted a minimal country strategy for Turkmenistan, citing the authorities’ failure
to make any perceptible progress toward political pluralism, civil and human
rights, and market reforms. The bank resolved to limit its engagement in the
country to the promotion of private sector activities, and to support these only
where it could be shown that the proposed investments were not effectively controlled
by the state.
United States
Turkmenistan’s cooperation in providing humanitarian aid to Afghanistan during
the 2001-02 U.S.-led military operation against the Taliban raised slightly Turkmenistan’s
profile vis-a-vis the U.S. government. In addition to praising Turkmen
cooperation, the U.S. supported President Niazov’s May proposal to revive plans to
construct a trans-Afghanistan pipeline to bring Turkmen gas to Pakistan and other
South Asian countries.
At the same time, U.S. government agencies voiced criticism of Turkmenistan’s
human rights record.The State Department’s annual report on human rights practices,
released in March, accused the government of committing serious human
rights abuses and severely restricting political and civil rights, including freedom of
speech and religion. Recognizing Turkmenistan’s particularly harsh restrictions on
freedom of conscience and belief, the United States Commission on International
Religious Freedom (USCIRF) reported in March that the conditions of religious
freedom in Turkmenistan were “extremely poor” and plagued by “ongoing, egregious
and systematic violations.”The report called Turkmenistan “one of the most
totalitarian states in the world today.” In an unusually strong recommendation, the
USCIRF called on the U.S. government to halt non-humanitarian aid, with the
exception of anti-terrorism assistance, to Turkmenistan until conditions improved.
In October, the USCIRF recommended that the Bush administration designate
Turkmenistan a “country of particular concern for religious freedom” pursuant to
the International Religious Freedom Act (IRFA).As of this writing, no decision had
been made on “country of particular concern” designations.
UKRAINE
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Despite progress in recent years, the human rights situation in Ukraine in 2002
remained uneven.Numerous irregularities were reported during the March parliamentary
elections.Virtually all major media owners depended on state ties for survival
and were thus subject to censorship. Opposition media and activists
continued to face harassment. Prison conditions and torture in detention received
attention from the national ombudsperson, but remained serious problems.
Racism, trafficking in persons, and discrimination against women, migrants,
refugees, and persons living with HIV/AIDS persisted.
National and regional parliamentary elections in March reflected the mixed
human rights situation. The European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) noted Ukraine’s progress toward complying
with international standards for democratic elections. Yet despite certain positive
developments, including greater transparency, international observers noted significant
flaws. Shortcomings in the campaigning period involved abuse of state
resources by incumbent candidates and preference given to certain candidates in
the use of state facilities.
Observers also noted an imbalance in the distribution of election commission
chairperson positions, with some 70 percent being drawn from pro-presidential
parties. In Lugansk, public employees were threatened with dismissal for refusal to
sign a “social agreement” that committed them to vote for a pro-presidential party.
The campaign was marred also by the murder of Mykola Shkibliak, a prominent
Social Democratic Party (United) candidate, on the eve of the elections. On election
day OSCE observers reported other incidents of violence, intimidation, and
inappropriate influencing of voters.
The state of independent media continued to deteriorate throughout 2002.
Although a broad range of media provided a diversity of political views during the
parliamentary campaign, most media failed to provide impartial and fair coverage.
Ukraine’s six national television channels were either state-owned or controlled by
persons close to the president. As a result, opposition parties frequently faced
obstruction in accessing local and national media, and major television and radio
outlets offered disproportionately more and only positive coverage to pro-presidential
political figures.
Independent media sources and journalists faced government harassment and
legal pressure in the form of tax inspections and arbitrary licensing procedures.
Four television stations lost their broadcasting licenses in 2002, including Studio
1+1, which continues to broadcast pending a final court decision.
Journalists complained of political censorship. In early October, staff of
UNIAN, an independent news agency, posted a statement denouncing the “fierce
pressure”they encountered since the appointment of a new executive director.Censorship
on television stations led many prominent newscasters to resign and motivated
journalists to sign statements denouncing political pressure and organize a
trade union to combat official coercion. Journalists and editors also reported physical
violence. Police officers beat and detained Oleh Zavada for taking photographs
during opposition protests in October.
The murders of investigative journalists Georgiy Gongadze in 2000 and Oleh
Breus and Ihor Aleksandrov in 2001, remained unsolved despite continued international
demands for transparent and timely criminal investigations that would
involve international commissions of inquiry. Authorities repeatedly attempted to
obscure their failures to properly investigate the Gongazde case. In January, the
deputy prosecutor general claimed, falsely, that the Council of Europe had declined
to create an international commission of inquiry. Increasing international pressure
led the government to accept foreign technical assistance in examining evidence, but prosecutors subsequently refused to cooperate with United States (U.S.) Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) homicide experts dispatched to Ukraine in April.
In September, the parliament’s ad hoc commission for investigating Gongadze’s
disappearance recommended that criminal charges be brought against President
Leonid Kuchma and other top officials in connection with the crime, based on tape
recordings of a meeting at which Kuchma allegedly asked security officials to “take
care”of the journalist.Based on these allegations, the Kyiv Court of Appeals opened
a criminal case against Kuchma in mid-October.
On September 16, major opposition groups organized anti-Kuchma protests
throughout the country to mark the second anniversary of Gongadze’s disappearance
and to call for the president’s resignation. Local authorities in Kiev attempted
to prevent the demonstrations from being held in the center of the city, and prevented
thousands from participating by denying entrance to cars and buses arriving
from outside of the capital. A government memo issued to national media
outlets recommended that television and radio sources avoid broadcasting information
about the demonstrations and press conferences held by opposition parties.
On the morning of the demonstrations, all six national television stations were
off the air for “maintenance.” Following the demonstrations, several thousand riot
police armed with shields and rubber truncheons beat and arrested dozens of protesters
who had set up a tent camp in front of the president’s office.
Torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement officials continued as in recent
years. The Ukrainian Office of the Commissioner for Human Rights reported that
30 percent of prisoners were victims of torture and perpetrators rarely faced prosecution.
In a rare exception to the general rule of impunity, the Mozola family,with
extensive help from the Ukrainian ombudsperson, won damages in a case against
the state security services for the death of their son by torture in pre-trial detention
in 1996. There also continued to be widespread reports of bullying and hazing of
military conscripts.
Arbitrary detention and excessively long periods of pre-trial detention
remained serious problems.Poor prison conditions—overcrowding, malnutrition,
and insufficient access to health care—have led to inmate violence, a death rate ten
times that of the population at large, and high rates of tuberculosis among inmates.
In its review of Ukraine’s fourth periodic report in November 2001, the United
Nations (U.N.) Committee against Torture noted many ongoing deficiencies in the
penal system, including the lack of clarity regarding the time when a detained person
may exercise the rights to counsel, medical examination, and contact with a
family member.
Ukraine’s minority populations faced racism, discrimination, and intolerance.
Crimean Tartars, deported during the Soviet era but recently returned to Ukraine,
succeeded in gaining citizenship but still encountered obstacles in access to jobs
and housing and in securing official recognition of their language. The results of
the March elections saw Crimean Tartar candidates elected to governing bodies,
thereby improving the previously weak Crimean Tartar political representation.
Roma continued to battle discrimination resulting in socioeconomic disadvantage,
high unemployment, insufficient political representation, and racially motivated
police harassment.
In January, Ukraine acceded to the 1951 U.N. Refugee Convention and its 1967
Protocol. Throughout 2001-2002, Ukraine detained hundreds of undocumented
migrants—including would-be asylum seekers—arrested in transit to Western
Europe in the newly established Pavshino camp on its western border. This detention
was under inhumane conditions and the authorities lacked funds to repatriate
detainees who expressed the desire to return home.According to the U.S.Committee
for Refugees,Ukrainian border guards allowed only three of 4,620 apprehended
foreigners,many of whom were Afghans fleeing the Taliban, to lodge asylum claims
during 2001.
Ukraine continued as both a country of origin and transit for large numbers of
trafficked persons. In its 2002 trafficking in persons report, the U.S. State Department
placed Ukraine on the list of countries not yet in compliance with the minimum
standards for the elimination of trafficking, despite some official efforts to
improve the situation. In May, the government approved a comprehensive program
for 2002-05 designed to combat trafficking through increased criminal investigative
efforts, and to improve services for victims including counselling and shelter.
In November 2001, parliament passed a new law on the prevention of domestic
violence that offered a broad definition of domestic violence and recognized marital
rape as a crime. In June the U.N.Committee on Elimination of Discrimination
against Women credited Ukraine for adopting the new law but expressed concern
about the prevalence of violence against women and the need for improved measures
for prosecution and victims’ services.
According to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), women
constituted 80 percent of the unemployed due mostly to discrimination in hiring
and disproportionate lay-offs, including illegal dismissals during maternity leave.
Women made up more than half of university graduates, and three-fourths of
unemployed women held university degrees. For those in the work force, women’s
salaries equalled only 73 percent those of men in comparable positions.
A U.N. report released during the International AIDS Conference in Barcelona
said Ukraine had one of the fastest growing HIV/AIDS epidemics in the world, and
concluded that the disease had spread beyond injecting drug users into the general
population. The disease was virtually unheard of in Ukraine as late as 1994, but by
2002 as many as four hundred thousand persons were estimated to be living with
HIV/AIDS. The government declared that it would make fighting AIDS a priority.
However, a widespread lack of information on HIV transmission and a long history
of marginalization and criminalization of drug users motivated discrimination
against persons living with the disease, as reported by the international press and
NGOs.
Ukraine continued to be implicated as a major weapons supplier to human
rights abusers, areas of violent conflict, and embargoed countries. Ukraine’s submission
to the U.N. arms register showed that it sold attack helicopters to, among
others,Algeria,Angola, Chad, Guinea, and Sri Lanka in 2001. A U.N. report issued
in October 2001, documented that Ukraine served as the point of origin for
weapons funnelled to embargoed Liberia. In September 2002, the U.S. recognized
as authentic a tape recording of President Kuchma approving the sale of sophisticated
air defense radar systems to Iraq in 2000. In October, legislation to control the arms trade was introduced in parliament. To date, arms trade control measures
remained elaborated only in ad hoc presidential and cabinet decrees.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Ukraine’s diverse civil society included human rights, ethnic, religious, and
women’s groups. Some groups have reported problems with local authorities over
registration and taxation. The ombudswoman actively investigated human rights
abuses and highlighted poor prison conditions.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In considering Ukraine in late 2001, the U.N. Human Rights Committee continued
to prioritize threats to freedom of expression and information. It also recommended
that authorities ensure that national minorities enjoy use of their own
language. The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which
reviewed the country in August 2001, noted continuing stereotyping and racial
profiling, including arbitrary arrests and illegal detention targeting in particular
the Romani population, and called for the development of effective disciplinary
measures for officials committing human rights violations.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
In a February visit Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) High Commissioner on National Minorities Rolf Ekéus encouraged
Ukrainian authorities to address discrimination against Roma,refugees, and immigrants.
The OSCE representative on freedom of the media called on authorities to
conduct a thorough investigation into the disappearance and murder of Gongadze.
The OSCE project coordinator in Ukraine provided trainings on the observance of
human rights in Ukrainian courts and worked closely with authorities to create an
administrative court system and improve legislation to combat the trafficking of
persons.
Council of Europe
The chairman of the Committee ofMinisters visited Ukraine in December 2001
to examine progress made by Ukraine in meeting its Council of Europe commitments.
The chairman noted some positive results, particularly given that in April
2001 the Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) had recommended Ukraine’s exclusion
for failure to honor its obligations. However, the chairman and the PACE both
stressed continuing shortcomings, including the unresolved cases of murdered
journalists and the lack of an independent judiciary able to enforce the rule of law.
In February, the PACE called on the Ukrainian authorities to release fifteen individuals
still being held in pre-trial detention since their arrest during anti-presidential
demonstrations in March 2001. A European Commission against Racism
and Intolerance report, published in July, highlighted continued direct and indirect
discrimination, particularly by police, against Crimean Tartars,Roma,immigrants,
and refugees, and recommended a number of measures to be taken to address the
shortcomings identified. Such measures included the adoption of a comprehensive
anti-discrimination law and awareness-raising among both state authorities and
the general public about issues relating to racism and discrimination and relevant
international standards.
Ukraine finally agreed to the publication of the Committee for the Prevention
of Torture’s (CPT) 1998-2000 reports. The reports cited numerous allegations of
physical ill-treatment of detainees, criticized the poor conditions of holding facilities,
and expressed particular concern over the treatment of prisoners sentenced to
life imprisonment. The CPT visited Ukraine again toward the end of 2002.
European Union
In its annual report on human rights the E.U. stated concerns about the problematic
environment for the media in Ukraine and stressed the need to ensure a
secure environment for journalists. In its 2002-03 National Indicative Programme
for Ukraine, the E.U. highlighted the strengthening of independent mass media, the
judiciary, and public administration, and the reduction of poverty as key priorities,
together with border security and trade issues. The European Initiative for Democracy
and Human Rights identified Ukraine as a focus country for 2002-04.
A joint statement issued on the occasion of the E.U.-Ukraine summit in July
“welcomed progress made by Ukraine toward meeting OSCE and Council of
Europe standards,”“agreed that the strengthening and stability of institutions guaranteeing
democracy, rule of law and market economy is of vital importance for
Ukraine’s development and for an intensified relationship with the E.U.,”and “confirmed
[the two parties’] joint desire to further reinforce our strategic partnership
aimed at promoting stability and prosperity in Europe as well as the strengthening
of democracy, respect of human rights, rule of law and market economy.”However,
responding to President Kuchma’s expression, at the World Economic Forum in
September, of Ukraine’s E.U. membership ambitions, E.U. Commissioner for
Enlargement Günter Verheugen stated that Ukraine’s accession was not likely.
United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
In advance of a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) delegation’s visit to
Kiev in July, President Kuchma announced Ukraine’s desire to seek full membership
in the alliance, although no substantive changes in the existing distinct partnership
were made. Ukraine’s relations with NATO and the U.S. deteriorated in
September, however, after the U.S. confirmed earlier that month that President
Kuchma had approved the sale of radar systems to Iraq in 2000. In order to avoid
further harm to the NATO-Ukraine relationship, the alliance refused to invite Kuchma to participate in the meeting of the NATO-Ukraine Council at NATO’s
Prague summit in November by downgrading scheduled meetings to the foreign
minister level.The U.S. suspended U.S.$54 million in aid to the central government
and said it would consider further measures pending the outcome of an investigation.
The U.S. also initiated a full review of U.S. policy toward Ukraine and worked
to downgrade Ukraine’s participation in the Community of Democracies.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
The NATO Summit and Arms Trade Controls in Central and Eastern Europe,
11/02
UZBEKISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Human rights abuses on a massive scale continued in Uzbekistan in 2002. The
closer relationship with the United States (U.S.) that developed after the September
11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the U.S.—including the provision of air bases for U.S.
troops—pushed Uzbekistan to make some gestures to show progress on human
rights.However, these did not amount to any fundamental improvement.The government
systematically violated the rights to freedom of religion, expression, association,
and assembly. There was no independent judiciary, and torture was
widespread in both pre-trial and post-conviction facilities.
The government’s campaign against independent Muslims continued in 2002
with hundreds of new arrests of people whose Islamic beliefs, practices, and affiliations
fell beyond strict government controls. That the government did not intend
to relent in its campaign became clear in April, when President Islam Karimov
announced that Uzbekistan would continue its fight against Hizb ut-Tahrir (Party
of Liberation), an organization that advocates the re-establishment of the Islamic
Caliphate, or state, by peaceful means. The authorities also continued to arrest
pious Muslims it labeled as “Wahhabis.” The government retrospectively justified
its five-year campaign against independent Islam by referring to the “war against
terrorism,” failing to distinguish between those who advocate violence and those
who peacefully express their religious beliefs.While authorities withheld comprehensive
statistics on prisoners held on religious and political charges, conservative
estimates put the total number between 6,500 and 7,000.
As in previous years, police arrested and tortured independent Muslims, and
courts dismissed torture allegations and sentenced defendants—including
minors—to long prison terms. By November 1, Human Rights Watch had documented
167 cases of people convicted or arrested awaiting trial in 2002, but the true number was believed to be far higher. Among those convicted was Hamidulla
Abdullaev, tried in March in Tashkent, the capital, along with four others for alleged
membership in Hizb ut-Tahrir. Ignoring Abdullaev’s court testimony that police had
beaten him for two days, the judge sentenced him to seven years of imprisonment.
Another Hizb ut-Tahrir conviction was that of Musharraf Usmanova, the
widow of Farhad Usmanov, who died from torture in custody in 1999 after police
arrested him on charges of possession of a Hizb ut-Tahrir leaflet. On April 14,police
officers raided Usmanova’s home and detained her. For seven days, police failed to
inform Usmanova’s relatives of her whereabouts in custody, and then held her
incommunicado for about two more weeks. At trial Usmanova was accused of
heading a Hizb ut-Tahrir women’s group. On July 16, the Tashkent Municipal
Court convicted her on the basis of testimony consisting of rumor and statements
that witnesses retracted in court, citing pressure by law enforcement agents. It
handed her a two-year suspended sentence.
Just days after Usmanova’s conviction, her sister-in-law,Dildora Akzamova, was
detained and “disappeared”for seven days before being confirmed in the custody of
the National Security Service (NSS), and she was then held incommunicado for
about two more weeks.At the time of writing,Akzamova was awaiting trial, also for
allegedly heading a Hizb ut-Tahrir women’s group.
At the end of July, police detained another Tashkent woman—whose husband
was in jail for Hizb ut-Tahrir membership—four times within four days, questioning
her about her meetings with human rights and media organizations.
In 2002, authorities began to target another group of independent Muslims—
those who study the works of Turkish Islamic scholar Bediuzzin Said Nursi. In June,
a closed military court convicted twelve alleged Nursi followers on a variety of
charges, ranging from “organizing a criminal society” to “distributing materials
that threaten public security.” The primary accusation was that they read, possessed,
or distributed books by Nursi. Ten of the defendants received prison sentences
ranging from fifteen to eighteen years; the other two were sentenced to five
years each.
In January, the authorities claimed that 860 religious and political prisoners had
been released under a 2001 amnesty. However, many of those released were subjected
to persistent police harassment and were required to report regularly to
police and sign statements promising not to attend meetings or protests and rejecting
their religious faith.
Some released under the amnesty were rearrested.Among them was Ibodat Sultanova,
who had complained to Human Rights Watch of constant police harassment.
On September 13, a court sentenced her to seven years of imprisonment for
“spreading religious extremist materials.”The evidence against her in court showed
that she had helped to distribute money to needy families whose male relatives were
in prison for their ties to Hizb ut-Tahrir. In April,Merziot Usmanov was also rearrested
and in July was sentenced to eight years of imprisonment on charges of
“extremism.”
Uzbek authorities continued to threaten family members of suspects to coerce
the latter’s cooperation with the police. At the September trial of Iskander Khudoberganov,
his father testified to the Tashkent Municipal Court that police had detained him and another son in order to coerce Iskander’s appearance for questioning.
He also told the court that police had tortured Iskander’s co-defendant in
front of him, threatening “to do the same thing to me and my son.”As of this writing,
Iskander Khudoberganov’s trial, on charges of “religious extremism,”murder,
and terrorism, was ongoing.
In January, four police officers were convicted and sentenced to twenty years of
imprisonment for torturing to death Ravshan Haitov, an alleged member of Hizb
ut-Tahrir, in 2001. In June 2002, three NSS officers were also sentenced to four to
sixteen years for the 2001 torture death of Alimukhammad Mamadaliev in Margilan.
Although some in the international community interpreted these trials as a
sign of the government’s willingness to prosecute torturers,many other deaths arising
from suspicious circumstances in custody, and countless reports of torture,
remained uninvestigated.
On October 9, 2002, two days after his arrest on suspicion of involvement in a
robbery, Izatullo Muminov died in police custody in Tashkent. Police reportedly
claimed that he hanged himself, but circumstances surrounding the death indicated
that he may have died as a result of torture.At the time of writing the authorities
had not made public any postmortem examination results.
On February 7, police reportedly brought Ikrom Aliev, a religious prisoner who
had been held in Navoi prison, home to his family; he died two days later. Relatives
told a local rights activist that Aliev was paralyzed on his right side, had a large
swelling on his head, and was unable to speak. The authorities reportedly told the
relatives that Aliev had tuberculosis, but on admission to hospital, doctors confirmed
that he had been beaten on the head with a heavy object.
On May 26, Husnidin Hikmatov—sentenced in 2001 to seventeen years of
imprisonment for Hizb ut-Tahrir membership—died two days after being released
from Jaslyk prison, from injuries reportedly sustained after a severe prison beating.
In April, he had reportedly become seriously ill after severe beatings and was given
no medical attention for several weeks before being transferred to the Tashkent
prison hospital.
On August 8, the bodies ofMuzafar Avazov and Husnidin Alimov,both religious
prisoners, were brought from Jaslyk prison to Tashkent for burial. Avazov’s body
showed signs of apparent torture, including burns on the legs, buttocks, lower back
and arms, a large, bloody wound to the back of the head, and bruising on his hands,
which had no fingernails.The authorities claimed that the injuries and deaths were
caused by a fight with cellmates.
Prison conditions remained atrocious. Prisoners suffered torture as well as lack
of food, medical attention, heating, and other basic needs. Religious and political
prisoners suffered particularly harsh treatment. According to the testimony of relatives
and several letters smuggled out of prison facilities, religious prisoners were
forced to write statements renouncing their faith, to ask President Karimov for forgiveness
every day and to sing the national anthem. Prisoners who refused were
punished with beatings, rape, solitary confinement, and denial of food and water.
Human Rights Watch received a letter in June 2002 that was smuggled out of a
facility in Kashkadaria province alleging that eighteen prisoners there were raped
by officials in the first half of 2002. In December 2001, according to relatives, authorities in one prison beat a prisoner for attempting to fast during Ramadan.He
was then reportedly placed for fifteen days in a cell flooded with water up to his
knees and with no heat, in freezing temperatures.
In addition to the four deaths from treatment in post-conviction prisons listed
above, local rights activists documented at least sixteen deaths in custody, officially
attributed to tuberculosis. At least two of those who died were also tortured.
According to official reports,Mirkamol Solikhojaev, a religious prisoner serving a
twelve-year sentence, died on February 28. Family members said that he had been
systematically beaten with clubs and barbed wire in prison, leaving puncture
wounds in his legs as a result. Similarly, Dilmurod Juraev died in February while
serving a sixteen-year sentence for his Hizb ut-Tahrir affiliation, and family members
stated that he had been beaten and subjected to electric shock.
Several Christian groups also faced harassment, including detention, fines,
refusal to register groups, and, in the case of Jehovah’s Witnesses, imprisonment for
fifteen days for holding illegal religious meetings. At the time of writing, criminal
prosecutions against three Jehovah’s Witnesses for their religious activities were
ongoing. Proselytism remained illegal.
In consistent strikes against freedom of assembly, Uzbek authorities harassed,
detained, and put under virtual house arrest those who tried to stage protest gatherings.
Relatives of imprisoned independent Muslims attempted throughout the
year to hold small demonstrations in Tashkent,Margilan, Karshi, and other cities
to protest prison conditions. On each occasion, police would detain the protesters—
usually several dozen women with their children—and hold them for fifteen
days on minor charges.
Often police would detain the women before they arrived at the protest site. On
May 20, police refused to let several women leave their homes, in what appeared to
be an attempt to prevent the women from attending a protest. On July 24, approximately
thirty women tried to protest in Tashkent and were immediately detained,
some before they arrived at the protest site. Several were sentenced to fifteen days
of detention.
Other groups who tried to protest were also harassed and detained. On July 2,
police in Tashkent forcefully snatched placards from a group of people protesting
human rights abuses and then detained two protesters, who were released several
hours later. Police threatened to charge one of them with “religious extremism,” if
he continued to organize protests. On August 27, police immediately detained
about six people gathered outside the Ministry of Justice to protest the general
human rights situation. Among them was Olga Krasnova, who was beaten on her
legs, back, and arms before being released some hours later. Two others were taken
to the Tashkent psychiatric hospital for compulsory treatment and remained in
detention at the time of writing.
On August 28, Sotevoldi Abdullaev was briefly detained along with two human
rights defenders when he also attempted to hold a protest outside the Ministry of
Justice, calling for an inquiry into his son’s 1999 death in custody. Two days later,
police again briefly detained him, together with two human rights defenders, as he
attempted to hold a press conference.
The government’s gestures toward political pluralism did not amount to significant advances. The Birlik (Unity) party succeeded in holding a series of regional
meetings without government interference. However, former and current Birlik
members remained on police lists and were required to report regularly to police
and to sign statements explaining their current activities. The party remained
unregistered. In May, the banned opposition party Erk (Freedom) had to cancel a
regional gathering, the first attempted in years, when police detained its leader
Atanazar Oripov. Police released Oripov only after those gathered for the meeting
had dispersed.
On May 13, pre-publication censorship was officially lifted after the chief censor,
Erkin Komilov, was fired and the State Inspectorate for the Protection of State
Secrets was disbanded. However, two days later, the authorities summoned
Tashkent newspaper chief editors and told them that they now had responsibility
for censorship. One newspaper editor reportedly responded by employing staff
from the old state inspectorate.
Subsequently, several articles on such topics as unemployment and poverty that
would not previously have been published appeared in some newspapers.However,
in at least one case the presidential administration summoned the editor of a newspaper
and pressured him to stop publishing such material.
According to the Committee for the Protection of Journalists, Madzid Abdurahimov
of the national weekly Yangi Asr, and Muhammed Bekjanov and Iusuf
Ruzimuradov of the banned opposition newspaper Erk remained in jail for their
professional work, on a variety of trumped-up criminal charges.
Uzbekistan’s borders with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan remained mined, as a result
of Uzbek government policy to deter the threat of Uzbek armed groups based outside
the country. Several deaths of adults and children as a result of Uzbekistan’s
mines were reported in the media in Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan.
Just over four thousand mountain villagers remained in resettlement centers in
open desert plains, four hundred kilometers from their homes near the Tajik border.
The Uzbek government had forcibly displaced them in 2000 and 2001, as it
sought to eliminate any possible support base for Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan
(IMU) fighters and to create a cordon sanitaire along the Tajik border. They
were refused permission to visit their homes, many of which were torched by
Uzbek law enforcement agents. Residents of resettlement centers in Sherobod and
Shurchi were living in conditions of extreme poverty in the summer of 2002,while
barely tenable conditions in all of the centers were expected to dramatically
worsen in the winter. At least seventy displaced villagers, unfairly sentenced in
2001 to lengthy prison terms on charges of collaboration with the IMU, languished
in prison.
In August, the Uzbek authorities deported several Afghan nationals with mandate
refugee status, including several minors, to Afghanistan, breaching the international
obligation against refoulement. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees wrote to the authorities protesting the deportation.
In April, Uzbek authorities reportedly extradited a Turkmen national to Turkmenistan,
where he was immediately imprisoned. He had reportedly fled Turkmenistan
in 1997, after facing persecution for his Uzbek ethnicity and trumped up
charges of corruption.
Female suicides surged in 2002,with 322 women committing suicide in the first
four months, according to the Institute for War and Peace Reporting. In May, Dilbar
Guliamova, the deputy premier, made an unprecedented statement attributing
99 percent of female suicides to domestic violence. In spite of a law making it a
crime to “drive someone to suicide,” only twelve of those 322 cases led to trials.
Trafficking in persons also continued, but the magnitude of the problem
remained unclear. In May, a U.S. district court in Texas found Sardar Gasanov, a former
United Nations program officer and Tashkent native, and his wife guilty of
“alien smuggling for profit.”Gasanov and his wife had trafficked three women from
Uzbekistan to the U.S. and forced them to dance nude in clubs.The couple was convicted
after two of the women appealed to the FBI for assistance.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In a positive development, the government registered the Independent Human
Rights Organization of Uzbekistan (IHROU) on the eve of a visit by President Karimov
to the U.S. in March, the first time it had registered a local independent human
rights organization. But no other human rights groups were registered since, and
one group’s application was rejected in October. Throughout the year, the government
harassed, threatened, and detained human rights defenders in an attempt to
restrict information on human rights abuses.
At least six defenders from the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan (HRSU)
and one from IHROU were arrested in 2002. On September 17,Yuldash Rasulov, a
member of the HRSU’s Kashkadaria branch, was sentenced to seven years of
imprisonment for spreading “religious extremist”materials. Police arrested him on
May 24 in Karshi and brought him to Tashkent where he was held in incommunicado
detention for approximately a month. In a statement to Human Rights Watch,
he reported that police tortured and threatened him, forcing him to sign a selfincriminating
statement. Evidence of torture raised in court was ignored. In what
may have been an attempt to deflect international attention from the case, authorities
claimed, shortly after Rasulov’s arrest, that he recruited young men for the Taliban,
but the court dropped such charges.
On June 5, a Tashkent court confirmed an April lower court decision to subject
HRSU member Elena Urlaeva to forced psychiatric treatment. The order was executed
on August 27, when Urlaeva was arrested and placed in a locked ward in the
main psychiatric institution in Tashkent. After Human Rights Watch visited
Urlaeva on August 30, her access to visitors, including her family, was restricted. In
2001, the government had forcibly committed Urlaeva to a mental institution, and
released her only after an international outcry. In 2002,Urlaeva was under constant
pressure from the authorities not to organize and participate in public protests
against government rights abuses.
On September 4, police arrested Jakhangir Shosalimov, a member of the
IHROU, after he had helped a journalist to interview victims of police violence in a
Tashkent market. According to IHROU, he received a fifteen-day jail sentence for
breaching public order.
In the same week, about thirty police surrounded the house of Tursunbai Utamuratov,
head of the Karakalpakstan section of the HRSU, and then arrested him
and searched his house.He was accused of tax evasion, but, according to the HRSU,
was targeted for his efforts to publicize local corruption.
On September 16, three HRSU members, Jura Muradov,Norpulat Rajapov, and
Musulmon Khomroev, from the Nishan district of Kashkadaria, were sentenced to
between five and six years of imprisonment for hooliganism, robbery, and property
damage. According to the HRSU, the three had exposed corruption in a local collective
farm,to which authorities responded by accusing them of abusing the director
of the farm and damaging his property. Their trial began in late June, but soon
went into recess with the defendants apparently believing the charges had been
dropped. However, according to the HRSU, a day before the three were due to
attend a regional meeting of Birlik, they were detained, taken to court,denied counsel,
and sentenced.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In May, the U.N. Committee against Torture considered Uzbekistan’s report on
compliance with the Convention Against Torture. Using unusually strong language,
the committee called on the Uzbek government to review all convictions
handed down since 1995 that were based solely on confessions, recognizing that
they may have been coerced through torture. The committee expressed concern
about the “numerous, ongoing and consistent allegations of particularly brutal acts
of torture by law enforcement personnel.” It also pointed out that Uzbekistan failed
to provide requested statistics on detainees and death penalty executions.
In late June, the Uzbek government issued a long-overdue invitation to the U.N.
special rapporteur on torture to visit Uzbekistan in August. The special rapporteur
was unable to visit at such short notice and the Uzbek authorities appeared to fail
to communicate with the special rapporteur in a timely manner to arrange a date
for the visit, jeopardizing the visit for 2002.During his visit to Tashkent in October,
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan raised the need for the Uzbek government to
cooperate with the special rapporteur.
European Union
The E.U.-Uzbekistan Cooperation Council met in January 2002 to discuss
implementation of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA). The PCA
requires that partner states guarantee basic civil and political rights, but the E.U.
appeared to have missed the opportunity to obtain a commitment from the Uzbek
government on specific improvements. Both parties agreed to strengthen their
political dialogue and trade and investment cooperation, as well as to develop activities
to fight drug trafficking and terrorism. The E.U. welcomed Uzbekistan’s
announced measures to liberalize the economy, in particular to move toward convertibility of the Uzbek currency, and announced a doubling of its annual aid to
Uzbekistan.
In September, the council of the E.U. called for an independent investigation
into the August deaths in custody of Muzafar Avazov and Husnidin Alimov. It also
called for the resumption of International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) visits
to prisons, citing concern that Uzbek authorities were not meeting ICRC universal
criteria for such visits.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) office in
Tashkent undertook training sessions for prison officials, human rights activists,
and lawyers. In September, it held a conference on freedom of the media and corruption,
as well as a roundtable for government officials on freedom of religion, as
a lead up to a regional conference on the same. The OSCE mission chief regularly
raised human rights concerns in meetings with the Uzbek leadership, though the
mission did not make public the results of such meetings.
The director of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
sent the government a strongly-worded letter dismissing as “extremely unlikely”
the official version of the deaths of Avazov and Alimov and urging a “prompt,
impartial and full investigation” into the deaths.
United States
The new U.S. relationship with Uzbekistan, combined with the severity of its
persecution of independent Muslims, made this country a key test for U.S. human
rights policy following the attacks of September 11. In some respects, human rights
issues were given a high profile in the U.S.-Uzbek bilateral relationship, rather than
disappearing from the agenda as some observers initially feared. President George
W. Bush and Secretary of State Colin Powell raised the need for progress on human
rights in their meetings with the Uzbek leadership, and U.S. diplomats on the
ground followed up on key issues.U.S. pressure contributed to some modest gains,
including the registration of the IHROU.
During President Karimov’s March visit to the U.S., he signed a U.S.-Uzbek Joint
Declaration, committing Uzbekistan to ensuring a strong and open civil society,
respect for human rights, free and fair elections, political pluralism, and independence
of the media and courts. In July, Congress enacted legislation making supplementary
aid to the Uzbek government conditional upon “substantial and
continuing progress” in meeting the human rights and democracy commitments
in the joint declaration.
The U.S. failed to take advantage of many opportunities to use its influence with
Uzbekistan, however, and sometimes exaggerated Uzbekistan’s progress in meeting
its human rights commitments. In August, the State Department prematurely certified
that Uzbekistan was making the progress demanded by the supplemental aid
legislation, allowing for the release of $16 million in military and security assistance.
It made no visible effort in July and August to use the law to leverage additional progress to meet the law’s requirements, despite several key human rights
setbacks during those months.
Prior to the August supplemental appropriation, Uzbekistan was scheduled to
receive $173 million in U.S. assistance, of which $61.3 million was security related.
Citing “serious human rights violations by members of Uzbek security forces,” an
amendment to the U.S. Foreign Appropriations Act required the administration to
report every six months on all military and security assistance to the government.
As of this writing the U.S. had not made a determination as to whether Uzbekistan
should be designated a “country of particular concern for religious freedom”
under the terms of the 1998 U.S. International Religious Freedom Act.
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development’s (EBRD) decision to
hold its 2003 annual meeting in Tashkent continued to spur controversy in both
governmental and nongovernmental fora. In May, Human Rights Watch joined
fifty-three other nongovernmental organizations in writing to the bank’s president,
Jean Lemierre, to express concern about the impact that holding the meeting in
Tashkent could have on human rights in Uzbekistan and on the bank’s credibility
as an institution committed to democracy,human rights, and the rule of law. A June
report by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on the activities of
the EBRD expressed hope that the bank would use the meeting to improve the
human rights situation in the country, as did a July U.S. Senate report.
The bank maintained that the meeting was “Uzbekistan’s opportunity to
impress through progress.”At the close of the 2002 annual meeting in Bucharest in
May, Lemierre noted that Tashkent’s selection was “an incentive to make progress,
and not an endorsement.”As of this writing, Human Rights Watch was not aware
of any specific efforts by the bank to encourage such progress.
International Monetary Fund
After suspending lending to Uzbekistan in 1996 and essentially withdrawing
from the country in 2001, the IMF decided to return in 2002, reportedly under
pressure from the U.S. In January, the IMF launched a Staff Monitored Program
(SMP) set to run from January 1 to August 31, but it set no political conditions and,
according to experts in the field, even set the economic standards very low. The
main objective was to eliminate the multiple exchange rate,which was supposed to
be completed by the end of June. However, in September the IMF confirmed that
this had yet to be accomplished.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Religious Persecution of Independent Muslims in Uzbekistan, 8/02
Dangerous Dealings: Changes to U.S.Military Assistance After September 11, 2/02
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA
SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
A major restructuring of the Yugoslav federation was under way in 2002,
although by November it had not come to a formal conclusion. On March 14, the
authorities in the two constituent republics agreed to create a new state under the
name of Serbia and Montenegro. The new arrangements confirmed the exceptionally
high level of autonomy that both republics already enjoyed. But the agreement
slowed the drive to independence favored by a narrow majority of the Montenegrin
electorate.Montenegrin officials stated that they entered into the agreement under
pressure from the European Union and with an understanding that the agreed constitutional
framework was provisional.As of November, the Serbian and Montenegrin
sides had been unable to agree on a system for electing the future parliament
and had therefore failed to produce a constitutional charter that would finalize the
restructuring.
In October parliamentary elections in Montenegro, the moderates with a longterm
goal of independence for Montenegro won an absolute majority of seats
against the parties advocating closer ties with Serbia and the pro-independence
radicals. Presidential elections in Serbia, held in September and October, failed to
produce a winner because the second round turnout was below the 50 percent
threshold required by the election law.
Progress on accountability was slow, both with regard to the surrender of
indictees to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the tribunal’s access to archives and witnesses in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (F.R. Yugoslavia). As of November 2002, only one individual, Bosnian
Serb Ranko Cesic, accused of war crimes in a detention camp in the Bosnian town
of Brcko in 1992, had been arrested and transferred to The Hague during the year.
Five indictees surrendered voluntarily: Dragoljub Ojdanic and Nikola Sainovic,
indicted for war crimes in Kosovo in 1999; Milan Martic, indicted for the cluster
bomb shelling of civilian objects in Zagreb in 1995;Mile Mrksic, former Yugoslav
army commander accused of crimes against humanity for the alleged killing of at
least two hundred non-Serbs near the Croatian city of Vukovar in 1991; and Momcilo
Gruban, a wartime shift commander in the Bosnian Serb-run prison camp
near Prijedor.
On April 11, the Yugoslav parliament adopted a law on cooperation with the
ICTY. Contrary to Yugoslavia’s United Nations (U.N.) obligations, a provision
in the law stated that it would apply only to individuals against whom indictments
had already been issued at the time it came into force. The law also contained
a number of ambiguities regarding procedures for cooperation with the
ICTY.
For months the authorities failed to facilitate access for ICTY investigators to
Yugoslav archives and potential witnesses. By mid-year this began to change,
although at the time of writing the tribunal did not yet completely have the access
it had requested. In July and August, the government freed a number of police officials
from the obligation to guard state secrets while giving testimony in the trial of
Slobodan Milosevic. (See below.) The government also allowed limited access to
the requested archives.
In February, a Serb government official acknowledged to the media, under condition
of anonymity, that Ratko Mladic, ICTY indictee and the former commander
of the Bosnian Serb army, had been protected by the Yugoslav army up to that time.
On the record, Serbian officials throughout the year denied knowledge of Mladic’s
whereabouts or, in the alternative, argued that an attempt to arrest him would trigger
civil war in the country. A dozen other ICTY indictees were believed to live in
the country during the year.
Four domestic war crimes trials were held in 2002. On July 8, the district court
in Prokuplje, Serbia, sentenced Ivan Nikolic, a former Yugoslav army reservist, to
eight years in prison for the killing of two Kosovo Albanian civilians in May 1999.
On September 10, the high court in Bijelo Polje, Montenegro, sentenced Nebojsa
Ranisavljevic to fifteen years of imprisonment for participation in the abduction
and killing of nineteen Yugoslav Muslims at a train station in Strpci (in the border
area between F.R.Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina) in 1993.On October 11,
the military court in Nis sentenced two Yugoslav army officers and two privates to
five and seven years, and three and four years of imprisonment respectively, for the
killing of two ethnic Albanian civilians in April 1999. Finally, in October the trial
began in Prokuplje against Sasa Cvjetan, a former reservist in the anti-terrorist unit
of the Serbian police, accused of killing nineteen Kosovo Albanian civilians in
March 1999.
The police and judiciary failed to act to resolve a number of other war crimes
cases, in which a significant body of evidence was known to exist. These included
the case of mass graves in Serbia, exhumed in 2001, in which up to six hundred bodies
of Kosovo Albanians had been buried.
As of November, the truth and reconciliation commission, established in 2001
by Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica, had failed to hold any hearings on war
crimes and other abuses committed during the 1990s in Serbia and other parts of
the former Yugoslavia. The slow progress was in part due to the commission’s limited
budget of only U.S.$20,000. The courts in Serbia and Montenegro failed to
resolve any of the high-profile cases of political assassination that were committed
or attempted during the rule of Slobodan Milosevic.
The authorities did not use police violence against the political opposition, but
during the year police abuses against ordinary citizens were still commonplace.The
Serbian Ministry of Interior either ignored allegations of police torture and illtreatment
made in the media and human rights reports, or claimed that it had no
knowledge of the alleged events. Of the eight known court decisions since October
2000 dealing with torture and ill-treatment by the police, all but one of a dozen convicted
law enforcement officers received sentences of less than eight months in
prison, even where the torture resulted in serious bodily injuries.The exception was an August 2002 court decision in which one accused policeman was sentenced to
eighteen months of imprisonment.
Serbian human rights groups and media registered a dozen serious cases of
police torture between December 2001 and October 2002. The abuses often
occurred in police stations, when officials attempted to compel detainees to admit
to theft or other crimes. As a consequence of the abuse, in one case the victim
underwent brain surgery (Nenad Tasic, tortured in August in Vranje); other victims
suffered a ruptured eardrum (Nemanja Jovic from Belgrade), bruised ribs (Marko
Brkic from Novi Sad), and other physical injuries.
On July 18, the Serbian parliament amended the law on the judiciary to
strengthen the role of parliament in the selection of judges, at the expense of an
independent body of experts, the High Judicial Council.The new provisions left the
council its role in nominating judicial candidates but, in cases where parliament
rejects the nomination, gave the decision on alternative candidates to parliament’s
judicial committee.The amendments also excluded the High Judicial Council from
the procedure for the election of the presidents of the courts.
On February 26, new legislation in Serbia replaced the death penalty with a maximum
prison sentence of forty years. In June, Montenegro also abolished death
penalty.
Although the Yugoslav constitution and law on the army allowed for alternative
military service in civilian institutions, the army continued to reject all requests by
conscientious objectors for service in humanitarian, health, or other similar institutions.
While most of the media operated freely during 2002, the cabinet of the Serbian
Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic effectively shaped the editorial policy of the two
main private television stations in F.R. Yugoslavia, Television BK and Television
Pink, through behind-the-scenes pressures.
The governments of Serbia and F.R. Yugoslavia failed to protect freedom of
expression when extreme nationalists repeatedly disrupted an exhibition of war
photographs by American artist Ron Haviv. The exhibition mostly consisted of
images documenting war crimes in Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo. The nationalists’
threats and violence,which no government official denounced, forced the organizers
to close down the exhibition in Uzice, Kragujevac, and Cacak. Only in Cacak
were misdemeanor charges brought against the perpetrators, resulting in three
minor penalties.
On February 13, the federal parliament adopted a Law on the Rights and Freedoms
of National Minorities. The law was prepared with the assistance of the
Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and it provided for broad protection of minority rights. The treatment of Hungarians,
Bosniacs, Croats, and Albanians in Serbia (outside of Kosovo) was satisfactory
in 2002, but police brutality against Roma continued to take place, and
discrimination against Roma in various fields of public life remained widespread.
Prosecutors continued to dismiss complaints of discrimination or simply
failed to take any action to address them, and legal provisions against discrimination
remained inadequate. Thousands of Roma families, many of them displaced
from Kosovo, continued to live in makeshift settlements in the vicinity of towns, an August 2002 court decision in which one accused policeman was sentenced to
eighteen months of imprisonment.
Serbian human rights groups and media registered a dozen serious cases of
police torture between December 2001 and October 2002. The abuses often
occurred in police stations, when officials attempted to compel detainees to admit
to theft or other crimes. As a consequence of the abuse, in one case the victim
underwent brain surgery (Nenad Tasic, tortured in August in Vranje); other victims
suffered a ruptured eardrum (Nemanja Jovic from Belgrade), bruised ribs (Marko
Brkic from Novi Sad), and other physical injuries.
On July 18, the Serbian parliament amended the law on the judiciary to
strengthen the role of parliament in the selection of judges, at the expense of an
independent body of experts, the High Judicial Council.The new provisions left the
council its role in nominating judicial candidates but, in cases where parliament
rejects the nomination, gave the decision on alternative candidates to parliament’s
judicial committee.The amendments also excluded the High Judicial Council from
the procedure for the election of the presidents of the courts.
On February 26, new legislation in Serbia replaced the death penalty with a maximum
prison sentence of forty years. In June, Montenegro also abolished death
penalty.
Although the Yugoslav constitution and law on the army allowed for alternative
military service in civilian institutions, the army continued to reject all requests by
conscientious objectors for service in humanitarian, health, or other similar institutions.
While most of the media operated freely during 2002, the cabinet of the Serbian
Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic effectively shaped the editorial policy of the two
main private television stations in F.R. Yugoslavia, Television BK and Television
Pink, through behind-the-scenes pressures.
The governments of Serbia and F.R. Yugoslavia failed to protect freedom of
expression when extreme nationalists repeatedly disrupted an exhibition of war
photographs by American artist Ron Haviv. The exhibition mostly consisted of
images documenting war crimes in Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo. The nationalists’
threats and violence,which no government official denounced, forced the organizers
to close down the exhibition in Uzice, Kragujevac, and Cacak. Only in Cacak
were misdemeanor charges brought against the perpetrators, resulting in three
minor penalties.
On February 13, the federal parliament adopted a Law on the Rights and Freedoms
of National Minorities. The law was prepared with the assistance of the
Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and it provided for broad protection of minority rights. The treatment of Hungarians,
Bosniacs, Croats, and Albanians in Serbia (outside of Kosovo) was satisfactory
in 2002, but police brutality against Roma continued to take place, and
discrimination against Roma in various fields of public life remained widespread.
Prosecutors continued to dismiss complaints of discrimination or simply
failed to take any action to address them, and legal provisions against discrimination
remained inadequate. Thousands of Roma families, many of them displaced
from Kosovo, continued to live in makeshift settlements in the vicinity of towns, Serbia and Montenegro, the governments prepared draft laws to establish an
ombudsman. The laws had not been adopted as of November.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In a report presented on March 25 to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights,
Jose Cutileiro, special representative on the situation of human rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and F.R. Yugoslavia, criticized police ill-treatment in Serbia and the
lack of implementation of government plans for national minorities in Montenegro.
On February 12, the trial of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic
began at the ICTY.Milosevic stood accused of command responsibility for crimes
committed against non-Serbs in Kosovo, Bosnia, and Croatia. Between February
and September, the prosecutor presented evidence of alleged crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed in 1999 in Kosovo. On September 26, the
presentation of evidence for crimes in Croatia and Bosnia began. Milosevic was
conducting his own defense, and he often used the significant latitude the trial
chamber allowed him in the cross-examination of witnesses to make arguments
only vaguely related to the charges contained in the indictment.
Six other individuals were transferred from F.R.Yugoslavia to the custody of the
ICTY in 2002 (see above),but trial had not begun in any of these cases as of November.
The tribunal provisionally released two indicted Yugoslav citizens, Pavle Strugar
and Miodrag Jokic, after receiving guarantees from the Yugoslav government
that the two would appear for trial.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission to
F.R. Yugoslavia organized, jointly with the Serbian Ministry of Interior, multiethnic
police trainings aimed at establishing an ethnically mixed police presence in the
area of Presevo,Bujanovac,and Medvedja, the three municipalities in southern Serbia
with a significant Albanian minority. The OSCE also monitored and positively
evaluated the July 28 municipal elections in this area. In June, it organized a conference
focusing on domestic war crimes trials. The session concluded with an
observation that there were “substantial problems within the judiciaries now that
should be addressed if the administration of justice is to meet international standards
and the standards set out in the European Convention on Human Rights.”
The OSCE mission in Belgrade assisted the Serbian authorities in the reform of
media and the judiciary. In Montenegro, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights (ODIHR) focused on the October 20 parliamentary and
presidential elections. In a report issued in August, the ODIHR gave a negative
assessment of the new legislation on the elections and the media, which had been
enacted by an ad hoc coalition of pro-Serb parties and the pro-independence radicals.
On ODIHR’s advice, the elections took place under the old legislation in place at the time the elections were called, supplemented by a limited number of additional
rules that the major parties adopted by consensus in September. ODIHR
concluded that the elections were conducted generally in accordance with international
standards.
Council of Europe
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) recommended
membership for F.R. Yugoslavia at its plenary session in September. In connection
with its vote the PACE outlined a list of commitments on which progress would be
scrutinized post-accession, in areas including cooperation with the ICTY, domestic
war crimes trials, police abuse, and discrimination against Roma. The Committee
of Ministers declined at its November session, however, to formally invite F.R.
Yugoslavia to become a Council of Europe member, because Serbia and Montenegro
had failed to produce a constitutional charter of a new state.
In a recommendation on the situation of refugees and displaced persons in F.R.
Yugoslavia, adopted in June, the PACE expressed concern about “the still unresolved
question of refugees and internally displaced persons” in the country and
called for renewed efforts on the part of the international community and the
authorities of F.R.Yugoslavia to address the problem.
On December 19, 2001, the European Court of Human Rights declared inadmissible
for lack of jurisdiction the application by six Belgrade families against the
seventeen member states of NATO that are also parties to the European Convention
on Human Rights. The complaint concerned the April 23, 1999 bombing by
NATO during the Kosovo conflict of the Belgrade headquarters of Radio-Television
Serbia, in which relatives of the applicants had been killed.The court found that the
deceased were not within the jurisdiction of the respondent states,due to the NATO
states’ lack of effective control of Serbia at the time the bombing took place.
European Union
In the course of 2002, the E.U. acted as a mediator in negotiations between the
Serbian and Montenegrin authorities over constitutional reform. Montenegrin
officials occasionally accused the E.U. of bias in favor of Serbia. E.U. High Representative
for Foreign Policy and Security Javier Solana, and his special envoys, visited
Yugoslavia on a number of occasions and participated in the negotiations.
European Commissioner for External Relations Chris Patten also met with Serbian
and Montenegrin officials on July 3 in Belgrade.He announced that financial assistance
to Yugoslavia would increase from Û195 million (U.S.$192 million) in 2002
to Û255 million ($251 million) in 2003.
In an April 4 Stabilization and Association Report, the European Commission
identified police reform, eradication of corruption, improvements in freedom of
expression, and cooperation with the ICTY as the main outstanding issues that the
authorities needed to address. The E.U.’s failure to insist on Yugoslav cooperation
with the ICTY, however, prompted ICTY Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte in April to
urge stronger E.U. pressure.
United States
On May 21,U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell lifted a freeze on financial assistance
to F.R.Yugoslavia, after receiving assurances from Yugoslav officials that they
would cooperate with the ICTY. U.S. economic pressure was instrumental in the
adoption of the ICTY cooperation law and other measures taken by Belgrade to
improve cooperation with the ICTY.At the same time, in August the U.S. requested
that the Yugoslav government enter into an agreement with the U.S. whereby
Yugoslavia would commit itself not to transfer U.S. citizens accused of war crimes
to the International Criminal Court. Individual Yugoslav officials either opposed
the request in strong terms or stated that Yugoslavia would take a stance identical
to that of the E.U. No such agreement with the U.S. had been signed as of this
writing.
KOSOVO
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Kosovo’s first post-conflict general elections, held in November 2001, were
largely peaceful and fair. Ibrahim Rugova’s Democratic League of Kosova (LDK)
won a significant lead over the other parties, but not enough for a majority in the
120-seat Assembly. Thirty-five seats, including twenty guaranteed by the Constitutional
Framework, went to the Kosovo Serb “Return” Coalition and five other
minority parties. The successful conduct of the election was overshadowed, however,
by difficult subsequent negotiations among the LDK, the Democratic Party of
Kosova (PDK), and the Alliance for the Future of Kosova. It took until the end of
February 2002, and three abortive parliamentary votes, for the parties to agree on
Rugova’s election as president of Kosovo and the appointment of Bajram Rexhepi,
a physician and former PDK mayor of Mitrovica/Mitrovice, to head the new government.
In February, the U.N. secretary-general appointed German diplomat Michael
Steiner as his new special representative in Kosovo. In April, Steiner presented the
U.N. Security Council with an “exit strategy” that contained a series of benchmarks
to be met before Kosovo’s final status would be decided and the international mission
terminated; these included respect for the rule of law, freedom of movement,
and the right of all Kosovars to return to their homes. Questions about Kosovo’s
final status—that is, its future relationship with Serbia—continued to affect the
overall stability of the province and led to the first tensions between the newly
elected institutions and the U.N.Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Municipal elections held in October 2002 were judged “within European standards”
by international monitors, but were marred by the killing of Ukë Bytyçi, the
LDK mayor of Suva Reka/Suhareke, the day after the ballot.The majority of Kosovo
Serb voters boycotted the elections, in a blow to U.N. efforts to integrate them into
the local political processes.
The year saw, for the first time since 1999, a significant decline in the number of
life-threatening attacks against minority communities. In order to remove psychological
barriers to free movement, the Kosovo peacekeeping force (KFOR) replaced
checkpoints and other static security arrangements around minority areas with
mobile patrols. Serbs and other non-Albanians began to venture out of their
enclaves onto the main roads and into towns. Despite these improvements, however,
minorities—including Roma and other non-Albanians as well as Serbs—generally
faced a precarious security environment. The greater mobility made them
subject to persistent intimidation and harassment, such as stone throwing, vandalism,
and verbal abuse. In October, a large Albanian mob attacked a bus carrying
Serb pensioners in the town of Pec/Peja and injured several UNMIK police officers
escorting it.
Realities and perceptions of insecurity, as well as scarce donor commitment,
affected the return of refugees and internally displaced Kosovars. The number of
returns remained low, despite statements of support by the new local institutions
and an UNMIK campaign to inform potential returnees about improving circumstances
in the province. UNMIK faced repeated threats of mass returns from
groups of displaced Kosovo Serbs, and pressures by the Belgrade authorities to
build large, segregated enclaves for returning minorities. Kosovo Roma refugees in
Macedonia protested unbearable camp conditions and complained that the international
community was neglecting their plight. Ethnic Albanian local officials in
Kosovo, on the other hand, continued to resist significant minority returns, despite
their proclaimed support for the process.
With the exception of the high-profile Milosevic trial at the ICTY, there was little
progress toward accountability for war crimes committed during the conflict,
clearly undermining the processes of refugee return and reconciliation.Neither the
Serbian authorities nor UNMIK took effective steps to hold accountable lowerlevel
Serbs for crimes committed against Albanians; at the same time, no Albanians
were indicted for war crimes against Serbs, Roma, and other civilians. The ICTY
prosecutor said in October that investigations of ethnic Albanian suspects were
being hampered by witnesses’ reluctance to confirm their earlier statements and
appear in court. The number of war crimes convictions handed out by the Kosovo
courts remained insignificant, with most trials ending in acquittals or convictions
for lesser crimes.
Although the U.N. stepped up efforts to hold accountable those responsible for
post-war ethnically motivated crimes, most such perpetrators remained at large. In
December 2001, the Supreme Court ordered the release of three Kosovo Albanians
implicated in the February 2001 bombing of a bus full of Serb civilians. The U.N.
administrators complied, after having held the suspects for months in extrajudicial
detention in defiance of similar court orders; they claimed “it had not been possible
to transform the [relevant] intelligence …into evidence that would secure their
conviction in a court of law.” To address such problems, the UNMIK Department
of Justice and the UNMIK police set up specialized structures to gather and analyze
evidence in sensitive cases.
While police statistics showed a general decrease in violent crime during the
year, KFOR troops and the UNMIK police faced some of the most aggressive confrontations since their deployment. The attackers were often Serb and Albanian
extremist groups that had been tolerated for too long by the peacekeeping mission.
The hottest security spot continued to be northern Mitrovica/Mitrovice,where the
February arrest of two “bridge watchers” (a violent gang supposedly organized to
protect the town’s Serbian population from Albanian attacks) triggered a wave of
growing vandalism against the international forces. On April 8, when UNMIK
police arrested a bridge gang leader, a rioting crowd responded with hand grenades
and gunfire, leaving twenty-two police officers injured.
Later in the year, the UNMIK police made a failed attempt to arrest Milan
Ivanovic, the extremist leader of the Serb National Council for northern Kosovo,
who was reportedly caught on tape attacking the police during the April riots.
When Ivanovic fled to Serbia, the Belgrade authorities not only refused to hand
him over, but also urged him not to surrender. This was only the most blatant
refusal by Belgrade to stop supporting Kosovo Serb radicals and illegal parallel
institutions (including parallel courts and security structures) that undermined
UNMIK’s authority, individual rights, and the Serb minority’s reintegration into
a multiethnic Kosovo. After months of international pressure, Ivanovic surrendered
to UNMIK police in October and was released on bail by an international
judge.
Kosovo Albanian leaders’ support for the rule of law was tested throughout 2002
as UNMIK police conducted a series of arrests of former Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) members.At least four different groups, including several active members of
the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), were charged with serious crimes against fellow
ethnic Albanians allegedly committed during and after the armed conflict. In
November 2001, Gani Ymeri, a senior KPC officer, was arrested for the alleged kidnapping
and attempted murder of a Kosovo Serb family in the last days of the conflict;
investigations into the case were ongoing as of October 2002, but Ymeri had
in the meantime been released on bail.
The arrests of Kosovo Albanians met with negative reaction from the Albanian
public, frustrated by the judiciary’s ongoing failure to address the crimes they had
suffered as well. Each of the high-profile arrests was followed by protests, which
turned violent in February and August, but subsided with time. However, the
August detention of former KLA commander Rustem Mustafa, on reported
charges of wartime murder and torture of fellow Albanians, triggered a barrage of
accusations against UNMIK by the media and politicians associated with the rebel
movement. The Kosovo government issued an official statement charging that the
KLA leaders’ arrests were politically motivated. Such attitudes put unacceptable
pressure on the pending judicial proceedings and prejudged their outcome.
Women’s groups welcomed the inclusion of rape charges in the Milosevic
indictment on Kosovo, as amended in October 2001. In 2002, Kosovar Albanian
victims of rapes committed during the 1999 campaign of “ethnic cleansing” gave
testimony on those charges at the ICTY, facing Milosevic in the courtroom.
The UNMIK police estimated that 104 establishments operated with trafficked
women and girls forced into prostitution throughout the province.Despite efforts
to train prosecutors and judges, both still failed to observe elements of a new antitrafficking
regulation designed to protect trafficking victims. The lack of witness protection for victims who agreed to testify against their traffickers remained a
major concern. This, coupled with bribery and intimidation of the judiciary, frustrated
police efforts to crack down on traffickers, who continued to operate with
widespread impunity.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights groups did important monitoring, reporting, and advocacy in
the province, although they were constrained by the security situation and, on
occasion, the international administration. In January, Serb “bridge watchers” in
Mitrovica/Mitrovice seized two vehicles and harassed staff members of the
Humanitarian Law Center. The center said that the bridge gang consistently prevented
its staff from crossing into the northern part of town to observe trials. The
Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms protested against the
refusal of the Pristina/Prishtina prison authorities to grant them access to
detainees.
Ombudsperson Marek Antoni Nowicki, who was reappointed for a second
term, made good headway toward the consolidation of the ombudsperson institution
and started preparations for its gradual handover to local leadership. The
ombudsperson’s second annual report was highly critical of UNMIK’s human
rights record, citing, among other things, its arbitrary restrictions of liberty and
property rights, violations of basic suffrage, and failure to make legislation available
in local languages.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
As new crises unfolded around the world, the international community began
to show signs of peacebuilding fatigue in Kosovo. This led to calls for a speedier
handover of authority to local institutions, but also raised concerns that a premature
disengagement would be counter-productive for regional peace and
stability.
United Nations
The U.N. mission strengthened its efforts to steer Kosovo toward a path of democracy,
rule of law, and economic recovery.More than three years into its international
administration, however, the mission continued also to restrict and derogate
from basic rights, invoking vague justifications of internal emergency and threats
to international peace and security. One instance of such arbitrariness was the decision—
taken without any due process—to bar three party leaders from contesting
the November 2001 election.
On a number of occasions, members of the peacekeeping mission violated fundamental
rights and set negative precedents for the rule of law in Kosovo. In one
egregious example, in February an Austrian officer of the UNMIK police, along with two local subordinates,beat an ethnic Albanian detainee for three hours,made
him dig his own grave, and forced him to walk through a Serb village wearing a sign
that read: “I kill all Serbs!”The officer was detained and stripped of his U.N.immunity,
but was then illegally whisked out of Kosovo by the Austrian authorities,who,
as of this writing, refused to send him back for prosecution in Kosovo. UNMIK
served an indictment to the Austrian government, but no trial date had been set as
of late October.
A lengthy report by Mental Disability Rights International revealed that patients
at Kosovo’s psychiatric facilities were routinely subjected to physical and sexual violence,
arbitrary committal, and grossly inadequate treatment. According to the
rights group, UNMIK was informed of the abuses, but did little to guarantee the
patients’ physical integrity and basic rights.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission in
Kosovo continued to play an important role, in particular through its monitoring
and reporting on the situation of minorities, the judicial system, and property
rights. A detailed analysis of seventeen war crime trials, published in September,
found serious deficiencies in their prosecution and adjudication. These included
lack of evidence gathering capacities, insufficient support for judges and prosecutors,
ignorance of international humanitarian law, and poor legal reasoning in
general.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
In May, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) announced a reduction
of its thirty-eight thousand-strong presence in Kosovo by around five thousand
troops, stressing that this reflected the improved security situation rather than a
waning commitment to the region. The NATO-led KFOR continued to violate
habeas corpus rights by detaining individuals without charge and without bringing
them promptly before a judge.An OSCE report charged that neither international
law nor the security situation on the ground supported such practices.
European Union
The E.U., Kosovo’s biggest donor, announced in September a significant reduction
in future aid to the province—Û50 million (U.S.$48.3 million) for 2003, down
from Û134 million ($129.6 million) in 2002. E.U. officials said they were shifting
focus from physical reconstruction aid to the strengthening of Kosovo’s institutions.
The E.U. supported UNMIK’s efforts to uphold the rule of law and condemned
the government’s allegations of bias regarding the arrests of former KLA
commanders.
United States
The United States pushed for accelerated efforts to reach sustainable self-government
in Kosovo, while encouraging the E.U. to take the lead in assisting and
integrating the region. The State Department’s second report on trafficking in persons
included only a cursory statement on the Kosovo situation, even though its
annual human rights report found that trafficking “was a serious and growing
problem” in the province.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Human Rights Concerns in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, 7/02
MIDDLE EAST AND
NORTH AFRICA OVERVIEW
The impact of the U.S.-led war on terrorism on individual rights, the Bush
administration’s stated objectives of sidelining Yasser Arafat and removing
Saddam Hussein from power, and the looming threat of war against Iraq all dominated
public attention in the Middle East and North Africa throughout the year.
Assaults on freedom of expression and association remained serious problems and
were especially acute in Egypt, Iran, and Syria. Peaceful critics and democratic
reformers found themselves beleaguered—put on trial, sometimes sentenced to
long prison terms, or otherwise marginalized, without access to state-controlled
mass media.Governments continued to harass, arrest, and prosecute human rights
activists under legal systems that lacked independence. The human rights crisis
arising from Israel’s continued occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and
armed Palestinian resistance to it, provided a shared but painful reference point for
governments and ordinary citizens alike throughout the Middle East and North
Africa.
From Rabat to Tehran, there was profound dismay at the Bush administration’s
flouting of international law with respect to the rights of prisoners held at the U.S.
military base in Guantanamo,Cuba, and the continuing harsh treatment in the U.S.
of Muslims of Middle Eastern, North African, and South Asian origin—including
racial profiling, arbitrary arrests, coerced confessions, secret detentions, and deportations.
Local human rights activists and others were concerned that these actions
conveyed a strong message that basic rights and safeguards could be shelved in
times of crisis or emergency, precisely the rationale that governments across the
region have long used to justify their own widespread abuses.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Residents of countries throughout the Middle East and North Africa, long
uneasy with the authoritarian character of their own governments and angry at
perceived double standards of Western leaders toward the region, had few outlets
for sustained and substantive political expression and no peaceful mechanisms to
change their rulers or political structures. Political power remained hereditary
under law in Jordan,Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and the smaller states in the Persian
Gulf, and was appropriated unilaterally by leaders of long-ruling political parties in
countries such as Egypt, Iraq, Libya, Syria,Tunisia, and Yemen. In February, Shaikh Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, Bahrain’s ruling emir, issued decrees unilaterally proclaiming
a new constitution and changing his title to king.
Emergency or exceptional laws,which international law permits only in extreme
circumstances and for limited periods, remained in force and circumscribed basic
rights in Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel and the occupied West Bank and Gaza
Strip, and Syria. Special security courts, and military courts in which civilians were
tried and whose procedures did not meet international fair-trial standards, continued
to operate in Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Tunisia, the Israeli-occupied
West Bank and Gaza Strip, and the territories under Palestinian control. Lebanon’s
military court continued to prosecute civilians for political offenses in unfair trials.
Syria’s state security court prosecuted and convicted peaceful activists for vaguely
worded political offenses and its judgments could not be appealed. Iran’s Islamic
Revolutionary Courts and Special Court for the Clergy were grossly unfair, operating
with complete disregard for due process safeguards, usually behind closed
doors.
Administration of justice elsewhere was seriously flawed. The judiciary in Algeria
and Tunisia showed little or no independence when handling politically charged
cases. Criminal trials in Saudi Arabia were often held without lawyers present, and
confessions were coerced under torture. The majority of these states have ratified
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Yet all violated core rights considered nonderogable under these two international
treaties, even in times of national emergency. Local groups reported the
gradual reversion to the use of torture in Israel, along with a sharp increase in the
ill-treatment of detainees
Independent civil society institutions were fragile or nonexistent in most countries.
Throughout the region, political parties, human rights organizations, and
other entities came under attack from the state or were hampered because laws did
not permit them to exist legally. In Iran and Saudi Arabia, conservative clerical
establishments remained entrenched and powerful, retarding progress and hampering
the development of independent and effective national institutions.
Governments that permitted some space for opposition politics continued to
outlaw certain political groups—often Islamist in ideology—and prosecute their
members. Algerian authorities maintained their ban on the Wafa party on the
grounds that it was too close to the Islamic Salvation Front, which had been outlawed
in 1992 after a strong electoral showing. Tunisia continued to imprison persons
on charges of belonging to the banned Nahdha party. In countries such as
Syria and Saudi Arabia, there were no laws on the books to enable peaceful political
opposition groups to obtain state authorization to function freely and participate
openly in the political process. Political parties remained outlawed in Bahrain,
although the king did scrap a provision of the new electoral law that prevented
existing societies and associations from campaigning for candidates.
Elected parliaments or appointed national consultative councils generally
served as rubber stamps for the executive branch or lacked powers under the law to
challenge state policies or initiate meaningful reforms. Parliamentary elections
scheduled for 2002 in Jordan and Yemen were postponed until 2003, with “inappropriate conditions” cited as the reason. Bahrain, which held municipal elections
in May, held parliamentary elections in October for a forty-seat lower house in a
reconstituted National Assembly. The participation rate was more than 53 percent,
despite the fact that four political societies associated with the nationalist left and
Islamist opposition publicly boycotted the contest. One reason for the protest was
electoral districting that disproportionately favored the minority Sunni population;
the other was the ruling family’s decision, in a new constitution decreed in
February, to give an appointed upper chamber (shura council) an equal number of
seats and a shared legislative role. Although campaigning for the boycott was not
permitted, al-Wifaq, the leading Shi’a Islamist society and largest of the boycotting
groups, had a public meeting that was by far the largest of the campaign—a peaceful
gathering that reportedly numbered more than twenty thousand people.
Various governments imprisoned prominent peaceful critics, civil society
activists, and proponents of democratic reform. In Egypt, sociology professor
Saadeddin Ibrahim was sentenced in July to seven years of imprisonment and
twenty-seven of his colleagues received between one- and five-year terms. The sentence
was subsequently quashed in December by the Court of Cassation and a retrial
was scheduled for January 2003. In Syria, economics professor Aref Dalila and
nine others, including two elected members of parliament, received prison terms of
up to ten years. In Saudi Arabia, professor Said bin Zuair, a university dean, continued
to be held without charge since his arrest in March 1995. In Iran, leading
reformists and dissidents once again were targeted for expressing peaceful political
opinions. In November, the sentencing to death for apostasy of reformist lecturer
Hashem Aghajari for questioning the absolute authority of the religious leadership
was only the most extreme example of a hostile climate for freedom of expression.
(His case recalled that of liberal cleric Hassan Yusefi-Eshkevari,who was arrested in
August 2000 after participating in a controversial reformist conference in Berlin
and subsequently sentenced to death for apostasy. Although the sentence was later
quashed on appeal, Yusefi-Eshkevari remained in prison at this writing, serving a
seven-year term.) Despite threats, prosecutions, and imprisonment at the hands of
the hard-line judiciary, there was lively criticism of the government in Iran
although progress toward reform remained elusive.
Restrictive press and publications laws gave officials in several countries broad
power to bring charges against journalists, censor and suppress information, and
ban or close newspapers and magazines. Bahrain’s new press law, decree 47/2002,
issued in November, continued to require new publications to obtain cabinetapproved
licenses through the Ministry of Information. The law also authorized
confiscation and banning of publications “through proper legal channels.”Some of
the stipulated offences under the law were vaguely worded, such as insulting the
official religion, while others clearly infringed on the right to free expression, such
as criticizing the king for government policies or publishing reports that adversely
affected the value of the national currency.
In Lebanon, a court-ordered indefinite closure on September 4 of the independent,
privately owned Murr Television station (MTV) and its radio station
Radio Mont Liban generated a political uproar and was viewed as an enormous setback
for freedom of expression. The publications court ruled that MTV, which openly criticized the Syrian presence in Lebanon, violated a provision of the electoral
law by broadcasting “unauthorized political propaganda” during a June 2002
by-election for a vacant parliament seat. The station’s owner, opposition politician
Gabriel Murr, had been a candidate in the by-election. Following the closure, the
Interior Ministry banned planned demonstrations and sit-ins, and security forces
forcibly dispersed protesters in Beirut on September 7. The publication court’s
decision was upheld on October 21, leaving four hundred workers unemployed.
Exiled opposition leader Gen. Michel Aoun commented that such actions were
transforming Lebanon into an “ugly photocopy of Syria.”
Toward Accountability and Justice: Mixed Results
Current and former government officials, and security forces with abusive
human rights records, continued to enjoy impunity with the inevitable consequence
of continued patterns of prolonged incommunicado detention, torture,
and other abuses. Victims of torture at the hands of elite internal security departments
of various interior ministries—such as Egypt’s State Security Investigation
or Saudi Arabia’s General Directorate of Investigation—had no recourse to independent
investigations or the prospect of justice.
In Algeria, there were isolated cases of police, gendarmes, and self-defense group
members prosecuted for rights violations, but the dreaded securité militaire agency
remained untouchable. Similarly, armed group members who participated in the
Algerian government’s offer of amnesty largely escaped any court scrutiny of their
past deeds, including acts of murder.
In Syria and Iraq, accountability for horrific past abuses such as mass extrajudicial
killings, “disappearances,” and indiscriminate military attacks against civilian
populations remained unthinkable under the respective ruling Ba’ath parties. In
Bahrain, the king issued numerous laws by decree which the new national assembly
was not empowered to review retroactively.Decree 56/2002 effectively ruled out
any civil suits or prosecutions against officials alleged to be responsible for serious
human rights violations committed prior to the general amnesty issued as part of
the king’s political reform program in February 2001.
Amidst this gloomy picture, important initiatives to investigate and hold
accountable the perpetrators of gross human rights violations—including torture,
summary executions, and “disappearances”—continued to be undertaken in several
countries,with the hopeful promise that a culture of accountability was slowly
taking root. In some cases, alleged perpetrators were prosecuted in domestic courts.
In Egypt, for example, four police officers were each sentenced to three years of
imprisonment in two separate cases in August and October in connection with the
death of two detainees. Both victims were apparently subjected to electric shocks
and other forms of torture.
In other cases, justice was sought abroad under the principle of universal jurisdiction.
In France, Algerian torture victims sought to prosecute Khaled Nezzar,
Algeria’s defense minister from 1990 to 1993, saying he bore command responsibility
for the torture they allegedly suffered at the hands of his subordinates. In separate
cases, French courts dismissed these complaints on the grounds that the evidence directly linking the ex-minister to acts of torture was not sufficiently compelling.
In contrast, a Tunisian torture victim in exile persuaded a French judge to
issue in February an international arrest warrant for torture against Khaled Ben
Saïd, a diplomat stationed in Strasbourg. The plaintiff ’s complaint alleged that in
1996 Ben Said had been the supervising police officer when interrogators in Jendouba
bound her ankles and wrists together and beat her with sticks and fists. Ben
Saïd disappeared after the warrant was issued.
There were developments in the lawsuit in Belgium that twenty-three survivors
of the September 1982 massacre of at least nine hundred civilians in the Sabra and
Shatila refugee camps in Beirut lodged in June 2001 against Israel’s prime minister
Ariel Sharon and director-general of the defense ministry Maj. Gen. (Res.) Amos
Yaron. The plaintiffs charged that Sharon, then minister of defense, Yaron, then
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) brigadier-general and division commander, and other
unnamed Israelis and Lebanese were criminally responsible for the killing, rape,
and “disappearances” of civilians. They argued that these acts together constituted
a crime of genocide, a crime against humanity, and war crimes under the Geneva
Conventions, and were punishable under Belgian law. On June 26, 2002, a Belgian
court of appeals ruled that although Belgian courts had jurisdiction, the complaint
was inadmissible because the defendants were not present on Belgian soil. Lawyers
for the plaintiffs appealed the decision on July 3, arguing to the Court of Cassation
that the ruling was contrary to the letter and spirit of Belgium’s universal jurisdiction
law of 1993 (for war crimes) and the 1999 amendment of the law expanding
its scope to include crimes against humanity and genocide.
These nascent efforts to press for accountability for past abuses were in contrast
to the lack of enthusiasm shown by regional governments for the International
Criminal Court.The court,which will prosecute crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity, and war crimes if national courts fail to respond,initially had a lukewarm
reception from governments in the region. Only Jordan signed the treaty in 1998,
and Israel and Iraq were among the seven states that voted against it. Twelve countries
in the region did sign the treaty, most of them in the closing weeks as the deadline
of December 31, 2000 approached. As of November 2002, only one country,
Jordan, had ratified the treaty. In contrast, the leader of Israel’s Likud party had
drafted legislation criminalizing cooperation with the ICC, yet to be tabled at the
time of this writing. A revealing Amnesty International survey of existing national
laws relevant to universal jurisdiction prosecutions found that national laws in at
least Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen could enable
criminal prosecutions for grave breaches of the Geneva conventions, other war
crimes,or lesser crimes committed abroad by foreigners resident in those countries.
The Mounting Toll:
Civilian Victims in the Israel-Palestine Conflict
Intensified and brutal clashes between Israeli military forces and Palestinian
armed groups, and the abject failure of the relevant parties and the international
community to ensure the protection of civilians, cast a long shadow over efforts to
instill greater respect for international human rights and humanitarian law throughout the region. In 2002 three separate Human Rights Watch reports, summarized
at the end of this overview, addressed the deteriorating conditions.
By November 2002, some 2,500 Palestinians and over 650 Israelis,many of them
civilians, had been killed since violence erupted in September 2000.At least twentyone
thousand Palestinians and two thousand Israelis were injured, including individuals
maimed for life. Both Israeli security forces and Palestinian armed groups
committed grave breaches of the rules of war in deliberately attacking civilians or
displaying serious and systematic disregard for innocent civilian lives. While old
abuses continued and intensified, new ones appeared.
During Israel’s repeated military incursions and eventual re-occupation of most
Palestinian Authority-controlled territories in the West Bank, the IDF used excessive
lethal force; killed Palestinian civilians willfully and unlawfully; inflicted wanton
damage on civilian homes and properties, looting and stealing in the course of
their searches to an extent not seen in earlier years; and detained at least 4,500 Palestinian
males. In a new development, the Israeli authorities at times actively prevented
outside observers, including journalists, human rights activists, and United
Nations fact-finders from entering the country. Israeli authorities also repeatedly
impeded access to the injured by ambulances, emergency medical staff, and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).Other violations of the principle
of civilian immunity included collective punishments in the form of intensified
and extended restrictions on movement and lengthy curfews imposed on Palestinian
towns and villages; and the taking of civilians as hostages, their coercion—
including children—to perform life-endangering acts that assisted IDF operations,
and their use as “human shields.”
Suicide attacks against civilians by armed Palestinian groups were carried out
with unprecedented frequency during the first part of 2002. In previous years,
Hamas and Islamic Jihad carried out such attacks, but by the beginning of 2002 the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades had
also joined in carrying out such attacks. Despite repeatedly condemning these
attacks, the Palestinian Authority (PA) failed to move decisively against the groups
while it still had the capacity to so. By mid-year, the PA’s capacity to maintain law
and order was almost nonexistent.
A PA moratorium on the death penalty collapsed on June 6,when two men were
executed by firing squad in Gaza after a three-hour trial at the Gaza State Security
Court. Palestinian state security courts sentenced at least thirteen people to death
following summary trials which did not meet international fair trial standards.
Armed Palestinians killed at least twenty-two alleged collaborators in vigilante
street attacks.
A major concern was the culture of impunity that had taken hold. Israeli authorities
repeatedly failed to conduct timely or credible investigations into numerous
IDF abuses, including unlawful or willful killings of Palestinian civilians. Where
such investigations did occur, the results were rarely made public. The Palestinian
Authority, in turn, failed to bring to justice those responsible for planning and carrying
out suicide bombings or other attacks against Israeli civilians while it had
capacity to do so. Both sides justified their violations of international law by pointing
to the other side’s repeated abuses of these very standards.
Continued Targeting of Civilians in Algeria
A similar disregard for the principle of civilian immunity could also be found in
Algeria where,despite an overall decline in political violence, an average of 125 lives
were lost each month as a result of such violence, most of them civilians.While the
government of President Bouteflika could claim to have restored some security in
the major cities, rebel groups, including the Armed Islamic Group (GIA), continued
to attack civilians indiscriminately in rural areas and smaller cities.
Security forces themselves continued to act with virtual impunity against the
armed groups and at times against the civilian population. Suspected militants
were either killed, at times in suspicious circumstances, or detained incommunicado
beyond legal limits putting them at risk of torture or mistreatment. Despite
the systematic abuses of the security forces in putting down Berber protests in 2001,
no more than two or three agents had been brought to justice. The security forces
continued to conduct operations in the Kabylie in 2002 during which homes and
businesses were looted and ransacked, and civilian passersby were beaten in the
streets.
The Struggle for Gender Equality
Despite some progress in the arena of electoral politics,women faced systematic
gender discrimination, particularly in states that maintained religiously based personal
status laws and where blatantly discriminatory family codes granted husbands
superior rights in terms of divorce, child custody, and inheritance. Saudi
Arabia permitted women for the first time to obtain their own identity cards, but
did not take steps to remove other formidable barriers to gender equality, particularly
with respect to freedom of movement, despite signing the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 2000. In
Syria, women faced discrimination under criminal law and various religion-based
personal status laws, and husbands had the right to request the Interior Ministry to
prohibit spouses from leaving the country. In Egypt and many other states, discriminatory
laws did not permit women married to foreigners or stateless men to
pass their nationality to their children. Jordan, in welcome contrast, passed legislation
in November that enabled female citizens married to foreigners to pass on citizenship
to their children and permitted them to acquire passports without written
permission from their husbands.
Women’s subordinate status in the family and society, and their marginalization
and underrepresentation in public life, made them all the more vulnerable to
domestic violence. Such incidents were underreported and victims faced inadequate
and biased investigations, lack of legal redress, and underfunded counseling
services and protective shelters. In Jordan and some other countries, women continued
to fall victim to so-called honor crimes, in which male family members murdered
female women to restore family “honor” and the perpetrators typically
enjoyed impunity. For example, in one case reported in the daily Jordan Times on
May 19, Jamal Mahmoud was convicted of a misdemeanor, instead of premeditated
murder, for stabbing to death in June 2001 his unmarried pregnant cousin who at the time of her death was engaged to marry the father of her unborn child. The
criminal court ruled, pursuant to article 98 of Jordan’s penal code, that Mahmoud
acted in a fit of fury. The court found that the victim’s actions —becoming pregnant
while unmarried—brought shame and disgrace to her family and led Mahmoud
“to lose his temper and to stab her to death without realizing the
consequences of his actions,” the newspaper reported. The court also acquitted
Mahmoud of abortion charges “because his intentions were aimed at killing his
cousin who brought him disgrace, and not the infant inside her.”
In Bahrain, there were rival peaceful demonstrations in October after the government
proposed a new personal status law that would, among other things,
establish minimum marriage age of sixteen for girls and eighteen for boys, and
require men to provide support for divorced wives and minor children. Women
demonstrators called for a single unified law rather than the separate versions for
Shi’a and Sunni communities as proposed by the government,while religious leaders
and their students, including women, opposed any change in the existing law,
which granted personal status authority to religious courts in accordance with their
respective interpretations of Islamic law.
Some of the elections that took place during the year provided greater openings
for women as voters or candidates. Thirty-five women secured seats in the 325-
member Moroccan House of Representatives during the September legislative elections,
placing Morocco first among Arab states in terms of female political
representation.Morocco was followed by Syria, which had twenty-five women out
of 250 members of parliament. Tunisia had sixteen women in its 175-member parliament,
and Egypt’s parliament included eleven women. The Moroccan government
appointed in November by King Mohammed VI comprised twenty-two
newcomers, including two women,while in Algeria the new government contained
five women ministers. Bahrain joined Qatar and Oman as the three Arab Persian
Gulf states where women had the vote and ran for office. In Bahrain’s municipal
elections in May and national legislative elections in October, more women voted
than men, according to reports.Although no women were elected, two reached the
second-stage run-offs in the legislative elections, where they made good showings.
Rights of Children
In most of the region, children were denied nationality in the country of their
birth if their fathers were not nationals, diminishing their rights and rendering
some stateless. The International Labor Organization estimated in April that 15
percent of the region’s children between age five and fourteen were employed. In
many cases this labor was hazardous or exploitative and violated the rights to education
and health. Girls—and poor, rural, and minority children—were especially
likely to face discrimination in education. Social welfare and juvenile justice systems
offered little protection for children in difficult circumstances, and poor or
abused children living or working on the street were sometimes caught in a cycle of
arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment in detention, and released back to the street.
The government of Morocco did not routinely monitor the situation of thousands
of the country’s children who each year entered Spain unaccompanied and without proper documentation. Nor did the government facilitate repatriation
when it was in the child’s interest. In its May 2002 report,Nowhere to Turn,Human
Rights Watch found that border police regularly beat children expelled from Spain,
stole their property, and detained them in cramped cells with adults. Children as
young as ten were held for hours without access to food, water, or toilets before
police released them, sometimes late at night. Despite large numbers of unaccompanied
children in Moroccan border and port cities, the government did little to
ensure their care and rehabilitation, and typically only provided shelter to children
convicted of crimes whom it frequently placed in juvenile detention centers that fell
short of international standards.
Foreign Workers at Risk
Migrant workers throughout the region, particularly women in low-wage occupations,
remained extremely vulnerable to economic exploitation and other abuse.
In countries such as Saudi Arabia—where sponsors retained the passports and
other important identity documents of their employees—hundreds of thousands
of persons endured poor working conditions, severe restrictions on freedom of
movement, and limited options to seek remedies under the law. In the United Arab
Emirates and Qatar, foreign workers comprised about 75 percent of the population
but were not permitted to organize trade unions. Migrant workers were barred
from joining trade unions in Yemen and newly authorized “labor committees” in
Saudi Arabia.
The Brussels-based International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU)
examined conditions in the region in its Annual Survey ofViolations of Trade Union
Rights,published on June 18.The report cited “widespread”abuse of migrant workers
in Saudi Arabia,which it said reflected “the dreadful conditions still suffered by
most migrant workers in all the Gulf states.” It noted that domestic workers in particular
labored “under conditions verging on slavery,” and endured physical and
sexual abuse, inadequate food, poor salaries, or no pay at all. The ICFTU also highlighted
Lebanon,where it said domestic workers, especially women from Ethiopia,
“suffer[ed] badly from their lack of legal protection,” with many of them “held in
conditions of near slavery.” It noted too that Jordan’s one million foreign workers
were prohibited from joining trade unions and engaging in collective bargaining or
strikes, and domestic and agricultural workers were excluded from protection
under the labor code.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders throughout the region continued to face obstacles and
dangers, including threats to their persons and actual physical attacks, harassment
and intimidation of their families, restrictions on freedom of movement and association,
criminal prosecution, and imprisonment.
Some countries—including Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Syria—did not permit
international human rights organizations access to carry out investigations.Other states, including Egypt, Jordan, and Tunisia, presented no obstacles to entry. Israel,
which had previously been open to international rights groups, actively restricted
the entry of some nongovernmental organization (NGOs), U.N. investigative and
reporting mechanisms, and U.N. humanitarian staff. Algeria, Iran, and Iraq permitted
access to some U.N. special rapporteurs but denied it to others, while the
Libyan foreign minister in a welcome move announced in October that Libya
would open its doors to all of the U.N. human rights mechanisms as well as international
human rights monitors. Saudi Arabia welcomed the special rapporteur on
the independence of judges and lawyers, who conducted a fact-finding mission in
October.
Legal professionals who were active in human rights came under attack during
the year. Iranian lawyer Mohammad Dadkhah was sentenced in May to five months
in prison and banned from practicing law for ten years. In Syria, pro-democracy
lawyers Riad al-Turk and Habib Issa were sentenced in the state security court to
prison terms of two-and-a-half years and five years, respectively. (Turk,who was in
his seventies, had been jailed since his arrest in September 2001 and was released on
humanitarian grounds on November 16, 2002.) In addition, the disciplinary council
of the pro-government Damascus bar association prohibited seventy-one-yearold
defense lawyer and rights activist Haythem al-Maleh from practicing law for
three years. In August, Maleh also was notified to appear in the military court in
January 2003 to face a variety of charges including forming the Human Rights Society
of Syria (HRSS) without approval of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor,
unauthorized distribution of the group’s magazine, and disseminating false information
abroad. In Tunisia, judge Mokhtar Yahiaoui was fired for publishing an
open letter to President Ben Ali denouncing the lack of judicial independence, and
heads of Tunisia’s human rights league and bar association experienced suspicious
break-ins in their private law offices.
The limited and in some cases nonexistent right to freedom of association left
human rights advocates and defenders vulnerable in countries such as Egypt, Saudi
Arabia, and Syria. In June, Egypt’s parliament passed a new law of associations
aimed at regulating the activities of NGOs. The law imposed stringent restrictions
on NGO funding and management, and introduced criminal penalties for any
NGO activity deemed “political,” effectively undermining the right of individual
activists to freedom of expression. Saudi Arabia did not permit locally based
human rights activists to organize openly, and Interior Ministry operatives reacted
quickly and forcefully against citizens who dared to make public any information
about specific abuses. Denial of official legal status significantly hampered rights
groups and civil society forums in Syria, leaving activists in a grey zone and subjected
to criminal prosecution. Two founding members of the Human Rights Society
of Syria (HRSS), Dr.Walid al-Bunni and lawyer Habib Issa, were sentenced to
five years imprisonment in July and August, respectively. In August,HRSS members
Fawaz Tello and Hassan Saaddun received sentences of five years and two years,
respectively, and four other HRSS activists were scheduled for trial in the military
court in January 2003. Dr. Kamal Labwani, a member of Committees for the
Defense of Human Rights in Syria, was sentenced to a three-year prison term in
August.
As in previous years, human rights defenders throughout the region were
detained or imprisoned. In Algeria, activists were jailed on spurious charges of
“inciting unarmed demonstrations” and authorities targeted those who monitored
“disappearances” and assassinations. In Syria, ten advocates of political reform
were prosecuted in 2002 and sentenced to prison terms of up to ten years for
vaguely worded criminal offenses such as “attempting to change the constitution by
illegal means.” In Egypt, Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies Director
Saadeddin Ibrahim, and twenty-seven of his colleagues, were re-tried before the
Supreme State Security Court and convicted in July on politically motivated
charges. Despite his poor health and need for medical attention, Ibrahim received
a new seven-year sentence, which he appealed. Abed Rahman al-Ahmar of the
Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group was released in May after serving one
year in Israeli administrative detention.
Israeli authorities threatened to initiate legal proceedings against, or conduct
investigations of, the activities of human rights organizations such as the Legal
Center for Arab Minority Rights (Adalah). Palestinian organizations were severely
hampered by movement restrictions, and the offices of several groups were damaged
during Israeli military operations in May. Nevertheless, local organizations
continued to operate effectively and consistently litigated in the Israeli High Court
of Justice on a wide range of issues.
Harrasment of activists sometimes included physical assaults, break-ins, car
thefts, and property damage. In recent years in Tunisia such incidents have not been
uncommon. Lassaad Jouhri, a disabled ex-prisoner, was assaulted in Tunis in broad
daylight by five security agents. They broke one of his crutches and beat him with
it, apparently in retaliation for his publicizing the plight of prisoners.
On a positive note, in July the government of Bahrain approved an application
of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights, allowing that group to work legally in the
country along with the already-established Bahrain Human Rights Society. Additionally,
during U.N. General Assembly negotiations over the Optional Protocol to
the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment, Bahrain was the first Arab country to come out in support of
the protocol, which passed on November 7.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
In 2002, Human Rights Watch continued to lobby governments and non-state
actors, including armed groups, to respect and abide by the principles of international
human rights and humanitarian law.We called for a halt to deliberate attacks
against civilians and their property, the removal of restrictions on freedom of
expression and association, promotion of the rule of law and independence of the
judiciary, an end to impunity for those who violate human rights, and the release
of activists detained for peaceful expression of political views and human rights
activities.
Our staff and other representatives of the organization traveled to Algeria,
Bahrain, Egypt, Lebanon, Iran, northern Kurdistan in Iraq, Israel, the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Palestinian Authority Territories, and Tunisia.We conducted
field research, held dialogue with government officials, observed court trials,
coordinated with local and international groups, and initiated outreach and
advocacy.Requests for access to Saudi Arabia and Syria remained pending as of this
writing.
We continued efforts to ensure that our research and output reached a broader
segment of the region’s population. These included an increase in translations of
our materials into Arabic, and at times Farsi, French, and Hebrew, and dissemination
of these documents on our web-site (www.hrw.org). There was a large and
growing number of requests from the region for our reports and users requested on
average about thirty-seven thousand pages of Arabic content each month.
We continued to emphasize consultation and coordination with other human
rights groups, including issuing joint interventions to increase effectiveness. For
example, in April we issued a joint statement with Amnesty International and the
International Commission of Jurists, urging Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
respect international humanitarian law; in February, together with the Francebased
organization Institut Ben Barka, we lobbied U.S. authorities to release intelligence
files on the disappearance ofMoroccan opposition leader Mehdi Ben Barka;
and in February, together with five other human rights organizations, we wrote a
joint letter to Moroccan authorities, urging them to accept the recommendations
of the U.N.Working Group on Arbitrary Detention following the unfair trial and
detention of the soldier Moustapha Adib.
We urged reform of criminal and civil laws in Morocco, where the personal status
code (mudawwana) treats women as minors and denies them legal autonomy
in marriage contracts.
We also defended freedom of expression across the region.We lobbied on behalf
of activists convicted for their political beliefs, including Iranian parliamentarians
Hossein Loghmanian, Fatemeh Haghighatjou, and Mohammad Dadfar. We
protested the Revolutionary Court decision in January to incarcerate fifty political
activists for their peaceful political activities, violating Iran’s constitution as well as
basic rights to freedom of expression and association.We monitored the trials of
ten Syrian political reformers and lobbied the E.U. in September to leverage its
strong linkages with Syria to press for their immediate release. We also wrote a
detailed memorandum to the Syrian government analyzing its new press and publications
law and urging revision of provisions in that law that violated Syria’s commitments
under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In February, we urged Tunisian President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali to show
respect for the rule of law and an independent judiciary by ordering an inquiry into
the arrest and beating of three leftist dissidents, including Hamma Hammami, in a
Tunis courtroom.After we observed their appeal in March,we called for the release
of these activists, who were jailed solely for their political beliefs and nonviolent
political actions.We also called for the release of Zouhair Yahiaoui in June,who was
imprisoned for editing a Tunisian online magazine critical of government repression.
In July, we called for Hammami’s release again, and for an end to harassment
of his wife and daughters. After Secretary of State Colin Powell praised Tunisia’s
efforts in the war on terror, we appealed to him to caution Tunisian authorities against the opportunistic oppression of dissent in the battle against terrorism and
to seek Hammami’s release.
We campaigned for an investigation of allegations that Saudi Arabia’s official
religious police hampered rescue efforts that resulted in the death of fifteen students
in a March fire at a girls’ school. The escaping students reportedly had not been
wearing obligatory long black cloaks and head coverings. In April,we publicized the
government’s denial of the right to peaceful assembly and also documented practices
that violated international standards of due process, focusing on the cases of
seven Westerners who were tortured and secretly tried without legal representation.
In September, we provided the Saudi justice minister and other government officials
a legal memorandum that analyzed the kingdom’s newly adopted criminal
procedure code. The memo highlighted provisions of the code that violated international
norms of presumed innocence and lack of safeguards against arbitrary
arrest and detention and mechanisms to investigate torture allegations.
In April, we urged Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika to bring to justice
members of the police who killed and beat residents of the Kabylie region.We also
called for the immediate and unconditional release of two Algerian human rights
defenders arrested in May, and lobbied the European Parliament in October to
adopt a resolution specifying steps necessary for Algeria to meet commitments on
democratic principles and fundamental rights prior to concluding the proposed
E.U.Association Agreement with Algeria.
Human Rights Watch monitored the intensified violence in Israel, the Occupied
Territories, and the areas controlled by the Palestinian Authority; urged all parties
to abide by international human rights and humanitarian law; called on Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to conduct investigations into violations; and for the international
community to send international human rights monitors to the area.
Our report released in April, In a Dark Hour: The Use of Civilians During IDF
Arrest Operations, condemned Israel’s forcible use of Palestinian civilians during
house to house searches and arrests. Such practices unnecessarily endangered the
lives of civilians and seriously breached international humanitarian law.
Our early May report, Jenin: IDF Military Operations, documented Israeli
Defense Forces’ extensive violations of international humanitarian law, some
amounting prima facie to war crimes. During the April offensive on the Jenin
refugee camp, Israel committed violations including the unlawful or willful killing
of civilians, use of Palestinian civilians as human shields, obstruction of emergency
medical and humanitarian assistance, and destruction that appeared to exceed that
which could be justified on the ground of military necessity.We pressured Israel to
allow access to the Jenin refugee camp by humanitarian and human rights organizations
and strongly criticized its decision not to allow a U.N. fact-finding mission.
We welcomed the IDF decision in May to forbid the use of hostages and human
shields, and to “examine” the forced use of civilians in response to a petition from
seven human rights organizations. The petition was drafted by Adalah’s staff attorney
and drew on the April and May Human Rights Watch reports noted above.
Throughout the year we condemned suicide bombings that targeted Israeli
civilians, and in November we released a 170-page report,Erased in a Moment: Suicide
Bombing Attacks Against Israeli Civilians. We argued that these attacks were crimes against humanity and called on groups claiming responsibility—Hamas,
Islamic Jihad, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, and the al-Aqsa
Martyrs’Brigades—to end the attacks unconditionally.We also called on the Palestinian
Authority to take steps to bring to justice those who incited, planned,
assisted, or carried out such attacks.
In October,we welcomed Iraq’s announcement of an amnesty for prisoners but
argued that U.N. human rights monitors and international NGOs should be given
immediate access to clarify the fate of several hundred thousand “disappeared.”We
issued a statement during the debate about military intervention in Iraq, reminding
all parties of their obligation to protect civilians.We also urged the international
community to indict top Iraqi leaders for the genocidal 1988 Anfal campaign
against Iraq’s Kurdish population.
Human Rights Watch also called attention to violations of children’s rights in
the region. In May, we published,Nowhere to Turn: State Abuses of Unaccompanied
Migrant Children by Spain and Morocco, which documented police abuse of children
whom Spain illegally expelled to Morocco. Despite large numbers of unaccompanied
children in Moroccan border and port cities, the government did little
to ensure their care and rehabilitation. (See Europe and Central Asia.) Building on
our December 2001 report, Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab
Children in Israel’s Schools, in June we criticized Israeli legislation that disproportionately
cut national child allowance funding for Palestinian Arab citizens and
exacerbated existing inequalities in educational spending. In June and July, we
investigated police abuse of children arrested under Egypt’s Child Law, which
afforded police broad powers to arrest children found begging, homeless, or not
attending school.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
The most significant developments in the Euro-Mediterranean “Barcelona
Process”were the implementation of the E.U.’s Association Agreement with Jordan
on June 10 and the signing of Association Agreements with Algeria on April 22 and
Lebanon on June 17. The Jordan agreement had been signed in 1997 but could not
be implemented until final ratification by national parliaments of all E.U. member
states. The agreements with Algeria and Lebanon would similarly require ratification
by all member states before they would take effect. During the year negotiations
continued to conclude a similar agreement with Syria.
The countries with which the E.U. had operational Association Agreements, in
addition to Jordan, were Morocco, Tunisia, and Israel. The E.U. declaration on the
occasion of the third ministerial Association Council meeting with Israel in October
raised a number of human rights issues and urged Israel to “put an immediate
end to activities that are inconsistent with international humanitarian law and
human rights, including extra-judicial killings, acts of collective punishment,” and
“military actions directed indiscriminately against civilian neighborhoods.” The E.U. declaration at the third Association Council meeting with Tunisia, in late January
2002, regretted “the absence of progress” with regard to freedom of expression,
assembly, and association. But neither on these occasions nor at other times
did officials of the E.U. or its members states address how article 2 of each agreement,
which states that each is premised on “respect for human rights and democratic
values,” could be made to have consequences for the operation of the
agreements in areas of trade, investment, and security cooperation.
Human rights were even less prominent in the E.U.’s relations with the Arab
states of the Persian Gulf. The Joint Council of the E.U. and the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) states held its twelfth ministerial meeting in late February.The joint
communiqué addressed international humanitarian law concerns regarding the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but the only mention of human rights as they might
apply to the states of the Gulf was to recall “the commitment of all states . . . that all
human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and inter-related.” The
communiqué appeared to retreat from even this anodyne endorsement of human
rights by adding that the parties “recognized their diversities and expressed their
commitment to promote the values which they all share.”
The year saw frequent E.U. official statements condemning international
humanitarian law violations by Israelis and Palestinians. There were also two other
statements of policy relating to human rights developments in the Middle East—a
Declaration of the Presidency on August 8 “deeply regret[ted]” Syria’s jailing of
advocates of democratic reform and a statement issued by External Relations Commissioner
Chris Patten on July 30 deplored Egypt’s re-conviction and sentencing of
civil society advocate Saadeddin Ibrahim and his colleagues from the Ibn Khaldun
Center.
United States
Three distinct and overlapping concerns dominated United States policy in the
Middle East during 2002—the “war on terrorism,” the Israel-Palestinian conflict,
and the drive to disarm Iraq and displace the government there. In an unprecedented
step, the Bush administration publicly announced in August that the U.S.
would not consider any increase in the amount of U.S. economic or military aid to
Egypt in light of the reconviction and jailing of democracy advocate Saadeddin
Ibrahim and his colleagues. This was the first occasion on which the U.S. openly
linked U.S. military and economic assistance to the human rights practices of a
close ally in the Middle East, although existing military and economic aid programs
amounting to $1.9 billion were not affected. Throughout the region, however, the
administration’s perceived selectivity—forcefully raising human rights concerns in
Iraq, showing concern about the prospects for democratic reform in the Palestinian
Authority, but doing little if anything to halt abuses by U.S. allies, especially
Israel and Saudi Arabia—heightened long-standing perceptions of U.S. double
standards when it came to human rights in the region.
The Bush administration invoked human rights concerns most explicitly in
building its case for a possible military strike on Iraq. In his September 12 speech to
the United Nations General Assembly, President Bush called on the U.N. to enforce Security Council resolutions mandating that Iraq disarm and end its repression of
minorities. He cited Iraqi practices of “arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, summary
execution and torture by beating and burning, electric shock, starvation,
mutilation and rape,” and declared that “[l]iberty for the Iraqi people is a great
moral cause and a great strategic goal.” In a nationally televised speech on October
8, the president said that, in addition to “declaring and destroying all of its weapons
of mass destruction” and “end[ing] its support for terrorism,” Iraq also “must cease
the persecution of its civilian population.”
On the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the administration for the most part displayed
broad and consistent public support for policies of the government of Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon. On April 13, in the midst of Israel’s Operation Defensive
Shield, Secretary of State Powell issued a statement that said, “Israeli forces must
exercise the utmost restraint and discipline, and refrain from the excessive use of
force in the conduct of military operations” and called on Israel “to respect international
humanitarian principles and to allow full and unimpeded access” to
humanitarian organizations. However, neither Secretary Powell nor any other
administration official suggested that Israeli violations of international humanitarian
law might put at risk U.S. military and economic aid, officially estimated at
$2.8 billion in fiscal year 2002, despite the fact that many IDF international humanitarian
law violations were carried out with U.S.-supplied weaponry. Asked in a
hearing of the U.S. Senate Foreign Operations Subcommittee about Israeli misuse
of U.S. military equipment in the West Bank and Gaza, Secretary of State Powell
said on April 24: “We are sensitive to the requirements of the law, and so far I have
not received any reports and have not yet seen the need for any inquiries as to
whether or not there has been a violation of the law,” a position he reiterated on
other occasions.
There were signs, moreover, that Secretary Powell did not speak for the Bush
administration as a whole on matters relating to Israel and the Palestinians.Many
in Israel and elsewhere in the region came to believe that Prime Minister Sharon’s
government could count on other officials, including Vice President Dick Cheney
and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, to head off pressures from Washington
to restrain Israeli military actions or the expansion of illegal civilian settlements in
the West Bank. This perception gained ground as Israel ignored calls by President
Bush and Secretary of State Powell to withdraw Israeli forces from Palestinian cities
occupied in April and refused to admit a U.N. fact-finding mission to Jenin in
accordance with Security Council Resolution 1405. U.S. policy towards the Palestinian
Authority and President Yasir Arafat also appeared to become more closely
aligned with that of Israel. In a major policy speech on June 24, President Bush
called on Palestinians to “elect new leaders . . . not compromised by terror” and “to
build a practicing democracy based on tolerance and liberty,” but said nothing
about Israeli closure of and assaults on Palestinian Authority institutions that
directly impeded such goals. On October 11, U.S. Ambassador Daniel Kurtzer
reportedly delivered a letter to Prime Minister Sharon expressing U.S. concern
about the increase in Palestinian civilian deaths under Israeli fire and Israel’s failure
to ease restrictions on freedom of movement of Palestinians.
The U.S. focus on combating terrorism included new acknowledgement of the need for greater political openness and respect for human rights in the Middle East
region. In a June 1 address at West Point, President Bush said, “The peoples of the
Islamic nations want and deserve the same freedoms and opportunities as people
in every nation.And their governments should listen to their hopes.”The U.S. publicly
applauded national elections held in Morocco and Bahrain, and Assistant Secretary
of State for Democracy, Rights, and Labor Lorne Craner visited Bahrain,
Qatar, and Kuwait in June. However, the administration otherwise refrained from
public criticism of the human rights records of allies, sometimes pointedly. For
instance, while the State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices
for 2001 for the most part presented a comprehensive account of violations in individual
countries, Assistant Secretary Craner, in the press briefing introducing the
report on March 4, repeatedly dodged questions about U.S. policy towards Saudi
human rights practices and Israeli violations of international humanitarian law.
Counter-terrorism initiatives included increased economic aid and military
assistance to Jordan and Yemen, and the U.S. did not comment on the postponement
of elections in both countries.U.S.Army Special Forces trained counterparts
in Yemen, and on November 3 an unmanned aircraft deployed by the U.S. Central
Intelligence Agency fired a missile at a car driving in the Marib region of Yemen,
killing five occupants including Salim Sinan al-Harithi, an alleged al-Qaeda leader
and wanted in connection with the October 2000 bombing of the USS Cole in Aden
harbor.
According to press reports, the U.S. government bypassed extradition and other
legal procedures and secretly transported “dozens” of persons suspected of terrorism
links to third countries, including Egypt and Jordan. The Washington Post
quoted a U.S. diplomat as saying, “After September 11, these sorts of movements
have been occurring all the time. It allows us to get information from terrorists in a
way we can’t do on U.S. soil.” In a move that strained U.S.-Canadian relations,
Maher Arar, a Syrian-born engineer and Canadian citizen traveling back to Canada,
was detained at a New York airport on September 26, on suspicion of alleged al-
Qaeda membership. On October 10, he was deported to Syria without informing
Canadian authorities or providing an explanation. Canadian Prime Minister Jean
Chretien said on October 17 that his government had lodged a protest with the
U.S., complaining that although Arar had a Canadian passport the U.S. “deported
him to Syria rather than to Canada.” As of mid-November, Arar was imprisoned
and under investigation in Syria, where Canadian diplomats had access to him.
In advance of a possible war with Iraq, the U.S. military presence in the region
steadily increased. In addition to an estimated five thousand to six thousand U.S.
troops in Saudi Arabia, there were some nine thousand in Kuwait, another 4,200 in
Bahrain, and about 3,300 in Qatar, as of October. Smaller numbers were deployed
at military bases in Oman and the United Arab Emirates. The rapid expansion of
the once-secret U.S. air base at al-Udeid, twenty miles south of Qatar’s capital
Doha, was widely reported, along with increasing speculation that it might serve as
a replacement for the Combined Air Operations Center at Prince Sultan Air Base in
Saudi Arabia. A U.S.Air Force commander at Udeid, Col. Tim Scott, told reporters
in October that the U.S. and Qatar were “negotiating to allow the base to be used in
any operation against Iraq.”
According to the annual report of the U.S. Library of Congress on arms sales to
developing countries, released in August, the Middle East remained the largest arms
market, accounting for more than 45 percent of all developing country purchases.
In the 1998-2001 period, the U.S. was the source for more than 70 percent of all
Middle East country purchases, and arms transfer agreements with Middle Eastern
countries accounted for more than 79 percent of all U.S. arms sales to developing
countries. The leading purchasers for this four-year period were the United Arab
Emirates, Israel, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia.
ALGERIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Political violence declined overall but continued to claim an average of 125 lives
monthly, most of them civilians. Frequent protests in the Berber-majority Kabylie
region, not all of them peaceful, led to arrests and, at times, harsh repression by the
security forces. Demonstrations and riots erupted frequently in other regions, in
protest of poor living conditions, repression, corruption, and the impunity enjoyed
by security forces, officials, and those with influence. Between March and April,
some fifty prisoners died in a series of uprisings and fires set by inmates of several
prisons protesting against harsh conditions and the jailing of pre-trial defendants
for long periods rather than releasing them on bail.
In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the U.S.,Algeria, in its first
report to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee, welcomed the new
global efforts as “corroborating its own consistently argued position on the nature
of terrorism . . . ” Algeria, the report stated, had “long suffered the ravages of terrorism,
often in the face of indifference” from the international community.
As in previous years, officials claimed that Algeria’s armed groups were on their
last legs. Army chief-of-staff General Mohamed Lamari told the London-based el-
Moushahid as-Siyassi in June that the number of armed Islamists nationwide had
dropped to seven hundred and that “the end of these criminal groups is imminent.”
Authorities refused, however, to end the ten-year-old state of emergency that
granted the Interior Ministry special powers to forbid public gatherings and detain
individuals without charge.
While security in the major cities had improved, rebel groups that had spurned
President Bouteflika’s 1999 offer of amnesty continued to massacre civilians in
rural areas and smaller cities. These groups were also believed responsible for placing
deadly bombs in public places.The province of Chlef was particularly hard-hit,
with at least 120 persons slain between July and October, including twenty-six in an
August 16 attack and twenty-one on October 24, both in isolated villages. A bomb
blast in a busy market in Larbâa killed thirty-eight persons on July 5. The perpetrators
of such attacks rarely, if ever, provided specific claims of responsibility or justifications for their acts. Active groups included the Armed Islamic Group,
which had for several years been indiscriminately targeting civilians, and the
Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, which was better known for attacks on
military targets.
There was a noticeable decline in reports of human rights violations committed
by the security forces compared to the mid-1990s.But the pattern of violations suggested
that any decline was caused more by the drop in political violence than by
stronger safeguards against abuse.While there were no new confirmed “disappearance”
cases, police wearing plainclothes continued to arrest young men and hold
them incommunicado beyond the legal twelve-day limit and without informing
their families.While reports of torture were down in absolute numbers, prisoners
were still at high risk of being tortured by their interrogators.
Impunity remained a paramount concern. President Bouteflika pledged more
than once to bring to justice the security force members accused of using excessive
force in putting down Berber protests in 2001, which left more than ninety dead.
The president kept his promise to withdraw some of the controversial gendarme
units stationed in the Kabylie, but little was done to bring offenders to justice. Similarly,
despite pledges by a new presidential human rights commission to resolve the
issue of the “disappeared” by the end of 2002, no progress had been achieved as of
mid-November.
The Berber protest movement focused on demands for recognition of cultural
and linguistic rights, and an end to repressive and corrupt behavior by the security
forces. On the question of regional political autonomy the movement housed
diverse viewpoints.
In elections held May 30, the National Liberation Front, the ruling party during
Algeria’s three decades of one-party rule, captured 199 out of the 389 seats in the
lower house of parliament. Three legal Islamist parties won a total of eighty-two
seats, although the Interior Ministry had disqualified tens of their candidates on the
grounds that they belonged to an “illegal organization,”namely the Front Islamique
du Salut (FIS). (Authorities banned the FIS in 1992 after it performed strongly in
the first round of legislative elections. A military-backed coup canceled the second
round of those elections to prevent the FIS from capturing a parliamentary majority.)
Wafa, a party expected to capture strong support among Islamist voters, could
not participate in 2002, since the Interior Ministry had refused it legal recognition
two years earlier, saying it was too close to the FIS.
During the campaign period, authorities prevented two Berber-dominated
political parties that favored an election boycott from holding rallies and meetings
in public venues, explaining that these were reserved for the parties competing in
the vote. State-controlled television also denied coverage to the pro-boycott movement,
but it covered the range of participating parties and candidates.
In parts of the Kabylie, the vote was marred by acts of intimidation, vandalism,
and disruption committed by activists associated with the pro-boycott Coordination
Inter-Wilaya, a collective of local Berber activist groups and councils in several
provinces. However, the turnout was extremely low even in those parts of the
Kabylie where no disruptions were reported, and reached only two percent for the
region as a whole.
In local elections held October 10, the National Liberation Front, together with
its ally the Democratic National Rally, won control of a majority of town councils
and provincial assemblies. Again, pro-boycott activists in the Kabylie tried to dissuade
voters through acts of intimidation and violence.
In a March 12 speech to the nation, President Bouteflika addressed some Berber
grievances without responding to others. He decreed that Tamazight, the Berber
tongue, would become a “national” language, a concession that fell short of the
demand that it become an “official” language, like Arabic. The president also
announced that twenty-four gendarme agents and five officers had been charged
with homicide or improper use of their firearms for their conduct during the
Kabylie unrest.“The trials will take place in complete openness,”he declared,“without
any ambiguities or aspects left untreated . . . . The state will not yield to
impunity.”However, in the months following this strong statement, it was possible
to verify only two or three cases where security force agents had been bought to
trial. These included the October 29 conviction by a military court of gendarme
Merabet Mestari. Merabet was sentenced to two years in prison for involuntary
homicide in the killing of student Massinissa Guermah, the incident that triggered
months of protests in the Kabylie in 2001. In isolated instances, gendarmes, police,
and members of government-organized civilian defense patrols were prosecuted
for human rights abuses; however, the feared Military Security agency continued to
be above any kind of public accountability for its conduct, notably its torture of suspects
under interrogation.
Both the unrest and the repression in the Kabylie sharpened during March,
despite the president’s speech. There were frequent sit-ins, marches, clashes, and
acts of vandalism against public property. Residents complained of “retaliatory”
and “punitive” raids by security personnel, who ransacked and looted homes, cars,
and businesses, and punched and clubbed passersby in the street. Seven youths died
in various incidents between March 21 and April 1, and scores were seriously
wounded by live and rubber bullets, teargas, and beatings. Authorities arrested
some three hundred people during March, including demonstrators and the leaders
of the protest movement.Many were quickly tried and sentenced to up to two
years in prison on charges such as participating in an illegal gathering, damaging
public property, incitement to riot, blocking traffic, and distributing subversive
tracts. The arrests and trials sparked further sit-ins and rallies to demand their
release. These continued sporadically in the region until President Bouteflika on
August 5 amnestied all those who had been arrested in connection with the protests
in the Kabylie up until that point. However, both the protests and the arrest of
demonstrators and their accused leaders continued after August.
On March 14, police in Algiers forcibly blocked a march called by the Berberbased
Socialist Forces Front, turning back cars with out-of-town license plates and
briefly arresting scores of marchers.Nine months earlier, authorities had banned all
demonstrations in the capital “until further notice.”However, in other parts of the
country, political demonstrations often took place without incident, such as an
April 20 march by some one hundred thousand in Tizi-Ouzou.
On April 2, an uprising in a prison near Constantine resulted in the death of
some twenty inmates in unclear circumstances. Throughout April and early May, prisoners staged disturbances and set fires in several facilities across the country.
Nearly fifty were killed, including about twenty in an April 30 mutiny in Serkadji
prison. Among the leading grievances expressed were the courts’ preference to
detain suspects pending trial and the often-lengthy pre-trial detention that
resulted.Mohand Issad,who headed a presidential commission on judicial reform,
blamed the disturbances also on prison conditions, including “overcrowding . . .
unacceptable food and disastrous medical conditions.” In press interviews in May,
he asked,“When detainees are piled on top of one another in small cells,when juveniles
are next to adult criminals and healthy persons next to sick ones,what should
you expect?” President Bouteflika said on October 30 that authorities had “heard”
the prisoners “cries of distress.” He promised improvements in prison conditions
and urged judges to respect the “exceptional” character of pre-trial detention in
Algerian law.
There was no progress in elucidating the fate of the estimated seven to ten thousand
persons who “disappeared” between 1993 and 1998 at the hands of the security
forces and their paramilitary allies. On October 28,Major General Mohamed
Touati, a presidential advisor, called “disappearances” an “unfortunate and prickly
issue that must be addressed by the governing institutions,” marking the first time
a senior officer of the army had publicly acknowledged the problem.
The president’s National Consultative Commission for the Promotion and Protection
of Human Rights, founded in 2001, told Human Rights Watch on November
6 that it had 4,743 dossiers submitted by families regarding persons presumably
“disappeared” by state agents, and that it continued to receive previously unreported
cases. Commission President Moustapha Farouk Ksentini said he believed
the real total of “disappearances” was “7,000 to 10,000, possibly even 12,000.” In a
June 28 interview with the online journal Algeria Interface, Ksentini said, “The
question of ‘disappearances’must be definitively resolved before the end of the year
. . . . If we reach the conclusion that the State is guilty,we will say so clearly . . . . The
truth must become known, whatever it may be. The honor of the country and its
institutions are at stake. The horrible things from the last few years must never be
repeated.”
Ksentini acknowledged to Human Rights Watch on November 6, however, that
neither the government nor his own commission had thus far satisfactorily elucidated
a single case of “disappearance.”Nevertheless, authorities continued to make
unsubstantiated claims during the year that the government was “clarifying” cases
that families had brought to its attention. On March 10, Justice Minister Ahmed
Ouyahia said on Algerian radio that some six hundred “disappeared” had in fact
joined terrorist groups, out of a total number that he put at 3,200 to 3,300.He did
not elaborate.
While there were no new confirmed cases of persons abducted and “disappeared”
in 2002, security forces continued to make arrests in a manner that violated
Algerian law and that put the detainee at risk of “disappearing.”The arresting force
often wore plain clothes and declined to identify itself. The detainee was then often
held in garde à vue detention beyond the twelve-day legal limit that applies to “terrorism”
and “subversion” cases, although flagrant violations of this law were less
frequent than in the mid-1990s.During garde à vue, relatives were unable to obtain any official information about the person’s whereabouts. For example, ex-prisoner
Omar Toumi of Algiers went on an errand on January 26 and failed to return to his
family.His family contacted the police but received no official confirmation he had
been detained until mid-February. Toumi was eventually brought to court and
charged with security offenses. Omar’s brother Saïd has been “disappeared” since
being arrested in 1994 at his workplace by armed men, some of them in uniform.
Persons taken into detention, whether for security or common criminal
offenses, were at risk of being tortured by their interrogators. Beatings and the
“chiffon”—placing a rag soaked in dirty water or household chemicals over the
nose and mouth to induce choking—were the most commonly reported torture
methods. The use of electric shocks was also reported on occasion in different
detention centers.Ahmed Ouali and his father Mohamed and uncle Fouad were all
arrested on January 12 near their homes in el-Harrach and brought to a detention
center run by the Military Security agency.The three later told defense lawyer Mahmoud
Khelili that their interrogators subjected Ahmed, a former FIS activist, to the
“chiffon” and electric shocks and bound him by a rope suspended from the ceiling.
Fouad suffered similar mistreatment. The two brothers were charged with membership
in a terrorist organization and placed in pre-trial detention. Mohamed,
who was beaten during interrogation, was released without charge.
Hoceine Rachdi of Relizane was arrested on October 2 and tortured by agents of
the Military Security who applied electric shocks to his ears, according to a relative
interviewed by Human Rights Watch. The relative said that family members could
still see traces of torture on Hoceine’s face and hands during an October 14 visit
with the prisoner, who was being held on suspicion of aiding a terrorist organization.
Boubaker Kamaz, a former security prisoner who lives in Constantine, was
arrested January 9. Kamaz told his lawyer that during his fourteen days in incommunicado
detention—two days longer than the legal limit—he was chained to a
chair, beaten, whipped, and gagged with a “chiffon.” The investigating judge
rejected his demand for a medical examination, a decision that was reversed on
appeal.When a doctor finally saw Kamaz on May 2, nearly four months after the
abuse occurred, he noted scratches from the wrist and ankle restraints. In a rare
departure from the usual practice, the trial judge on October 20 acquitted Kamaz
on charges of belonging to a terrorist group, apparently after accepting the medical
report as grounds for doubting the evidentiary value of Kamaz’s confession.
State-controlled television and radio remained government mouthpieces,
ignoring or downplaying major demonstrations and massacres that were covered
on locally available European and Arab stations. A bright spot was the live broadcasting
of sessions of parliament. Private newspapers, in spite of repressive press
laws, often criticized government actions, publishing eyewitness accounts of the
gendarmerie’s suppression of demonstrations, and accusing officials and state
institutions of corruption, nepotism, and incompetence. They exercised more selfcensorship
concerning the army’s role in politics.
A number of reporters, cartoonists, and editors at Algeria’s private daily newspapers
were summoned for questioning by the police or investigating judges in
response to complaints filed by the Defense Ministry regarding published articles and political cartoons. Those who were charged risked the longer jail terms and
larger fines provided by the 2001 amendments to laws on libel. However, journalists
who were sentenced to prison terms during 2002 appealed their convictions
and none was actually incarcerated during the first ten months of the year.
Khaled Nezzar,Algeria’s defense minister from 1990 to 1993, sued ex-army officer
Habib Souaïdia for libel in a Paris court for having declared on French television
that Algeria’s “generals” had killed “thousands of people” during the political
violence of the 1990s. Souaïdia is author of a book on Algerian army abuses entitled
The Dirty War, published in 2001 in France, where he resides. The weeklong
trial in July featured some thirty witnesses, including persons tortured by the security
forces and relatives of persons murdered by armed groups. The court ruled in
September against the plaintiff, saying that history, rather than the court, was a better
venue to resolve the dispute.
In separate cases, French courts also dismissed complaints against Nezzar filed
by torture victims who claimed that Nezzar bore command responsibility for the
torture they allegedly suffered at the hands of his subordinates. The French courts
decided to close the cases after Nezzar submitted in April to questioning by police
who were investigating the complaints. The court ruling was based on the grounds
that the evidence directly linking the ex-minister to acts of torture was not sufficiently
compelling. In Algeria, meanwhile, a court on April 30 sentenced Souaïdia
in absentia to twenty years in prison for having said in a press interview that he had
been in touch with a dissident group of ex-officers in exile and if there were a revolt
against Algeria’s rulers he would come back “to take up arms against the generals.”
The new government formed after the May legislative elections included five
women ministers, including the renowned women’s rights activist Khalida Messaoudi
as spokesperson. However, there was no progress made during the year
toward modifying the 1984 Family Code, which grants women inferior rights in
divorce, inheritance, custody of children, and other matters.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights defenders collected and published information openly in major
Algerian cities.However, their work was hampered by selective acts of harassment
and prosecution and by the fear of many victims and witnesses to come forward to
provide testimony.
Mohamed Smaïn, spokesperson for the Algerian League for the Defense of
Human Rights (Ligue Algérienne de défense des droits de l’Homme, LADDH) in
the western city of Relizane, was sentenced to one year in prison and a fine by a
court of appeals on February 24 on charges of libeling a former mayor, el-Hadj Fergane,
and members of an armed self-defense group he headed. Smaïn had long
accused Fergane and his colleagues of carrying out “disappearances” and assassinations
in the region during the mid-1990s. In February 2001, Smaïn had alerted the
press to an earth-digging operation, at which Fergane was allegedly present, to
transfer the contents of a mass grave near Relizane to another location. Smaïn was
free pending his appeal of the verdict to the Supreme Court, which had not ruled by the time this report went to press. In September, Smaïn’s passport and driver’s
license, confiscated in 2001, were returned to him. Repeated efforts by Human
Rights Watch while in Relizane in November to obtain comment from Fergane
were unsuccessful.
Organizations built around relatives of “disappeared”persons continued to collect
previously unreported cases from 1993 to 1998. They held regular sit-ins in
Algiers, Oran, Relizane, and Constantine to demand the return of their relatives or
information about their fates.These were tolerated on some occasions and forcibly
dispersed on others. On March 18, police dispersed relatives of the “disappeared”
who were attempting to gather in front of the United Nations office in Algiers and
arrested Abderrahmane Khelil, an activist with the LADDH and SOS-Disparus, an
advocacy group launched by relatives of the “disappeared.” He was released without
charge after a few hours. Police also used force to break up sit-ins by relatives of
the “disappeared” before the headquarters of the president’s human rights commission
on June 23 and July 3, and to turn back a march of some fifty relatives
toward the president’s office on November 6.
Khelil and a friend, Sid Ahmed Mourad,were arrested on May 19 near an Algiers
university campus where they had gone on behalf of the LADDH to investigate the
arrest of students the day before. They were jailed until May 26, when a court gave
them a six-month suspended sentence for “inciting an unarmed demonstration,”
even though they had not arrived at the scene of the demonstration in question
until the following day.
Foreign human rights organizations continued to receive visas selectively and
sporadically. Between February 2001 and August 2002, no request to conduct missions
from Human Rights Watch,Amnesty International, the International Federation
of Human Rights, or Reporters without Borders was approved.However, the
organizations were able, on occasion, to send researchers and trial observers when
they needed no entry visa due to their nationalities. In September 2002, both
Human Rights Watch and Reporters without Borders received entry visas for the
first time since May 2000 and January 2001, respectively, and both organizations
carried out research missions in October.
Algeria continued its refusal to grant long-standing mission requests from the
U.N. special rapporteurs on torture and on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary
executions, and did not accept a request for an invitation from the Working Group
on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances. However, it allowed a visit in September
by the rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued its program
of visiting inmates in prisons administered by the Justice Ministry, and opened an
office in the capital. The organization was permitted also to visit prisoners in garde
à vue detention in police stations. However, detainees held in facilities run by the
military—where the most severe abuses were thought to take place—remained offlimits.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
The government of Algeria made progress in rehabilitating its image internationally
in late 2001 and in 2002. An overall drop in political violence, President
Bouteflika’s offer of partial amnesty to the rebels, and his strong anti-terror position
following the September 11, 2001 attack on the United States helped to upstage
human rights concerns that had kept many Western governments from deepening
relations with Algiers.
The president met with President Bush twice during 2001. On November 30 of
that year, he hosted Jacques Chirac in the first visit by a French head of state since
1988. One month later he was in Brussels for the initialing of an Association Agreement
with the European Union.
Europe remained the chief source of Algeria’s imports and the main consumer
of its exports, mostly natural gas and oil. France was the state most influential in
shaping E.U. policy toward Algeria. It was also the leading source of Algeria’s
imports and home to the largest Algerian community outside Algeria.
The E.U.-Algeria Association Agreement was formally signed on April 22, after
four years of mostly stalled negotiations. It focused on tariff reductions, but also
included an article that called “respect for human rights” an “essential element” of
the agreement; this article was common to the E.U.’s agreements with its Euro-
Mediterranean partners.The Algeria pact won the European Parliament’s endorsement
on October 10, but before taking effect it had still to be approved by the
national parliaments of Algeria and the E.U. member states.
The E.U. was quieter on human rights issues than in 2001,when the outbreak of
unrest in the Kabylie prompted a more vocal response. The E.U.’s constituent bodies
made no comment on the legislative elections held on May 30.But on June 5, on
the occasion of the first of the twice-yearly meetings between Algerian officials and
the E.U. “troika,” Spanish Foreign Minister Josep Pique, the delegation head, said
the troika had noted a “clear improvement” in respect for democracy and human
rights.He provided no specifics.
Pique added that the delegation had raised the issue of “disappearances,” but he
did not disclose whether headway was made on the issue. Officials of the European
Commission told Human Rights Watch that the troika had requested, at each bilateral
meeting since 1999, concrete information on a regularly updated list of some
thirty “disappearance” cases, but, as of October 2002, had yet to receive from Algerian
authorities verifiable information on the whereabouts or status of any of those
cases.
The Algeria Strategy Paper under the Euro-Med Partnership for 2002-2006
identified “consolidation of the rule of law and good governance” as one focus of
E.U. assistance. In January, the European Commission signed a contract to disburse
Û8.2 million over six years for police reform, and also provided aid to a variety of
nongovernmental organizations and independent media.However, the E.U.’s program
hit a rough spot in January 2002, when Algerian authorities denied visas to
two commission officials who were about to conduct a technical mission to Algeria to assess potential partners within civil society.Algeria,which stated that it had not
been duly consulted in advance of the mission, subsequently issued visas and the
mission took place in April.
When giving its assent to the Association Agreement, the European Parliament
overwhelmingly adopted a strong ancillary resolution identifying “points of reference
for assessing compliance with the human rights clause” of the pact. These
goals included resolving the problem of the “disappeared,” “ending all forms of
impunity,”“guarantee[ing] a truly independent justice system,”and allowing access
for U.N. rapporteurs and human rights organizations.
United States
The U.S. and Algeria drew closer during 2001 and 2002, a result of increased
cooperation in fighting terrorism, growing bilateral trade, and U.S. private investment
in Algeria, mostly in the hydrocarbon sector.
While U.S. direct aid to Algeria remained minimal, the two countries engaged in
a fourth round of joint naval exercises in January and several senior U.S. officials
traveled to Algeria following President Bouteflika’s two meetings with President
Bush in 2001. In December of that year, Undersecretary of State William J. Burns
met with President Bouteflika; a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) delegation
came in February to discuss security cooperation.Despite these opportunities,U.S.
officials did not publicly raise human rights concerns.Criticism,when it came, was
mild. Burns, speaking in Washington on January 30, cautioned all the Maghreb
countries about “heavy-handed governance that aims to suppress dissent, but often
has the effect of prolonging it.” State Department spokesman Richard Boucher
commented on May 30, “We have seen progress in Algeria toward greater democracy,
and we urge President Bouteflika and his government to continue efforts to
improve and strengthen freedom of expression, responsive government, and a
transparent political process.”
But the tenor of relations during 2002 was revealed more by the Department of
State’s counter-terrorism chief Francis X. Taylor, who declared upon his arrival in
Algiers on June 27,“Algeria is one of the most tenacious and faithful partners of the
United States . . . . Algeria has cooperated with us in every domain.” Under Secretary
of State Marc Grossman visited Algiers on November 6 and said in a press conference
that the U.S. was supporting Algeria’s fight against terrorism “with some
joint training and also with other help that we can provide.”Grossman met that day
with Prime Minister Ali Benflis and Foreign Minister Abdelaziz Belkhadem. There
was no public indication that he raised human rights issues in those discussions;
however, in his press conference Grossman said the U.S. was prepared to help train
Algerian judges so that they would be “independent . . . courageous . . . [and] make
decisions on the basis of the law.”
The only forceful public comment made by the U.S. on the subject of human
rights in Algeria remained the annual country reports on human rights practices,
released in March. The U.S. Agency for International Development funded some
training programs for human rights and other civil society organizations.The State
Department’s Democracy Commission Small Grants Program awarded $18,000 to three human rights groups to organize a conference on the “disappeared.” The
National Endowment for Democracy, a congressionally funded private foundation,
also provided grants to independent human rights groups.
On March 27, the State Department added the Salafist Group for Preaching and
Combat to its list of foreign terrorist organizations, a designation it had already
given to the Armed Islamic Group.
The U.S.-government-run Export-Import Bank, which provided loans and
guarantees to assist U.S. investment abroad, had an exposure in Algeria on September
30 of U.S. $1.84 billion, second in the region only to the bank’s exposure in
Saudi Arabia of $1.88 billion.
The U.S. shifted its policy in favor of licensing private sales of night-vision
equipment for counter-insurgency use by the Algerian government, according to
various press reports published since late 2001. The equipment had been among
the nonlethal materiel the U.S. had previously declined to license because of concerns
about the human rights practices of the government. The State Department
declined to comment when Human Rights Watch sought confirmation of this
reported change in policy.
EGYPT
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The government intensified its crackdown on real or suspected political opponents,
tightened its control over civil society institutions, and clamped down on
freedom of speech and expression. Thousands of political suspects remained in
prolonged detention without trial under emergency legislation in force almost continuously
since 1967, and there were a series of grossly unfair trials before military
or state security courts in which defendants had no right of appeal to higher tribunals.
The torture and ill-treatment of political detainees remained common, and
the government continued to impose the death penalty.
The authorities carried out hundreds of arrests during 2002 of suspected government
opponents, targeting principally alleged members of banned Islamist
groups. The arrests were widely perceived as part of a wider crackdown on groups
espousing Islamist ideologies in the wake of the September 11, 2001, attacks in New
York and Washington, D.C. Minister of Interior Habib al-‘Adli told journalists in
February: “There should be a clear distinction made between human rights and
crimes. I have no mercy for criminals who give themselves the right to threaten the
nation’s well-being.”Many of those arrested were held under emergency legislation,
in some cases allegedly tortured, and subsequently either released without charge
or referred to trial before special courts that failed to meet international fair trial
standards.
A small number of those arrested allegedly belonged to Talae’ al-Fatah (Vanguards of the Conquest), a banned Islamist group believed to be an offshoot of al-
Gihad al-Islami (Islamic Gihad). The vast majority of the Islamists targeted, however,
were alleged members of the banned al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun (Muslim
Brotherhood), scores of whom were arrested in several operations carried out by
state security personnel. Eight prominent members of the group were arrested on
January 25 after allegedly participating in a secret meeting in the al-‘Agouza district
of Cairo.They included several university professors and doctors as well as an engineer.
They were detained for fifteen days pending further investigation. A further
twenty-eight people reportedly linked to the Muslim Brotherhood were arrested on
July 12 in Cairo and elsewhere.They were charged with planning to stage a demonstration
“allegedly to support the Palestinian cause and to criticize the government’s
policy in handling that issue,” according to Interior Ministry officials. They
were detained for fifteen days pending investigation. On July 21, thirty-four other
alleged Muslim Brotherhood members were also held for fifteen days pending
investigation.They were arrested the previous day near Cairo and accused of membership
of an illegal organization, possessing literature promoting the group’s ideology,
and harming national unity. Among them were students, university
lecturers, doctors, engineers and other professionals. It was not known how many
of them remained in detention at this writing.
Violent clashes erupted in Alexandria on June 28 during parliamentary by-elections,
as security and police personnel reportedly prevented Muslim Brotherhood
supporters from reaching the polling stations to cast their votes. The two seats in
the al-Raml constituency being contested had remained unfilled after the 2000 parliamentary
elections. In the first round of the 2000 election, two Muslim Brotherhood
candidates had defeated candidates representing the ruling National
Democratic Party (NDP); the Ministry of Interior then annulled the results, stating
that voting had been marred by irregularities.The election went ahead in June 2002
following an administrative court ruling and NDP candidates achieved a landslide
victory. Some 150 Muslim Brotherhood supporters were arrested during the election-
related clashes. Many of them were released shortly thereafter, but 101 were
charged and brought to trial.
Scores of demonstrators were also arrested following protests against Israeli and
U.S. government policies toward the Palestinians. On April 9, several thousand
demonstrators,many of them university students, held a demonstration in Alexandria
to coincide with the visit to Egypt of U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell.
Clashes broke out between the demonstrators and riot police,who reportedly used
tear gas and water cannons to disperse the crowds. One demonstrator was killed in
the clashes, allegedly after riot police used shotgun pellets, and scores of others were
injured. Some seventy student demonstrators were arrested and held under emergency
legislation for up to ten days, accused of damaging public property and illegal
assembly. They were later released without charge. In mid-May, several activists
affiliated with the Egyptian Popular Committee for Solidarity with the Palestinian
Intifada were also arrested in Cairo’s Tahrir Square. They were reportedly distributing
lists of U.S. goods and products and urging members of the public to boycott
them. The authorities accused them of disrupting public order and held them for
one day before releasing them without charge.
The government continued to refer civilian political suspects to military courts,
the vast majority of them on charges of membership in banned Islamist groups and
related offences. The trial of twenty-two people accused of membership in the
Muslim Brotherhood opened before the Supreme Military Court in Haikstep on
December 24, 2001.Most of the defendants were university professors, engineers,
doctors, and businessmen, arrested the previous month after staging peaceful
protests against U.S. military strikes in Afghanistan. The charges against them
included attempting to recruit members to the Muslim Brotherhood and inciting
the public against the government. On July 30, the court sentenced sixteen defendants
to prison terms of between three and five years and acquitted the remaining
six. In a statement issued after the verdict, the Muslim Brotherhood accused the
government of targeting its members as part of a crackdown on Islamists carried
out under U.S. pressure. In a separate case, noted above, 101 alleged Muslim Brotherhood
members and supporters were brought before the state security court in
Alexandria between September 2-4, charged with illegal assembly, rioting, assaulting
police personnel, and obstructing voting following violent clashes with police
and security forces during parliamentary by-elections in the city. On October 22,
sixty-six of the defendants received three-month prison terms but were released
since they had already served the time; the remainder were acquitted.
Fifty-one alleged members of a previously unknown Islamist group, Tanzim al-
Wa’d (Organization of Promise),were convicted by the Supreme Military Court on
September 9 following a trial that began in December 2001. They were among
ninety-four defendants arrested principally in May 2001, initially accused of illegally
collecting funds for Chechen separatists and the Palestinian group Hamas,
and held for several months without trial. In October 2001, the authorities
announced that the defendants would be referred to trial and charged additionally
with plotting to assassinate senior government officials,Muslim and Christian religious
figures, writers, and others, and plotting to organize military training for
their members in Chechnya with the intention of perpetrating terrorist acts in
Egypt. The defendants included several foreign nationals, among them three Russian
nationals from Dagestan, while the Egyptian defendants included two prominent
mosque preachers and two others who had received flight training in the U.S.
Initially, seven of them were tried in absentia, but the trial was extended following
the extradition of one of the suspects from Azerbaijan in April. Those convicted
received prison terms ranging between two and fifteen years, and the remaining
forty-three were acquitted.During the trial, a number of defendants said that they
had been tortured under interrogation.They had no right of appeal before a higher
tribunal and could only appeal for a review before the Military Appeals Bureau.
On October 20, the trial of twenty-six defendants charged with membership in
the banned Hizb al-Tahrir al-Islami (Islamic Liberation Party) opened before an
Emergency Supreme State Security Court in Cairo. The defendants were among
scores of suspects arrested in early April in Cairo, Giza, and Alexandria governorates,
accused of belonging to a banned group aiming to “obstruct the legal system
and to undermine state institutions” and to establish an Islamic caliphate. The
majority was released following several weeks of incommunicado detention. The
twenty-six referred to trial, among them three Britons—Ian Nisbett,Majid Nawaz, and Reza Pankhurst—also faced additional charges of attempting to recruit new
members to the Islamic Liberation Party and possession of anti-government literature.
During the opening session of the trial, some of the defendants stated that
they had been tortured during interrogation to obtain confessions from them,
including through beating and electric shocks. The trial was ongoing by late
November. If convicted, the defendants faced maximum prison terms of fifteen
years and had no right of appeal to a higher tribunal.
Police and security personnel continued to routinely torture or mistreat
detainees, in some cases leading to death in custody. A number of political suspects
on trial before military or state security courts during 2002 on charges of membership
in banned political groups and related offenses alleged that they had been tortured
during interrogation while in the custody of State Security Intelligence (SSI).
(See below.) Ordinary criminal suspects held in police custody also stated that they
had been tortured to extract confessions from them.At least five deaths in custody
were reported in 2002.According to the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights
(EOHR),at least twelve detainees died under torture at police stations between January
2001 and June 2002. In a report released in May, the EOHR detailed eleven
other cases of torture at the hands of the police during the same period.
In a positive development, the authorities referred a number of police personnel
accused of torturing and causing the death of suspects in their custody to trial
in four separate cases in 2002. For example, the Cairo Criminal Court on July 14
sentenced three police officers to five-year prison terms in connection with the case
of Ahmad Taha Yusuf, who died in February after being tortured at Wayley police
station in the city. On August 8, a Cairo Criminal Court sentenced two police officers
to three-year prison terms each in connection with the death of Sayed Khalifa
‘Isa, arrested on suspicion of car theft on January 26. He died in early March after
being repeatedly beaten and reportedly subjected to electric shocks at a police station
in Madinat Nasr.
Authorities did not investigate the vast majority of allegations of torture, however,
and new cases continued to be reported. In November, two local NGOs
reported the deaths in custody in July of Nabih Muhammad al-Shahin and his
cousin Muhammad Muhammad ‘Abdul-Fattah, who were reportedly tortured at
Zefta police station and Wadi Natrun prison. They were arrested in June in connection
with a street fight. It was not known whether the authorities had opened a
criminal investigation into their deaths.
Egypt’s Child Law gave police broad powers to arrest children found begging,
homeless, or skipping school, and police regularly detained these children for days
without food and bedding in cells with adult criminal suspects and subjected them
to beatings and sexual abuse and violence.
Egyptian courts sentenced at least fifty-eight people to death and the authorities
carried out nineteen executions between November 2001 and November 2002,
according to Amnesty International. All the sentences were imposed for ordinary
criminal offenses, including murder, rape, and drug trafficking.
On June 10, a state security court in Alexandria sentenced Magdi Anwar Tawfiq
to ten years in prison with hard labor after convicting him of spying for Israel’s
intelligence agency,Mossad.He had been arrested in September 2001 and accused of communicating with the Israeli consulate in the city, allegedly with the intent of
offering information related to Egypt’s political and economic interests, and his
trial opened on May 11. He had no right of appeal to a higher tribunal. In a separate
espionage case, Sherif al-Filali, also charged with spying for Mossad, was convicted
by the Emergency Supreme State Security Court in Cairo and sentenced to
fifteen years’imprisonment in late March.He had no right of appeal to a higher tribunal.
The court had previously acquitted Al-Filali of the charge in a first trial in
2001, but a re-trial was ordered in accordance with emergency laws after President
Mubarak’s office refused to endorse the verdict. (See Human Rights Watch World
Report 2002.) His co-defendant, a Russian army officer, was sentenced in absentia
to twenty-five years in prison.
The government continued to prosecute individuals for their exercise of freedom
of expression. A Cairo misdemeanors court sentenced Shohdy Surur, a web
designer for the English language newspaper Al-Ahram Weekly, to a one-year
prison term on June 30 after he was found guilty under Egypt’s publication laws of
violating “public morality.” He was arrested in November 2001 after he posted a
poem on the Internet written by his late father, Naguib Surur, in the early 1970s.
The poem, political in nature, was said by the prosecution to be sexually explicit.
Shohdy Surur was released on bail pending appeal, but on October 14 the appeals
court upheld the sentence, since, according to Egyptian law, Surur was required to
be present at the hearing. Surur was abroad at the time, and had not returned to
Egypt by late November.
The government also prosecuted individuals for exercising their right to freedom
of conscience and religion. On September 28, a Cairo state security court sentenced
Sayed Tolba Abu ‘Ali, an employee of Egypt’s Atomic Energy Authority, to a
three-year prison term with hard labor on charges of blasphemy through the propagation
of “ideas contrary to Islamic principles.” A female co-defendant received a
one-year prison term, and nineteen others, said to be followers of Sayed Tolba,were
given one-year suspended sentences. The authorities arrested Sayed Tolba on
March 21 in Madinat Nasr, seizing letters and a videocassette in which he allegedly
claimed he was a messenger of God. The defendants had no right of appeal before
a higher tribunal.
The government continued to prosecute individuals on grounds of their actual
or perceived sexual orientation. On December 19, the Cairo Juvenile Appeal Court
for Misdemeanors upheld the conviction handed down to a seventeen-year-old for
“habitual debauchery,” but reduced his original three-year prison term to six
months. The boy was one of fifty-three defendants tried in 2001 in the so-called
Queen Boat case, in which the authorities charged the defendants with “debauchery”
under the Combat of Prostitution Law, and had already spent seven months in
detention, including four months held with adult prisoners. (See Human Rights
Watch World Report 2002.) Of the twenty-three adult men convicted by the Emergency
State Security Court for Misdemeanors, twenty-one received prison terms
ranging between one and two years, and two others were sentenced to three and five
year terms. In May, President Mubarak endorsed the verdicts against the latter two
but rescinded those against the twenty-one, who were then released on bail. Their
cases, together with those of their twenty-nine co-defendants who had been acquitted by the court, were referred to prosecutors once again for review. A new trial for
all fifty-two defendants opened on July 27 before an ordinary criminal court, and
was ongoing at this writing. In a separate case, four other alleged homosexuals were
convicted of “debauchery” on February 3 by the Court of Misdemeanors in Cairo
and sentenced to three-year prison terms each. During their trial, some of the
defendants said they had been beaten and otherwise tortured while in police custody.
In the third week of September they were acquitted on appeal and released.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
On June 3, the National Assembly passed a new law regulating the activities of
an estimated sixteen thousand nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in Egypt,
and the law was ratified by President Mubarak two days later. Law 84 of 2002 was
intended to replace the controversial Law on Civil Associations and Institutions
(Law 153 of 1999),which was overturned by Egypt’s Supreme Constitutional Court
in June 2000 on procedural grounds. (See Human Rights Watch World Report 2002.)
The new version of the law contained an amendment, welcomed by a number of
local human rights groups, allowing administrative courts to hear cases arising
from disputes between NGOs and the authorities.However, it retained most of the
stringent regulations imposed on the activities of NGOs contained in the original
law. These included obliging NGOs to seek prior approval from the relevant government
authorities for some of their key activities, such as seeking funding from
abroad, becoming affiliated to organizations outside Egypt, and holding elections
for board members. The law also contained new provisions giving the government
even greater powers over NGOs, notably article 42 which authorized the Ministry
of Social Affairs to dissolve NGOs without recourse to a court ruling. Among the
grounds for dissolution were the participation of NGOs in political or trade union
activity deemed prohibited by the authorities and the receipt of foreign funding
without prior approval. The new law was condemned by both local and international
human rights groups, as well as by funding institutions within the European
Union.
On July 29, the Supreme State Security Court sentenced Saadeddin Ibrahim,
director of the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies in Cairo, to a sevenyear
prison term at the end of a second trial that opened on April 27. The trial,
widely perceived as politically motivated and aimed at silencing real or potential
criticism of the Egyptian government (see Human Rights Watch World Report 2002
and 2001), followed a decision by the Court of Cassation overturning previous verdicts
against Ibrahim and twenty-seven co-defendants and ordering a re-trial. The
defendants had been released on February 7, 2002,but a travel ban on Ibrahim,preventing
him from seeking medical treatment abroad, had remained in force pending
the re-trial.
In the second trial, marred by irregularities described below, Ibrahim was once
again found guilty of receiving donations without prior official permission, disseminating
false information designed to undermine Egypt’ stature abroad, and
defrauding the European Union.Nadia ‘Abd al-Nour, the center’s chief accountant was convicted on the fraud charge and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment, as in
the original trial. Two other employees of the center had their two-year prison
terms for fraud reduced to one-year suspended sentences and were released shortly
thereafter. Two other defendants had their five-year prison terms for bribery and
forgery reduced to three years,while the remaining twenty-two sentences remained
unchanged.
The outcome of the second trial was widely condemned by local and international
human rights groups, as well as by member states of the European Union and
the Unites States, and by U.N.human rights mechanisms.The trial was also marked
by serious procedural irregularities, including denying the defense team adequate
time to prepare its case and the failure of the presiding judges to respond to applications
by defense lawyers for leave to challenge the constitutionality of the legislation
under which two of the charges against Ibrahim were brought. The judges
failed to respond to pleas for proceedings to be suspended to enable Ibrahim, diagnosed
as suffering from a degenerative neurological disorder, to travel abroad for
medical treatment. His health was reported to have deteriorated markedly during
his incarceration. The authorities also refused to allow representatives of international
human rights groups to visit Ibrahim and his co-defendants in prison.
In a victory for free expression, the verdict in the second trial was quashed on
appeal on December 3 and a new trial, to be heard before the Court of Cassation,
was scheduled for January 7, 2003. Ibrahim and three co-defendants serving custodial
sentences were released pending the new trial.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
During the year, Egypt’s human rights record was under scrutiny by a number
of the United Nations’ human rights mechanisms. In October, the U.N. Human
Rights Committee considered Egypt’s combined third and fourth periodic reports
on the implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
It welcomed positive developments in improving the status of women, the introduction
of human rights training and awareness programs in educational institutions
and for law-enforcement officials, and the creation of human rights divisions
within certain government ministries.The committee expressed concern about the
continuing state of emergency in the country and called for a review of the necessity
of maintaining it. It also called for a review of the “very large number of
offenses” punishable by death, with a view to abolishing the death penalty. The
committee criticized “the persistence of torture” perpetrated by law-enforcement
personnel and “the general lack of investigations into such practices, punishment
of those responsible, and reparation for the victims.” It also “noted with alarm that
military courts and state security courts had jurisdiction to try civilians accused of
terrorism although there were no guarantees of those courts’ independence and
their decisions were not subject to appeal before a higher court.” Among other
things, the committee called on Egypt to refrain from punishing “private sexual relations between consenting adults” and to review legislation governing the activities
of NGOs to enable them to operate “without obstacles.”
In November, the Committee against Torture considered Egypt’s fourth periodic
report on the implementation of the Convention Against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Among other things, it
welcomed the enactment of legislation banning flogging in prisons and measures
taken to regulate procedures for unannounced inspections to places of detention.
The committee criticized the absence of mandatory inspections of prisons by an
independent body, the numerous complaints of torture and ill-treatment, including
of minors, and the absence of prompt and impartial investigations into torture
and related deaths in custody. It made a series of recommendations, among them
the abolition of incommunicado detention, enabling victims of torture to obtain
full redress, ensuring that prisons under state security jurisdiction be subjected to
mandatory inspection, and holding minors separately from adult detainees and
protecting them from abuse. The committee also urged Egypt to abolish the use of
administrative detention, to grant those convicted by military courts the right of
appeal before a higher tribunal, to allow human rights NGOs to “pursue their activities
unhindered,” and to agree to a visit by the special rapporteur on torture. In his
March report to the Commission on Human Rights, the special rapporteur had
detailed scores of cases of alleged torture and ill-treatment, including two cases of
death in custody, which he had transmitted to the government between May and
November 2001.
In her February report to the Commission on Human Rights, the secretary-general’s
special representative on human rights defenders,Hina Jilani, expressed concern
about procedural irregularities in the state security trial of Saadeddin Ibrahim
and his co-defendants. She warned that “the conviction of these members of civil
society for their human rights activities will have a chilling effect on the activities of
other human rights defenders in Egypt,” and she expressed concern about the use
of laws to restrict sources of funding for human rights defenders and to impose
related penalties. Jilani said her April 2001 request to visit Egypt remained pending,
and she had received no response from the government by July when Jilani submitted
her report to the General Assembly.
The special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom
of opinion and expression, Abid Hussain, said in his January report to the Commission
on Human Rights that he had received an invitation to visit from the
Egyptian government, but by the end of November the visit had not taken place. In
his report, the special rapporteur detailed several cases transmitted to the government,
among them the referral of twenty-two alleged Muslim Brotherhood members
to a military court. (See above.)
During a visit to Egypt in February, High Commissioner for Human Rights
Mary Robinson met with relevant government officials and representatives of
human rights and other NGOs. Among the issues of concern reportedly raised by
Robinson was the continuing state of emergency and its adverse effect on human
rights protection in the country, particularly in allowing the trial of civilians before
military and state security courts.
On May 6, 2002, Egypt ratified the International Labor Organization’s Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the
Worst Forms of Child Labor (ILO Convention 182).
European Union
On November 29, 2001, the European Parliament passed a legislative resolution
giving its assent to the conclusion of the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement
between Egypt and the E.U., which had been signed in June 2001. On the
same day, the European Parliament passed another resolution expressing concern
about aspects of Egypt’s human rights record. The resolution stated that “despite
substantial efforts, progress still needs to be made . . . with regard to human rights,
freedom of expression and freedom of religious conscience,” and in strengthening
the role of civil society. It called on Egypt to take steps to ensure greater respect for
fundamental rights and to abolish the death penalty. The resolution urged the
European Council and the European Commission “to devise practical arrangements
for regular assessments” to improve “regular and impartial monitoring of
developments in the field of human rights and the extent to which human rights
activists are free to act and speak out in defense of the rights of others.” During a
visit to Egypt by External Affairs Commissioner Chris Patten in October, Foreign
Minister Ahmad Maher announced that the Association Agreement would be forwarded
to the People’s Assembly for ratification during its forthcoming session.
The agreement provided for a budget of 351 million euros for the period 2002-
2004, of which twenty million euros were earmarked for support to social development
and civil society in 2003.
On July 4, the European Parliament passed a resolution expressing concern at
the Egyptian authorities’ decision to retry fifty-two Egyptian men charged with
“debauchery” and related offenses (see above), noting that this contravened article
14 of the ICCPR, since the defendants had already been tried in an earlier trial. The
resolution urged the government to halt “all prosecution of citizens on grounds of
homosexuality and to protect their individual freedoms.”
Commissioner Patten denounced in a July 30 statement the guilty verdict
handed down to Saadeddin Ibrahim and his co-defendants in the Ibn Khaldun case
(see above), and he criticized the continued use of state security courts to hear such
cases. He said that the “questionable procedures used in the conduct of this high
profile trial, the decision to retry these defendants after a successful appeal, the
deteriorating health of the principal defendant, and the harsh outcome of the new
trial must concern those who most support Egypt in its ambitious program of economic,
social and political reform.” An E.U. Presidency statement issued on the
same day also expressed “its surprise at the hurried fashion in which the sentence
was handed down, which can throw doubt on the respect due . . . this trial.”
In a September 5 debate on the human rights situation in Egypt, European Parliament
member states expressed concern about the continued imprisonment of
Saadeddin Ibrahim and some of his co-defendants, as well as the prosecution of
alleged homosexuals on grounds of their sexual orientation, the arrest of suspected
Islamist activists, and the continuing restrictions on NGO activity. Several member
states stressed that respect for human rights was an integral part of the Association Agreement between Egypt and the E.U., and that “the democratic clause in article
2 is not a luxury,nor is it an option.”Commissioner Patten strongly condemned the
government’s handling of the Ibn Khladun case,which he said had caused “evident
damage to Egypt’s international reputation.” He reiterated that the commission
“has no evidence of financial or other wrongdoings by Dr. Ibrahim or his co-defendants
with respect to the two NGO contracts managed by them,”detailed in an affidavit
submitted during the defendants’ appeal. Following the debate, the European
Parliament passed a resolution reiterating its condemnation of the conviction of
Ibrahim and his co-defendants following a second trial in July, urging President
Mubarak “to use his powers to obtain the release of Dr. Ibrahim and his colleagues
pending a fair and final judgment.”
United States
The U.S. remained Egypt’s largest provider of foreign military and economic
assistance, estimated at U.S.$2.1 billion. However, with the noteworthy exception
of a public decision in August not to consider additional aid following the reconviction
of Saadeddin Ibrahim, the Bush administration refrained from making U.S.
assistance in any way conditional on improvements in Egypt’s poor human rights
record.
In January, the U.S. announced an accelerated assistance plan of U.S.$959 million,
which it said was aimed at helping the Egyptian economy’s recovery in the
aftermath of the September 11, 2001, attacks on the U.S. An estimated U.S.$202
million was released at the end of June, the bulk of which was aimed at supporting
the Egyptian government’s measures in combating money laundering. In a statement
on July 1, the U.S. ambassador to Egypt, David Welch, said that the U.S. government
supported “the efforts of the Egyptian government in preventing the flow
of money to terrorists and criminal groups.”
On August 15, the Bush administration announced that it would not consider
further aid to Egypt in response to the July 29 conviction of Saadeddin Ibrahim,
who held dual Egyptian-U.S. citizenship, and his co-defendants. Earlier, a State
Department spokesperson said the administration was “deeply disappointed” at
the verdict, and that it would “continue to follow Dr. Ibrahim’s case closely” and
press its concerns with the Egyptian authorities.U.S. officials made clear, however,
that Egypt’s annual $2.1 billion of military and economic assistance was “not in
danger.” The Bush administration also did not comment on the politically motivated
arrests and unfair trials of scores of alleged Islamist opponents of President
Mubarak’s government.
In its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2001, released in March
2002, the State Department said that Egypt’s record “remained poor with respect to
freedom of expression and its continued referral of citizens to trial in military or
State Security Emergency courts, among other areas.” It criticized the use of emergency
legislation to restrict basic rights, and said, “In combating terrorism, the
security forces continued to mistreat and torture prisoners, arbitrarily arrest and
detain persons, hold detainees in prolonged pre-trial detention, and occasionally
engage in mass arrests. In actions unrelated to the anti-terrorist campaign, local police killed, tortured and otherwise abused both criminal suspects and other persons.”
It also said that prison conditions remained poor.
In its Annual Report on International Religious Freedom for 2002, released in
October, the State Department said that “there was a continued trend toward
improvement in the Government’s respect for religious freedom,” but that certain
abuses and restrictions remained. It said that the government “continued to prosecute
for unorthodox religious beliefs and practices under the charge of ‘insulting
heavenly religions.’”
Secretary of State Colin Powell visited Egypt in early April as part of a wider
Middle East tour. Talks held with President Mubarak and government officials
focused on the revival of the Middle East peace process in the context of the deteriorating
security situation in Israel and the Palestinian Authority areas. The continued
violence between Israelis and Palestinians also dominated talks between
President Mubarak and President Bush when the former visited Washington,D.C.,
in early June.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
The State of Egypt vs. Free Expression: the Ibn Khaldun Trial, 01/02
IRAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Human rights progress in Iran was caught in a continuing political power struggle
between popularly elected reformers, who controlled both the presidency and
Parliament, and clerical conservatives, who exercised authority through the office
of the Leader (held by Ayatollah Ali Khamenei), the Council of Guardians, the judiciary,
and the armed forces.Despite landslide electoral victories in every major election
from 1997 to 2002, the reformers were unable to dislodge repressive policies
favored by the clerical leadership, including far-reaching restrictions on freedom of
expression, association, and political participation.
The Council of Guardians repeatedly blocked bills passed by the Parliament in
such areas as women’s rights, family law, the prevention of torture, and electoral
reform.The judiciary, deployed as one of the conservative’s strongest weapons, further
undermined the rule of law with arbitrary closures of newspapers and imprisonment
of political activists.
Two notable political events illustrated the conflict between reformers and conservatives.
On July 8, a leading cleric, Ayatollah Jalaluddin Taheri, announced his
resignation as Friday Prayer Leader of Isfahan. Friday Prayer Leaders, appointed by
the Leader of the Islamic Republic, were the senior religious authorities in their cities and districts. In his widely circulated letter of resignation, the Ayatollah,
declaring that he would flee what he could no longer tolerate, issued a ringing
denunciation of the clerical establishment. He accused Iran’s clerical leaders of
directing and encouraging “a bunch of club wielders” and of “marrying the ill-tempered,
ugly hag of violence to religion.”He observed that the centers of power were
“unchecked and unbridled ...neither reproached by the executors of justice nor
reproved by the law.” This criticism of lack of accountability, corruption and lawlessness,
coming from someone of impeccable religious credentials at the heart of
the establishment, struck a deep chord. The conservative establishment sought to
limit the damage by ordering official news outlets to restrict their coverage of the
Ayatollah’s statement, an order that was only partially successful.
A second major political development revealed how structural contradictions
within the Islamic Republic perpetuated the political conflict between reformers
and conservatives. In September, President Khatami presented new bills to Parliament
designed to override obstacles to his reform agenda. One new bill sought to
increase the president’s power to issue warnings when state institutions exceeded
their constitutional functions.President Khatami had issued numerous such warnings
over the years to protest the arbitrary closures of newspapers or the jailing of
his supporters, but his warnings had been ignored. The bill was accompanied by
another designed to curb the powers of the Council of Guardians to veto electoral
candidates. By the end of the year, the bills had passed the Parliament easily, but
their endorsement by the Council of Guardians was unlikely.
Attacks against the independent news media persisted. They had begun in April
2000 with a speech by the Leader identifying the reformist press as “bases of the
enemy.” They continued in November 2001, when the daily Nation (Mellat) was
closed by order of the head of the Tehran Press Court, Judge Said Mortazavi. He
accused the newspaper of cultural bias and of ignoring warnings. The closure followed
a pattern, repeated throughout the year, in which the judiciary ignored the
press law requirement for a public court hearing in front of a jury before any order
to close.
On December 15, 2001,Mohammad Salamati, editor of Our Era (Asr-e Ma), the
mouthpiece of a group called Mojahedine of the Islamic Revolution Organization,
was sentenced to twenty-six months in jail for views he expressed in the journal.
The judge of the press court where he was tried ignored the jury’s recommendation
to commute the sentence. Salamati’s sentence was reduced to seventeen months on
appeal in March, and suspended after the intervention of the Ministry of Culture
and Islamic Guidance. The magazine remained closed at this writing. In December
2001 and January 2002, provincial newspapers in Tabriz, Hormuzgan, Luristan,
and Zanjan were closed and editors received prison terms of up to eighteen months
for inciting public opinion and insulting Islamic sanctities.Other closures in January
included specialist film magazines accused of offending moral decency. In
April, the Tabriz general court revoked the publication license of Shams-i Tabriz
weekly and sentenced publisher Ali Hamed Iman to seven months in jail and seventy-
four lashes.Charges against Iman included publishing lies, stoking ethnic tensions,
and insulting Islamic sanctities and officials.
A further wave of closures began in May. The judiciary banned the influential reformist newspaper Foundation (Bonyan). Then it closed the pro-reformist newspaper
Iran for twenty-four hours. The court gave no reason for the paper’s suspension,
but it was believed the decision was related to an allegedly blasphemous article
suggesting that the Prophet Muhammad enjoyed listening to women sing and play
music.
In July, the judiciary shut the leading reformist newspaper in Iran, New Day
(Norouz), for six months. The paper’s director, Mohssen Mirdamadi, a senior
reformist personality and a member of Parliament, was sentenced to six months in
jail, though he had not yet begun serving the sentence at this writing. Norouz was
the most important of the remaining reformist dailies and acted as the voice of the
biggest reform political faction, the Participation Front.Mirdamadi was also fined
and banned from press activities for four years. Another press court banned New
Day (Ruz-e Now) merely because its name was similar to Norouz.
The Tehran daily Mirror of the South (Ayineh-e Jonub), launched nationwide
only a week previously, was closed in July for allegedly publishing articles contrary
to the law and spreading propaganda against the Islamic revolution. A press court
subsequently banned the Daily Report (Guzarish-i Ruz),which had previously been
ordered closed temporarily. The judiciary also threatened to prosecute Iran’s official
Islamic Republic News Agency for printing a statement by the recently banned
opposition party, the Iran Freedom Movement (IFM). Further closures followed
and by the end of the year the number of newspaper and magazines closed since
April 2000 had reached over eighty-five titles. Any pretense that legal principles
would be observed in regulating the press disappeared. Iran’s press courts acted as
a law unto themselves, issuing closure orders by decree without legal basis.
Iran’s courts also restricted independent political activity through a series of
political trials of supporters of the National Religious Alliance (NRA), a loose
alliance of reform minded activists, who had been detained in March and April
2001. In November 2001, more than thirty members of the IFM, a fifty-year-old
political party,went on trial before the Tehran Revolutionary Court, accused of acts
against national security and planning to overthrow the government. They had
been among those detained in March and April 2001.
Six of the IFM detainees—Abolfazl Bazargan, Mohammad Tavasoli, Hashem
Sabaghian, Khosro Mansourian, Mohammad Naeimpour, and Alireza Hendi—
were held in detention until March 2002 and released while the trial was in session.
Many of the defendants were held incommunicado for months and coerced into
making incriminating statements. At trial, the prosecution presented no credible
evidence that the IFM defendants had engaged in anything other than legitimate,
peaceful political activity. In July, the court sentenced more than thirty defendants
to prison terms. Senior figures in the IFM received sentences of between eight and
ten years. The court also ordered the complete dissolution of the party. Ibrahim
Yazdi, the leader of the banned party, returned to Iran in April from medical treatment
in the United States.He, too, was facing criminal charges based on his political
activities, although his trial had not started at this writing.
In a related case, fifteen NRA activists were tried before the Tehran Revolutionary
Court in January on charges of seeking to overthrow the government. Ezzatollah
Sahhabi, arrested in December 2000, was held in an unknown location. The other fourteen, arrested in March 2001, were held incommunicado, most often in
solitary confinement, in a Tehran detention center known as Prison 59.Nine of the
detainees—Mohammad Maleki, Mohammad Hossein Rafiei, Alireza Rajaei, Reza
Alijani,MohammadBasteh Negar,Mahmoud Omrani,Massoud Pedram,Morteza
Kazemian, and MohammadMohammadi Ardehali—were released on bail in 2001.
The other five—Taghi Rahmani, Habibollah Payman, Reza Raeis-Toussi, Saeid
Madani, and Hoda Saber—remained in Prison 59 until March 2002 and were only
released after paying large bail sums. One detainee, Saeid Madani, paid one billion
rials, a sum equivalent to more than U.S.$500,000 at the official exchange rate.
Prison 59, located in a Revolutionary Guard military installation in Eshratabad
in central Tehran, is an unregulated detention facility outside the official penal system.
All of the detainees, many of whom were elderly, complained of harsh treatment
while in detention, including being beaten by their captors and, for much of
the time, being held in small cells where they could only lie in a cramped position.
Detention conditions for several elderly prisoners were a cause of particular
concern. Ezzatollah Sahhabi, more than seventy years old, was hospitalized twice
with heart attacks. His medications were adjusted, but he was not been permitted
to meet with his own doctor.Another prisoner, Dr.Habibollah Payman, sixty-six, a
dentist, suffered from severe kidney and urinary tract problems, but was given only
limited toilet access. He was forced to use the drinking vessel in his cell to relieve
himself, rinsing it out when given access to the bathroom. Dr. Raeis Toussi, sixtyfive,
a law professor at Tehran University, had one interrogation session that lasted
more than twenty-four hours and three that exceeded eighteen hours each, all of
which exacerbated a serious back injury. He was held in solitary confinement for
168 days. During the detentions, the judiciary blocked access to the detainees and
prevented President Khatami from sending an observer to visit them.
A third trial arising from the March and April 2001 arrests involved Habibollah
Peyman, leader of the Militant Muslims Movement (Junbash-i Musalmanan-i
Mubarez). His closed-door trial began in Tehran on April 7. He, too, was released
on payment of substantial bail, after spending more than a year in detention,much
of it incommunicado in solitary confinement. His lawyer complained that he was
deprived of access to prosecution documents relating to the case.There was no outcome
in this trial at this writing.
In other political proceedings, the conservative-dominated judiciary convicted
several politicians allied with President Khatami. In January, Member of Parliament
(M.P.) Hossein Loghmanian was sentenced to ten months in prison.He had
been convicted for insulting the judiciary in a speech he gave to Parliament, criticizing
the arbitrary closure of newspapers, and protesting the imprisonment of
political prisoners. Leader of the Islamic Republic Ayatollah Ali Khamenei pardoned
the jailed reformist M.P. after a walkout by members of Parliament.
Two prominent jailed journalists,Emadedin Baqi and Akbar Ganji, remained in
prison. Four other prisoners—Mohssen Youssefi Eshkevari,Ali Afshari,Khalil Rostamkhani,
and Saeid Sadre—continued serving sentences for their participation in
the March 2000 Berlin conference. (See Human Rights Watch World Report 2001.)
In April, another prominent reformist journalist, Ahmed Zeid Abadi, received a
twenty-three-month jail term for spreading propaganda against the state and insulting officials.He had been detained two years previously for seven months.He
remained free on bail pending appeal.
On July 2, a court in Hamedan announced that it had summoned Hashem
Aghajari, a leader of the Mojahedine of the Islamic Revolution Organization
(MIRO), to face charges of insulting religious sanctities.The charges followed a celebrated
speech he made in June criticizing the clergy’s role in politics and urging
disobedience of senior clerical leaders on religious grounds. MIRO was an important
strand of the coalition of reformist groups in the Parliament and Aghajari’s
blunt comments indicated growing frustration among some reformists over the
lack of progress. In November, a Revolutionary Court sentenced Aghajari to death
for blasphemy and insulting the clergy. His lawyer filed an appeal against the sentence
in December.
Behrouz Geranpayeh, the head of the National Institute for Opinion Polls, was
detained in October and held incommunicado for more than a month while under
interrogation after publishing a poll showing the majority of Iranians favored
restoring relations with the United States. In November, two heads of private
research institutes that had conducted the poll,Abbas Abdi and Hossein Ali Ghazian,
also prominent reformist figures, were arrested. They faced charges of “collaboration
with U.S. elements and British Intelligence” and of conducting
“psychological warfare” aimed at overthrowing the government.
Other notable incidents of arbitrary detention included that of Siamak
Pourzand, a seventy-three-year-old journalist seized outside his sister’s house in
November 2001.He was then held in an unknown location before being brought to
trial, in secret, in March.With their disregard for pre-trial safeguards, the proceedings
flagrantly violated fair trial standards. The journalist was released in November,
but remained under threat of prosecution.
In June, an Iranian dancer,Mohamad Khordadian, who had been living in Los
Angeles for twenty-two years before returning to visit his family, was arrested on
charges of corrupting public morality.At his trial he received a ten-year suspended
prison term and was banned from returning to the United States. In September, an
actress, who kissed a film director at a film festival, was also prosecuted for corrupting
public morality. These high-profile prosecutions exemplified attempts by
hardline conservatives to generate public concern over a supposed decline in public
morality, of which they were the self-appointed guardians.
Senior Shi’a religious leaders and their supporters who dissented from the ruling
clerical establishment remained targets of official persecution. A telling incident
occurred in Qom in December 2001, at the funeral for Grand Ayatollah
Mohammad Shirazi, a leading clerical figure who questioned the form of government
in the Islamic Republic.At the funeral, his body was seized by security forces
and interred in Hazrat-i Masumeh mosque, the major shrine in the city. He had
expressed his wish to be buried on the grounds of his house, but the authorities
apparently feared that his tomb might become a rallying point for clerical opposition.
Grand Ayatollah Hossain Ali Montazeri, the former designated successor to Ayatollah
Khomeini as Leader of the Islamic Republic, remained under house arrest in
Qom, although his ideas continued to circulate widely.
Iran’s religious and ethnic minorities remained subject to discrimination and
persecution. Representatives of the predominantly Sunni Muslim Kurdish minority
protested the appointment of a new governor of Kurdistan province from the
Shi’a majority. The authorities overlooked Sunni candidates for the post put forward
by Kurdish parliamentarians. The lack of public school education in Kurdish
language remained a perennial source of Kurdish frustration.
The banned Kurdish opposition party, the Peoples Democratic Party of Iran
(PDKI), which had engaged in armed opposition to the government, announced
that the Iranian government had executed Karim Toujali in Mahabad on January
24, 2002. Toujali had sought political asylum in Turkey, but had been unsuccessful
in his claim. Turkish police then forcibly returned him to Iran. In October, another
PDKI prisoner, Hamzeh Ghaderi, was executed in Orumieh. The PDKI claimed
that another five supporters were executed with Ghaderi. Other PDKI supporters
reportedly remained in jail facing execution.
The ten Jewish Iranians sentenced to prison in Shiraz in 2000 were released in
October after appeals for their release by the representative of the Jewish community
in Parliament, Maurice Motamed. Some of the prisoners had served longer
than their allotted sentences.Throughout the year,Motamed also drew attention to
institutional discrimination against religious minorities, including continued limits
on access to educational opportunities and employment. In August, in a bold
move, he proposed a bill calling for equivalence in the amount of Diyeh (blood
money) between Muslims and non-Muslims. The Qisas (retribution) system of
criminal law specifies penalties for various crimes which differ according to the religion
of the victim and the perpetrator. In general, non-Muslims are subject to
harsher penalties and enjoy fewer protections than Muslims.Motamed’s bill,which
remained under consideration at the end of the year, would remove these discrepancies
although it would not apply to Iran’s largest religious minority, followers of
the Baha’i faith.
Baha’is also continued to face persecution, including being denied permission
to worship or to carry out other communal affairs publicly. At least four Baha’is
were serving prison terms for their religious beliefs. Bihnam Mithaqi and Kayvan
Khalajabadi, imprisoned since 1989,were informed in January that their sentences
would run until 2004.Musa Talibi, imprisoned in 1994, was held in Isfahan. It was
not clear whether his death sentence had been commuted. Zhabihullah Mahrami,
imprisoned since 1995 and convicted of apostasy, had his death sentence commuted
in March.
The campaign by conservatives against moral decline, noted above, was accompanied
by an increase in public executions and corporal punishment. In October,
the authorities carried out public executions of five men convicted of a series of
attacks on women in Tehran. Their bodies were hoisted on mobile cranes and
driven through the city. In Hamedan, on October 15, two thieves convicted of more
than thirty robberies each had four fingers amputated in a public ceremony.
With the collapse of the Taliban government in Afghanistan, hundreds of thousands
of Afghan refugees who had been living in Iran began to return. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) expressed concern that Iranian
authorities were exerting pressure on Afghan refugees to leave, a charge denied by the Iranian government. Some one million Afghan refugees remained in Iran at
this writing.
Shadowy underground paramilitary forces, linked to hardline conservative clerical
leaders unwilling to relinquish their continuing grip on power, continued to be
implicated in violent unrest.Sporadic clashes in the streets between crowds and riot
police supported by Basij, religious paramiltary forces, occurred at various times
throughout the year. One clash took place in October 2001 following Iran’s elimination
from the soccer World Cup. Although these clashes and demonstrations
often took on a political complexion, they tended to be small and easily contained
by the authorities.
Several thousand people marched in Tehran in July in what was becoming an
annual event to commemorate a 1999 raid by paramilitary forces on student dormitories
at Tehran University. At least four students detained in 1999—Ahmed
Batebi,Mehrdad Lohrassbi,Akbar Mohammadi and Manouchehr Mohammadi—
remained in prison serving long prison terms. There were sporadic clashes with
police and hardline vigilantes, but no serious disturbances. The major student
organization that supported the reform movement had urged its members to stay
away from the march for fear of provoking a clash with hardliners.
Students nationwide protested the death sentence imposed on Hashem Aghajari
in November. Protests subsided when senior clerical leaders threatened the students.
On November 22,Ayatollah Khamenei issued an ultimatum stating that students
should “return to their homes” or “the people will intervene” against them, a
thinly veiled threat to unleash the same paramilitary forces that the authorities had
used in July 1999 to crush student protests.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Access to the country for independent human rights investigators remained
restricted, although the government did declare its willingness to admit U.N.
special rapporteurs to the country. There continued to be lively discussion of
human rights issues in the press and in Parliament, although independent local
human rights groups were not permitted to function.
Several lawyers known for their defense of human rights were targets of prosecution.
Mohammad Dadkhah, part of the defense team of the Iranian Freedom
Movement, was sentenced to five months in prison in May. He was also banned
from practicing law for ten years.
The judiciary confirmed the sentences of several lawyers associated with
reformist causes, including cases relating to the assassinations of writers and intellectuals
in 1998. One lawyer,Nasser Zarafshan, was sentenced to five years in prison
and fifty lashes. The bar association described the flogging sentence as indefensible
and unjustifiable. The appeal was dismissed. Zarafshan had probed the involvement
of Ministry of Intelligence officials in the 1998 murders and claimed in the
press that there were more victims of these killings than had been mentioned in the
trial of officials involved in the killings.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
European and Iranian officials met repeatedly throughout the year to extend
cooperation in a range of areas, including counter-terrorism, trade, and the promotion
of human rights. The E.U. remained committed to a policy of engaging
with Iranian leaders, while at the same time giving human rights a high profile in
its public discourse about the relationship. E.U.Commissioner for External Affairs
Chris Patten told the BBC that the dialogue was aimed at bolstering Iranian
reformists, such as elected president Mohammad Khatami. “It can’t seriously be
anybody’s idea of a good way of promoting stability in the region to think that we
should isolate and cut Iran off forever,” he said. “If you don’t talk to the reasonable
people, you fetch up with fewer reasonable people to talk to.”
The improvement of relations with the E.U. remained vulnerable to interference
by hardliners opposed to such normalization. In March, the planned visit to Berlin
of Speaker of Parliament Hojatoleslam Mehdi Karrubi was canceled when Chancellor
Gerhard Schroeder declined to receive him, a decision that many observers
believed resulted from political machinations by Iran’s conservative judiciary.
Schroeder was displeased with the apparently punitive transfer of Said Sadr to a
remote and notorious prison near the Afghan border in advance of Karrubi’s visit.
Sadr, an Iranian employee at the German embassy in Tehran, had been imprisoned
in Iran since the controversial Berlin Conference in 2000. Shortly before his
planned trip, Karrubi apparently had angered hardliners by telling German journalists
that he was trying to secure Sadr’s release; the judiciary responded by transferring
Sadr to the remote prison, derailing the visit.
In a move likely to please the Iranian government, the E.U. recognized the Mojahedine
Khalq Organization (MKO) as a terrorist group on May 3. The MKO was
based in Iraq and launched armed attacks against Iranian targets. It was described
as a foreign terrorist organization by the U.S. State Department.The E.U., however,
did not include the affiliated National Council of Resistance in its designation.
On June 17, the E.U. placed human rights at the top of a list of four areas in
which it wanted to see improvements through its policy of engagement with Iran:
(1) human rights and fundamental freedoms; (2) non-proliferation; (3) terrorism;
and (4) the Middle East peace process.
In September, Iran approved a new British ambassador. The move ended an
eight-month diplomatic dispute following Tehran’s rejection in January of David
Reddaway, described by conservative newspapers in Iran as a Zionist and a spy. It
was an indicator of the importance given to Iran by the E.U. and the U.K. that
embarrassing incidents of this nature were not permitted to stall the momentum of
engagement.British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw traveled to Iran in October to further
advance the relationship but was met by an upturn in political and public executions,
interpreted by many as another example of the conservatives using their
control over the judiciary to seek to influence Iran’s foreign policy.
United Nations
In April, during the fifty-eigth session of the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights, a draft resolution criticizing the situation in Iran was defeated by a roll-call
vote of twenty to nineteen, with fourteen abstentions, marking the first time in
more than fifteen years that a resolution criticizing Iran’s human rights practices
did not pass at the commission. It brought to an end the mandate of the U.N.
special representative on human rights in Iran and was seen as a major victory for
Iranian diplomacy. The Iranian government regarded the special representative’s
mandate as political and repeatedly blocked his access to the country, despite the
balanced and constructive tone of his reporting over many years.
In July, Iran said it would give immediate access to United Nations thematic rapporteurs
to allow them to examine its human rights record. Iran’s ambassador,
Mohammed Reza Alborzi, told High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary
Robinson that specialists would “be welcome.” By the end of the year no visits had
taken place.
United States
Possibilities for an improvement in U.S.-Iranian relations based on the shared
goal of removing the Taliban from power in Afghanistan were not realized due to
continuing U.S. concerns over Iranian support for terrorism. Such concerns were
exemplified by the seizure of the Karine A, caught smuggling weapons from Iran to
the Palestinian Authority.
President Bush’s characterization of Iran, Iraq, and North Korea as an “axis of
evil” during his January 29 State of the Union address caused anger in Iran across
all factions within the clerical leadership. It fueled expectations among parts of
public opinion that the U.S. would intervene directly in Iran, as it had in Afghanistan,
and change the government. The government and many Iranians resented
this implied interference in their affairs.
In July,President Bush issued a subtler statement that, though barely reported in
the U.S., sparked much debate in Iran. It came a few days after clashes between students
and police in Tehran on the anniversary of the 1999 student demonstrations
and the resignation of a prominent cleric, Ayatollah Jalaledine Taheri, who had
accused the Iranian authorities of corruption and repression. In his written statement,
President Bush expressed solidarity with the students, saying, “their government
should listen to their hopes.” In a targeted phrase, the president urged Iran’s
un-elected leaders to abandon policies that denied Iranians the opportunities and
rights of people elsewhere. In singling out un-elected leaders for criticism the President
appeared to be differentiating between factions within the Iranian power
structure.This more measured approach to Iran made the U.S. government’s statements
an important influence on human rights conditions in the country for the
first time in many years.
The U.S. continued to block Iran’s access to loans from international financial
institutions. For example, in September, the U.S. blocked the private-sector financing
arm of the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation, from investing U.S.$2 million in an Iranian company. The World Bank had planned to lend Iran
hundreds of millions of dollars, but the U.S. effectively blocked the deals.
In March, the U.S. State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices
for 2001 called the Iranian government’s human rights record “poor” and
detailed significant restrictions on citizens’ right to change their government. In
September, the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom identified
Iran, together with eleven other states, as countries of particular concern with
respect to violations of the rights to freedom of religion.
Iranians worried about U.S. military action in nearby Afghanistan and threatened
action in Iraq, but they were also interested in the administration’s strong
rhetoric supporting democracy and human rights in Iran. The openness of Iranians
to the U.S. was seen in September when the state news agency, IRNA, published
the results of a public opinion poll showing that 75 percent of Iranians favored a
dialogue between Iran and the United States, and almost 50 percent approved of
U.S. policy toward the country. The judiciary responded by closing down the institute
that conducted the poll and prosecuting the poll’s director and the director of
the news agency that published it. Some conservative leaders even called for the
criminalization of advocating dialogue or normalization with the United States.
However, the reformists appeared emboldened by the public mood. President
Khatami admonished the critics of dialogue and expressed his own willingness to
enter into discussions with the United State without preconditions.
IRAQ AND IRAQI KURDISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The Iraqi government continued to commit widespread and gross human rights
violations, including the extensive use of the death penalty and the extrajudicial
execution of prisoners, the forced expulsion of ethnic minorities from government-
controlled areas in the oil-rich region of Kirkuk and elsewhere, the arbitrary
arrest of suspected political opponents and members of their families, and the torture
and ill-treatment of detainees. In a national referendum in mid-October,
which excluded the three Kurdish-held northern provinces, President Saddam
Hussain received a “one hundred percent approval from a one hundred percent
turnout” for another seven-year term of office, according to ‘Izzat Ibrahim al-
Douri, deputy head of Iraq’s Revolutionary Command Council. An amnesty for
Iraqi prisoners was announced within days of the referendum.
Relations between the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic
Union of Kurdistan (PUK), which retained control over most of the northern
provinces of Sulaimaniya,Arbil, and Duhok, improved as they began to implement
a 1998 U.S.-brokered peace agreement. While both sides continued to maintain
separate administrations in areas under their control, the former unified parliament, the Kurdistan National Assembly, met for the first time since the outbreak of
intra-Kurdish fighting in 1996. KDP and PUK officials accused Iraqi government
agents and Kurdish Islamist groups of perpetrating acts of sabotage in the region,
including the deliberate targeting of civilians.Human rights abuses were committed
by Kurdish opposition groups, including by Islamist groups in the context of
clashes with PUK forces.
Economic sanctions imposed on Iraq by the United Nations Security Council in
1991 remained in force. The government accepted the terms of Security Council
Resolution 1409 restructuring the sanctions by introducing a Goods Review List
for potential “dual-use” items and “fast-track”procedures for humanitarian goods.
Following several months of United States threats of military action, the government
announced in early October it would allow U.N.weapons inspectors access to
the country without conditions. On November 8, the Security Council unanimously
adopted Resolution 1441, calling on Iraq to comply with a significantly
stricter inspection regime or face “serious consequences.”
Human Rights Developments
in Government-Controlled Iraq
On October 20, Iraq’s Revolutionary Command Council issued Decree 225,
granting a general amnesty to political detainees and army deserters, as well as
those at large in the country and those abroad. Two categories of detainees did not
benefit: those charged with or convicted of murder where “no reconciliation has
been reached with the families of the murdered,” and those detained for debtrelated
charges. Shortly after the announcement of the amnesty, described by the
authorities as “full and final and complete,”Minister of Justice Mundhir al-Shawi
clarified that those held in connection with espionage for the U.S. and the “Zionist
entity” would also be excluded. On the same day, thousands of inmates were
released from Abu Ghraib prison and other places of detention throughout the
country, with government officials declaring that Iraq’s prisons had been emptied.
No official figures were made public on the number of releases.However, many
Iraqis reported to Human Rights Watch that their relatives, detained in various
parts of the country for political reasons, had not been released. In an unprecedented
development, families whose detained relatives remained unaccounted for
staged a protest outside the Ministry of Information on October 22, demanding
information on their relatives’ fate and whereabouts. There was a widespread perception
that few political detainees had in fact been released, the majority who benefited
being those held in connection with common law offences, including scores
of foreigners. In the ensuing days, a number of former inmates described to foreign
journalists the appalling conditions in which they had been held and the torture
and ill-treatment to which they had been subjected during their incarceration.
Government opponents and relatives of political detainees continued to report
numerous executions of political suspects and those convicted of ordinary criminal
offenses, as well as former army personnel suspected of disloyalty to the authorities.
Scores of civilians detained in Abu Ghraib prison were apparently executed in
early March, among them five Shi’a Muslims from al-Najaf province who were arrested in December 2001 after reportedly failing to cooperate with the authorities
in the capture of army deserters. Their bodies were returned to their families
later in March. Ten other suspected government opponents were also executed in
Abu Ghraib in June, among them Jabbar Sadeq ‘Ali and ‘Abd al-Salam Hadi Jawad,
both from Basra. The bodies of these victims were apparently not returned to their
families, and were buried by the authorities in a Baghdad cemetery. A number of
armed forces personnel were also reportedly executed by firing squad in Baghdad,
Mosul, and other cities in March, among them ‘Abd al-Haq Isma’il and ‘Abd al-
Hussain Jassim.
The government continued to implement its “Arabization” policy of forcibly
expelling Kurdish,Turkman,and Assyrian families from their homes in areas under
its control in Kirkuk, Khaniqin, Sinjar, and other areas, and replacing them with
Arab families brought from southern Iraq.The vast majority of those expelled were
Kurds, who were moved to Kurdish-held areas in the northern provinces, with a
smaller number expelled to southern Iraq. In September, Human Rights Watch
interviewed scores of expelled Kurdish and Turkman families, some within days of
their expulsion. Officials forced them to leave their homes with very few personal
possessions, and stripped them of all documentation except for their identity cards.
In the majority of cases, one immediate reason for expulsion was their refusal to
sign the so-called nationality correction forms, which were introduced by the government
in 1997 to force non-Arabs to alter their ethnic identity by registering as
Arabs. Other reasons included their refusal to join the Ba’th Party or the failure of
male family members to undergo military training for the Jerusalem Army (Jaysh
al-Quds) or, in the case of children age twelve through seventeen, for Saddam’s
Cubs (Ashbal Saddam).Many reported that the government continued to ban the
use of non-Arab names when registering newborns, and that in some cases they
pressured non-Arabs to adopt Arab names upon marriage. In April, the authorities
were reported to be giving additional incentives, such as plots of land, to Arabs
resettled in Kirkuk who brought the remains of dead relatives for reburial in the
city’s cemeteries.Government officials told the U.N. special rapporteur on Iraq (see
below) in April that registration by ethnic minorities as Arabs was “optional and
not compulsory,” and that the confiscation of lands belonging to expelled families
was for “agricultural purposes.”
In January, 507 Iraqi prisoners of war captured during the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq
war were repatriated from Iran under the auspices of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), together with 188 Iraqi servicemen detained in Iran since
1991.The ICRC also assisted in the repatriation of other individual cases: a Kuwaiti
civilian repatriated from Iraq on March 30, six Iraqi civilians repatriated from
Saudi Arabia on April 7, and two Iraqis repatriated from Kuwait on July 8. The latter
had been detained in Kuwait’s Central Prison “for reasons unconnected to the
1991 Gulf war.”The Iraqi government continued to limit ICRC prison visits to the
foreigners’ section at Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad, where a total of 775 inmates
were being held, according to ICRC information released in October.
At a press briefing on November 30, 2001, U.N.Humanitarian Coordinator for
Iraq Tun Myat said that the “oil-for-food” program was “beginning to show signs
of ageing,” having expanded from its original aims of providing food and medicine to the Iraqi population into dealing with sectors such as electricity, water, sanitation,
housing, education, agriculture, and nutrition. He said that “the life of an
average inhabitant of the country had definitely improved,” but that progress in
providing fresh water, sanitation, and electric power remained priorities. Myat
highlighted as major problems the amount of holds on goods in various sectors and
continuing difficulties in securing visas and work permits for the program’s staff.
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s November 12 report to the Security Council
said, “[T]he trend of malnutrition among children under the age of five, albeit still
at a relatively high level, has been arrested and reversed” in the areas under government
control. The report said that acute malnutrition had gone from 11 percent in
1996 to 5.4 percent in 2002, while chronic malnutrition had dropped from 32 percent
to 24 percent in the same period.Myat attributed continuing problems in this
area to lack of clean water and poor sanitary conditions, rather than shortages of
food or medicine. He added that “much remained to be done to rehabilitate the
infrastructure”. In his September 25 report to the Security Council on the implementation
of the “oil-for-food” program, Benon Sevan, executive director of the
U.N. Office of the Iraq Program (OIP), said that the level of holds had peaked by
mid-July to U.S.$5.43 billion worth of contracts, but that the level had fallen to
U.S.$3.74 billion by mid-September following procedures introduced in May.
U.N. agencies and other humanitarian organizations continued to express concern
about the humanitarian situation in Iraq. The U.N. Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) on October 7 stated that declining essential public services, environmental
pollution, and access to safe water remained areas of concern, and that the
humanitarian situation remained dire despite improvements in the “oil-for-food”
program. In its annual report, released in June, the ICRC said that the effects of
economic sanctions on public infrastructure and services “continued to take a
heavy toll on public health and on the nutritional status of the population. The
result was high infant and child mortality, a reported increase in maternal mortality
and a decline in life expectancy.”
Human Rights Developments in Iraqi Kurdistan
The two principal Kurdish opposition groups in Iraqi Kurdistan, the KDP and
the PUK, maintained their control over most of the three northern provinces of
Arbil, Duhok, and Sulaimaniya. Each group continued to administer their respective
areas through separate administrative, legislative, and executive structures.
There was progress in implementing the provisions of the 1998 Washington
Accord. On October 4, the unified Kurdistan National Assembly met for the first
time since 1996. At a subsequent session on November 12, a joint committee was
appointed to prepare for parliamentary elections in Iraqi Kurdistan, to take place
within nine months.
During a mission to Iraqi Kurdistan in September,Human Rights Watch found
that the overall human rights situation in the region had markedly improved relative
to previous years. Both the KDP and PUK administrations promulgated laws
and adopted decisions aimed at the protection of fundamental civil and political
rights, including freedom of expression and of association. However, representatives of several Islamist and Turkman political parties told Human Rights Watch
that political activity by their members and supporters remained curtailed. Perceived
sympathizers of Islamist groups, in particular, were said to be liable to arbitrary
arrest and detention without trial.
Both the PUK and the KDP continued to grant access to its prisons to representatives
of the ICRC, who reported that in the first half of the year they had visited
almost five hundred detainees in twenty-three different places of detention. As of
early September, the ICRC had registered an estimated total of 2,700 detainees held
by all sides in Iraqi Kurdistan.Hygiene, services, and overall treatment of detainees
in the prisons improved.However, a number of political suspects held by both the
PUK and the KDP told Human Rights Watch in September that interrogators routinely
beat or otherwise mistreated them during questioning.At the Asayish (security)
prison in Sulaimaniya, several detainees accused of complicity in acts of
sabotage endured prolonged solitary confinement, in one case for some six
months.Detainees also experienced long pre-trial detention and inordinate delays
in trial proceedings. At the Asayish prison in Arbil, for example, several suspects
charged with theft upon their arrest in September 1996 still had not been convicted
or acquitted six years later.
The security situation in Iraqi Kurdistan remained precarious. PUK and KDP
officials said that Iraqi government agents and members of Kurdish Islamist groups
carried out acts of sabotage.Between November 2001 and October 2002, there were
at least five bomb attacks targeting public places, such as restaurants, parks, and
summer resorts in Arbil, Sulaimaniya, and elsewhere. Several people were injured
when assailants threw two hand grenades at a crowd celebrating the New Year on
December 31, 2001, in Sulaimaniya. PUK officials later announced the arrest of
three suspects in connection with the attack. In a June 26 incident, an explosive
device detonated at a restaurant in Brusk Park in Arbil, injuring nineteen and
killing an eight-year-old boy. No group claimed responsibility for the attacks on
civilian targets, but PUK and KDP officials attributed most to Ansar al-Islam (Supporters
of Islam—see below), along with several incidents involving actual or
attempted suicide bombings and actual or attempted assassinations. The latter
included the attempted killing on April 2 of PUK Prime Minister Barham Saleh
outside his home in Sulaimaniya. Five of his bodyguards, as well as two gunmen,
were killed in the attack. In a statement issued by its Shura Council on April 3,Ansar
al-Islam denied involvement in the incident, but the PUK later released the name
of three suspects it had apprehended, saying evidence linked them to the Islamist
group.
In December 2001, the Islamist group Jund al-Islam (Soldiers of Islam) was dissolved
and reconstituted under a new name, Ansar al-Islam. Its armed fighters
remained in control of the villages of Biyara and Tawela, and their vicinity, near the
border with Iran. Armed clashes between their forces and those of the PUK continued
into November 2001 (see Human Rights Watch World Report 2002), but in
mid-December Ansar al-Islam announced a ceasefire. Peace talks between the two
sides took place between December and March, but were suspended in April following
the attempted assassination of the PUK prime minister. (See above.) No
major armed clashes ensued, but relations between the two sides remained tense.
On May 4, the leader of Ansar al-Islam,Mullah Fateh Krekar, issued an amnesty for PUK fighters. In the areas under its control,Ansar al-Islam continued to perpetrate
human rights abuses, notably the arbitrary arrest and detention of suspected
PUK sympathizers and others accused of contravening the strict Islamic code
imposed by the group. In September,Human Rights Watch interviewed a number
of former detainees held and tortured by Ansar al-Islam. They suffered beatings,
burning of the skin with acid, and prolonged suspension from the limbs.Most were
eventually released after their families paid sums of money. By September, at least
forty families had fled the villages of Biyara and Tawela to the nearby town of Halabja
as a consequence.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
On November 29, 2001, Security Council Resolution 1382 extended the “oil-forfood”
humanitarian relief program for Iraq for a further six months and introduced
a Goods Review List (GRL), effective May 30.The GRL designated items that
Iraq was prohibited from importing without Security Council approval, thereby
facilitating the processing and approval of contracts for all other goods. In December
2001, the Iraqi government rejected the GRL, saying it would not agree to any
amendments to the 1996 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that established
the “oil-for-food”program.U.N.Office of the Iraq Program (OIP) Executive Director
Benon Sevan visited Iraq between January 14 and February 10 to review the
implementation of the program in both the government-controlled and Kurdishcontrolled
regions.
On May 14, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1409, extending the “oilfor-
food”program for a further six months and introducing a revised GRL and new
procedures for expediting the processing and approval of contracts for humanitarian
supplies and equipment. The three hundred-page GRL contained items
deemed to have potential military purpose or “dual-use,” including telecommunications
and computer equipment, chemical compounds, and vehicles. The Iraqi
government accepted the terms of the resolution on May 16. However, in his May
29 briefing to the Security Council, Sevan called attention to a shortage of funds in
the U.N.-controlled escrow account after a pricing dispute led to a significant
reduction in Iraqi oil exports. In September, Sevan informed the Security Council
that oil exports had “dropped from an average of over 2 million barrels per day in
the year 2000, to under one million barrels per day in recent months.” On October
28, the Sanctions Committee of the Security Council approved a list of six thousand
items for “fast-track” approval by the OIP. These new procedures came into effect
on November 1.
On May 31, the secretary-general appointed Ramiro Armando de Oliveira Lopes
da Silva as U.N. Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq, replacing Tun Myat, whose
term ended in late June. Lopes da Silva took up his post in Baghdad on July 20.
Several rounds of high-level talks between officials of the U.N.Monitoring,Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and Iraqi officials took place in
March, May, and July, focusing on the question of weapons inspections as well as on outstanding issues between Iraq and Kuwait. In late September, Iraq held talks
in Vienna with UNMOVIC and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
on practical arrangements for the resumption of inspections, and an agreement
was announced on October 1.
The Security Council held an open debate on Iraq on October 16 and 17, in
which Secretary-General KofiAnnan supported the passage of a new resolution “so
that there are no weaknesses or ambiguities”with regard to the return of weapons
inspectors to Iraq. On November 8, the Security Council unanimously adopted
Resolution 1441, giving Iraq a “final opportunity to comply with its disarmament
obligations” and setting up “an enhanced inspection regime with the aim of bringing
to full and verified completion the disarmament process” in accordance with
Resolution 687 (1991) and subsequent resolutions. Co-sponsored by the U.S. and
the U.K., the resolution required Iraq to confirm its intention to comply with the
resolution’s terms within seven days of adoption, and to provide a complete declaration
of all aspects of its chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons programs
within thirty days. It also required Iraq to provide weapons inspectors “immediate,
unimpeded, unconditional and unrestricted access”to any sites in Iraq, and warned
that any “further material breach” of its obligations would result in “serious consequences.”
The resolution instructed UNMOVIC to resume inspections within
forty-five days and to report to the Security Council sixty days thereafter. On
November 13, Iraq announced it would comply with the resolution.
The Iraqi government continued to deny entry to Yuli Vorontsov, the secretarygeneral’s
high-level coordinator for the return of missing property and missing
persons from Iraq to Kuwait. In December 2001, the Security Council urged Iraq
“to abandon its stance of declaring no knowledge of the fate and whereabouts” of
the estimated 605 Kuwaiti and third-country nationals unaccounted for since the
1991 Gulf war, and to cooperate with Vorontsov. The Iraqi government responded
by renewing its demand for clarification of the fate of some 1,137 Iraqis whom it
said were also missing since 1991. In March, Vorontsov said that the government
must “sooner or later” disclose information about these cases. In his April 15 report
to the Security Council on the implementation of Resolution 1284, the secretarygeneral
welcomed renewed pledges made by Iraq and Kuwait at the March summit
of the League of Arab States in Beirut to resolve the fate of the missing detainees.
However, in August, the Security Council expressed concern that Iraq “has yet to
match its words on the fate of missing persons with tangible deeds and cooperation,”
urging the government to “fully implement the decisions of the Beirut Summit”
in this regard. On October 19, Iraq began returning, through U.N. auspices,
the Kuwaiti archives removed by its forces during the 1990 occupation of Kuwait.
Iraq acknowledged possession of the archives and other Kuwaiti property in June.
On October 28,Vice-President Taha Yassin Ramadan declared that Iraq “is detaining
no Kuwaiti prisoners.”None were apparently among the thousands of inmates
released from prison as a result of the October 20 general amnesty.
In a resolution adopted on December 19, 2001, the General Assembly condemned
systematic and widespread human rights violations perpetrated in Iraq,
and called upon the government to cooperate with U.N. human rights mechanisms,
in particular by giving the special rapporteur access to the country.
The special rapporteur on Iraq, Andreas Mavrommatis, visited Iraq between
February 11 and 15, after being granted access by the government for the first time
since his appointment in 1999. During his visit, the rapporteur met with the ministers
of foreign affairs, interior, justice, and labor and social affairs, as well as with
members of the judiciary, police officials, and religious leaders.He also made brief
visits to Abu Ghraib prison and a women’s prison in the Baghdad area. In his March
15 report to the Commission on Human Rights, the rapporteur said that he had
raised with Iraqi officials the widespread use of the death penalty and its application
to less serious crimes, the use of special courts, allegations of torture, procedures
for punishing law enforcement officials accused of abusing detainees in their
custody, prison conditions, the forced expulsion of ethnic minorities to the Kurdish-
held northern provinces, disappearances, religious freedoms, and the general
humanitarian situation in the country. The rapporteur urged the government,
among other things, to implement a moratorium on executions, reduce the number
of crimes punishable by death, improve prison conditions, establish “a system
of independent prison visitors,” abolish special courts, end discriminatory policies
against ethnic or religious groups, and clarify the fate of missing persons.
In an April 19 resolution, the Commission on Human Rights welcomed the rapporteur’s
visit but condemned continuing violations saying, “[T]here has been no
improvement in the situation of human rights in the country.” The commission
renewed the rapporteur’s mandate for another year and called on Iraq to allow him
further visits, to implement his recommendations, and to allow “the stationing of
human rights monitors throughout Iraq.” In his August 20 interim report to the
General Assembly, the special rapporteur described the information received from
the government since his February visit as neither “very detailed”nor “comprehensive,”
and added that “some of the most important information requested, in particular
with regard to the right to life and the death penalty, had not been received.”
European Union
On May 16, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the human rights
and humanitarian situation in Iraq, as well as issues relating to regional security
and disarmament. The resolution condemned the “regime of terror against all levels
of society” and the continued perpetration of gross human rights violations.
The resolution urged the government to abide by its international treaty obligations
and to comply with relevant Security Council resolutions. It called for the
deployment of human rights observers in Iraq and the creation of an international
commission to investigate disappearances throughout the country. It also called for
the establishment of an ad hoc international tribunal under U.N. auspices “to bring
those Iraq regime officials responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law”to justice.As a preliminary step, the resolution proposed the formation
of an “Office of Inquiry for human rights violations” in order to “prepare
. . . the necessary evidence.” It also urged the council and the commission to freeze
“illegal financial assets of the Iraqi leadership” inside the E.U. and “refus[e] access
of leading members of the Iraqi regime to the E.U.”
In a November 6 briefing to the European Parliament on the situation in Iraq, the E.U.High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)
Javier Solana reaffirmed the E.U.’s insistence on the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction.He said that the E.U.’s objective “was not to seek a change of regime as
such, but rather to work for a solution through the U.N. and multilateral negotiations.”
United States
In his State of the Union speech on January 31, President George W. Bush
announced an expansion of the scope of the “war against terrorism,” launched in
the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, attacks on the U.S., naming Iraq, Iran, and
North Korea as constituting an “axis of evil, arming to threaten the peace of the
world.”Focusing on Iraq,President Bush said that it “has plotted to develop anthrax
and nerve gas and nuclear weapons for over a decade . . . and has something to hide
from the civilized world.”On February 6, Secretary of State Colin Powell told a congressional
hearing that “[t]he President is examining a full range of options” to
bring about Iraq’s compliance with U.N. resolutions, including those regarding
weapons inspections.While declining to spell out whether such options included
military intervention, Powell reiterated that “[w]e still believe strongly in regime
change in Iraq” and that the U.S. “might have to do it alone.”
On September 19, President Bush submitted a draft resolution to the U.S. Congress
requesting authorization for the use of force against Iraq. The resolution,
passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on October 10 and 11
respectively, gave President Bush the authority to use force “as he determines to be
necessary and appropriate,” without requiring U.N. or further congressional
approval.
In a September 12 speech to the U.N. General Assembly, President Bush
announced his government’s intention to “work with the U.N. Security Council for
the necessary resolutions” to ensure that Iraq granted unrestricted and unfettered
access to weapons inspectors and complied with earlier resolutions. He warned,
however, that in the event on non-compliance,“action will be unavoidable.”He also
called on the Iraqi government to “cease persecution of its civilian population,” to
“end all support for international terrorism,” and to account for all personnel missing
since the 1991 Gulf war. On the same day, the White House released a document
on Iraq, entitled A Decade of Deception and Defiance,which detailed U.S. charges of
“Saddam Hussein’s defiance of the United Nations.” The document said that this
defiance included “among other things: continuing to seek and develop chemical,
biological, and nuclear weapons[,] . . . brutalizing the Iraqi people, including committing
gross human rights violations and crimes against humanity . . . [and] supporting
international terrorism . . . .”
The U.S. administration continued to hold talks with representatives of the Iraqi
political opposition abroad, and to provide financial and technical support to a
number of these groups.Under the auspices of the State Department, the administration
in July launched the “Future of Iraq Project,” aimed at finding “practical
steps for planning the future of Iraq after Saddam Hussein.” State Department
spokesman Richard Boucher said on July 12 that the U.S. was “sponsoring financially a series of workshops” over several months to examine issues related to Iraq’s
economy, law and order, the judicial system, health and education, and the environment.
In its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2001, released in March
2002, the State Department said that the Iraqi government “committed numerous
political and other extrajudicial executions” of suspected political opponents. It
said that Iraq’s human rights record “remained extremely poor” and that the
authorities “continued to deny citizens the basic right to due process.” In its Annual
Report on International Religious Freedom for 2002, released in October, the State
Department said that the government “continued its systematic and vicious policies
against the Shi’as,” severely restricting their religious practices and perpetrating
“a brutal campaign of murder, summary execution, arbitrary arrest, and
protracted detention against Shi’a religious leaders and adherents.” The State
Department, in its 2001 report on patterns of global terrorism, released in May, also
said that the Iraqi government “continued to provide training and political encouragement
to numerous terrorist groups, although its main focus was on dissident
Iraqi activity overseas.”
ISRAEL, THE OCCUPIED WEST BANK AND
GAZA STRIP, AND PALESTINIAN
AUTHORITY TERRITORIES
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The violence that erupted beginning in September 2000 intensified in 2002.
Civilians increasingly paid the price for repeated, egregious violations of international
humanitarian law by the Israel Defense Forces (IDP) and Palestinian armed
groups. At least 1,949 Palestinians and 637 Israelis were killed between September
2000 and late October 2002, the majority civilians, including 292 Palestinian and
seventy-nine Israeli children.New patterns of abuse arose, and old ones intensified.
Pernicious practices that had been diminishing were revived.
Israel and the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon’s coalition government held the severely weakened
Palestinian Authority (PA) responsible for all armed attacks by Palestinians. Following
the destruction of the World Trade Center in September 2001, Israeli government
ministers consciously imitated the language of U.S. foreign policy. Israeli
authorities characterized all armed Palestinian activity as terrorism, and justified
Israeli military actions in the Occupied Territories as a part of the global “war on
terrorism.”
In February, the Israeli government re-introduced into the Knesset the “Illegal
Combatants Law,” a measure initially designed to legitimize retroactively the continued
detention of Lebanese hostages Sheikh 'Abd al-Karim 'Obeid (abducted
from Lebanon in July 1989) and Mustafa al-Dirani (abducted from Lebanon in
May 1994). The Knesset passed the law, which enabled the military to hold individuals
arbitrarily and indefinitely on the basis of assumption rather than proven
guilt, on March 7, 2002.
As Israeli military operations escalated in December 2001, so did the number
and gravity of violations committed by the Israel Defence Forces. Repeated militarized
“arrest raids” into PA-controlled areas in late 2001 grew in size and intensity
until, in March 2002, the IDF mobilized some thirty thousand troops for Operation
Defensive Shield, reportedly Israel’s largest military operation since the 1982 invasion
of Lebanon.
During the operation, Israeli soldiers repeatedly used indiscriminate and excessive
force, killed civilians willfully and unlawfully, and used Palestinian civilians as
human shields. IDF troops also inflicted damage to homes, businesses, and government
offices; looted and stole in the course of searches; coerced civilians to assist
military operations, and detained at least 4,500 Palestinian men and boys, many of
whom reported ill-treatment during arrest and interrogation. From March 29 to
April 19, the Israeli authorities impeded the entrance of outside observers, including
journalists, human rights activists, United Nations representatives, and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). These violations reflected patterns
of abuse that—partly reflecting the effective impunity enjoyed by Israeli soldiers—
had progressively worsened since September 2000.
Israeli security forces continued to resort to excessive and indiscriminate use of
lethal force, causing numerous civilian deaths and serious injuries. In Jenin,
Human Rights Watch documented twenty-two civilian killings during the IDF military
operations in April.Many of them were killed willfully or unlawfully, and in
some cases constituted war crimes. Fifty-seven-year-old Kamal Zghair, a wheelchair-
bound man, was shot and then run over by IDF tanks on April 10 as he was
moving in his wheelchair—equipped with a white flag—down a major road in
Jenin. Thirty-seven-year-old Jamal Fayid, a quadriplegic, was crushed to death in
the rubble of his home on April 7 after IDF soldiers refused to allow his family to
remove him from their home before a bulldozer destroyed it. Under international
law the Israeli authorities were required to criminally investigate these and other
killings to ascertain individual responsibility. At this writing, the IDF had not
responded to repeated requests from Human Rights Watch for information as to
whether these killings were investigated.
After five suicide bombings in four weeks (described below), Prime Minister
Sharon announced on June 18 that the IDF would re-occupy the West Bank and
Gaza Strip “as long as terror continues.” Israeli troops re-occupied all major population
centers except Jericho, and instituted the heaviest restrictions on civilian
movement in the Occupied Territories to date. On August 7, Israeli authorities
announced their willingness to withdraw from Bethlehem in return for strong
Palestinian security measures against armed militants. Israeli troops withdrew
from central Bethlehem at the end of August, but returned on November 22.
IDF killings of unarmed Palestinian civilians continued throughout the year.
Casualties were aggravated by Israeli policies marked by insufficient regard for
civilian life. These included a policy of employing deadly force against civilians to
enforce protracted and at times haphazardly implemented curfews. On June 21,
four civilians, including three children,were killed as they attempted to buy food in
the Jenin market: An initial military inquiry said that local soldiers had “erred.”
Municipal driver Ahmad al-Qureini was shot and killed by Israeli soldiers on
August 10, despite the fact he had permission to travel during curfews. A subsequent
IDF investigation stated his vehicle had lacked the flashing light required for
proper municipal identification, despite Associated Press video footage of the incident
that showed the flashing light.
Israeli authorities intensified their policy of “liquidations,” killing individuals
whom they accused of planning or carrying out attacks on Israeli military targets
or civilians. Israeli forces used snipers, helicopter-fired missiles, tanks, and explosive
devices to carry out the killings,many of which appear to have been undertaken
in circumstances where the target could have been arrested.According to LAW, the
Palestinian Society for the Protection ofHuman Rights and the Environment, some
148 individuals were killed in these “liquidations” between November 9, 2000 and
August 31, 2002. At least forty-six civilian bystanders were also killed. On July 23,
2002, fourteen civilians were killed and some 140 injured in the “liquidation” of
Hamas military leader Salah Shehadeh. Eight of the fourteen were children. Israeli
political and military authorities had approved the operation, which involved the
dropping of a one-ton bomb in a crowded civilian residential area, in violation of
Israel’s obligation under international humanitarian law to minimize civilian casualties.
An IDF inquiry held the next day determined the means of attack had been
“inappropriate.”The operation was described by Prime Minister Sharon as “a great
success.”
On January 24, LAW and the Public Committee Against Torture in Israel
(PCATI) petitioned the Israeli High Court of Justice to outlaw the “liquidations”
policy. The court gave the state forty days to reply to a series of questions regarding
the policy’s legality.At the time of writing, Israeli authorities had not replied.After
July, such killings continued even in those areas where the IDF exerted direct control,
and thus had greater capacity to make arrests.
During military operations, Israeli soldiers routinely coerced Palestinian civilians,
including children, to perform life-endangering acts that assisted military
operations. The practice, known as the “neighbor procedure,” violated the fundamental
international humanitarian law principle of civilian immunity, violated
multiple provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and recklessly exposed civilians
to danger. By April, there were widespread, documented cases in which IDF
soldiers explicitly used Palestinian civilians to shield themselves from Palestinian
fire. In one case documented by Human Rights Watch, seven men and one fourteen-
year-old boy were forced by IDF soldiers to stand on the balcony of a house in
the Jenin refugee camp to deter Palestinian gunmen from firing at the IDF soldiers.
The eight were compelled to stand in front of the soldiers when the soldiers fired at
Palestinian gunmen, the soldiers’ resting their rifles on the civilians’ shoulders. In
another case, Faisal Abu Sariya, a forty-two-year-old teacher, was forced to both shield and assist IDF troops from April 4-6 in the Jenin refugee camp, until he was
shot by Israeli forces.
On May 7, in response to a petition by seven local human rights organizations,
the IDF informed the High Court of Justice that it would immediately prohibit its
forces from using civilians as hostages or human shields. The IDF also committed
to investigate the use of the “neighbor procedure,” and to clarify to commanders
that it could not be used in circumstances that might physically endanger civilians.
Despite repeated requests, the IDF did not make a copy of the order or results of the
investigation available to human rights groups. After the death of Ahmad Abu
Mohsen while being forced to assist IDF soldiers in a military operation in Tubas
on August 14, the same seven organizations petitioned the High Court to ban the
procedure’s use. On August 18, the High Court issued a temporary injunction preventing
use of the “neighbor procedure”until a final decision was made.At the time
of writing, reports of the procedure’s use continued.
IDF operations caused extensive, and often repeated damage to civilian buildings
and infrastructure in PA areas, including the partial or complete destruction
of roads, sewage networks, water supplies, and electrical grids. In at least Jenin,
Nablus, and Ramallah, severe damage appeared to exceed any requirement of military
necessity.According to the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Israeli military operations between March and May caused some U.S.$342
million worth of damage to physical and humanitarian infrastructure in the West
Bank. On July 24, 2002, immediately before its summer recess, the Knesset
approved an amendment to the “Law for Handling Claims Related to IDF Activity
in Judea and Samaria.” The amendment sharply curtailed the ability of civilians to
obtain compensation for damage or injury caused by negligent or unlawful acts of
the Israeli security forces.
The IDF continued to resist appeals to investigate wrongful deaths or other violations
by Israeli soldiers. On October 15, the Israeli newspaper Ha’aretz reported
some 220 military police investigations had been opened since September 2001.
Only thirty of these were reportedly related to weapons-related charges. Investigations
were not conducted according to international norms of timeliness, thoroughness,
and impartiality.
The Israeli authorities also tightened long-standing restrictions on freedom of
movement in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. These restrictions were so severe and
widespread as to constitute collective punishment. Palestinian movement on primary
roads and the majority of secondary roads was banned for much of 2002,
enforced via cement blocks, boulders, earth ramparts, and some 150 to 180 military
checkpoints. An IDF program to reduce harassment was introduced at key checkpoints
mid-year.
These crippling movement restrictions were accompanied by extensive IDFimposed
curfews from late June 2002. Formerly concentrated in the Hebron area,
in the first week of July some 850,000 Palestinians were under curfew; by late September
this number stood at some 550,000, concentrated particularly in the northern
West Bank. Notification of curfew impositions and liftings were often
inconsistent and erratically enforced.
Throughout the year IDF forces blocked access to emergency medical assistance on numerous occasions and for long periods, often in circumstances that appeared
to violate Israel’s obligations under international humanitarian law. Israeli soldiers
also attacked ambulances and harassed or ill-treated emergency medical personnel,
alleging armed Palestinian groups used ambulances to transport weapons and personnel.
As of November, the IDF had made public evidence of only one such case,
on March 27, 2002, involving a Palestinian ambulance reportedly carrying explosives
near Ramallah.
The humanitarian situation in the Occupied Territories deteriorated significantly
as a result of the cumulative impact of damage to civilian infrastructure,
movement restrictions, and ongoing violence.When visiting the region in October,
the head of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) described the
humanitarian situation as “the most dire since 1967.”
Economic activity, already severely curtailed, came to a virtual standstill and
humanitarian agencies became increasingly responsible for provision of food,
medication, and other essential goods and services in the West Bank and Gaza.
According to the U.N. special coordinator for the Occupied Territories, by August
31 unemployment stood at 50 percent in both the West Bank and Gaza.More than
55 percent of inhabitants in the West Bank and 70 percent in Gaza lived under the
poverty level of two dollars of consumption per day.By November 1, Israeli authorities
had transferred $42 million of the estimated $681 million of frozen tax transfers
owed by Israel to the PA.
In addition to the logistical challenges imposed by severe movement restrictions,
humanitarian organizations complained of increased harassment of staff by
IDF soldiers and increased difficulty in gaining permission for expatriate staff to
enter Israel.
Israeli forces continued to demolish punitively the homes of families of alleged
suicide bombers or other members of armed Palestinian groups.According to B’Tselem,
more than eighty-one homes had been punitively demolished from January
1 to November 17, 2002. These acts violated international humanitarian law provisions
prohibiting collective punishment. Other dwellings were destroyed for
alleged security purposes. According to the Gaza-based Palestinian Center for
Human Rights (PCHR), 613 dwellings were destroyed by IDF forces in Gaza from
September 2000 to September 25, 2002, leaving more than four thousand individuals
homeless. The PCHR reported some seventeen thousand dunums of agricultural
land were forcibly cleared during the same period.
Israeli authorities also confiscated Palestinian lands to expand Israeli settlements
and for the construction of bypass roads. On May 20, the Israeli group Peace
Now reported that fifteen new settlement sites had been established since the election
of Prime Minister Sharon in February 2002 in contravention of international
humanitarian law. In August, Peace Now reported that eight new settlements had
been established in that month alone. On September 19, outspoken settlement
supporter Effie Eitam was appointed minister of national infrastructure. Two
weeks later, Defense Minister and Labor leader Benyamin Ben-Eliezer ordered the
dismantling of some eighteen unauthorized settlement outposts, the majority
uninhabited, before resigning from government on October 28.
More land was confiscated, and de-facto borders re-defined, as Israel began the construction of a “security fence” over 116 kilometers of the northern West Bank,
along—but not contiguous with—the Israeli border. Over ten thousand Palestinian
inhabitants were expected to be affected as their villages became caught within
the proposed fence.
On September 3, the Supreme Court upheld the forcible relocation of two family
members of an alleged suicide bomber from the West Bank to Gaza for two years.
The court’s decision limited the application of the punishment to individuals who
themselves constituted a security danger to the state. The determinations were
made in administrative proceedings, based on secret evidence unavailable to the
defendants and their counsel. Similarly, the right to trial was denied to Nahad Abu
Kishaq,whose Israeli citizenship was revoked by the minister of the interior on the
basis of Kishaq’s alleged involvement in Hamas attacks against civilians.
According to B’Tselem, Israeli settlers in the Occupied Territories killed at least
twelve Palestinian civilians from January to October 2002, and injured dozens
more. Settlers attacked Palestinian homes, fields, cars and other property, and
blocked major roads with unofficial checkpoints. On July 28, settlers from Kiryat
Arba in Hebron killed two Palestinian children and injured at least fifteen others as
they attacked and burned houses in Hebron following the funeral of two settlers
killed by Palestinian gunmen two days earlier. Settler attacks against Palestinian
civilians and civilian property were rarely prevented or halted by the Israeli authorities,
and were particularly acute during the October-November olive harvest
season.
Israeli military prisons and detention centers overflowed as a result of mass
arrests conducted in March-April. Local organizations estimated at least 4,500
Palestinian civilians, including children, were arrested for questioning during
Operation Defensive Shield, and a steady stream of arrests continued throughout
the year. Reports of ill-treatment were widespread, including kicking, beating,
squalid conditions, and deprivation of food and drink. On September 4, the Public
Committee Against Torture in Israel reported that there appeared to be a “gradual
reversion to the use of torture” despite the September 1999 High Court decision
outlawing its use.While the extent of their use was unclear, methods outlawed by
the High Court but reportedly used during interrogation included exposure to
extremes of temperature, sleep deprivation, the requirement to remain in an
enforced position for extended periods, and intense psychological pressure.
According to media reports some 1,600 Palestinians were detained on securityrelated
grounds at the end of the year. Nine hundred of them were held in administrative
detention, without charge or trial.
On June 5, 2002, the Knesset passed legislation cutting by 24 percent
national child allowances for children whose parents had not served in the army.
The cuts disproportionately affected Palestinian Arab citizens, the majority of
whom were exempt from military service and whose children are the poorest in
Israel. The new cuts exacerbated inequalities in educational spending that Human
Rights Watch documented in its December 2001 report,Second Class: Discrimination
against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s Schools. The High Court issued a
temporary injunction against the cuts on October 14, prior to a full hearing on the
issues scheduled for mid-November.
The Israeli Labor Party withdrew from the governing coalition on October 30.
Sharon’s resulting minority government set an early election date for January 28,
2003.
Palestinian Authority Territories
As Israeli military operations increased, armed Palestinian groups mounted the
deadliest series of attacks against Israeli civilians in decades. On December 1, 2001,
a series of attacks on a Jerusalem pedestrian mall were followed the next day by a
Hamas attack on a Haifa city bus.These incidents collectively represented the worst
twenty-four hours of civilian attacks in Israel since 1996,but were followed by some
six weeks without attacks after President Arafat successfully pressured armed
groups to observe a ceasefire.
On January 27, the al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades, a network of Fatah-affiliated
armed groups, carried out their first suicide attack against Israeli civilians, a tactic
already frequently used by Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and, from October 2001, the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestinian (PFLP).Violence against Israeli civilians
peaked in March, when eighty civilians were killed and some four hundred were
injured in twelve separate attacks, the most deadly of them was the March 27 bombing
of Netanya’s Park Hotel, in which twenty-nine civilians were killed and one
hundred were injured.
Despite repeatedly condemning suicide bombings and other deliberate attacks
on civilians,President Arafat and other PA officials consistently failed to move decisively
against those who ordered or organized such attacks. A culture of impunity
resulted. While senior Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and PFLP members continued to
openly admit their responsibility in ordering such attacks, senior Fatah officials distanced
themselves from those carried out by the al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades—but
failed to cut clearly Fatah’s ties with the Brigades. Debate within the Palestinian
community over the legitimacy of suicide attacks against civilians increased from
May, when a group of some 150 intellectuals published a petition in the East-
Jerusalem based newspaper, al-Quds, opposing their use. Attacks declined in frequency
after May, but did not stop completely.
In addition to attacks on military targets, armed Palestinians continued to shoot
at settlements and to use firearms and roadside bombings against Israeli settlers in
the Occupied Territories. On January 15, architect Avi Boaz, seventy-one, was
abducted from his car at a police checkpoint near Bethlehem and shot some thirteen
times by gunmen of the al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades. Although some militants
justified such attacks by saying that residents of illegal settlements were legitimate
military targets, such attacks directly violated international humanitarian law,
which makes clear that civilians are to be protected unless they directly participate
in armed hostilities.
The Palestinian Legislative Council criticized the participation of children in
armed activities is reaction to growing community concern after several incidents
in Gaza in which Palestinian boys aged under sixteen were killed as they attempted
to attack settlements on April 24. Hamas and Islamic Jihad published statements
publicly requesting children not to take part in such activities, but the groups failed to specify the age at which they considered participating in military activities to
be legitimate. In contrast, the al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades recruited at least three
children to carry out suicide attacks against Israeli civilians. In September, the
Palestinian Journalists’Association sought to ban media coverage of children participating
in political demonstrations.
Armed Palestinians killed at least twenty-two alleged collaborators with Israel.
PA officials declared a one-month official amnesty for collaborators on July 10,
promising leniency and fair trials for those that gave themselves up. A convicted
collaborator, Hossam Hissi, was shot by Gazan prison authorities the same day
while “trying to escape.”According to media reports, individuals suspected of collaboration
were sometimes required to prove their loyalty by carrying out attacks
against Israeli military targets or civilians; according to uncorroborated documents
released by the Israeli security forces, officials of the Palestinian General Intelligence
Service may have also ordered or carried out the vigilante killing of collaborators.
The PA failed to bring to justice those responsible for such killings.
PA control over the territory delegated to it under the Oslo Accords became
weaker throughout the year as Israel’s destruction of PA infrastructure undercut
the PA’s ability to deliver civilian and security services. Internal and external pressure
on President Arafat to reform PA structures continued to build steadily
throughout the year. On May 28, Arafat finally signed several laws long-sought by
human rights advocates, including the Basic Law and the Judicial Authority Law. In
June, Arafat announced parliamentary elections would be held in January 2003.
Palestinian groups worked hard to define practical reform steps and indicators of
success,while the E.U. and U.S. joined with Japan and international financial institutions
to ensure international support for the process via an International Palestinian
Reform Task Force. At the time of writing, tentative preparations for
elections, scheduled for January 20, had begun.
The PA system of justice deteriorated further under the pressure of a fracturing
political climate, ongoing military operations, and the destruction of court records
and infrastructure. Proceedings in civilian courts virtually ground to a standstill.
Even state security and military courts, which failed to meet minimum international
fair trial standards and usurped many of the functions of the civilian courts,
operated at best erratically throughout the year.At least thirteen persons were sentenced
to death after summary trials. On April 4, five men and one boy were sentenced
to death by the State Security Court on charges of collaboration with the
Israeli General Security Service, while another man was sentenced to fifteen years
hard labor.The boy’s sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. On June 5, one
month after Arafat signed the Judicial Authority Law, the Gaza State Security Court
sentenced Faisal Abu Teilakh, twenty-six, and Sa’id al-Najjar, twenty-nine, to death
for the rape and murder of Islam Mahmoud al-Khatib, a seven-year-old. The men
were convicted and sentenced after a three-hour hearing. Both men were executed
the following day.Haidar Ghanem,a Gaza-based fieldworker for B’Tselem,was sentenced
to death on charges of collaboration on October 28. State Security Court
verdicts were not open to appeal.
The cumulative damage suffered by PA prisons and other detention facilities
aggravated still further the chaotic and arbitrary conditions under which PA
detainees were being held. Individuals continued to be held in makeshift detention facilities, often without charge or trail. The PA continued to hold Ahmed Sa’adat,
leader of the PFLP and other members of Palestinian armed groups without charge
or trial. In May, during the period Arafat was confined for thirty-four days in his
compound by the IDF, the PA convicted four of five men alleged to have organized
or carried out the killing of Israeli tourism minister,Rehavam Ze’evi, in a show trial.
The five men, plus Arafat adviser Fu’ad Shubaki, were transferred under U.S. and
U.K. international supervision to Jericho prison on May 1. The Palestinian High
Court ordered Sa’adat’s release on June 3 on the basis of a lack of evidence against
him. PA officials did not comply with the court order.
Strains within and between the PA and members of armed Palestinian groups
saw an increase in incidents of internal politically-motivated violence, as well as a
rise in the use of lethal force by Palestinian police. On May 14, PA Minister for
NGOs Hassan Asfour was hospitalized after being severely beaten by masked men,
reportedly as a result of internal political rivalries. On September 22, the home of
Nabil Amr, Palestinian Legislative Council member and reform proponent, was
shot at by unknown men in a drive-by shooting. One week later, Arab newspapers
reported that Fatah General Secretary Mahmud Abbas had received death threats
as a result of rumours that he was a potential candidate for prime minister, a position
some members of the Palestinian Legislative Council had advocated as a
potential mechanism for executive reform.The proposal was officially dropped following
a ten-day Israeli siege of the Ramallah government compound in October.
On October 8, Hamas members reportedly captured and killed riot police chief
Colonel Rajah Abu Lehiya in revenge for the killing of two Palestinian demonstrators
exactly one year before.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Israeli restrictions on freedom of movement and entry hampered the ability of
human rights defenders to collect and disseminate information. Human rights
defenders from a variety of nongovernmental organizations were denied entry or
re-entry into Israel, including Human Rights Watch, the Palestinian Center for
Human Rights, and the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims.
Palestinian lawyers continued to be prevented from gaining access to clients held in
detention facilities inside Israel.
Israeli security forces detained several Palestinian and Israeli human rights
activists. On January 2, prominent activist Dr. Mustapha Barghouti was arrested
twice by Israeli security officials and severely beaten. He was released without
charge and sought treatment for a fractured right patella the same day. Abed Rahman
al-Ahmar, an employee of the Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group,
was released on May 23 after more than one year in administrative detention.Yasser
Ali Mohammad Dissi, an employee of al-Haq, was detained by the IDF on March
30 during a search of al-Haq’s offices, and placed under a three-month detention
order on April 13. He was released from the Ansar-3 detention center after the
order’s expiry on July 2, one week after he was injured in a prison protest for more
humane conditions of detention.
Israeli nongovernment organizations faced increased use of intimidatory tactics by the Israeli authorities. On August 5, the Israeli newspaper Ha’aretz reported that
the prime minister had requested the attorney general to examine possible legal
steps against Israeli peace group Gush Shalom, after the group had warned fifteen
soldiers that it was compiling evidence of violations of the laws of war for potential
use in a national or international tribunal. In mid-August, the attorney general’s
office notified Gush Shalom that such letters “could be in violation of extortion
laws” but that the office would not initiate legal proceedings “for the moment.”On
August 11, the Legal Center for Arab Minority Rights learned from media reports
that it was to be investigated by the Israeli Registrar of Associations for alleged
breaches of the Associations Law.The registrar did not engage in any initial process
of clarification with Adalah, nor did he inform it of his decision until August 18.
The PA continued to allow human rights organizations to operate in the territory
under its authority,but continued to deny human rights workers access to prisons
and unofficial detention facilities. Three members of the Grassroots
International Protection for the Palestinian People were kidnapped on September
18 and held hostage by former members of the PA security services. The three were
released without harm the following day. A representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross was kidnapped on November 7, allegedly by the same
group, and later released without harm.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
On December 5, 2001, the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
met and issued a detailed declaration in which they reaffirmed the convention’s
applicability to the Occupied Territories, including East Jerusalem. The
U.S. did not attend. On June 26, a Belgian appeals court ruled that the case against
Prime Minister Sharon, and others, brought by survivors of the 1982 Sabra and
Shatila massacres in Lebanon, could not proceed because the defendant could not
be tried in absentia. The plaintiffs appealed the decision on July 3. A complaint in
Belgium filed against President Arafat on November 26, 2001 had yet to be heard.
United Nations
The secretary-general and high commissioner for human rights consistently
criticized violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. The secretary-
general regularly emphasized that there would be no lasting security without
a political settlement, a position he emphasized both individually and in his
capacity as a member of the “Quartet,” a diplomatic group comprised of the E.U.,
Russia, the U.N., and the U.S. The special rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, John Dugard, submitted reports in March and August.
On December 14, 2001, the Security Council debated a resolution condemning
violence on the ground and supporting the establishment of an international monitoring
mechanism. The resolution failed to pass as a result of a U.S. veto. Similar
language was incorporated into a resolution of the fifteenth resumed meeting of  the Tenth Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly on December 20,
2001.
The U.N. Security Council passed five resolutions on the situation in Israel and
the Occupied Territories from January to November 2002.As Israeli incursions into
PA-controlled areas accelerated, the Security Council passed Resolution 1397 on
March 12, which for the first time affirmed “a vision of a region where two States,
Israel and Palestine, live side by side within secure and recognized borders.” After
Operation Defensive Shield was launched on March 29, Resolution 1397 was followed
by 1402 on March 30, which called for a ceasefire and the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Palestinian cities. On April 4, the council passed Resolution
1403, which demanded the implementation of 1402.
On April 5, the Commission on Human Rights requested the high commissioner
for human rights to organize an urgent mission to report on the deteriorating
human rights situation in the Occupied Territories. The mission was called off
on April 19 because it “would not be facilitated by the Israeli authorities.”The same
day, the Security Council passed Resolution 1405, which emphasized the “dire
humanitarian situation” of the Palestinian population in the Occupied Territories
and welcomed the secretary-general’s initiative to develop a fact-finding team
regarding events in the Jenin refugee camp.While the Israeli government originally
consented to the fact-finding team under U.S. pressure, it expressed progressively
broader objections to the team’s mandate and composition. The secretary-general
disbanded the team—which had already begun preliminary information-gathering—
on May 3, 2002.
On May 19, a resumed meeting of the Emergency Special Session requested the
secretary-general to present a report on events in Jenin and other cities.The report,
collated from existing sources of information without the cooperation of the Israeli
authorities, was released on August 2. Although recognizing the limitations inherent
in the secretary-general’s mandate, human rights groups criticized the report
for making limited reference to the obligations of the parties under international
law, reaching few clear conclusions about violations of that law, and failing to raise
the issue of accountability for serious violations that may have been committed
As the year continued, the U.N., like other international organizations, became
increasingly responsible for providing humanitarian assistance to the civilian population.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
(UNRWA) experienced a nine-fold increase in its hardship caseload, despite facing
increasingly severe problems with the movement of staff and goods. Catherine
Bertini, the secretary-general’s personal humanitarian envoy, reported in mid-
August that a “serious humanitarian crisis” existed in the West Bank and Gaza,
linked closely to restrictions on freedom of movement. Bertini said Israeli authorities
had committed to address “some of the most immediate constraints,” but
noted the existence of a wide gap between official policies and their implementation.
In September, the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Activities
reported that some twenty U.N. staff had been denied permission to enter
Israel.
On September 25, during Israel’s siege of Arafat’s compound, the Security
Council passed Resolution 1435.The resolution demanded Israel cease its activities in Ramallah, and withdraw to the position it occupied in September 2000. The resolution
also reiterated a call for a complete halt to all acts of violence. The U.S.
abstained from voting, but did not veto the resolution. Israel publicly refused to
comply with the resolution, although it withdrew from the compound four days
later under intense U.S. pressure.
On October 4, the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child issued its concluding
observations on Israel’s first periodic report. Amongst its many recommendations
the committee encouraged the creation of a focal point for children,
called for the allocation of sufficient resources to implement current legislation,
and emphasized the need for Israel to fully comply with international humanitarian
law in the Occupied Territories.
European Union
While E.U. leaders at times used forceful language on the violence in Israel and
the West Bank and Gaza, E.U.political actions continued to be subordinated to U.S.
policy interests, a reflection of weak E.U. influence in Israel, and of differences
among E.U. member states.
The E.U. remained the pre-eminent donor to the Palestinian Authority and
other key humanitarian institutions. From January to October, 2002, the E.U. provided
an estimated total of Û219 million to Palestinian organizations and projects,
as well as Û70 million to the UNRWA. E.U. funding continued to provide emergency
budgetary support for the PA at Û10 million per month.
E.U. funding to the PA became the subject of controversy in late April, when
Israeli officials alleged that it had been used to fund armed activities against Israel.
The European Commission asked Israel for proof of its allegations on May 8. On
June 20, External Affairs Commissioner Chris Patten announced a joint E.U.-IMF
inquiry had found there was “no evidence [that] E.U. funds [were] used for other
purposes than those agreed. There is no reason to state that E.U. money has
financed terrorism or bought weapons.”
In January 2002, the E.U.wrote to the Israeli prime minister to protest the IDF’s
destruction of some U.S.$15 million worth of E.U. funded projects, including
schools, irrigation and sewage schemes, and forestry projects. E.U. officials explicitly
reserved “the right to claim reparation in the appropriate fora.”E.U. criticism of
Israel’s isolation of President Arafat and heavy use of force grew still sharper after
February 8, when an IDF helicopter fired missiles into Arafat’s offices while E.U.
Special Envoy Moratinos met with Arafat.
In February and October, the E.U. took preliminary steps to require importers
who sold goods made by Israeli manufacturers to either provide proof that the
products were not made in the Occupied Territories, or deposit funds against any
future tariffs. Despite pressure from the European Parliament, which on April 10
voted 269 to 208 to suspend the Euro-Israeli Association Agreement, the E.U. failed
to call a special meeting of the Association Council or to undertake other concrete
association-related actions to influence Israeli policies.
E.U. leaders continued to urge the resumption of political and security negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinians throughout 2002. In December 2001 and early 2002, E.U. statements emphasized the continued legitimacy of President
Arafat as leader of the PA, criticized IDF incursions in PA areas, urged Palestinian
leaders to end attacks against civilians, and re-affirmed the applicability of the
Fourth Geneva Convention to the Occupied Territories. E.U. members abstained
on the resolution on violations of human rights in the Occupied Territories at the
Commission on Human Rights, but from April E.U. leaders highlighted the
humanitarian consequences of IDF military activities. From July, the E.U. began to
play a leading role in the “International Taskforce on Palestinian Reform,” in its
capacity as a member of the Quartet. A draft peace plan was proposed by the Danish
Presidency on September 4 and discussed by Quartet members on September
17.The plan was presented to Israeli and Palestinian authorities, and was under discussion
at this writing.
United States
U.S. policy on Israeli and Palestinian issues was inconsistent for much of 2002.
Affected by differences between the State Department,White House, and Defense
Department, policies were directly influenced first by the rhetoric and actions of
the “war on terrorism,” and later by the proposed war against Iraq.
Israel remained the largest recipient of U.S. bilateral aid.Under the provisions of
the 2002 Foreign Operations Appropriations Bill, Israel received $720 million in
economic support, $60 million assistance for migrants and refugees resettling in
Israel, $2.04 billion in military financing, and an unspecified amount under the
heading “Nonproliferation,Anti-Terrorism,Demining and Related Programs.”
U.S. assistance to the Palestinians comprised some $100 million to UNRWA and
$75 million in U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) projects in
2002.
The IDF continued to employ U.S.-supplied weaponry in military operations,
including Apache and Cobra helicopters, F-16 fighter aircraft, munitions, and M-
16 automatic weapons. In September 2002, the State Department Authorization
Bill signed into law by President Bush provided an extra $100 million in military
assistance to Israel, under the title of war reserve stockpiles. The same bill provided
$50 million in Palestinian emergency disaster relief projects. Special Envoy
Anthony Zinni and other U.S. officials made multiple visits to the region, many of
them disrupted by violence. The most prominent was Secretary of State Powell’s
visit in mid-April, at the end of Operation Defensive Shield. Powell reiterated U.S.
demands that Israel withdraw from Palestinian cities and proposed a mid-year
multilateral peace conference. The proposal lapsed after June 24, at which time
President Bush delivered a speech demanding reform of Palestinian institutions
and new Palestinian leadership: “When the Palestinian people have new leaders,
new institutions and new security arrangements with their neighbors, the United
Sates of America will support the creation of a Palestinian state whose borders and
certain aspects will be provisional until resolved as part of a final settlement in the
Middle East.”
The United States’ pursuit of reform, via the Quartet, was coupled with an
emphasis on the humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. U.S.
efforts continued to be hampered by strong public perception of bias in favor of
Israel, aggravated by the administration’s refusal to meet with senior Palestinian
leaders despite frequent meetings with Prime Minister Sharon. On August 5, Israel
and the United States signed a bilateral treaty preventing the citizens of either
country from facing charges in the International Criminal Court. On August 28,
Israel informed the U.N. secretary-general that it did not intend to become a party
to the ICC statute, and therefore had no legal obligations arising from its December
31, 2000 signature.
U.S. reactions to reported Israeli violations of international humanitarian law
continued to emphasize Israel’s right of self-defense without clear reference to
international humanitarian law standards.The U.S. continued its stated opposition
to Israel’s policy of “liquidations,” reiterated on November 5, after the U.S. targeted
killing of an alleged al-Qaeda associate in Yemen.U.S. language on Palestinian civilian
casualties strengthened somewhat toward the end of the year. On October 7, a
Department of State spokesperson described the U.S. as “deeply troubled” by the
civilian casualties caused by an IDF attack in Gaza, and called on the Israeli authorities
to act with “the utmost care to avoid harm to civilians,” particularly when conducting
operations in heavily populated areas. U.S. language was not, however,
accompanied by public steps to pressure Israel to meets its obligations under international
humanitarian law.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Erased in a Moment: Suicide Bombing Attacks Against Israeli Civilians, 11/02
Jenin: IDF Military Operations, 05/02
In a Dark Hour: the Use of Civilians During IDF Arrest Operations, 04/02
SAUDI ARABIA
Following the attacks on New York and Washington on September 11, 2001,
Saudi Arabia faced the most sustained international scrutiny in its modern
history.Despite massive media attention and liberal access granted to Western journalists,
detailed information about human rights violations remained elusive. The
continuing absence of a local human rights movement and the government’s policy
of keeping the kingdom closed to investigators from international human rights
organizations contributed to the information shortage, as did the Interior Ministry’s
effective use of harassment and intimidation to keep human rights victims
and their advocates silent. Interior Ministry operatives also pressured families of
perceived critics and in several documented cases security officials detained close
relatives without charge.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The broad features of the kingdom’s human rights landscape remained
unchanged. Saudi Arabia lacked independent national institutions to question,
criticize or hold accountable the all-powerful executive branch of government controlled
by the royal family. The appointed Consultative Council (majlis al-shura)
had a limited role and was no substitute for an elected parliament with independent
oversight powers. Political groups of any kind were not permitted and demonstrations
were banned.Meetings and public assemblies required permission of the
authorities. Procedures to obtain legal status for nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) remained cumbersome and opaque, with independent groups unable to
establish themselves. The department of statistics disclosed on August 9 that 50
percent of the Saudi population was under the age of fifteen. It remained unclear
how authorities were prepared to accommodate this educated and potentially
restive population in the coming years, since students were not permitted to organize
groups to articulate their concerns.
Freedom of expression, including press freedom, was limited, and authorities
took punitive measures against journalists and others viewed as too outspoken.The
King Abdul Aziz Center for Science and Technology controlled access to the Internet.
Users were unable to reach sites that authorities blocked for political or “moral”
reasons. There were no independent women’s rights organizations to give voice to
gender issues, such as discrimination in the legal and education systems and sharp
restrictions on women’s freedom of movement. Similarly, the kingdom had no
NGOs to advocate for the rights of religious minorities—notably, Shiite and Ismaili
Muslims who faced serious discrimination—or the kingdom’s estimated six million
to seven million foreign workers. Senior government officials refused to give
credence to reports of human rights violations and reacted defensively when such
information was publicized internationally.
On the positive side, the newly adopted code of criminal procedure came into
force on May 1.The law represented an important step toward greater transparency
in the administration of the criminal justice system by specifying legal procedures
and due-process rights. Notably, it prohibited torture and other forms of ill treatment,
stated clearly that persons arrested or detained must be promptly informed
of the charges against them, and acknowledged the right of criminal suspects to the
assistance of lawyers during investigation proceedings and trial. It also provided for
oversight of prisons and other places of detention by members of the Public Investigation
and Prosecution Department to ensure that no one was detained or
imprisoned in an unlawful manner.
Some of the code’s provisions were at odds with international human rights
standards, such as article 33, which stated that suspects must establish their innocence
to the satisfaction of non-judicial authorities within the first twenty-four
hours of arrest or face the prospect of long-term detention.Despite the code’s various
deficiencies, it nevertheless provided important benchmarks for assessing the
practices of internal security and police forces, public prosecutors, and other officials.
But without an active network of human rights lawyers or an effective civil rights association serving citizens and foreign residents alike, it remained to be seen
how compliance with the code will be monitored and how violations of it will be
addressed. It also remained unclear how the government planned to educate the
public about the new law. Saudi citizens interviewed by Human Rights Watch during
the year had no knowledge of the code or the specific rights it guaranteed.
Westerners continued to be targeted and killed in mysterious car bombings,
which the government maintained were not the work of Saudis. On June 20,British
banker Simon Veness died in Riyadh when his car exploded on the way to work.
Nine days later, also in Riyadh, an American couple discovered a bomb under their
car before it detonated. On September 29, German worker W.Maximilian Graf was
killed in Riyadh when his car exploded. Prince Nawwaf bin Abdulaziz, director of
the General Intelligence Department, called it an “isolated” incident and not “a terrorist
[act] against foreigners in the kingdom.”
Torture under interrogation of political prisoners and criminal suspects continued.
One Saudi prisoner, released in 2002 after being held for six years without
charge or trial by the Interior Ministry’s General Directorate of Investigation (popularly
called mabahith in Arabic), said that as a condition of release he was forced
to sign a pledge that he would not speak or write to anyone about what he witnessed.
In a document provided to Human Rights Watch he described how
detainees were tortured, including “beating with sticks, whips, and electric cables;
use of a revolving electric chair until the victim loses consciousness and begins to
vomit; sleep deprivation for long periods, up to one week; and forcing the victim to
stand on one leg and raise one arm for extended periods.”He also alleged that prisoners
were subjected to “sexual harassment by threat or the actual practice [of]
inserting an iron rod in the rectum,” and held in “solitary confinement for more
than four months, in some cases in a windowless room less than two meters square
and without ventilation.”Human Rights Watch also received credible information
concerning the physical and psychological torture meted out to five Britons and
one Canadian imprisoned as suspects in bombings of Westerners that began in
November 2000. (See below.) Techniques included: continuous sleep deprivation
for up to ten days; abrupt slapping on the face and punches to the body; forcing
them to stand while their hands were shackled to the top of a door; hanging them
upside down,with their hands and feet shackled; and threats to harm their relatives
if they did not agree to sign dictated confessions.
In September, British citizen Ron Jones, a forty-nine-year-old accountant, initiated
legal action to sue the Saudi government for false imprisonment and torture
during his sixty-seven days of detention in 2001. He was injured in a bombing in
Riyadh in March 2001; within twenty-four hours Jones was removed from his hospital
bed and detained by the Interior Ministry as a suspect, according to The
Guardian (London). “They said they knew I was part of the bombing circle, that I
had planted the bomb, and that if I didn’t admit it they would torture me until I
confessed,” Jones told the newspaper.
Secret and wholly irregular trials of Saudis and foreigners continued. In some
cases, it appeared that the defendants themselves were not aware that a trial was in
progress, since they were asked to do no more than verify that a signed confession
was their own. In February,Prince Nayef said that the case of seven foreigners—five Britons, one Canadian, and one Belgian charged with the anti-Western bombings—
was “before the judiciary.”He provided no additional details.Human Rights
Watch learned that the defendants were secretly tried and sentenced without the
notification or presence of their Saudi defense lawyers. Nor were the lawyers
informed when the Court of Cassation and the Supreme Judicial Council (SJC)
reviewed and approved the sentences—reportedly eight years for Belgian Raf
Schyvens, eighteen years for Britons Pete Brandon, James Cottle, James Lee, and Les
Walker, and the death penalty for Briton Alexander Mitchell and Canadian William
Sampson. In a special written appeal to the SJC after it upheld the sentences, the
lawyers made clear that they had no opportunity to defend their clients while the
legal proceedings were underway; that the only evidence presented was coerced
confessions obtained under torture; and that judges ignored defendants’ claims of
coerced confessions and did not request investigations. The lawyers also pointed
out that similar car bombings of Westerners continued after the arrest of their
clients, citing the June 20 attack that killed a Briton in Riyadh.
Deputy Interior Minister Prince Ahmed bin Abdulaziz revealed on June 13 that
some of the suspects in the 1996 bombing of the Khobar Towers, in which 19 U.S.
Air Force personnel were killed, were tried in a court of first instance. He did not
disclose the dates of the trial or the names or number of defendants. He provided
few details other than that the group “did not include non-Saudi nationals.” The
prince said the “sentences will go to a higher court, then to the Supreme Judicial
Council and then to the king for approval,” adding vaguely that the verdicts would
be “announced at the appropriate time.”
Authorities continued to detain without charge relatives of perceived critics.
Kamil al-Ahmed, the younger brother of Saudi activist Ali al-Ahmed,who founded
the U.S.-based nongovernmental Saudi Institute in 2000, was arrested at his home
in Safwa on September 13, 2001.He was held without charge in a mabahith detention
facility in Dammam.More recently, internal security forces detained the son
of Dr. Said bin Zuair, an academic and political prisoner who has been held without
charge since March 1995. The son, Saad, had campaigned for his father’s
release, speaking on the widely watched al-Jazeera television station on several
occasions and writing about the case in Internet discussion forums.He was arrested
on July 4 at Riyadh airport, reportedly en route to Qatar for an interview on al-
Jazeera.He was taken to al-Ha’ir prison, where his father was also being held.As of
this writing, there was no information about any legal basis for his arrest.
The rights of Saudi women and girls remained captive to the kingdom’s patriarchal
social-cultural traditions as well as conservative interpretations of shari’a
(Islamic law).Women did not enjoy freedom of movement and required permission
from their fathers, husbands, or other close male relatives to travel inside the
kingdom or abroad. Some 3,500 members of the Committee to Promote Virtue and
Prevent Vice, or religious police, enforced the mandatory dress code for women. In
May, the Commerce Ministry confirmed that it was coordinating with the religious
police to clamp down on local factories that made abayas (the traditional formless
black cloaks that were regulation public attire for Saudi women) that officials considered
risqué. The garments were reportedly becoming popular in some Saudi
cities.Authorities were prepared to confiscate and destroy the new abayas and take “punitive measures” against their owners, according to a May 2 story in Arab News.
The ongoing ban on women driving caused economic hardship in some families
and tremendous inconvenience for young graduates of teacher colleges
assigned to schools in outlying districts. The government began in November 2001
to issue photo identification cards to women for the first time, although it did so
“very quietly without any publicity in the press or the state-run radio and TV,”
Agence France-Presse reported on December 2, 2001.Women reportedly required
the written permission of a spouse or other male guardian to obtain the cards.
Some Saudi women dismissed the move as “window dressing” for the West, making
no real difference in their lives. “You still need your husband’s or male
guardian’s permission to apply for a job, be admitted to a hospital, and travel anywhere
inside or abroad. Without their approval, you cannot do anything,” one
Riyadh-based educated mother of three told Human Rights Watch. The national
policy of gender segregation limited education and employment opportunities for
women and girls, although they were enrolled in numbers proportionate to men
and boys at all levels of the education system, including universities.Women were
not permitted to study engineering and were barred from attending the prestigious
King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, which trained a male student
body of some seven thousand for jobs in the energy industry.
Blatant gender discrimination meant that Saudi women and girls (Saudi law sets
no minimum age for marriage) were not permitted to marry non-Muslims and
could not pass on their Saudi citizenship to their children from non-Saudi fathers.
Foreigners married to or divorced from Saudi men faced an added discriminatory
burden: They were not permitted to enter the kingdom to visit their children without
the written permission of the fathers, who had to file a “statement of no objection”
with the Interior Ministry as a condition for granting a visa, according to the
U.S. State Department January 2002 report on international parental child abduction.
The tragic fire at an overcrowded and unsafe public school for girls in Mecca on
March 11, in which fifteen were killed, precipitated a public uproar in the kingdom
and unprecedented critical press coverage of the religious police and the General
Presidency for Girls Education (GPGE), the conservative agency responsible for
policymaking and administration of female education. A March 25 royal decree
forced GPGE head Ali bin Murshid al-Murshid into early retirement and merged
the GPGE with the Ministry of Education, ending its historic autonomy. But senior
government officials appeared reluctant to take on the religious police, whom
eyewitnesses criticized for hampering rescue efforts at the school because the fleeing
girls were not properly attired in the customary abayas and head coverings. On
March 24, Interior Minister Prince Nayef implicitly defended the religious police,
stating: “The fire was extinguished by the civil defence [force] within five minutes.”
He then criticized the Saudi press for inaccurate reporting: “Have those who
reported the incident been competent and responsible? Sorrowfully no. Every correspondent
wanted to satisfy his newspaper [by] exaggerating.” On April 9, Prince
Saud bin Fahd, deputy chief of intelligence, said: “Investigations into the fire incident
proved that the [religious police] had done nothing wrong.”
The public controversy surrounding the Mecca fire had broader implications for the local press. Prince Nayef met with newspaper editors and “scolded them for
crossing lines concerning religion,” the Associated Press reported from Riyadh on
April 24, citing a source who attended the meeting. This informal control of the
press from the top, influencing coverage and content, was noted by Saudi journalism
professor Suleiman al-Shammari,whom the Associated Press quoted as saying:
“The government acts like the media’s doorman, especially when it comes to foreign
policy, opening and closing the door when it wishes.”
Muhamed Mukhtar al-Fal, editor in chief of the daily al-Madina, was dismissed
from his post in March, reportedly on orders of the interior minister. The action
came after the newspaper published “The Corrupt on Earth,” a poem of Saudi
writer and poet Abdel Mohsen Mosallam. The poem lambasted corrupt judges,
stating in part: “Your beards are smeared with blood. You indulge a thousand
tyrants and only the tyrant do you obey.”Mosallam was arrested on March 18, eight
days after the newspaper published his poem. He was held for eighteen days without
charge in a mubahith office in Riyadh and was not mistreated during his detention.
As of this writing, he was blacklisted, unable to publish in Saudi newspapers,
and banned from traveling.Al-Fal was not reinstated to his post but was not banned
from writing.
The government did not respect the rights of religious minorities in the kingdom,
whether these communities were Saudi or expatriate. In April 2000, Ismaili
Shiite Muslims in the southern province of Najran protested the storming and closure
of a mosque, leading to violent clashes with Saudi security forces and mass
arrests. In December 2001, Ismaili elders in Najran issued a public statement,
charging that ninety-three Ismailis remained imprisoned and seventeen of them
faced the death penalty, adding that they were being held “for opposing the condition
of degradation, repression and humiliation that is practiced against them and
their tribesmen by Saudi authorities because of their faith.” Subsequent unconfirmed
reports said the death sentences had been commuted to life imprisonment.
On January 9, 2002, the Wall Street Journal published an article from Najran discussing
discrimination against the Ismaili minority. It quoted tribal leader Sheikh
Ahmed Turki al-Sa’ab,who said: “We love our country, but we believe that the government
is making a mistake against us.” Although this was his only quote in the
article, he was reportedly arrested on January 15 and on April 23 sentenced to seven
years imprisonment and flogging. On February 25, the Wall Street Journal reported
that two other Ismaili tribal leaders, Sheikh Hamad Ali Daseeny, a retired geologist,
and Hamad Qulayyan al-Zbaidy, had been detained on February 4.
Members of the kingdom’s Shi’a Muslim minority, numbering about one million—
six percent of the Saudi population—continued to assert that the government
practiced severe forms of discrimination against them, including toleration
of hate speech from the pulpits of Sunni Muslim mosques and from educators in
public schools. The Interior Ministry targeted outspoken peaceful critics, harassed
them in interrogation sessions, and threatened them with sanctions including loss
of their jobs.
Christian residents of the kingdom were not permitted any public display of
their faith.The government did not allow churches of any Christian denomination
to occupy public space, in sharp contrast to the large number of churches allowed in nearby Dubai. Asian and African Christians suspected of proselytizing Saudi
Muslims were arrested and imprisoned in harsh conditions, and pressured to convert
to Islam as a condition of release. Two U.S.-based groups, International Christian
Concern and Middle East Concern, publicized the arrest and detention
between July and September 2001 in Jeddah of eleven foreign nationals—from
India, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and the Philippines.They reportedly were held for practicing
their religion in their homes. One of them, Dennis Moreno-Lacalla, a Filipino
who worked in the kingdom for sixteen years, was arrested in Jeddah in August
2001 and held without charge until his release seven months later. He said that he
witnessed the flogging of three Ethiopian Christians—Tinsaie Gizachew, Bahru
Menguistu, and Gebeyahu Tafera—in January 2002, reporting that the men were
“kicked, suspended with chains, and lashed 80 times with a steel rod cable about
one inch in diameter,” punishment that left them bleeding and in severe pain.
The government took action to move the kingdom slightly closer to compliance
with international labor standards when Minister of Labor and Social Affairs Dr.
Ali al-Namlah authorized on April 17 the creation of “labor committees” at companies
with one hundred or more employees, although foreign workers were barred
from committee membership. International Labor Organization (ILO) Director
General Juan Somavía described it as “a milestone in the labor history of Saudi Arabia.”
The ILO also reported that a second expert team completed consultations with
the Labor Ministry in April concerning a new labor law,which it said would be submitted
to the kingdom’s appointed Consultative Council (majlis al-shura) “in the
near future.”
Despite this positive development, foreign workers in the kingdom—particularly
Arabs and South Asians in low-wage occupations, including women domestic
workers—remained extremely vulnerable to poor working conditions and other
abuse at the hands of their employers, who typically held their passports and official
residence permits (iqama, in Arabic).With these documents essentially confiscated,
these workers had limited freedom of movement. They were unable to leave
the country unless their employment sponsors requested an exit visa, and were subjected
to arrest and steep fines if stopped without residence permits in their possession.
Foreigner workers comprised about 65 percent of the private sector labor
force, the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs
reported in February.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The absence of freedom of association, coupled with strict limits on freedom of
expression, left Saudi citizens and other residents of the kingdom without the ability
to report openly about human rights conditions. There were no independent
rights organizations, including women’s rights groups, despite signing the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
(CEDAW) in 2000.The U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and
lawyers, during an official mission to Saudi Arabia in October (see below), reported
that the government was “proposing the establishment of a national human rights
institution.”
Some Saudi citizens who suffered rights abuses, or collected information about
such abuses, communicated to the outside world in clandestine fashion for fear of
punishment at the hands of authorities. Human Rights Watch received information
in 2002 from individuals who were summoned to the Interior Ministry and
questioned at length about publicizing human rights abuses and contacting international
human rights groups. Such harassment and intimidation enforced their
silence, leaving them frightened and fearful of arrest or dismissal from their public-
sector jobs.
The kingdom remained closed to international human rights organizations
during the year. As of this writing, Saudi authorities did not respond to Human
Rights Watch’s longstanding requests to visit. Amnesty International was similarly
denied. In December 2001, Lieutenant-General Ali Hussein al-Harithi, head of the
Interior Ministry’s General Directorate of Prisons, told al-Sharq al-Awsat newspaper
that Amnesty International and other groups were welcome to visit at “any
time.”He added: “We have nothing to hide or fear. [They] will find that the reality
of our prisons and inmates does not conform with what is rumored or said about
them.” A Human Rights Watch letter to the government following up on these
remarks went unanswered.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Pursuant to an invitation first extended in 2000, the first official visit to Saudi
Arabia by a U.N. special rapporteur took place in 2002. Dato’ Param
Cumaraswamy, special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers,
conducted an official mission October 20-27.He met with senior government officials
and examined law, policy, and practice in the kingdom’s administration of justice.
He offered preliminary observations in a statement to the press in Riyadh on
October 27, noting that the justice system was “currently in a stage of transition.”
Cumaraswamy said that there was “some resistance on the part of some judges to
the presence of lawyers in their courts” and that the kingdom lacked “a culture of
legal representation in the courts but this may soon be rectified.”He expressed concern
about “the frequent reliance on confessional evidence before the courts to
prove an offense” and “the lack of compliance with some international standards of
due process,” including “the right of anyone deprived of their liberty by arrest or
detention to be promptly brought before a court to ensure the legality of their continuing
detention.”He said he learned that women represented about half the graduates
of university law faculties and that there were “no restrictions on them
appearing as lawyers before the courts.”He stated that “[m]ore women should be
encouraged [to] seek admission to the legal profession and practice before the
courts.” The special rapporteur was scheduled to report his findings at the fiftyninth
session of the Commission on Human Rights in March 2003.
U.N.High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHRC) Ruud Lubbers conducted his
first mission to Saudi Arabia October 11-14.He had meetings with senior government
officials to discuss Rafha refugee camp and the kingdom’s possible accession to the 1951 Refugee Convention. On October 14, he visited Rafha camp, where
5,200 Iraqi refugees have remained in limbo since the end of the 1991 Gulf war,
neither resettled nor repatriated to Iraq. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) said in an October 15 press release that Lubbers told the
refugees that UNHCR wanted “to help them find a solution to their long exile”
through resettlement in third countries or local integration, if they did not wish to
return to Iraq.He noted that the camp was “a remote site”and that the refugees were
afforded “only occasional access to the nearby town.”
As part of its obligations under the U.N.Convention Against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the government submitted
an initial report to the U.N. Committee against Torture. The committee considered
this report during its twenty-eighth session in April and May 2002, and
issued concluding observations and comments on May 28. Among the subjects of
concern, the committee noted the lack of criminal sanctions in Saudi domestic law
for the crime of torture; corporal punishment, including flogging and amputation
of limbs; prolonged incommunicado detention, including lack of access to legal
and medical assistance; minimal judicial supervision of pre-trial detention; and
prolonged pre-trial detention and denial of consular access to detained foreigners
for extended periods. The committee also found that the powers of the religious
police were “vaguely defined by law, and that their activities may violate the Convention.”
It concluded that Saudi Arabia failed “to provide effective mechanisms to
investigate complaints of breaches of the Convention [against Torture],” stating
that “as a practical matter” compensation to individuals for violations of the convention
was “rarely obtained,” thus limiting “full enjoyment of the rights guaranteed
by the Convention”.
United States
Despite political tension in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, the U.S.
and Saudi Arabia maintained close economic and military ties. Shared economic
interests included improvement of the stability and reliability of the international
oil market. The kingdom’s “capacity to mitigate [oil] supply disruptions in any
region,” was noted by Alan P. Larson, under secretary of state for economic, business
and agricultural affairs, in an April 22 speech.
The bilateral trade relationship was substantial. In 2001, the kingdom exported
$13.3 billion to the U.S., mostly crude oil and other petroleum products. Saudi Arabia
remained the largest market in the Middle East for U.S. products, importing
$5.9 billion. The kingdom’s defense spending “increased by 50.8 percent in 2001,
reversing a 30 percent decrease between 1998 and 2000,” according to Allied Contributions
to the Common Defense, published in June by the U.S. Department of
Defense (DOD). DOD’s Defense Security Cooperation Agency reported on September
26 that in fiscal year 2001 the U.S. government’s Foreign Military Sales
(FMS) program delivered $2.03 billion to Saudi Arabia and concluded FMS agreements
of another $587 million. Arms exports from U.S. companies in the same
period totaled $1.02 billion. Formal military ties included a U.S.Military Training
Mission to assist Saudi forces with procured U.S. weapons and a similar training mission with the kingdom’s National Guard.An estimated 6,600 U.S. military personnel,
mostly air force, and an undisclosed number of aircraft, were stationed in
Saudi Arabia.
Official statements from both governments de-emphasized bilateral political
tensions during the year concerning Afghanistan, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and the U.S.-led campaign to use military force to overthrow the government of
Saddam Hussein.There appeared to be a tacit agreement to highlight mutual interests,
such as counterterrorism, trade, and energy sources.The U.S. repeatedly made
clear that it was willing to assist Saudi Arabia in its longstanding bid to join the
World Trade Organization, and that it hoped for a positive outcome from the Saudi
government’s protracted negotiations of a $20 billion natural gas exploration and
development deal with seven international energy companies, four of which were
U.S.-based: Exxon Mobil, ConocoPhillips, Marathon Oil Corporation, and Occidental
Petroleum Corporation. The other multinationals were BP, Royal
Dutch/Shell, and TotalFinaElf.
Senior U.S. officials maintained a distinct public silence about the royal family’s
autocratic rule and the persistent pattern of serious human rights violations in the
kingdom.Meanwhile, representatives of both governments affirmed publicly that
ties remained strong. Crown Prince Abdullah, de facto head of state, made an official
visit to the U.S. and met with President Bush on April 25 at his ranch in Texas.
The president said that the meeting “confirmed the strong relationship” between
the U.S. and the kingdom.He added: “And we’re constantly working with him and
his government on intelligence-sharing and cutting off money.”On August 12,U.S.
State Department spokesman Philip Reeker said: “[W]e’ve been very pleased with
the level of Saudi cooperation in the international campaign against terrorism.”His
comments came after Iran arrested and transferred to the kingdom sixteen Saudi
citizens, all alleged al-Qaeda members. On September 20, the Saudi embassy in
Washington stated that the government had “blocked more than $700 million in
suspected terrorist assets.”
Bush administration officials scrambled to distance themselves from the controversial
July 10 briefing given by Rand Corporation analyst Laurent Muraweic to
the U.S. Defense Policy Board, which provides advice to the U.S. Defense Department.
He charged that Saudi Arabia was “active at every level of the terror chain”
and “supports our enemies and attacks our allies.” U.S. Defense Secretary Donald
Rumsfeld said on August 6 that Murawiec’s analysis “did not represent the views of
the government; it didn’t represent the views of the Defense Policy Board.”
On October 7, the State Department issued the 2002 International Religious
Freedom Report, which found, as in past reports, that freedom of religion did not
exist in Saudi Arabia, the government prohibited the public practice of non-Muslim
religions, and “continued to detain non-Muslims engaged in worship services.”
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Human Rights in Saudi Arabia: A Deafening Silence, 12/01
SYRIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Syria’s nascent civil society and human rights movement absorbed a severe blow
as government action eroded already limited rights to free expression and association.
Between March and August, ten advocates of democratic reform were sentenced
to prison terms ranging from two to ten years, convicted on vaguely worded
criminal charges such as “attempting to change the constitution by illegal means”
and “spreading false information.”Activists affiliated with one independent human
rights group were also summoned for trial before the military court in 2003. Given
the prominence of some of those imprisoned and the legacy of repression under
former President Hafez al-Asad, there could be no doubting the intimidating effect
of these measures on other proponents of political reform and human rights in
Syria.
As Syrians courageous enough to speak out and openly criticize the state were
being prosecuted and imprisoned, authorities continued to release political prisoners
from a previous era, including individuals implicated in anti-government
violence. In late November 2001, a presidential pardon released 113 political prisoners,
some of whom had been imprisoned for up to twenty-two years, including
members of the banned Muslim Brotherhood, the Iraqi wing of the Ba’ath party,
and the Syrian Communist Workers Party. Among the released Muslim Brothers
were three arrested in 1980, Sheikh Imad Ranko, Sheikh Mahmoud Othman,
Sheikh Hisham Majzoub, and Sheik Khaled Chami, arrested in 1982. A military tribunal
reportedly had condemned Chami to death, a sentence later commuted to
life imprisonment by presidential decree. On August 11, 2002,Haytham Na’al was
released in poor health after serving twenty-seven years of a life sentence. He and
other members of the Arab Communist Organization were detained in 1975 and
tried for alleged involvement in bombings. Some of the defendants were sentenced
to death and executed; two others, Imad Shiha and Faris Murad, remained imprisoned,
reportedly in poor health.
Despite granting them permission to enter the country, authorities arrested Syrian
citizens returning from many years in political exile. In one case,Mohammed
Hasan Nassar, an exile who left Syria in 1980 and lived in Jordan, died after being
taken into custody on his return, according to the London-based Syrian Human
Rights Committee (SHRC). It reported that Nassar was gravely ill and his family
had secured permission from the Syrian embassy in Amman for his return, but he
was arrested on February 17 at the border. On March 23, Nassar’s body was delivered
to his family in a village near Aleppo and buried the next day. SHRC reported
the detention of three other exiles:Nawras Hussein al-Ramadan, a teacher who fled
Syria in 1980 and worked in the United Arab Emirates, on February 13 upon arrival
at Damascus airport; Dr.Muhammad Ghazi Hobaieb on April 16 after he arrived
at Damascus airport from Saudi Arabia,where he worked as a medical doctor; and Moussa Zain al-Abdeen on August 12 at a border checkpoint after returning from
over twenty years of exile in Saudi Arabia, where he worked as a teacher. As of this
writing,Ramadan continued to be held incommunicado. Dr.Hobaeib was released
on May 14, but was ordered to leave Syria within one week, and Abdeen was
released in late October.
Syria secretly gained custody ofMohamed Haydar Zammar, a Syrian-born German
national suspected of recruiting three of the September 11 hijackers. According
to various press reports, Zammar was clandestinely arrested in Morocco and
transferred to Syria with the knowledge of the U.S. government but without notification
of German authorities.The Washington Post, citing one unnamed U.S. official,
reported on June 19 that the U.S. did not have “direct access to Zammar” but
“the Americans have been submitting questions for him to the Syrians, and some
of the answers have helped gauge the credibility of detainees in U.S. custody.”
Ten Syria democracy activists who had been arrested in August and September
2001 were tried and sentenced. Two of them were independent members of parliament,
Mamoun al-Homsi and Riad al-Seif, and were sentenced in the Damascus
criminal court to five years imprisonment, in March and April, respectively, for
“attempting to change the constitution by illegal means,” among other charges.
Their convictions were upheld on appeal. The other eight defendants, including
two lawyers, two medical doctors, and one engineer,were tried in the State Security
Court, whose decisions cannot be appealed. Notably, Syria’s government-controlled
professional associations did nothing on behalf of these defendants.
Of the other eight defendants, Riad al-Turk, the seventy-two-year-old lawyer
and veteran political activist who was imprisoned without charge and held incommunicado
from 1981 to 1998, was sentenced to a prison term of two and a half years
on June 26 for “attempting to change the constitution by illegal means.” (Turk
received a presidential pardon and was released on November 16 for “humanitarian
reasons.”) The remaining seven defendants—all of whom were active in the
country’s popular independent civic forums and human rights organizations—
were sentenced between June and August.
On June 24,Habib Saleh, a businessman who founded a civil forum in Tartous,
was convicted of “opposing the aims of the revolution”and “inciting ethnic and sectarian
strife,” and sentenced to three years imprisonment. On July 31,Aref Dalila, a
prominent economist and university professor, was found guilty of “attempting to
change the constitution by illegal means” and sentenced to ten years. He was a
founding member of the Committees for the Revival of Civil Society, an advocate
of economic reform and a critic of official corruption.Also on July 31, Dr.Walid al-
Bunni, a physican who helped launch the independent Human Rights Society of
Syria (HRSS) in 2001, was convicted of the same criminal offense as Dalila and sentenced
to a prison term of five years. On August 19, lawyer Habib Issa, spokesperson
for the Jamal al-Attasi Forum for Democratic Dialog and a founding member
of HRSS, was sentenced to five years for charges that included “attempting to
change the constitution by illegal means” and “publishing false information.” He
served as a defense lawyer for Riad al-Seif
The last three defendants were sentenced on August 28. Dr. Kamal Labwani, a
physician, was sentenced to three years for inciting armed rebellion. He was an active member in the independent Committees for the Defense of Human Rights
in Syria. “You’re a doctor, so learn to go to your clinic and not interfere in politics,”
one State Security Court judge told Labwani, the BBC reported. Fawaz Tello, an
engineer, was found guilty of “attempting to change the constitution by illegal
means” and sentenced to five years. He was an active member of the Forum for
Democratic Dialog and the HRSS. Hassan Saadun, a retired teacher, an activist in
the civil society movement, and a founding member of the HRSS, was convicted of
spreading false information and sentenced to two years.
Authorities also targeted other activists affiliated with the HRSS. In June, the
group’s head, seventy-year-old lawyer Haythem al-Maleh, was barred from practicing
law for three years pursuant to action taken by the disciplinary council of the
Damascus bar association. In August, Maleh and three other members of the
HRSS—Muhamed Farouq al-Homsi, Muhamed Kheir Bek, and Ghasoub Ali al-
Mallah—were ordered to appear in the military court on January 18, 2003.All four
were charged with unauthorized distribution of the HRSS’s occasional magazine
Tayarat, which was printed in Lebanon.Maleh, Homsi, and Kheir Bek faced additional
charges, including joining a political association of an international character
without government permission, and publishing material that advocated
sectarian strife. Additional charges against Maleh and Homsi included forming a
human rights group without Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor approval, and
Maleh was separately accused of disseminating false information abroad.
The cases of “disappeared” Syrian citizens, Palestinians, and other foreign
nationals, many dating back to the 1980s, remained unresolved. Human Rights
Watch received information indicating that the names of some “disappeared” Syrians
had recently been entered in civil registers as deceased, and that various
branches of the internal security apparatus advised relatives to check these registers.
There was concern among Syrian activists that authorities might employ this
method more widely to “solve” the cases and thereby facilitate settlement of legal
matters, such as marital status and inheritance without families learning the circumstances
of the death of their relatives.
Families of the “disappeared” maintained hope that their loved ones were still
alive in Syria, and the outcome of one case indicated that this hope was not necessarily
misplaced. A Palestinian—who asked Human Rights Watch to withhold his
name—was released on December 13, 2001, after having been “disappeared” in
Damascus in May 1988.He had been held incommunicado for fourteen years in a
prison at a training base, near Damascus, of the Palestinian group Fatah the
Intifada, led by Abu Musa (Musa Muhamed Maraghah) and Abu Khaled al-Amleh.
He reported that he was held in an underground cell under a false name, tortured,
and denied medical treatment, newspapers, and a radio. He reported that at the
time of his release at least fifteen additional prisoners languished in solitary confinement
at the camp, which was guarded by Syrian forces, and that some of them
had “gone insane” as a result of torture.
Lebanese nongovernmental organizations continued to campaign vocally for
answers about “disappeared” Lebanese, including those believed to be in Syrian
custody. Some sixty members of the Committee of the Parents of Lebanese Disappeared
or Detained in Syria made a highly publicized visit to Damascus on July 22.
They traveled in a bus with signs that read: “You can resolve our ordeal and return alive.”Senior Syrian military officers met the bus at the border and escorted it to the
Interior Ministry in Damascus,where the parents presented to Interior Minister Ali
Hammoud the names of 176 Lebanese believed to be victims of arbitrary detention
or “disappearance” at the hands of Syrian authorities.The minister indicated to the
families that he needed three months before he could respond to them.On November
2, forty-eight members of the committee set out again for Damascus for a previously
arranged appointment with the interior minister, only to be turned back at
the border. One participant informed Human Rights Watch that an officer told the
families that the minister might not be available for an entire month and said they
should “go back to Lebanon and try to speak to your officials.”
Political activists in Lebanon continued to demand the withdrawal of all Syrian
forces from the country and organized demonstrations throughout the year, many
of which the internal security forces dispersed forcibly. In a speech on March 19,
Rev. Selim Abou, rector of St. Joseph University in Beirut, criticized Syria’s influence
in the Lebanese army.He said “to military domination is added a political control
which is increasingly heavy,” and predicted, “soon it will need only to interfere
in the appointment of janitors who can, after all, be excellent informants.” The
army responded with a statement the next day, Reuters reported, warning Abou to
“exercise precision and objectivity before airing such opinions,which cause despair
and mislead students and young people, rather than teaching national consciousness
and respect for the army's patriotic role.”
Major General Ghazi Kenaan, who headed Syrian military intelligence in
Lebanon and was long a symbol of Syrian hegemony there, left his post in October,
reportedly to assume other duties in Damascus.Colonel Rustom Ghazali,who long
served as Syria’s senior military intelligence operative in Beirut, replaced him. The
Associated Press reported on October 9 that Kenaan met in Beirut with Lebanese
President Emile Lahoud and Prime Minister Rafik Hariri before his departure and
was awarded “a civilian medal of appreciation for his work in Lebanon.”
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The government maintained its pressure on the country’s fragile human rights
movement through a combination of intimidation, criminal prosecution of leading
activists, and imprisonment. Some human rights activists reported to Human
Rights Watch that they had been “invited” by the political section of state security
for discussions about their work. In addition, some of them said that internal security
operatives sent oral messages, through intermediaries, threatening them with
detention if they did not cease their activities. One prominent activist said that he
was summoned for questioning on a regular basis.
Despite the harassment, rights activists continued to issue public statements,
speak to the press, and organize open meetings across the country, some of which
internal security forces members attended. “We inform people through word of
mouth. If we keep the numbers small, there is no harassment,” one activist told
Human Rights Watch.
Syria remained a closed country for international human rights organizations.
Amnesty International last had official access in 1997 and Human Rights Watch in
1995; the government did not reply to written requests for access from both organizations.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
The European Union (E.U.) and its member states did not undertake vigorous
public advocacy on behalf of beleaguered Syrian advocates of human rights and
political reform, despite substantial leverage. Syria and the E.U. maintained a
strong trade relationship,with 66 percent of Syria’s exports destined for E.U.member
states, including 62 percent of its crude oil and other petroleum products, the
European Commission reported in December 2001. Some 34 percent of Syria’s
total imports were from the E.U. states, with Italy, Germany, and France the lead
sources.
Since 2000, the E.U. concluded seven Financing Agreements with Syria for economic-
reform projects as part of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership. Programs
formulated in 2001 included assistance for reform in the health sector and
improvement of water and sewage systems in two Palestinian refugee camps and
nearby Syrian villages. The European Commission stated in January 2002 that aid
plans for 2002-2004 focused on “economic modernization and reform,” with priorities
in the areas of “institutional development, industrial modernization,human
resource development and trade enhancement.” It added that grants to Syria from
the E.U. budget were “complemented by loans from the European Investment
Bank, generally aimed at large economic infrastructure projects.”
On August 8, the E.U. Presidency issued a declaration of concern about Syria’s
“limited progress” on political and economic reform since Bashar Asad assumed
the presidency in 2000. It noted that the E.U. had previously expressed concern
about “politically motivated arrests and trials of prominent members of civil society
for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of speech,” and said it “deeply
regret[ted]”the recent prison sentences for Syrian activists, and urged the release of
“all political prisoners.”
The E.U. and Syria continued to engage in negotiations, launched in 1998, to
conclude an Association Agreement. This trade pact stated that relations between
the parties “shall be based on respect of democratic principles and fundamental
human rights as set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
guides their internal and international policy and constitutes an essential element
of [the agreement].”However, the sentencing and imprisonment of the ten Syrian
activists (see above) did not interfere with the last negotiating session in Brussels in
October, and the E.U. did not indicate their unconditional release as a benchmark
for further negotiations.
United States
Terrorism, counter-terrorism, and weapons-related concerns dominated the
Bush administration’s agenda with Syria during the year. Defense Secretary Donald
Rumsfeld stated on April 1 that Syria, in addition to Iran and Iraq, was “inspiring
and financing a culture of political murder and suicide bombing.” President
Bush, on April 4, added that although Syria had “spoken out against al-Qaeda,” the
U.S.“expect[ed] it to act against Hamas and Hizballah as well” and that it was time
for Syria “to decide which side of the war against terror it is on.”
In a speech on May 6, Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International
Security John R. Bolton named Syria—along with Libya and Cuba—“as
three other state sponsors of terrorism [in addition to Iraq, Iran and North Korea]
that are pursuing or who have the potential to pursue weapons of mass destruction
or have the capability to do so in violation of their treaty obligations.” He cited
Syria’s chemical warfare program, its “stockpile of the nerve agent sarin,” and its
“research and development of the most toxic and persistent nerve agent VX.” He
also charged that Syria was “pursuing the development of biological weapons” and
was “able to produce at least small amounts of biological warfare agents.”He said
that Syria’s mobile missiles were capable of reaching “much of Israel, Jordan, and
Turkey from launch sites well within the country.”
On May 21, Syria was again named as one of seven state sponsors of terrorism
in the State Department’s patterns of global terrorism annual report. It noted that
the government “cooperated with the United States and with other foreign governments
in investigating al-Qaeda and some other terrorist groups and individuals.”
It also stated that Syria had not been “implicated directly in an act of terrorism since
1986,”and “continued to adhere to its longstanding policy of preventing any attacks
against Israel or Western targets from Syrian territory or attacks against Western
interests in Syria.” But, as in past years, the State Department charged that Syria
continued “to provide safe haven and logistics support to a number of terrorist
groups.” It named five such groups with offices in Damascus—the Popular Front
for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, Palestine Islamic Jihad, Fatahthe-
Intifadah, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, and Hamas—and said
that Syria “provided Hizballah, Hamas, PFLP-GC, the PIJ, and other terrorist
organizations refuge and basing privileges in Lebanon’s Beka’a Valley, under Syrian
control.” The report also stated “Damascus served as the primary transit point for
the transfer of Iranian-supplied weapons to Hizballah.”
As a designated state sponsor of terrorism, Syria received no U.S. aid and was
subjected to a variety of economic sanctions, although it maintained a trade relationship.
Syria imported $226 million in U.S. products in 2001, outpacing its
exports to the U.S. of $158 million.
Despite the Bush administration’s strong criticism of Syria, it did not support
the Syria Accountability Act, a bill introduced in the U.S.House of Representatives
in April.Among other measures, the proposed legislation called for the withdrawal
of all Syrian military, intelligence, and other security personnel from Lebanon;
deployment of Lebanese troops in south Lebanon and removal of “all terrorist and
foreign forces” there,“including Hizballah and the Iranian Revolutionary Guards”;
closure of “all terrorist offices and facilities” in Syria; cessation of the development
and deployment of short and medium range ballistic missiles; and an end to the
development and production of biological and chemical weapons. It proposed new
sanctions, including a ban on all U.S. exports to Syria, except food and medicine,
and prohibition of U.S. companies from investing or operating in Syria.
In a September 3 letter to Congressman Robert Wexler, President Bush stated
that the U.S. had “both serious differences and areas of common interest with Syria.
Managing our complex relationship with Syria requires a careful and calculated use
of all the options we have to advance U.S. interests.” The president added that the
imposition of new sanctions pursuant to the proposed legislation “would limit our
options and restrict our ability to deal with a difficult and dangerous regional situation
at a particularly critical juncture.We are pursuing a number of initiatives to
reverse [Syria’s] unacceptable behavior.”
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
Decree No. 50/100: Human Rights Concerns, 1/02
TUNISIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Tunisian authorities exploited the U.S.-led war on terrorism to curtail public
liberties and keep critics of all viewpoints under pressure.The repression tightened
after April, when Tunisia suffered its first deadly terrorist attack in many years.
Suspected Islamists faced the harshest treatment,with a revival of military court
trials for civilian suspects, long prison terms under inhumane conditions, and
heavy restrictions that kept ex-prisoners from resuming an ordinary life. Liberal
and leftist dissidents encountered arbitrary curbs on their rights to meet, demonstrate,
and travel, and were victimized by assaults, vandalism, and theft credibly
attributed to plainclothes police. A few spent time in prison or remained in exile.
In parliament in April and in a national referendum in May, the ruling Democratic
Constitutional Rally party easily won adoption of constitutional amendments
that included new affirmations of certain rights but, more significantly,
enabled President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali to run again in 2004 and 2009.They also
granted permanent immunity to the head of state for acts connected to official
duties. The amendments were approved by more than 99 percent of the voters—
the same official margin by which Ben Ali had won re-election in 1989, 1994, and
1999.
The Islamist Nahda party remained banned, as did the small but vocal Tunisian
Communist Workers Party (Parti communiste des ouvriers tunisiens,PCOT). One recently formed opposition party, the Congress for the Republic, continued to be
denied legal recognition,while another, the Democratic Forum for Work and Freedom,
was legalized on October 25, eight years after first applying for recognition.
In April,Tunisia suffered the first serious act of political violence in a decade and
the first major terrorist attack to be credibly claimed by al-Qaeda since the September
11, 2001 attack on the United States. The target was North Africa’s oldest
Jewish synagogue, in Djerba, an international tourist destination. Twenty-one persons,
including fourteen Germans, died when a young Tunisian
detonated the gas-laden truck he was driving.The attack was condemned by
all political forces in Tunisia, including the banned Nahda party.
During 2001 and 2002, authorities increasingly referred suspected Islamists to
military courts, particularly those who were arrested after periods spent out of the
country. Tens of civilians were charged, many in absentia, under article 123 of the
code of military justice for “serving, in times of peace, terrorist organizations operating
abroad.”Military courts deprived defendants of fair trial guarantees and their
rulings were subject to no appeal except a narrow review by the Court of Cassation.
On January 30, a Tunis military court convicted Béchir Ben Zayed, Mounir
Ghaïth, Abdelbasset Dali, and thirty absentee co-defendants of forming an al-
Qaeda-linked terror group called Ahl Al-Jamaâ w’al-Sunnah (Adherents of the
Islamic Community and the Traditions of the Prophet). Their lawyers claimed the
court ignored allegations that testimonies had been obtained under duress, arrest
dates had been falsified to hide irregularities, and the prosecution produced no
convincing evidence against the defendants. In April, the Court of Cassation confirmed
the sentences of between eight and ten years for the three men. One of their
absent co-defendants, Jaber Trabelsi, surrendered to authorities in Italy and on June
26 received an eight-year sentence in a military trial closed to the press.
While military trials of civilians were troubling, civilian courts hardly ensured a
fair trial in politically tinged cases. A stark example was the February 2 re-trial of
Hamma Hammami, spokesman of the PCOT, and co-defendants Samir Taâmallah
and Abdeljabbar Maddouri. The three had just emerged from four years in hiding
to challenge their convictions in absentia.
Before the judge could open the proceedings, police surged into the crowded
courtroom and forcibly removed the defendants, prompting a walk-out by the
defense lawyers. The defendants were later escorted into a different courtroom,
where they told the judge that police had beaten them. The judge did not respond
to these allegations.Nor did he conduct any manner of trial or hear testimony.He
swiftly re-imposed the original sentences of nine years and three months on
charges that included “maintaining an unauthorized association,” “defamation of
the judiciary,” and “inciting the public to violate the country’s laws.” Maddouri
received an additional two years for a “defamatory”remark he allegedly uttered that
day.
The sentences were later reduced on appeal. After a five-week hunger strike by
Hammami’s wife, human rights lawyer Radhia Nasraoui, and the confirmation of
the convictions by Tunisia’s highest court on September 2, authorities conditionally
released Hammami and Taâmallah on September 4 for “health reasons.”Maddouri
was conditionally freed on November 5.
Tunisia’s prisons held, at a minimum, several hundred political prisoners. The
great majority had been convicted in previous years for mere Nahda membership
or participation in Nahda activities,without evidence that they had any connection
to acts of violence.During the year, suspected Islamists continued to be arrested or
re-arrested for these offenses, sometimes reformulated as the crime of “associating
with a criminal gang” in order to bypass the statute of limitations that would have
applied to lighter charges.
August marked the tenth anniversary of the conviction in two unfair mass trials
before military courts of 265 suspected Nahda leaders and members for an alleged
plot to overthrow the state. During 2002, some one hundred remained in prison.
These included party leaders like Sadok Chorou, Ajmi El-Ourimi, and Habib
Ellouz, who were serving life sentences under harsh conditions. Like some of the
other leaders, Ali Laaridh, who was serving fifteen years, endured near-permanent
solitary confinement and deprivation of materials for reading and writing.
In January, authorities cited “humanitarian reasons” in conditionally releasing
Mohamed Mouada, a leading opposition politician, seven months after re-imprisoning
him. Initially sentenced in 1996 to eleven years on trumped-up charges of
providing intelligence to a foreign state, Mouada had been conditionally released
later that year but then was subjected to continuous surveillance and harassment
until his second arrest in 2001. On both occasions, Mouada’s imprisonment followed
his sharp public criticisms of the president.
Prisons,which since 2001 have been under the authority of the Justice Ministry,
remained closed to inspections by independent monitoring groups. Inmates staged
frequent hunger strikes to protest overcrowding, poor hygiene,medical neglect, the
assignment of prisoners to facilities far from their families, and other abuses. Strikers
were sometimes beaten, denied family visits, or placed in isolation.
Abdelwahab Boussaa died in March after a four-month hunger strike. Lakhdar
Essdiri died two weeks later,possibly from medical neglect.Boussaa and Essdiri had
been serving sentences of sixteen and twenty-eight years respectively for Nahda
activities. Habib Saïdi, an inmate in his thirties, died mysteriously in late September,
only days before his scheduled release; he was the younger brother of Ali Saïdi,
a civil servant and former human rights activist who was murdered under suspicious
circumstances in December 2001.
Released political prisoners faced surveillance, house searches, passport confiscations,
and onerous measures of control, sometimes court-ordered but often arbitrary.
Freed prisoners were often unable to hold jobs due to government pressures
on employers and orders that they sign-in frequently with police. In September,
Taoufik Chaieb, an ex-prisoner and former high school teacher in Tunis, reported
that police pressures on him and employers had forced him from one job to
another. Chaieb was also deprived of a passport.
After completing an eleven-year sentence for Nahda activities, Abdallah Zouari
defied an order from the Ministry of Interior banishing him to the south of the
country, far from his family home in the capital. For his refusal, a court sentenced
Zouari on August 23 to eight months in prison, a decision upheld on appeal.
Authorities conditionally released Zouari on November 6.
Police also harassed the families of exiled Islamists, questioning them about
their relatives abroad and searching their homes.
The state kept tight reins on all broadcast media and daily newspapers. Only
small-circulation, independent, and party periodicals criticized the absence of
public liberties, and these were confiscated on occasion.
As Internet use continued to expand, authorities imprisoned an online writer
for the first time.Zouheir Yahiaoui had been pseudonymously publishing the satirical
electronic journal Tunezine when authorities arrested him on June 4 at the
cybercafé where he worked. They then searched his house without a warrant and
confiscated computer materials. Yahiaoui was sentenced on June 20 to one year in
prison for disseminating “false” information and sixteen months for theft of
telecommunication services in connection with the unauthorized Tunezine. In July,
an appeals court reduced the total sentence to two years.Yahiaoui is the nephew of
dismissed Judge Mokhtar Yahiaoui (see below),whose open letter to President Ben
Ali first ran in Tunezine.
On June 16, twelve days after Yahiaoui’s arrest, La Presse reported that authorities
had temporarily shut down some Internet cafés that were not complying with
the applicable laws. Tunisia’s Internet regulations were designed partly to prevent
that medium from escaping government controls placed on other means of expression.
While impunity prevailed inside Tunisia, torture victims in exile achieved a victory
when one victim persuaded a French judge to issue an international arrest warrant
in February for a diplomat stationed in Strasbourg, the first such warrant ever
to be issued against a Tunisian. The plaintiff ’s complaint alleged that the diplomat,
Consul Khaled Ben Saïd, had been the supervising police officer in Jendouba in
1996 when agents interrogating her bound her ankles and wrists and beat her with
sticks and fists. Ben Saïd disappeared after the warrant was issued.
In addition to the work of human rights organizations, evidence of civil society
assertiveness included a one-day nationwide strike by lawyers to protest police
intervention during the Hammami trial in February and steps by the General
Union of Tunisian Workers to enhance the union’s internal democracy.
In January, the government hosted a regional seminar on the Land Mine Ban
Treaty in North Africa.The army destroyed one thousand stockpiled antipersonnel
mines as part of the event. On October 4, Tunisia submitted its annual report on
measures taken to implement the treaty.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
As of mid-November, the government had not shut down human rights organizations
or imprisoned human rights defenders in 2002, but authorities continued
to employ a wide range of repressive measures to hamper their activities. Defenders
faced heavy police surveillance, suspicious break-ins and acts of vandalism,
travel bans, dismissals from work, harassment of spouses and children, and frequent
blockage of telephone and e-mail service.
The two leading human rights organizations, the twenty-five-year-old Tunisian
Human Rights League (Ligue Tunisienne des droits de l’Homme, LTDH) and the
three-year-old National Council on Liberties in Tunisia (Conseil pour les libertés
en Tunisie, CNLT), operated in legal limbo: the former because of a 2001 court decision nullifying the election of its outspoken executive committee, the latter
because its application for legal recognition had been rejected.
Police on many occasions prevented, without explanation, meetings called by
rights groups. On May 19, activists heading from Tunis to Jendouba for an LTDH
meeting on political prisoners were intercepted and turned back at a checkpoint on
the intercity road. On June 2, the day that the LTDH celebrated the opening of a new
office in Monastir province, police occupied the premises and changed the locks,
ostensibly pursuant to a lawsuit filed by the landlord. On June 16,Monastir police
blocked a rally organized in solidarity with the local LTDH section, and on July 23,
a court ruled in favor of the landlord and voided the signed lease. On September 10,
police thwarted a meeting at CNLT headquarters in Tunis, pushing away members
and guests as they arrived.
While the state-controlled press maintained a blackout on criticism of authorities
by these organizations and by groups such as the independent Tunisian Association
of Democratic Women, pro-government papers engaged in lurid
campaigns to defame their leaders. For example, Le Quotidien in April lambasted
CNLT spokesperson Sihem Ben Sedrine for supposedly cozying up to Israeli diplomats
while in Geneva, asking whether “organizations that connive with Zionist terrorism
can also be working for the well-being of Tunisians . . . [and] for human
rights.”
Discrediting the LTDH appeared to be the goal of the extensive coverage given
to the charges of attempted rape filed against LTDH Secretary-General Khemaïs
Ksila in September 2001. The pro-government press shed its customary respect for
the privacy of victims of sex crimes, in this case divulging the name of the alleged
victim and covering in a detailed, one-sided fashion the accusations against Ksila.
It even published excerpts of the investigating judge’s inquiry in apparent violation
of Tunisian law. Ksila,who had left the country in 2001, was convicted in February
2002 in absentia for attempted rape and sexual harassment and sentenced to a fine
and ten years in prison.
On December 29, 2001, the Judicial Disciplinary Council dismissed Judge
Mokhtar Yahiaoui from the bench for “insulting the honor of the judiciary” and
violating his “professional duties” and his “obligation of professional reserve.”
Yahiaoui’s offense was to have published, as a sitting judge in July 2001, an open letter
to President Ben Ali denouncing the lack of judicial independence. After persisting
in his public criticism and rejecting inducements to retract,Yahiaoui found
himself the object of anonymous phone threats, surveillance, confiscation of mail,
disruption of phone service, and a ban on leaving the country imposed by the Ministry
of Justice in November 2001. On April 5, after leaving a pro-Palestinian rally
in Tunis, police forced him into a car without explanation and then, twenty kilometers
from Tunis, dropped him off at the side of the road.
The two-year-old travel ban against Moncef Marzouki, a veteran human rights
defender, was lifted in late November 2001, days before the visit to Tunisia of French
President Jacques Chirac. But the ban against Sadri Khiari, a co-founder of the
CNLT and of an unauthorized anti-globalization group, remained in force, preventing
Khiari from defending his doctoral dissertation in France.
Human rights lawyers and defenders in Tunisia suffered a suspiciously high incidence of physical assaults, break-ins, car thefts, and property damage, crimes
that were solved by the police rarely if ever. The office of Bechir Essid, the independent
president of the national Bar Council, was burglarized and ransacked on
the night of October 26-27, 2001. LTDH president Mokhtar Trifi’s law office suffered
a similar fate on the night of February 6-7, 2002.
A high proportion of rights activists endured extended blockages of incoming
and outgoing phone calls as well as disruptions of e-mail service. They remained
unreachable at times when communication with other Tunisians appeared problem-
free.
Lassaad Jouhri, a disabled ex-prisoner, was assaulted by five men in downtown
Tunis in daylight on August 28. They broke one of his crutches and beat him with
it. The men refused to identify themselves as security agents to Jouhri but did so
when ordering a uniformed policeman not to intervene. For Jouhri, it was the most
severe of the assaults he had suffered in apparent retaliation for his publicizing the
plight of prisoners.
The government-sponsored Higher Committee for Human Rights and Fundamental
Liberties received members of the public with human rights complaints
and had authorization to conduct unannounced inspections of prisons.
Foreign human rights organizations and trial observers visited frequently during
2002. However, a delegation from the International Commission of Jurists
(ICJ), arriving to look at the justice system, was turned back at Tunis-Carthage airport
June 16 on the pretext that the government had been “insufficiently informed
of the mission’s objectives.”Another ICJ delegation was expelled upon its arrival on
October 26.
At politically charged trials, police often admitted some foreign observers while
turning away others.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In its report to the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee, dated
December 26, 2001, Tunisia stated that it “did not wait for the events of 11 September
2001 before taking the necessary measures to combat terrorism, as it had
already proceeded to combat it within its borders and succeeded in countering it.”
Among the measures it listed was the above-mentioned trials in military courts of
civilians who had returned from abroad.
The Committee on the Rights of the Child noted some areas of progress in its
May 28 response to Tunisia’s periodic report, but said it was “extremely concerned
at allegations of violations of the right of the child not to be subjected to torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, . . . particularly in
relation to children of human rights defenders and political opponents.”
As of mid-October, Tunisian authorities had yet to reply favorably to a longstanding
request for a visit by the special rapporteur on the independence of judges
and lawyers.
European Union
The European Union (E.U.) continued to underscore its satisfaction with
Tunisia’s record of economic growth and liberalization, along with the pace of tariff
reductions pursuant to the four-year-old Association Agreement between the
two parties. The E.U. raised rights concerns from time to time, but in a low-key
fashion. At the third bilateral Association Council meeting on January 29, an E.U.
statement praised Tunisia’s success in reducing poverty and illiteracy but regretted
“the absence of progress in certain spheres, notably freedom of expression, assembly,
and association.” Despite a provision in the Association Agreement expressly
addressing human rights, however, the E.U. never suggested that Tunisian rights
violations imperiled the agreement or aid programs.
In its Tunisia Strategy Paper under the Euro-Med Partnership for 2002-2006, the
E.U. declared, “[t]he impetus for a democratic transition, notably with respect to
cooperation with civil society, reinforcing the rule of law and press freedom, seems
highly desirable.” However, it noted, dialogue via the Association Council and
Committee “progressed with difficulty due to Tunisia’s impatience with respect to
criticism by the E.U. concerning matters of human rights.”
The Tunisian government impeded some projects of nongovernmental organizations
that had been funded by the European Commission, on the grounds that it
had been inadequately informed of them,according to a commission official.However,
earlier blockage of European Commission-backed LTDH projects was
reported to have eased during the year.
Responding to a parliamentary question, Commissioner in Charge of External
Relations Chris Patten said on July 26 that the European Commission had earlier
that month “raised in very clear terms the problem of human rights with various
Tunisian ministers and high officials.” In addition to diplomatic communications,
he said, the commission’s financial cooperation program with Tunisia emphasized
human rights, democratization, and the primacy of law.
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on March 14 criticizing trial
and detention conditions for Hamma Hammami and his co-defendants. A small
group of deputies actively defended Tunisian human rights activists and political
prisoners.
France
After it voiced increasing discomfort with repression in Tunisia beginning in
2000, France eased the pressure following the events of September 11, 2001, the reelection
of President Jacques Chirac in May 2002, and the ouster of the Socialist-led
government by center-right parties in June.
In Tunis on December 1, 2001,Chirac praised Ben Ali’s “exemplary” rejection of
“intolerance” and “fundamentalism,” overlooking his use of such labels as a cover
for jailing nonviolent critics and crushing all dissent. “It’s clear that if everyone,
regardless of the country or the religion, had the same attitude, there would probably
be far fewer problems and human rights violations,”Chirac told the press.He
stated that rights issues were raised in bilateral talks, but added, “I have always
strived to do so in a noncontentious manner.”
On February 6, then-Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine of the Socialist Party
spoke more bluntly on the conviction of Hamma Hammami and his co-defendants.
“I am very concerned by the reports I have received concerning the conduct
of the trial,” he said. “Precisely because of the remarkable economic and social
progress it has achieved . . . Tunisia should be widening the space for public liberties.”
Vedrine’s successor, Dominique de Villepin, was more circumspect in his first
months in office.His hosting of Foreign Minister Habib Ben Yahia on July 10 occasioned
no public comment on human rights. However, a French Foreign Ministry
spokesperson cautiously noted on July 30 and August 2 that France had raised with
Tunisia the Hammami case. On September 5, the spokesperson welcomed Hammami’s
release as a “conciliatory gesture.”
Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy conducted an official visit on October 31
described as focusing on security cooperation and the plight of Tunisians in France.
De Villepin visited on November 14 and met both with Foreign Minister Ben Yahia
and President Ben Ali.De Villepin later said he raised human rights in his meetings
but neither he nor Sarkozy commented publicly on the subject.
France remained Tunisia’s leading trade partner. France’s loans and grants surpassed,
on a per capita basis, the aid it provided to any other country, and its diplomatic
mission in Tunisia was among the largest in that country.However, embassy
personnel attended political trials and other human rights events less frequently
than diplomats from Great Britain and the U.S., among other countries.
United States
Washington enjoyed warm relations and conducted joint military exercises with
Tunisia, although it did not view it as a priority country in the region.Washington’s
minimal bilateral assistance included U.S.$3.5 million in Foreign Military Financing
and $1 million in International Military Education Training. According to an
embassy letter dated October 7, “None of the military exercises or financing has
been associated with security forces implicated in human rights abuses.”
The main U.S. contributions to rights promotion were the detailed, hard-hitting
chapter in its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices and the work of U.S.
embassy staff who actively monitored conditions on the ground by meeting with
human rights defenders and attending political trials. But the human rights message
was muddled following the events of September 11, 2001 by often unqualified
praise given to President Ben Ali’s cooperation against terrorism.
Central Intelligence Agency Director George Tenet met with President Ben Ali
in Tunis on February 18 and conferred on anti-terrorism measures. On April 19,
Secretary of State Colin Powell received Foreign Minister Ben Yahia in Washington.
A State Department spokesman that day praised Tunisia as “a strong supporter of
our campaign against terrorism” but gave no indication that human rights issues
were raised in the meeting.
On July 4, U.S. Ambassador Rust M. Deming reportedly declared: “We have
learned a lot from the Tunisian experience in combating terrorism.”The ambassador
described bilateral relations as “exemplary” in an interview published around
the same time in the Revue Méditerranée. In a letter to Human Rights Watch of August 8, Secretary of State Powell stated that the U.S. was continuing to encourage
Tunisia “to address serious concerns about human rights.”He said that Ambassador
Deming had met on August 5 with then-Minister of Human Rights Fethi Houidi
and raised the case of Hamma Hammami, among others. Hammami was released
one month later.
Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Marc Grossman visited Tunis on
November 5 and met with Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi and other ministers.
Embassy sources said he raised human rights issues privately. But in his press
conference that day Grossman avoided mention of human rights concerns while
hailing Tunisia as a “model of social and economic development” and praising its
help in the “global war on terrorism.”
UNITED STATES
Government policies adopted after the terrorist attacks of September 11,
2001 profoundly altered the human rights landscape in 2002. Although
United States citizens continued to enjoy a broad range of civil liberties and government
leaders at all levels responded promptly and often effectively to the wave
of anti-Arab and anti-Muslim hate crimes that immediately followed the attacks,
2002 was marked by significant steps backward on human rights. The arbitrary
detention of non-citizens, secret deportation hearings for persons suspected of
connections to terrorism, the authorization of military commissions to try noncitizen
terrorists, the failure to abide by the Geneva Conventions in the treatment
of detainees held by the United States in Cuba, and the military detention without
charge or access to counsel of U.S. citizens designated as “enemy combatants,”were
among the U.S. actions that indicated the failure of the Bush administration to
respect human rights and humanitarian law in its anti-terrorist campaign. These
measures primarily affected non-citizens, eroding their basic rights and due
process protections. Longstanding human rights problems in the United States
continued as well, including police abuse, application of the death penalty, overincarceration
of low-level offenders, primarily African-Americans and the poor, and
the treatment of prisoners.
ANTI-TERRORISM CAMPAIGN
On the anniversary of the September 11 attacks, President George W. Bush
asserted, as he had throughout the year, that the United States campaign against al-
Qaeda was a fight for freedom, the rule of law and human dignity. Nevertheless,
many of the steps taken by the U.S government to protect the country against terrorism
belied the very principles the president pledged to defend. Over the past
year, the country witnessed a persistent erosion of basic rights, including the right
to liberty. The executive branch sought to circumvent legal restraints imposed by
international human rights law and the Geneva Conventions, as well as the U.S.
Constitution. It sought to shield its conduct from public scrutiny, disdaining
democratic principles of public transparency and accountability, and to deny the
courts any meaningful role in protecting citizens and non-citizens alike from arbitrary
detention.
The United States government detained three discrete groups of people in the aftermath of September 11. At least twelve hundred non-citizens were detained in
connection with the terrorist investigation in the United States. The second group
consisted of almost six hundred captured combatants and other non-citizens held
at a U.S. military base in Guantánamo Bay,Cuba. The third group consisted of two
U.S. citizens, whom the Bush administration labeled as “enemy combatants,” who
were being held by the U.S. military.
Post-September 11 Detainees
Some twelve hundred non-citizens, mostly from the Middle East or South Asia,
some of whom were legal permanent residents, were arrested in connection with
the investigation of the September 11 attacks, although the government has never
disclosed the exact number. At least 752 were held on immigration charges; the
others were held on criminal charges or as material witnesses. Four have been
indicted for terrorism-related crimes.
Although immigration detention and proceedings have traditionally been public
in the United States, the Department of Justice extended a cloak of secrecy over
the “special interest”detainees—non-citizens held on immigration charges in connection
with the September 11 investigation. It refused to reveal the names of those
detainees as well as those held as material witnesses, their place of incarceration,
and whether they had attorneys, arguing the release of such information might aid
terrorists attempting to interfere with the post-September 11 investigation and
threaten national security.The government also insisted that deportation proceedings
against the “special interest”detainees be conducted in secret—as of June, over
six-hundred proceedings had been held which were closed to the detainees’ family,
friends, the press, and the public at large.
On August 2, a federal district court called secret arrests “odious to a democratic
society,” and ordered the disclosure of the identities of the “special interest”
detainees. The Department of Justice appealed this decision. On August 26, a federal
appeals court ruled that deportation proceedings should be presumptively
open to the public, pointing out that “democracy dies behind closed doors.” The
court affirmed constitutional protection for “the people’s right to know that their
government acts fairly, lawfully, and accurately in deportation proceedings.” In a
subsequent case, a federal district court also asserted that secret proceedings violated
the constitutional due process rights of non-citizens absent a particularized
showing of the need for denying the public access on a case-by-case basis. On October
8, 2002, however, another federal appeals court reached the opposite conclusion,
accepting the government’s argument that blanket secrecy protected national
security interests. On September 28, 2002, the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights adopted precautionary measures, asking the United States to take
urgent steps to protect the fundamental rights of detainees who had been ordered
deported or granted voluntary departure but who had been kept in detention
beyond the maximum time period allowed under existing law to effectuate their
removal from the United States.
Human Rights Watch documented the mistreatment of non-citizens swept up
in the September 11 investigation, including: custodial interrogations without access to counsel, prolonged detention without charges, overriding judicial orders
to release detainees on bond during immigration proceedings, and the unnecessarily
restrictive conditions—including solitary confinement—under which some
“special interest”detainees were confined. Some detainees were physically and verbally
abused because of their national origin or religion.
By arresting persons of interest to the September 11 investigation on immigration
charges, such as overstaying a visa, the Department of Justice was able to keep
them incarcerated while it continued investigating and interrogating them about
possible criminal activities. In so doing, the Department of Justice circumvented
the greater safeguards in the criminal law—including the requirement of probable
cause for arrest, the right to a court-appointed attorney and the right to be brought
before a judge within forty-eight hours of arrest. The Department of Justice also
instituted new immigration policies that weakened existing protections against
arbitrary detention. For example, it issued a new rule allowing it to keep detainees
in jail despite immigration judges’ orders that they be released on bond. Turning
the presumption of innocence on its head, the Department of Justice kept “specialinterest”
detainees incarcerated on immigration charges until it decided they did
not have links to or knowledge of terrorism. Most were ultimately removed from
the United States.
Guantánamo Bay Detainees
As of this writing, the United States was holding approximately 625 prisoners in
legal limbo at the United States naval base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.Most of the
prisoners had been captured during the fighting in Afghanistan and were, according
to the U.S. government, combatants from the Taliban armed forces or al-Qaeda.
Originally held in makeshift open-air facilities with chain-link walls, the Guantánamo
detainees were moved to a newly constructed prison on April 28. According
to press reports, the detainees spend twenty-four hours a day in small single-person
cells, except for two fifteen minute periods of solitary exercise a week, as well as
interrogation sessions. Most of the cells had three walls of steel mesh, which
allowed the detainees to talk with each other. About eighty of the prisoners, however,
were held in special high security cells with steel walls that prevented them
from communicating with other prisoners.Apart from the International Committee
of the Red Cross—which does not report publicly on its findings or concerns—
no independent groups or the press have been permitted to talk with detainees or
go inside the prison. The Department of Defense has not responded to a request
from Human Rights Watch for access to the facilities.
On February 7, the White House announced that the U.S. government would
apply the “principles”of the Third Geneva Convention to captured members of the
Taliban, but would not consider any of them to be prisoners-of-war (POWs) under
that convention. It also stated the United States government considered the Geneva
Conventions inapplicable to captured members of al-Qaeda, although it insisted it
would treat them humanely.As Human Rights Watch pointed out in a detailed letter
to Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, the United States position failed to
comply with the requirements of the Geneva Conventions. The United States should have granted POW status to all captured Taliban soldiers who were members
of Afghanistan’s armed forces and to members of an identifiable militia
attached to these forces. Where there was doubt as to status, the United States
should have convened a “competent tribunal”provided for by the Geneva Conventions
to determine on a case-by-case basis which individuals did not qualify as
POWs, and it should have treated them as POWs until such a tribunal determined
otherwise.
In asserting that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to alleged members of
al-Qaeda, the Bush administration undercut any legal basis for holding al-Qaeda
suspects without trial. If al-Qaeda combatants are mere common criminals, as the
administration contended, then under international human rights law they should
have been charged with a criminal offense and prosecuted as well as given the
opportunity to challenge the legality of their detention. The United States had not
given clear indication that it planned to prosecute any of the Guantánamo
detainees.
At the end of October, the U.S. released four detainees—three Afghans and one
Pakistani—from Guantánamo amid reports that six more of the fifty-five or so
remaining Pakistani detainees would also soon be repatriated. U.S. officials said
they planned to continue freeing small groups of detainees after determining they
have no intelligence value and do not pose a terrorist danger. Pakistani officials
asserted that some of the Pakistani detainees may have been innocent bystanders
swept up in mass arrests near the Afghan-Pakistan border.
As of this writing, although the armed conflict with the former Taliban government
appeared to be nearing a conclusion, the United States had not announced
any commitment to release all Taliban combatants upon the end of “active hostilities”
as required by the Geneva Conventions. Instead, statements by administration
officials suggested the possibility that at least some detainees might be held indefinitely
without trial until such time as the “war against terrorism” had ended.
A federal judge ruled on July 30 that U.S. federal courts do not have jurisdiction
to hear constitutional claims brought by aliens held by the United States outside
U.S. sovereign territory. The case involved a habeas corpus petition filed on behalf
of a group of Guantánamo detainees who challenged the constitutionality of their
detention without charges and without access to counsel. As no other court had
recognized jurisdiction over the detainees (the United States would be unlikely to
honor any decision by a Cuban court if such court asserted jurisdiction), the
detainees remained without a legal forum in which they could challenge their
detention. Human Rights Watch joined an amicus brief filed in the detainees’
appeal of the court’s decision, arguing that the United States was bound by international
law to respect the fundamental rights of all persons under its control,
regardless of their physical location, and that detention outside of the United States
alone should not be a bar to the jurisdiction of U.S. courts. The United States
rejected the March 12 request of the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights that a lawful tribunal or court—as opposed to a political authority—determine
the legal status of the Guantánamo Bay detainees.
Enemy Combatants
President Bush designated two U.S. citizens as “enemy combatants”and asserted
the authority to hold them incommunicado, without charges, and without access
to attorneys. One man, Yaser Esam Hamdi, was captured in Afghanistan, transferred
to Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, and in April was transferred to a U.S. Navy brig
in Norfolk, Virginia. The other man, Jose Padilla, a.k.a. Abdullah al-Mujahir, was
arrested at the Chicago international airport and initially held as a material witness
pursuant to a federal court order. In June, the president signed an order designating
him as an enemy combatant. Padilla was removed from the criminal justice system,
and incarcerated in a military base in South Carolina. U.S. officials claimed
that Padilla had met with al-Qaeda representatives overseas, that he had engaged in
conduct in preparation for acts of international terrorism, and that he had returned
to the United States to advance plans to explode a radioactive “dirty bomb” in the
United States.
In legal proceedings challenging the legality of Hamdi’s detention, the U.S. government
took the position that a citizen alleged to be an enemy combatant can be
detained indefinitely without charges or access to counsel, and that judicial review
of such detention should be limited to accepting the allegations provided in a twopage
memorandum by a Department of Defense official—without providing
Hamdi the opportunity to contest those facts in court or even to meet with his
attorney. A federal district court ordered the government to produce additional
evidence, arguing that to do otherwise would in effect “be abdicating any semblance
of the most minimal level of judicial review,” and that the court would be
“acting as little more than a rubber stamp.” The government appealed the court’s
decision. The government also sought a dismissal of a motion for habeas corpus
brought by Padilla’s attorney, asserting that the judiciary owes great deference to the
executive branch in matters of national security and military affairs, and that there
was no basis to “second-guess”the president’s conclusion that Padilla was an enemy
combatant.By early November, the court had not ruled on Padilla’s habeas petition.
The government argued that the laws of war authorized its treatment of Hamdi
and Padilla as enemy combatants.But, as Human Rights Watch pointed out in public
statements, if suspects are apprehended outside areas of armed conflict and have
no direct connection to the conflict, the laws of war are inapplicable.The use of the
“enemy combatant” designation appeared to be intended to circumvent the U.S.
criminal justice system and its safeguard of basic rights.
Military Commissions
On November 13, 2001, President Bush issued an order authorizing the military
detention and trial of suspected terrorists who were not U.S. citizens. Under the
express terms of the order, any foreign national designated by the president as a suspected
terrorist, or as aiding terrorists, could be detained, tried, convicted, and even
executed without a public trial, without adequate access to counsel, without the
presumption of innocence—or even proof of guilt beyond reasonable doubt—and
without the right of appeal.Human Rights Watch and other organizations and legal experts strongly criticized the proposed special military commissions and urged
the Department of Defense to develop rules and procedures for them that would
honor the fair trial guarantees mandated by international human rights law.
In March, the Department of Defense issued rules for the military commissions.
The rules contained important due process protections, including the requirement
that commission proceedings be public, requiring proof beyond reasonable doubt
for conviction, providing access to defense attorneys, and permitting the accused to
see the evidence against him or her and to cross-examine witnesses. In other
regards, the rules failed to meet core human rights requirements. The rules limit
appellate review of the commissions to a specially created military panel appointed
by the secretary of defense, thereby denying any person tried by the commissions
the right to appellate review by an independent and impartial court outside the
military chain of command. The rules also left intact the overbroad assertion of
military jurisdiction contained in President Bush’s order.Under the order, the president
may unilaterally subject to trial by military commission any non-U.S. citizen
suspected of being a terrorist, including non-combatants detained in the United
States and accused of criminal offenses which would otherwise be subject to the
jurisdiction of civilian courts. In a letter to the Department of Defense, Human
Rights Watch insisted that such military jurisdiction over civilians would violate
the right of the accused to a hearing by a competent, independent, and impartial
tribunal.
The Bush administration stated that the rules were to go into effect immediately,
without any period of public comment, citing the need to act quickly in the ongoing
war against terrorism.As of September, no one had been prosecuted before the
military commissions.
DEATH PENALTY
By early October, the United States had carried out fifty-six executions during
2002—over half of which took place in Texas. The number of men and women on
death row was 3,718. Four death row inmates were exonerated in 2002, bringing to
102 the number of persons released from death row since 1973 because of evidence
of their innocence. In September, a Mississippi death row inmate convicted of raping
and murdering a three-year-old girl in 1995 had his sentence overturned and
was granted a new trial after a judge reviewed new DNA evidence exonerating him
of the crime.
The growing number of persons released from death row because of wrongful
convictions contributed to the continued erosion of public confidence in the fairness
and reliability of capital punishment. In April, a bi-partisan commission
appointed by Governor George Ryan of Illinois released the findings of its two-year
study of the death penalty system in Illinois. The commission recommended
dozens of reforms to the state’s criminal justice system that would reduce the scope
and arbitrariness of capital punishment and lower the risk of wrongful convictions
and executions. The commission was unanimous in concluding that no system,
given human nature and frailties, could ever guarantee absolutely that no innocent person would be sentenced to death. A majority of the commission favored abolishing
capital punishment entirely.As of September, the moratorium on executions
that Governor Ryan enacted in 2000 remained in effect, and the governor was considering
commuting the sentences of all Illinois’ death row inmates to life imprisonment.
In May,Governor Paris Glendening imposed a moratorium on executions
in Maryland pending the completion of a study on racial bias in application of the
death penalty in Maryland. Eleven of the seventeen death row defendants in Maryland
were African-American, and all but one were convicted of murdering white
victims, even though the vast majority of murder victims in Maryland are African-
American.
In June, the Supreme Court issued a landmark decision in Atkins v. Virginia,
holding that the execution of people with mental retardation violated the Eighth
Amendment’s ban on cruel and unusual punishment. An estimated 5 percent of
death row inmates were believed to be mentally retarded. At the time of the decision,
eighteen of the thirty-eight states with the death penalty and the federal government
barred such executions, twenty states permitted them, and twelve states
banned the death penalty entirely. The court pointed to state legislation as well as
public opinion polls to support its conclusions that a national consensus existed
that executing the mentally retarded was inconsistent with the country’s evolving
standards of decency. The majority opinion also pointed to the diminished culpability
of mentally retarded offenders and questioned whether the death penalty
served the goals of retribution or deterrence when applied to the mentally retarded.
Two weeks later, the Supreme Court ruled in Ring v. Arizona that the constitution’s
requirement of trial by jury was violated when judges—instead of juries—made
crucial factual findings required to sentence a defendant to death. The court’s decision
invalidated death penalty laws in five states, and cast doubt on the laws of four
others. The decision could affect nearly eight hundred of the country’s death row
inmates. While heartened by these two court decisions, opponents of the death
penalty were dismayed by a March decision in which the Supreme Court ruled that
a death row inmate’s right to counsel had not been violated even though the lawyer
appointed to represent him had previously represented the youth he was charged
with killing.
Two federal district courts ruled the federal death penalty law was unconstitutional.
In September, a federal judge held the law violated a defendant’s right to due
process by allowing evidence that could not be used at trial to be used in sentencing.
In July, a judge had ruled the right to due process was violated because the
increasing number of exonerations of death row inmates through DNA and other
evidence made the death penalty “tantamount to foreseeable, state-sponsored
murder of innocent human beings.” Federal prosecutors appealed the decision.
In Congress, bipartisan support grew for the Innocence Protection Act (IPA),
legislation that would raise the standards for adequate representation in death
penalty cases and provide greater access to post-conviction DNA testing.
The United States remained virtually alone in the world in imposing death sentences
on those who were juvenile offenders—under the age of eighteen—at the
time they committed their crimes. Only the United States, Congo, and Iran have
executed juvenile offenders in the past three years. Twenty-two U.S. states continued to allow the death penalty to be imposed on juvenile offenders; eighty-three—
thirty-nine of whom were black—were on death row as of July 1, 2002.
The state of Texas executed three juvenile offenders in 2002. Napoleon Beazley
was put to death on May 28; T.J. Jones, on August 8; and Toronto Patterson, on
August 28. Each was seventeen years of age at the time he was convicted. The executions
secured Texas’s unenviable position as national leader in the execution of
juvenile offenders. Of the twenty-one juvenile offenders put to death nationwide
since 1976, thirteen were from Texas.
Public support for the abolition of the death penalty for juvenile offenders
increased, as reflected in the growing number of states prohibiting such executions.
Indiana abolished the death penalty for juvenile offenders in 2002, bringing to sixteen
the number of states which set eighteen as the minimum age for the death
penalty. During 2002, legislative measures to prevent the execution of juvenile
offenders were considered in at least ten other states, including Texas.
Many legal experts believed the issue of executions of offenders who committed
their crimes as juveniles would be the focus of the court’s next major death penalty
case. Four justices dissented on October 21 from the Supreme Court’s decision not
to hear the case of Kevin Nigel Stanford,who received the death penalty for a murder
he committed in 1981 at the age of seventeen, and who sought a court ruling
that the execution of juvenile offenders was unconstitutional. The four dissenting
justices wrote that execution of juvenile offenders was “a relic of the past,” and concluded,
“We should put an end to this shameful practice.”
In 2002, one foreign national and one dual citizen were executed.Tracey Housel,
a dual citizen of the United States and the United Kingdom, was executed in Georgia
in March, despite pleas for clemency from Prime Minister Tony Blair, Foreign
Minister Jack Straw, and the European Union and the Council of Europe. In
August, Javier Suarez Medina, a Mexican citizen, was executed in Texas. According
to reports, Mr. Suarez had not been informed of his right under the Vienna Convention
to seek assistance from the Mexican consulate.Mexican President Vicente
Fox, who had called President Bush asking for clemency for Medina, cancelled a
scheduled trip to Texas following the execution. According to Amnesty International,
approximately one hundred death row defendants who were foreign nationals
had also been denied their rights under the Vienna Convention.
The United States’ continued use of the death penalty drew repeated criticism
from its European allies. The European Union condemned the executions of juvenile
offenders and foreign nationals in the United States, and the Council of Europe
continued to call for the abolition of capital punishment in the United States.European
opposition to capital punishment complicated U.S. efforts to extradite terrorism
suspects from Europe. In November 2001, Spain said that it would not
extradite terror suspects to the United States if they would be subject to the death
penalty—the European Convention on Human Rights bans signatories from extraditing
suspects to countries with capital punishment. France urged that Zacarias
Moussaoui—a French citizen arrested in the United States for his alleged link to the
September 11 attacks—not be subject to the death penalty. German authorities
expressed reluctance to turn over evidence they had concerning Moussaoui and his
ties to the September 11 hijackers because of concerns regarding his possible execution. In September, Germany also said that differences with the United States
over the death penalty would probably prevent German authorities from providing
evidence to the U. S.Department of Justice in the case of Ramzi Binalshibh—an al-
Qaeda suspect arrested in Pakistan who had lived in Hamburg and was seen by U.S.
officials as a key figure behind the September 11 attacks.
POLICE BRUTALITY
There were thousands of allegations of police abuse during 2002, including
unjustified shootings, beatings, chokings, and rough treatment, yet overwhelming
barriers to accountability remained, enabling officers responsible for human rights
violations to escape punishment. Victims seeking redress faced obstacles that
ranged from overt intimidation to the reluctance of local and federal prosecutors
to take on police brutality cases. Officials in many cities failed to acknowledge
police brutality and undertake reforms to improve training, supervision, and
accountability until high profile police scandals emerged.
During the fiscal year that ended on September 30, 2001 (the last year for which
statistics were available), more than twelve thousand civil rights complaints, most
alleging abuses by law enforcement officials, were submitted to the U.S. Department
of Justice. Federal prosecutions of accused officers were rare. During that
same period, only fifty-six officers were either convicted or pled guilty to crimes
under the civil rights statute. As in past years, federal civil rights prosecutions of
accused officers were rare due to inadequate resources, insufficient efforts to collect
and review cases, and the evidentiary hurdle of having to prove a “specific intent”
by the defendant to deprive the victim of his or her civil rights. Federal prosecutors
also faced some of the same problems as local prosecutors in pursuing such cases,
including unsympathetic victims and the public’s predisposition to believe police
officers.
Videotaped incidents of police violence graphically displayed the problem of
police abuse. In July, police in Inglewood,California (in the Los Angeles metropolitan
area) were caught on videotape beating a black sixteen-year-old who was not
armed. The tape showed one officer slamming the teen’s head onto the hood of his
patrol car and punching him in the face. The police department dismissed him in
October. A Los Angeles County grand jury indicted him on state assault charges,
and the U.S. Justice Department announced that it was reviewing the case as well.
Two weeks before the videotaped encounter, the same officer had administered a
chokehold and hit a man with his baton, leading to the man’s hospitalization for
three days.
In August, a bystander videotaped a New York City police officer who appeared
to hit a handcuffed man in the face with his police radio. Another officer then
sprayed him in the face with pepper spray. Neither officer reported the incident.
The videotape was sent to the police commissioner who suspended one of the
involved officers; prosecutors subsequently filed assault charges against the officer.
In 1994, Congress authorized the Justice Department to investigate city police
departments alleged to have engaged in a pattern or practice of civil rights violations. In cases in which investigators concluded that changes are necessary to protect
residents, the Justice Department has authority to either negotiate an agreement
with the city to implement reforms or file a lawsuit against the city to force
improvements. As of September, the department had secured eight settlement
agreements or consent decrees addressing police department practices. Five of the
agreements were reached since the Bush administration took office.
In June 2002, the Department of Justice began inquiries into the Miami police
department. Two Miami-Dade special unit police officers pled guilty and a dozen
more faced federal civil rights charges in cases arising out of a series of incidents in
the mid-1990s in which officers planted weapons on the bodies of unarmed people
they had just shot to justify the shootings. A Miami Herald investigation found that
the fourteen officers had been the subject of 293 allegations of misconduct during
their careers—a complaint rate far out of proportion with the rest of the force. The
newspaper also found the officers were usually cleared of any wrongdoing or, if
found responsible, escaped meaningful discipline. The Department of Justice also
began an investigation of the police department in Prince George’s County,Maryland
following years of reports of questionable shootings, deaths caused by
restraint techniques, and use of police dogs to attack suspects who had already surrendered.
In 2002, the Department of Justice reached agreements with Cincinnati, Ohio
and Buffalo, New York. The Cincinnati investigation began after the April 2001
shooting of an unarmed African-American man, Timothy Thomas, that led to
protests and rioting. The agreement with the Cincinnati police department
required the department to improve complaint procedures, training, use-of-force
policies, and supervision. The agreement with the Buffalo police department
required it to address its improper use of pepper spray, and inadequate complaint
procedures, training, and use-of-force reporting procedures.
INCARCERATION
The absolute number of prison inmates in the United States continued to
grow—with 2.1 million persons incarcerated at the end of 2001—although the rate
of growth declined to its lowest level since 1972. According to the Department of
Justice, the rate of incarceration was 686 inmates per one hundred thousand residents,
the highest in the world, and many times higher than the rate of most industrialized
democratic countries. One in every 146 adults was incarcerated.
Dramatic racial disparities continued to characterize the correctional population.
Although blacks accounted for only 13 percent of the United States population,
more than 43 percent of all sentenced inmates were black men. Nationwide,
one in ten black men aged twenty-five to twenty-nine was incarcerated; in some
states one in ten of all black men was behind bars.
The continued growth in the prison population, despite falling crime rates,
reflected the impact of public policies that lengthened sentences, imposed mandatory
prison terms even for minor nonviolent drug crimes, and restricted opportunities
for early release. 51 percent of state prisoners were sentenced for nonviolent offenses, including drug, property, and public order crimes.The war on drugs continued
to have a dramatic impact on the rates of incarceration in the United States.
About 25 percent of state prisoners and 57 percent of federal inmates were convicted
of a drug crime. Of those prisoners, 58 percent have no history of violence
or high level of drug dealing activity. According to the United States Sentencing
Commission, low-level offenders—e.g., street level dealers, mules, and other
expendable minions in the drug trade—constituted the preponderance of federal
drug convictions. The concentration of anti-drug law enforcement efforts in heavily
minority neighborhoods contributed to the dramatic racial disparity in drug
incarceration: blacks accounted for 56 percent and Hispanics 23 percent of state
inmates sentenced for drug offenses.
Federal sentencing laws imposed disproportionately harsh sentences on these
offenders: The average federal sentence for a street level dealer of crack cocaine was
103.5 months. The most disproportionate sentences arose under laws that
enhanced sentences for recidivists. The U.S. Supreme Court in April agreed to hear
in tandem two cases raising the question of whether life sentences under California’s
“three strikes” law, when imposed for minor offenses, violated the constitutional
prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. In one case, Gary Ewing
received a life sentence for shoplifting three golf clubs. Because Ewing had four
prior felony convictions for burglary and robbery, he was sentenced under the three
strikes law to life with no possibility of parole until he had served twenty-five years.
In the second case, Leandro Andrade received a life sentence for shoplifting $153
worth of videotapes from two stores. Because he had three prior felony convictions
arising from residential burglaries committed thirteen years earlier, he was sentenced
to life with no possibility of parole for fifty years.
Prison Conditions
Contracting budgets, lack of political will, and public antipathy made it even
harder for correctional systems to provide safe,humane,and productive conditions
of confinement. Correctional officials lacked the funds to recruit, properly train,
and retain adequate numbers of staff to provide work, training, or educational programs
for inmates in order to keep them occupied and to support their eventual
reintegration into society. Adequate levels of substance abuse treatment or other
rehabilitative activities were not present in the majority of correctional facilities.
Most prisons were overcrowded, impoverished facilities; many were rife with
inmate-on-inmate violence (including rape), and in some cases, inmates suffered
physical and sexual abuse by correctional staff.The deliberate indifference of many
prison officials to complaints of rape was a major contributing factor to the perpetuation
of this devastating human rights abuse.
Death row inmates in Mississippi,who were locked in their cells twenty-three to
twenty-four hours a day, brought a lawsuit challenging the conditions under which
they were confined, “including profound social isolation, unrelieved idleness and
monotony, lack of exercise, intolerable stench and pervasive filth, grossly malfunctioning
plumbing, constant exposure to human excrement, dangerously high
ambient cell temperatures and humidity, grossly inadequate ventilation, constant exposure to mosquitoes, gnats, horseflies, and other insects, deprivation of basic
medical, dental and mental health care, and constant exposure night and day to the
screams, ravings, and hallucinations of severely mentally ill inmates in adjoining
cells.”
The failure of correctional systems to provide appropriate conditions of confinement
and treatment for mentally ill inmates—whose numbers among prison
populations appeared to be growing—prompted at least two major class action
lawsuits. In February, mentally ill inmates challenged conditions in a Georgia
prison as unconstitutionally cruel, claiming they were victims of a “brutal regime
of physical force,mental abuse, intimidation and excessive use of involuntary medication.”
Negligence, lack of training, and staff indifference resulted in the death of
at least two mentally ill inmates at the hands of other prisoners in the last year. In
New York, a lawsuit claimed that the Department of Corrections and the state
Office ofMental Health had allocated inadequate physical and human resources to
provide even minimally adequate care for the estimated sixteen thousand prison
inmates estimated to be suffering from serious mental illness. In addition, the suit
claimed inmates were punished for behavior related to their illness and confined
under punitive high security conditions that aggravated their illness.
Inmate claims of abusive or unnecessary use of force by correctional staff rarely
resulted in criminal prosecutions; and those prosecutions that did go forward rarely
led to convictions. The difficult hurdles that must be overcome to obtain convictions
were exemplified by the acquittal in May of three prison guards accused of the
1999 killing of a Florida death row inmate, Frank Valdez. Valdez died with twenty
broken ribs, bootmarks on his body, and fractured sternum, vertebrae, nose and
jaw. The state prosecutor dropped charges against five other corrections officers
implicated in Valdez’ death because of lack of evidence and the difficulty of seeking
an impartial jury in a county with four prisons where a high percentage of adults
work for or are connected to someone who works for the state corrections system.
There were two important and successful court challenges to conditions in socalled
super-maximum security (“supermax”) prisons where inmates spend
twenty-three to twenty four hours a day in small sealed cells with scant opportunity
to relieve the isolation, tedium, and harsh security restrictions.
In Wisconsin, plaintiff inmates challenged as cruel and unusual the conditions
at the state’s supermax prison in Boscobel. Conditions at Boscobel were similar to
the conditions in most of the country’s supermax prisons. Inmates in the most
restrictive Boscobel unit spent day and night confined to single-person cells sealed
with a solid door that opened onto an empty vestibule with another steel door. The
cells were illuminated twenty-four hours a day, and only a little natural light
entered the cells through a small strip of glass at the top of the cell wall. Inmates
were allowed four hours of exercise per week in an empty cell that was slightly bigger
than a regular cell, contained no windows or equipment, and was too small for
jogging. Prisoners had no access to outdoor exercise facilities. Their personal possessions
were severely restricted. They were allowed only one six-minute telephone
call a month, and were not allowed to participate in any prison programs.Mentally
ill prisoners were included among the prisoners confined under these conditions.
In February, a federal district court issued a preliminary injunction against prison officials ordering them to transfer mentally ill prisoners out of the Boscobel
supermax facility and to undertake a rigorous mental health screening of other
prisoners. The court noted that, “rather than being supplied the programming,
human contact and psychiatric support that seriously mentally ill inmates needed
to prevent their illnesses from escalating, inmates at supermax are kept isolated
from all other humans,whether guards, other inmates or family members.Many of
the severe conditions serve no legitimate penological interest; they can only be considered
punishment for punishment’s sake.” The court identified some of the
super-maximum features that were particularly damaging to inmates with serious
mental illnesses, including the almost total and relentless isolation and sensory
deprivation as well as the lack of programming. It noted that one of the plaintiff ’s
experts considered the conditions at the supermax so restrictive and debilitating
that they “border on barbarism.” It concluded that the public interest was “not
served by housing seriously mentally ill inmates at supermax under conditions in
which they risk irreparable emotional damage and, in some cases, a risk of death by
suicide.”
The exclusion of mentally ill inmates from the Boscobel supermax prison was
incorporated into a subsequent court-approved settlement of the lawsuit. In addition,
Wisconsin correctional authorities agreed to undertake a number of steps to
ameliorate conditions at the prison, including to improve the heating and cooling
of the cells, to permit additional reading material and access to some video programs,
to reduce the brightness of the cell lights left on at night, to provide cells with
calendar clocks so inmates know what day and time it is, to increase the amount of
time inmates would be allowed outside their cells, and to permit slots in the solid
steel doors to remain open so prisoners could see out into the hallways. The Wisconsin
authorities also agreed to construct an outdoor recreation area.
A class action lawsuit by prisoners in Ohio’s supermax prison also yielded significant
improvements. The state agreed to exclude mentally ill inmates from the
prison, to build an open-air recreation area (inmates currently must exercise in a
small barren indoor room with vents), to improve the prison’s health care, and to
allow independent medical staff to examine prisoners for two years as a way of
monitoring prisoner mental health and to ensure that the mentally ill were not confined
at the prison. The state refused, however, to accept any limitations on its
power to determine who gets sent to the supermax facility or how long they are kept
there. In February, after a trial, the federal district court ruled that supermax placement
decisions affect inmates’ liberty interests and that the state must therefore
provide adequate notice, hearings, and appeal opportunities to inmates that the
state intends to send to the supermax. The judge also restricted the ability of the
state to send men to the supermax for dealing small amounts of drugs or simply for
being gang members. Ohio’s appeal of the ruling was pending as of this writing.
In most supermax prisons, inmates are isolated in their cells. Inmates in the
Secure Housing Unit (SHU) of California’s Corcoran State Prison, however, are
held two to a cell. In 2001, three men confined in the SHU were killed by their cellmates,
the most recent dying on December 16 after a fatal beating by his cellmate.
In August 2002, a U.S.Department of Justice investigation found that conditions
in the Baltimore City Detention Center violated inmates’ civil rights. In a strongly worded forty-page letter sent to state officials on August 13, the department concluded
that the jail was unsafe, provided inadequate medical and mental health
care, and failed to protect juvenile and adult detainees from harm. Human Rights
Watch had identified these and other violations in a 1999 report on conditions for
children in Maryland jails. That report helped prompt the federal investigation.
ABSTINENCE-ONLY PROGRAMS
Human Rights Watch work in 2002 included a study of federally funded sex education
programs that threatened adolescent health by censoring basic information
about how to prevent HIV/AIDS and by failing to present accurate information on
the efficacy of condoms to prevent HIV/AIDS.
The programs limited high school students’ access to experts on HIV/AIDS and
suggested condoms do not work as a means of HIV/AIDS protection, despite the
broad scientific consensus that condoms, when used correctly, in fact are highly
effective in preventing the transmission of HIV. In Texas,which received a substantial
share of federal abstinence-only funds, one abstinence-only program sponsored
a “Truth for Youth” advertisement campaign that suggested that parents who
advise their children to use condoms may be threatening their children’s lives. By
portraying sex outside of heterosexual marriage as psychologically and physically
harmful, these programs also discriminated against gay and lesbian youth.
Since 1997, Congress had spent more than $350 million on “abstinence-only”
programs. In 2002, the Bush administration lobbied for a 33 percent increase in
funding for such programs, even though federal public health agencies had repeatedly
emphasized the importance of providing comprehensive information to youth
about how to protect themselves from HIV infection, including information about
condom use.
RELEVANT HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH REPORTS:
We Are Not the Enemy: Hate Crimes Against Arabs,Muslims and Those Perceived
to be Arab or Muslim after September 11, 11/02
Ignorance Only: HIV/AIDS, Human Rights and Federally Funded Abstinence-
Only Programs in the United States, 9/02
Presumption of Guilt: Human Rights Abuses of Post-September 11 Detainees
Collateral Casualties: Children of Incarcerated Drug Offenders in New York, 06/02
Growing Problem OfGuantanamo Detainees: Human Rights Watch Letter to Donald
Rumsfeld, 5/02
Human Rights Watch Presentation to the United States Sentencing Commission on
Proportionality and Federal Crack Sentences, 03/02
Race and Incarceration in the United States: Human Rights Watch Press Backgrounder,
02/02
Background Paper on Geneva Conventions and Persons Held by U.S. Forces:
Human Rights Watch Press Backgrounder, 01/02