T@D< KF A98E;FE K?< ALKF:I8KJ
8E; ED9I8:< R@>?KJ:
The International Response to the Arab Spring
By Kenneth Roth
The sad truth is that the dominant Western policy toward the Arab people traditionally
has been one of containment. Today many applaud as the people
of the region take to the streets to claim their rights, but until recently
Western governments frequently acted as if the Arab people were to be
feared, hemmed in, controlled. In other regions, democracy spread, but in the
Middle East and North Africa, the West seemed content to back an array of
Arab autocrats, so long as they in turn supported Western interests.
Elsewhere, governments were expected, at least in principle, to serve their
people, but the West looked to the monarchs and strongmen of the Arab
world to guarantee “stability,” to keep the lid on popular demands. The
world’s promotion of human rights had an Arab exception.
The Arab Spring showed that many people in the region do not share the
West’s comfortable complacency with autocratic rule. No longer willing to be
the passive subjects of self-serving rulers, they began to insist on becoming
full citizens of their countries, the proper agents of their fate. In one country
after another, an act of repression sparked popular outrage at a regime that
had taken one brutal step too many. This time the much discussed but long
quiescent Arab Street arose and upended the old order. In finding its collective
voice and power, the region’s people transformed its politics in a way
that will not be easy to turn back.
In Tunisia, the catalyst was the self-immolation of fruit vendor Mohamed
Bouazizi after a routine case of humiliation by the police. In Egypt, it was photos
of the deformed face of Khaled Said, a young man beaten to death by the
police. In Syria, it was the torture of teenagers for scribbling anti-regime graffiti.
In Libya, it was the arrest of Fathi Terbil, the lawyer for the victims of the
1996 Abu Salim prison massacre. These quotidian examples of abuse, among countless others, sparked what in essence became a series of human rights
revolutions—driven by demands for governments that, finally, would be elected
by their people, respectful of their rights, and subject to the rule of law.
The West is still adjusting to this historic transformation. While generally
opposing the violent suppression of peaceful demonstrations, many of the
world’s leading democracies remain reluctant partners of the protesters, worried
by the consequences of entrusting these pivotal countries to their citizens.
And if Western governments have been hesitant to abandon autocratic
friends, many other countries have shown outright hostility to the rebellions.
Dictatorial governments have been predictably terrified by the precedent of
people ousting authoritarian regimes. China went to extraordinary lengths to
prevent “Jasmine rallies” inspired by Tunisia’s Jasmine Revolution. North
Korea was so determined to keep its people in the dark about the Arab Spring
that it prevented its workers in Libya from returning home. From Zimbabwe to
Iran, Sudan to Uzbekistan, Cuba to Russia, Ethiopia to Vietnam, autocrats live
in fear of the kind of popular power demonstrated by the Arab Spring.
They are not wrong in their apprehension. The uprisings show that the quest
for rights has broad appeal, capable of uniting disparate elements of society
and generating a powerful collective force for change. The old tools of repression—
the censorship, the arbitrary detention, the torture, the killing—seem
only to have emboldened the demonstrators once they gained confidence in
their numbers. Rather than instilling fear and grudging acquiescence, the
repression showed the autocrats’ true colors and highlighted the righteousness
of the protesters’ cause. That sends a chilling warning to regimes long
confident in the assumption that their repressive capacity would always
eclipse the public’s discontent.
More disappointing in their response to the Arab Spring have been some
democratic governments of the global South, such as Brazil, India, and South
Africa. They seemed to be guided less by the aspirations of the Arab people
than by their commitment to outmoded views of national sovereignty, even when it has meant shielding repressive regimes from urgently needed international
pressure. Despite themselves having developed accountable governments
and the rule of law, these Southern democracies showed only sporadic
interest in helping the people of the Arab world who were struggling to do the
same. More often, they pointed to the potential misuse of human rights pressure—
the fear that it might serve as a tool of Northern dominance—to justify
failing to use their own influence on serious violators of human rights.
This indifference from many quarters to the rights of the region’s people must
end. Standing firmly with the people of the Middle East and North Africa when
they demand their legitimate rights is the best way to exert pressure on their
persecutors to stop the bloodshed. A principled insistence on respect for
rights is also the best way to help these popular movements steer clear of the
intolerance, lawlessness, and summary revenge that are a risk in any revolution
and its aftermath.
The Arab Spring is a transformative moment, an historic opportunity for a
long-suppressed people to seize control of its destiny. Yet the transformation
will not be easy. The people of the region, like everywhere else, deserve the
world’s support for their rights as they embark on this long-awaited venture.
It is time for the Arab exception to end.
The West’s Embrace of Arab Autocrats
Western governments allowed the Arab exception because they believed their
interests in the region would be better served by authoritarian rulers’ illusory
promise of “stability” than by the uncertainties of elected government. Five
core reasons explain the West’s past acceptance of these would-be presidents
and monarchs-for-life.
The first was containing any threat to Western interests from political Islam.
Western governments and their allies have always had a certain ambivalence
toward political Islam—promoting it when seen as a useful foil for a more
dreaded enemy (the mujahedeen against the Soviets, Hamas against the
Palestine Liberation Organization) or when it aligned with Western interests (as in Saudi Arabia). But when political Islam challenged friendly governments,
the West has been deeply wary.
A major catalyst for this distrust was a non-Arab nation—Iran, as it emerged
after overthrowing the Western-supported Shah. The dread of “another
Khomeini”—of Iran’s hostility to the United States, brutality toward its own
people, and support for Hezbollah and Hamas—led many Western governments
to distrust political Islam when it took the form of an opposition movement
challenging an ally.
The nadir of this distrust came in the early 1990s when, after a brief political
opening in Algeria, the Islamic Salvation Front appeared to be on the verge of
electoral victory. A military coup stopped the electoral process with scant
Western protest. Coup supporters argued that the Islamists’ secret agenda
was to allow “one man, one vote, one time.”
Many Islamic parties have indeed embraced disturbing positions that would
subjugate the rights of women and restrict religious, personal, and political
freedoms. But so have many of the autocratic regimes that the West props
up. Moreover, Islamic movements are hardly monolithic or implacably
opposed to rights. Yet rather than engage with them to demand respect for
rights, Western governments have often treated them as untouchable.
That distrust made a mockery of occasional Western support in the region for
democracy. For example, in a post-facto attempt to justify his invasion of Iraq
as an act of democracy promotion, US President George W. Bush briefly
pressed for elections elsewhere in the region as well. But that democracy
agenda quickly ended once Hamas prevailed in fair elections in the West
Bank and Gaza in 2006, and the Muslim Brotherhood won most of the seats it
contested in Egypt’s parliamentary elections in 2005.
Despite Western caution, political Islam has gained adherents as it has
become a primary mode of expressing discontent with the region’s corrupt
and unresponsive rulers. Because the mosque has often been the freest institution
in an otherwise suppressed civil society, it has also become a natural
gathering point for dissent. Arab leaders typically have had only to dangle the threat of hostile Islamists replacing them in order to lock in Western support
for crackdowns and defer demands for elections.
A second reason for Western indulgence of Arab strongmen was the perception
that they could help to combat the threat of terrorism. Arab extremists by
no means hold a monopoly on terrorism, but Western policymakers viewed
certain Arab groups as particularly menacing because they murdered civilians
not only in their own countries but also in the West. In the name of protecting
their citizens, Western governments were willing to promote Arab autocrats
who vowed to fight these terrorists. That these autocrats also tortured or
repressed their own people was seen as secondary. That this repression often
fueled support for violent extremist groups was ignored.
Third, the West trusted Arab autocrats more than the Arab people to reach a
modus vivendi with Israel—a factor that was particularly important in policy
toward Egypt, Jordan, and to some extent Syria and Lebanon. Many Arabs
were naturally disturbed by Israel’s repression of the Palestinian people, and
often protested. The autocrats of the region soon learned that allowing—even
encouraging—these protests was a good way to channel discontent away
from their own misrule. So long as Arab dictators kept the protests under control,
they enjoyed Western support. Those who went further and signed a
peace treaty with Israel received massive US aid regardless of their domestic
policies.
Fourth, the West saw Arab autocrats as the best way to sustain the flow of oil.
Of course, even Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s Iran and Muammar Gaddafi’s
Libya willingly sold oil to the West. But with markets tight and prices high,
revolutionary change, particularly in Saudi Arabia, risked economic turmoil
through a disruption of the oil flow. Nor did the West want a hostile Iran to
gain control over the vast oil reserves of its neighboring Persian Gulf states.
To prevent these scenarios, or any threat to the cozy relationships that developed
between Western and Arab business elites, the West preferred the
strongmen it knew to the vagaries of popular rule. Meanwhile, often-bountiful
oil revenue gave these autocrats the coercive means to retain power without
accountability to a tax-paying public.
Finally, the West—particularly the European Union—looked to the region’s
authoritarian governments to help stem migration. Northern Africa is both a
source of, and an important transit route for, undocumented migration to
Europe. The West relied on pliant governments to help curb it—to prevent
migrants from departing their shores and to accept their summary return. The
EU, in turn, rewarded these governments with various trade and aid agreements.
The Fallacy of the “Arab Exception”
Despite their self-interested motives, Western governments did not like to
admit their preference for Arab authoritarianism. Instead, they proceeded as
if the usual convenient mischaracterizations of Arab society were true—that it
was politically passive and underdeveloped, that deference to authority was
inherent in Arab culture, that some combination of Arab tradition and Islam
made the people of the region uninterested in or unsuited for democracy. The
uprisings that have shaken the Arab world belie these convenient excuses for
accommodating the region’s despots.
Ironically, none of the forces most feared by the West lay behind this last
year’s outburst of popular protest. Political Islam was little in evidence as a
spark or sustaining force for the uprisings; it emerged mainly later, when the
Islamists’ better organization and traditional opposition role gave them a
competitive advantage over newer activists and parties. Nor was there any
prominent place in the protests for opposition to Israeli policies, support for
terrorism, or anti-Western sentiment. The uprisings represented a determination
to improve life at home rather than flee to Europe.
The driving force for the rebellions was opposition to autocratic rule itself.
Tunisians, Egyptians, Libyans, Bahrainis, Yemenis, Syrians, and others had
had enough of the repression, corruption, cronyism, arbitrary rule, and stagnant
societies of the autocrats. These were protests of outrage at an out-oftouch,
self-serving elite. Much like the revolutions that upended Eastern
Europe in 1989, the Arab upheavals were inspired by a vision of freedom, a desire for a voice in one’s destiny, and a quest for governments that are
accountable to the public rather than captured by a ruling elite.
International Ambivalence
Yet Western governments still at times have been ambivalent about these
movements and selective in their response, unsure how to reconcile their
comfort with the old autocrats and the growing realization that these despots’
days are numbered. The US and EU were most principled and determined in
responding to repression by two Arab governments that at various points had
been considered antagonists. In Libya, they imposed sanctions and invoked
the International Criminal Court (ICC). Several of them forged a rapid military
response to what they saw as an impending human rights disaster. In Syria,
after some hesitation, they aligned themselves with a peaceful opposition
movement and instituted targeted sanctions against President Bashar al-
Assad’s government.
Elsewhere, however, the Western approach to the region’s uprisings has been
more tentative and uncertain. The US government was reluctant to challenge
Egypt’s President Hosni Mubarak, a perceived bulwark of regional “stability,”
until his fate was virtually sealed, and then was hesitant for too long to press
Egypt’s ruling military council to subject itself to elected civilian rule. France
remained similarly attached to Tunisia’s President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali
until his reign had largely ended.
Similarly, Western governments imposed no meaningful consequences for
killing protesters on the government of Yemen’s President Ali Abdullah Saleh,
whom they viewed as a defense against al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
They condemned Bahrain’s suppression of its democracy movement, and
urged some reforms, but applied no real pressure on the government out of
concern for the fate of the US Fifth Fleet’s base, as well as deference to Saudi
Arabia, which worried about Iranian meddling in that Shia-majority country
and feared a democratic model off its shore. Even within the US government,
policymakers were divided on Bahrain, with the US Congress blocking an
arms sale proposed by President Barack Obama’s administration. Meanwhile, Western governments urged reforms in the region’s other monarchies, such
as constitutional amendments in Morocco and pledges for change in Jordan,
but said little when monarchies have taken anti-democratic actions, such as
the adoption of new repressive laws in Saudi Arabia and the imprisonment of
five democracy activists in the United Arab Emirates.
Nations outside the West have shown similar inconsistency. Arab League governments
historically sought to defend each other from any form of human
rights criticism. Now, they have become more constructively engaged, driven
to varying degrees by the new post-rebellion governments, regional rivalries
(especially with Iran), and an attempt to stay relevant amid the region’s prodemocracy
movements. In Libya, the Arab League’s endorsement of pressure
on Gaddafi laid the groundwork for action by the United Nations Security
Council. In Syria, the Arab League protested the political killings and crafted a
plan for ending the violence to which Syria theoretically agreed. When Syria
predictably broke its word, the Arab League suspended its membership and
announced sanctions.
By contrast, the African Union has been shamefully complacent. Ostensibly
founded to promote democracy, it has acted like a dictator’s support club,
siding with whichever government happens to be in power regardless of its
conduct. As the revolutions proceeded in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, the AU
was at best irrelevant, at worst unhelpful. Only the AU’s independent African
Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights, in its first substantive case, ordered
Gaddafi to end the killing.
Russia and China tolerated international action in Libya only when their political
isolation would have made blocking it seem callous. When they had partners
in their indifference, as in the case of Syria, they had no qualms about
vetoing international action.
Brazil, India, and South Africa—the key Southern democracies on the UN
Security Council—endorsed or tolerated international action on Libya, but
then cited NATO’s alleged overstepping of its protection mandate there as a justification for not endorsing even symbolic Security Council pressure on
Syria.
This international ambivalence comes at a time when the Arab Spring revolutions
are anything but complete. Idealistic revolutionaries face serious countervailing
pressures with no guarantee of victory. Moreover, the revolutionaries
themselves have at times violated rights, as in Libyan militias’ apparent
summary execution of Muammar Gaddafi and his son Muatassim and their
persecution of black African migrant workers. The international community
could play an important role in countering these threats to the emergence of
rights-respecting democracies—from both the old powers and the new revolutionary
forces.
Three Groups of Countries in the Region
In considering the region, it is useful to think in terms of three broad groups
of countries.
The first, comprising Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, has overthrown long-time
autocrats (though in the case of Egypt, not entrenched military rule) and at
this writing is in the difficult process of building a new governmental order.
The task is not simple. It is easier to tear down autocratic institutions than to
replace them with democratic ones, to build consensus on the need to oust
the despot than to forge a common vision of what should replace him. And
unlike in Eastern Europe in 1989, there is no lure of prospective European
Union membership to encourage the new governments to respect rights
(although the EU does have other carrots to offer, such as trade preferences
and visa liberalization). Nor are repressive regimes crumbling as quickly as in
1989 or opponents of those regimes as united. Rather, the cautionary tale
comes from the dictatorships of post-Soviet Central Asia, where anti-democratic
forces prevailed and substituted new repressive regimes for their
Communist predecessors.
Fortunately, the countries in this first group are relatively unburdened by the
sectarian strife that so poisoned Iraq’s post-Saddam Hussein nation building and continues to rear its head in Syria, Bahrain, and Saudi Arabia. However,
these countries have their own divides at risk of being inflamed—tribal in
Libya, Copt-Muslim in Egypt, coastal-interior in Tunisia. Particularly in times
of uncertainty, people are more susceptible to the fear-mongering and provocation
that encourage resort to communal identities, and there are always
beneficiaries of the old order who are willing to stoke those fears. Moreover,
if hard economic times continue, the danger grows of people forsaking democratic
ideals for uglier, less tolerant, politics.
At the moment, Tunisia seems best placed to move forward. Old laws restricting
association, assembly, speech and political parties have been reformed.
After elections for a constituent assembly that were widely seen as free and
fair, the Islamic party al Nahda (“The Awakening”) gained a plurality of the
vote, and its leaders made encouraging pledges about building a broad
governing coalition and respecting the rights of all Tunisians. This is a promising
beginning, but the pledges, of course, remain to be tested.
In Libya, the transitional authorities repeatedly vowed to respect citizens’
rights, to establish control over all militias, and to subject themselves to the
rule of law. But fulfilling these pledges will be difficult, particularly in a country
that Gaddafi deliberately left bereft of developed government institutions.
So far, the new authorities have failed to gain control over the many militias
that have power and substantial arms. And despite stated plans to try Saif al-
Islam Gaddafi, the former leader’s son wanted by the ICC, they have not built
a criminal justice system capable of meeting ICC requirements for a fair trial.
Egypt, the region’s largest country and long-time leader, must still overcome
intense internal divisions among three broad groupings: the military which
despite great popular discontent remained in power after replacing Mubarak,
the largely secular leftists and liberals who were so prominent during the
Tahrir Square uprising, and the Islamists who at key moments joined the
demonstrations in large numbers and have emerged as the dominant political
force. At various points each group cautiously has seen the others as both
potential allies and adversaries.
The military, under pressure to give up power, at times saw the Islamists with
their social orientation as less likely than the liberals to impede its autonomy
or to scrutinize its massive budget and business interests. The liberals
looked (illiberally) to the military to enforce limits on political Islam, while
joining with the Islamists in an effort to oust the military. The Islamists, distrustful
of the military after decades of suppression, hoped the liberals would
help to secure a democratic transition, yet potentially differed from the liberals
on a range of social freedoms. And to further complicate matters, the
Islamists were divided in their interpretation of Islamic law and the role they
see for Islam in governing the country. It remains far from clear how this
complicated tug-of-war will be resolved.
The second group of Arab countries—Syria, Yemen and Bahrain—is enmeshed
in struggles between abusive governments and oppositions calling for democratic
rule. Syrians have shown remarkable bravery, repeatedly taking to the
streets despite the omnipresence of security forces that frequently respond
with lethal force. Yemen’s overwhelmingly peaceful protests have been gradually
overshadowed by armed clashes among rival elite factions, and it is too
soon to tell whether an exit pact signed by President Saleh is a step toward
genuine reform. Bahrain’s rulers, backed by security forces led by neighboring
Saudi Arabia, have used a panoply of repressive tools—lethal force
against peaceful protesters, torture and ill-treatment, unfair trials, abrupt dismissal
of workers from jobs and students from universities—but have succeeded
only in creating a divided population with many seemingly counting
the days until the next opportunity to rise up. The success of the protest
movements in these countries remains very much in play.
Finally, there are the region’s monarchies which, apart from Bahrain, have
largely avoided large-scale uprisings. They enjoy the advantage of being able
to diffuse popular discontent by sacking the government—Jordan in particular
has seen a revolving door of prime ministers—without jeopardizing the
monarchy. Some monarchs—in Morocco, Kuwait, and Qatar—have experimented
with granting limited powers to elected parliaments while retaining
control over the most important levers of power. Some in the Persian Gulf
have tried to buy social peace by showering salary increases and subsidies on disgruntled populations. These tactics, at times coupled with a heavy
dose of repression, have mostly diffused large-scale protests.
Yet that social peace may be short-lived. Saudi Arabia, for example, has elements
for its own springtime movement: an aging leadership and a young
and disenchanted population. (The same can be said of non-monarchial
Algeria, which suppressed the limited protests it experienced in 2011.) The
Saudi royal family has been savvy so far about preserving its rule—whether
by disbursing oil money or whipping up sectarian fears—but that is only
buying time.
The Proper Role of the International Community
How should the international community respond to this complex and varied
landscape? Before taking up prescriptions, a degree of humility is in order.
The revolutions of the Arab Spring have been internally driven—the achievement
foremost of those countries’ citizens. External forces have had influence,
but in most places only around the margins.
That said, the response of external actors can be important, and sometimes
decisive. The Arab League’s abandonment of Gaddafi as his forces opened
fire on protesters in Tripoli and he threatened a massacre in Benghazi laid the
groundwork for UN Security Council action to protect civilians. US pressure,
reinforced by the leverage of large-scale aid, helped to convince Egypt’s military
early in the revolution to protect the Tahrir Square demonstrators from
attacks by police and Mubarak supporters. Targeted economic sanctions on
the Syrian elite provide one of the best chances of convincing its members to
part with Assad’s brutal strategy of repression.
Looking forward, to promote democratic, rights-respecting governments, the
international community should adopt a more principled approach to the
region than in the past. That would involve, foremost, clearly siding with democratic
reformers even at the expense of abandoning autocratic friends. There
is no excuse for any government to tolerate Assad’s lethal repression, to
close its eyes to Bahrain’s systematic crackdown, or to exempt other monarchs from pressure to reform. All autocrats should be dissuaded from using
repression to defend their power and privileges.
Such principled support for protesters can also positively influence the outlook
of the new governments they seek to form. Revolution can be a heady
experience, opening previously unthought-of possibilities for the majority to
take control of its fate. But the revolutionaries must also accept the constraints
on majoritarian rule that rights require, especially when it comes to
the rights of minorities, whether political, religious, ethnic or social.
Revolutionary zeal can lead to summary revenge or a new imposed orthodoxy.
Continuing economic hardship can lead to scapegoating and intolerance.
International affirmation of the importance of respecting the rights of all citizens
can help to ensure the emergence of genuine democracies. Conditioning
economic assistance on respect for those rights, just as the EU conditioned
accession for Eastern European states, can help to steer new governments in
rights-respecting directions.
By the same token, the international community must also come to terms
with political Islam when it represents a majority preference. Islamist parties
are genuinely popular in much of the Arab world, in part because many Arabs
have come to see political Islam as the antithesis of autocratic rule, in part
because Islamist parties generally did a good job of distinguishing themselves
through social service programs from the corrupt and self-serving
state, in part because Islamists enjoyed organizational advantages that longrepressed
secular counterparts did not share, and in part because political
Islam reflects the conservative and religious ethos of many people in the
region. Ignoring that popularity would violate democratic principles.
Rather, wherever Islam-inspired governments emerge, the international community
should focus on encouraging, and if need be pressuring, them to
respect basic rights—just as the Christian-labeled parties and governments of
Europe are expected to do. Embracing political Islam need not mean rejecting
human rights, as illustrated by the wide gulf between the restrictive views of
some Salafists and the more progressive interpretation of Islam that leaders such as Rashid Ghannouchi, head of Tunisia’s Nahdha Party, espouse. It is
important to nurture the rights-respecting elements of political Islam while
standing firm against repression in its name. So long as freely elected governments
respect basic rights, they merit presumptive international support,
regardless of their political or religious complexion.
The Quest for Freedom of Expression
The right to freedom of expression also requires consistent defense. The Arab
revolutions became possible only as civil society was able to organize itself
and, using the internet, build public outrage by circumventing the state’s
monopoly over the public dissemination of information. Satellite television,
represented foremost by Al Jazeera, also played an essential role in galvanizing
outrage to the brutal repression that it regularly beamed throughout the
region. Just as civil society must continue to be nurtured, so this key medium
of communication needs a strong defense, even when its message may be
seen as “anti-Western.”
The newest frontier for the battle over free expression is social media. Though
limited to a wired elite, and surpassed in importance by more prosaic technology
such as satellite TV and mobile telephones, social media played an
early and important role, allowing seemingly leaderless movements to build
momentum gradually, with participants standing up to be counted (for example,
by signaling support on Facebook) without necessarily taking to the
streets until there was a sufficient sense of safety in numbers. Social media
such as Twitter also helped protesters to communicate with each other and
the world about police repression and ways to outfox it. Activists used
YouTube to post mobile-phone videos recording military and police brutality.
But social media can also be a tool for monitoring and repressing the
opposition. That was President Assad’s calculation when he invited Facebook
and YouTube into Syria at the height of Egypt’s revolution. His bet that his
secret police could stay a step ahead of proliferating users turned out to be
misplaced, but other countries both in the region and beyond are still trying to limit the political threat that social media poses, often using Western
technology.
The winner of this cat-and-mouse game between censor and user, the repressive
monitor and the freedom-seeking protester, remains in doubt. Strong
global standards are needed to better protect the freedom and privacy of
internet users. And international companies should be prevented from selling
equipment or know-how to governments, in the Arab world or elsewhere, that
allows them to spy on or repress ordinary citizens.
Complicity in Torture
Even the tightest controls cannot prevent some whiff of freedom from entering
public consciousness, and the region’s security forces have all too often
responded with torture. In principle, the international community firmly
opposes torture, as reflected in numerous treaties outlawing it without exception.
Yet the fight against terrorism and political Islam led to growing international
tolerance of, and sometimes active complicity in, torture. Following the
September 11, 2001 attacks the Bush administration not only used torture
itself but, aided by various allies, also sent terrorist suspects for interrogation
by the region’s security forces despite their pervasive use of torture. That
inexcusable complicity set a terrible precedent, reinforcing regional security
forces’ worst habits, while weakening the credibility of occasional protests
from the West.
The Obama administration ordered an end to this complicity in torture but
has refused to investigate, let alone prosecute, the US officials who were
responsible. The short-term political calculation behind that dereliction of
duty risks dangerous long-term consequences by signaling that torture is a
policy option rather than a crime. The United Kingdom government has at
least authorized an investigation into British complicity in torture overseas,
but so far under rules of secrecy and unilateral inquiry that bode poorly for an
honest examination.
Western hypocrisy toward torture in the region is best illustrated by the use of
“memoranda of understanding,” or “diplomatic assurances,” to justify sending
terrorism suspects to security services that are likely to torture them. CIA
documents that Human Rights Watch found in a Libyan intelligence office
show how these worked. The US and UK cooperated in sending suspects captured
abroad for interrogation by Libyan intelligence services despite their
notorious torture record. Yet the CIA dutifully sought assurances from the
Libyans that suspects would not be mistreated. These assurances were no
more than a fig leaf. Given that the Libyan government was already flouting
its legally binding treaty obligations not to torture, as the US government
itself regularly reported, there was no reason to expect it to respect a quiet
promise between diplomats or intelligence agencies. It would make an enormous
contribution to ending torture in the Arab world if the West were to
come clean about its own complicity, punish those responsible for the crime
of ordering or facilitating torture, and explicitly end use of diplomatic assurances
to justify sending suspects to countries where they risk torture.
The Need to End Impunity
Revolutionary movements need help building the governing institutions that
the autocrats deliberately left weak and underdeveloped, above all national
institutions of justice for holding all representatives of the state subject to
the rule of law. Until security forces and government officials have a reasonable
expectation that their misconduct will land them in court, the temptation
to resort to the former regimes’ corruption and abuse will be hard to resist.
Yet at least when it comes to international justice, the international community
still sometimes acts as if democratic transitions are best advanced by
sweeping past abuses under the rug. As the Arab upheavals have shown, a
precedent of impunity is not easily forgotten, increasing the likelihood that
bad habits persist. And prosecution is not the impediment to democratic
change that is so often assumed.
When the ICC issued arrest warrants for Muammar Gaddafi, his son Saif
al-Islam, and his intelligence chief Abdullah Sanussi, some argued that this act of justice would discourage Gaddafi from relinquishing power. Yet in common
with most dictators, Gaddafi had already made clear even before the ICC
warrants that he intended to stay in power until the bitter end, with his son
Saif vowing that they would fight on “to the last man.” If anything, the arrest
warrants hastened Gaddafi’s downfall by signaling to his coterie that they
had no political future with him and were better off defecting.
But Gaddafi was a tyrant who was easy to abandon and hold to account. The
international community was less principled in the case of Yemen’s Saleh. In
an initiative launched by the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) with no clear
disapproval from the UN Security Council, Saleh and other senior officials
were offered blanket immunity from prosecution in exchange for stepping
down. The perverse effect was that Saleh’s government was given a green
light to continue killing demonstrators without consequence. Even when
Saleh agreed to resign as president, his supporters continued to kill, knowing
that if they succeeded in clinging to power, they obviously would not prosecute
themselves, and confident that if they failed, the GCC had said they
would not face prosecution either.
The international community was no more principled in its approach to justice
elsewhere in the region. Russia, China, Brazil, India, and South Africa all
refused to support authorizing ICC involvement in Syria, despite levels of
killing that far exceeded Libya’s at the time of its referral to the ICC. And the
West persisted in its usual exemption of Israel from the demands of justice,
most recently insisting that if the Palestinian Authority is accepted as a UN
observer state it must not seek access to the ICC. The US even opposed a proposed
UN Human Rights Council request that the Security Council refer Syria
to the ICC for fear that it would set a precedent that might be used against
Israel.
The Role of Brazil, India, and South Africa
The international response to the Arab rebellions illustrates the importance of
building broad coalitions in defense of human rights. Multilateral pressure for
reform reaffirms that the values in question are universal rather than the narrow agenda of a particular region. Quite apart from the much-contested military
intervention in Libya, the international community was strongest in putting
pressure on Gaddafi when it acted in unison. That Brazil, India, and
South Africa, backed by the Arab League, joined the major Western powers in
referring Libya to the ICC made it difficult for China or Russia to stand isolated
in opposition. The result was historic—unanimous UN Security Council
action—sending Gaddafi a powerful message he ignored at his peril.
Sadly, when it came to defending the Syrian people, Brazil, India, and South
Africa reverted to their reflexive opposition to human rights pressure and
refused to support Security Council action even as the Assad government
killed thousands of protesters. Only in the less powerful UN General
Assembly did Brazil support a critical resolution on Syria, while India and
South Africa abstained. As noted, their main excuse for not supporting
Security Council action was NATO’s alleged overreaching in Libya—when, they
contended, NATO moved beyond the authorized protection of civilians and
adopted an agenda of regime change. But no one could have interpreted the
mildly worded draft Security Council resolution on Syria that they refused to
support as authorizing military force. Instead, they effectively asked the people
of Syria to pay the price for NATO’s alleged misconduct in Libya. That
indifference to Syrians’ plight is particularly disappointing coming from countries
that enjoy strong democratic governance, and in the past have suffered
the indifference of other countries to their own struggle for freedom.
The Role of Turkey
Perhaps the most interesting new presence in the region is Turkey. Despite its
distinct history, it remains a powerful example of a country with a religiously
conservative elected government that has not used Islam as a pretext to
undermine basic rights. Turkey has capitalized on its growing stature by
entering the political fray of the Arab world. More vigorously than its Arab
neighbors, Turkey denounced the political killing in Syria, championed
democratic change in Egypt, and opposed Israel’s punitive blockade of Gaza.
Yet Turkey faces several challenges if it is to live up to its enormous potential
in the human rights realm. Will it use its growing influence in multilateral arenas
to oppose the outdated view of India, Brazil, and South Africa that it is
somehow imperialistic to stand with people who are risking their lives to
protest repression by their governments? Will Turkey press for democratic
change not only among the uprisings of the Arab world but also in Iran, which
crushed its Green Revolution in 2009, and the stultified and repressive countries
of post-Soviet Central Asia? And will Turkey clean up its worsening
human rights record at home–including persistent restrictions on freedom of
speech and association, a flawed criminal justice system, and long-term mistreatment
of its Kurdish minority—so it can be a less compromised proponent
of human rights abroad? Turkey can make a positive difference on human
rights in the region—if its leaders take the bold decisions at home and
abroad needed to advance this cause.
A Global Responsibility
The past year has seen revolutions in the Arab world that few would have
imagined. These uprisings present extraordinary opportunities to heed the
pleas of people who so far have benefited little from global human rights
advances of the last half-century. Yet given the violent forces resisting
progress, it is wrong to leave the fate of the Arab world solely in the hands of
the people facing the guns. The international community has an important
role to play in assisting the birth of rights-respecting democracies in the
region.
So far, that role has been played only equivocally. Short-term parochial interests
are still too often allowed to stand in the way of a more principled and
helpful response. Ultimately, the international community must decide what
it stands for—whether it values the rights and aspirations of the individual
over the spoils and promises of the tyrant. As we pass the first anniversary of
the initial Arab Spring rebellions, the international community will help to
determine whether violent governments prevail over protesters seeking a better
life, and whether the protesters’ vision includes respect not only for their own rights but also for those of all their fellow citizens. It is a global responsibility
to help see a positive conclusion to the Arab people’s brave efforts to
demand their rights, and to ensure that the toppling of one autocratic regime
does not lead to its replacement by another.
The World Report
The World Report is Human Rights Watch’s twenty-second annual review of
human rights practices around the globe. It summarizes key human rights
issues in more than 90 countries and territories worldwide, drawing on
events from January through November 2011.
The book is divided into five essays, followed by a photo essay, and countryspecific
chapters.
In the first essay, Eric Goldstein considers signs of change that human rights
workers overlooked before this year’s populist revolts (“Before the Arab
Spring, the Unseen Thaw”). Rachel Denber sifts through the aftermath of the
USSR’s collapse 20 years ago in search of lessons (“After the Fall”).
Meanwhile, Ben Ward notes that while many European officials see the Arab
Spring as “the most thrilling period since the fall of the Berlin Wall,” domestic
rights policies increasingly are falling short (“Europe’s Own Human Rights
Crisis”).
Next, Shanta Rau Barriga looks at misguided policies that often deprive people
with disabilities of the ability to make fundamental choices about their
own lives, while claiming to protect them (“From Paternalism to Dignity”).
“Good intentions,” she notes, “don’t always make for good policy.”
Finally, Jo Becker and Nisha Varia sound a cautious note of victory, hailing a
new International Labour Organization convention that establishes global
labor standards for the 50 to 100 million women and girls worldwide who
clean, cook, and look after children and the elderly in private homes (“A
Landmark Victory for Domestic Workers”).
The photo essay that follows—which includes images from the 2011 uprisings
in Bahrain, Egypt, Libya, Syria, Tunisia, and Yemen—captures some of the
tumult, violence, and also hope seen during the past 11 months.
Each country entry identifies significant human rights issues, examines the
freedom of local human rights defenders to conduct their work, and surveys
the response of key international actors, such as the United Nations,
European Union, Japan, the United States, and various regional and international
organizations and institutions.
The report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2011 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human
rights activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of our
advocacy team, which monitors policy developments and strives to persuade
governments and international institutions to curb abuses and promote
human rights. Human Rights Watch publications, issued throughout the year,
contain more detailed accounts of many of the issues addressed in the brief
summaries in this volume. They can be found on the Human Rights Watch
website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country
where Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance.
Failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more
than staffing limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance
of the problem. There are many serious human rights violations that
Human Rights Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2011 (and
hence the content of this volume) include the number of people affected and
the severity of abuse, access to the country and the availability of information
about it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to influence, and the importance
of addressing certain thematic concerns and of reinforcing the work of local
rights organizations.
The World Report does not have separate chapters addressing our thematic
work but instead incorporates such material directly into the country entries.
Please consult the Human Rights Watch website for more detailed treatment
of our work on children’s rights, women’s rights, arms and military issues,
business and human rights, health and human rights, international justice,
terrorism and counterterrorism, refugees and displaced people, and lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender people’s rights, and for information about our
international film festivals.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.
B<=FI< K?< AI89 SGI@E>, K?< UEJ<<E T?8N
By Eric Goldstein
Like everyone else, we didn’t see it coming.
Even though we human rights workers spent much time scrutinizing the
Middle East and North Africa from the bottom up, talking to the disenfranchised,
the oppressed, and the stubbornly defiant, the timing and extent of
the popular revolts that shook the region in 2011 surprised us as much as
they did policy-makers, scholars, diplomats, and journalists.
Why didn’t we see the upheavals coming? One reason was because we overestimated
the robustness of some of the authoritarian regimes, and underestimated
demands for a better life, measured partly in human rights terms.
Yes, we heard a lot about the hogra, an Algerian term used throughout North
Africa to denote the contempt of rulers toward their people. But we failed to
see how quickly it could ignite into a region-wide revolt that is, in large part, a
struggle for dignity.
It’s a concept that is, of course, central to the human rights enterprise. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights leads with the assertion that “recognition
of the inherent dignity....” of human beings is the “foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world.” The Koran says that God has “dignified
humankind,” while contemporary philosophers have reflected on the link
between dignity and human rights. Martha Nussbaum, for example, writes
that all persons “are of equal dignity and worth.” The primary source of these
values, she says, is a power of moral choice within them that gives them a
fair claim to certain types of treatment from society and politics. “This treatment
must … respect and promote the liberty of choice, and … respect and
promote the equal worth of persons as choosers,” she states.
The notion of dignity is so central to human rights that it had—for me at
least—become an abstraction until the Arab Spring protests forced me to
reflect on its meaning. Long before Tunisian peddler Mohamed Bouazizi set
himself ablaze on December 17, 2010, to protest a humiliating run-in that day with local police—igniting unrest that ousted President Zine el-Abidine Ben
Ali one month later and spread as far as Syria, Bahrain, and Yemen—there
were countless, equally poignant protests against indignity that passed unnoticed.
But they added to the pent-up frustrations that gave resonance to
Bouazizi’s desperate act.
In 2004, for example, Slaheddine Aloui, a Tunisian agricultural engineer
recently freed from 14 years in jail for political activity, sat down in a local
market holding a sign that offered, with Swiftian irony, to sell his daughters.
The Ben Ali government had prevented him from supporting his family by
pressuring employers not to hire ex-political prisoners and had imposed a 16-
year sentence of post-prison “administrative control” that subjected him to
onerous and time-consuming sign-in requirements.
This quest for dignity, including the right to self-governance, was evident
throughout Tunisia on election day, October 23, 2011, as more than 80 percent
of registered voters joined long lines to vote in the country’s first free
election, in this case for a constituent assembly that will write a constitution.
“It’s the first time I’ve waited on line for three hours for anything and am smiling,”
one voter told me.
And it was the demand for dignity that propelled a depoliticized Egyptian
middle class into action, as Ramez Mohamed, a 26-year-old computer science
graduate who works in telecommunications told The New York Times in
February 2011:
… the [government’s] websites’ blockade and communications
blackout on January 28 was one of the main reasons I, and many
others, were pushed to the streets…. Imagine sitting at your home,
having no single connection with the outer world. I took the decision,
“This is nonsense, we are not sheep in their herd.” I went
down and joined the protests.
For many Libyans, dignity came via a rebellion that showed the world, “We
are not Gaddafi”—the leader with whom the country had been synonymous
for four decades—but rather a people able to shape its own destiny.
with local police—igniting unrest that ousted President Zine el-Abidine Ben
Ali one month later and spread as far as Syria, Bahrain, and Yemen—there
were countless, equally poignant protests against indignity that passed unnoticed.
But they added to the pent-up frustrations that gave resonance to
Bouazizi’s desperate act.
In 2004, for example, Slaheddine Aloui, a Tunisian agricultural engineer
recently freed from 14 years in jail for political activity, sat down in a local
market holding a sign that offered, with Swiftian irony, to sell his daughters.
The Ben Ali government had prevented him from supporting his family by
pressuring employers not to hire ex-political prisoners and had imposed a 16-
year sentence of post-prison “administrative control” that subjected him to
onerous and time-consuming sign-in requirements.
This quest for dignity, including the right to self-governance, was evident
throughout Tunisia on election day, October 23, 2011, as more than 80 percent
of registered voters joined long lines to vote in the country’s first free
election, in this case for a constituent assembly that will write a constitution.
“It’s the first time I’ve waited on line for three hours for anything and am smiling,”
one voter told me.
And it was the demand for dignity that propelled a depoliticized Egyptian
middle class into action, as Ramez Mohamed, a 26-year-old computer science
graduate who works in telecommunications told The New York Times in
February 2011:
… the [government’s] websites’ blockade and communications
blackout on January 28 was one of the main reasons I, and many
others, were pushed to the streets…. Imagine sitting at your home,
having no single connection with the outer world. I took the decision,
“This is nonsense, we are not sheep in their herd.” I went
down and joined the protests.
For many Libyans, dignity came via a rebellion that showed the world, “We
are not Gaddafi”—the leader with whom the country had been synonymous
for four decades—but rather a people able to shape its own destiny.
prevented their supporters from gaining steam, the combination of grassroots
protest in the disenfranchised inland and the solidarity movement in the
north now seems a dress rehearsal for the regime-changing uprising of
December 2010 and January 2011.
Following the unification of North and South Yemen in 1990, civil society
blossomed and was largely able to resist efforts since 2007 by President Ali
Abdullah Saleh, who has ruled since 1978, to clamp down on independent
media and associations. In early 2011, civil society leaders had become a key
force in the protests calling for the president’s exit. (The anti-Saleh movement
gained force also from Huthi rebels in the north and separatists in the south,
which both allege discrimination by the central government, and from a renegade
military brigade and tribal militias).
Even in Syria and Libya—where the governments were among the region’s
most brutal—human rights contestation picked up during the past decade. In
the former, the “Damascus Spring” reform movement and the Committees for
the Revival of Civil Society that launched shortly after Bashar al-Assad succeeded
his father as president in 2000, as well as the Damascus Declaration
of 2005, displayed a new assertiveness by small groups of Syrians demanding
basic rights, although many wound up serving long prison terms. And in
Libya, families of victims of the 1996 mass killings in Abu Salim prison
became the first group in the country to demonstrate regularly in public after
a North Benghazi court in 2008 ordered the government to reveal the fate of
Abu Salim prisoners who had “disappeared.”
In addition to such frontal defiance, subtler strands of opposition were also
forming.
In Tunisia, sympathizers with the cause of human rights who had demobilized
in the early and mid-1990s under pressure from Ben Ali’s government
re-emerged in the 2000s. In 2001, for example, we found a journalism professor
attending events organized by the Tunisian Human Rights League and
briefing foreign visitors on the lack of media freedom; just five years earlier,
he had declined to meet with Human Rights Watch because he feared questioning and surveillance by the secret police. Families of political prisoners,
who had just a few years earlier shunned contact with international human
rights groups fearing reprisals against themselves or their loved ones, now
sought out such organizations and strove to publicize the plight of imprisoned
relatives.
What had changed?
For the professor it was a newfound sense that civil society had been paralyzed
too long and it was time to take a stand. For the families of political
prisoners,it was the realization that by remaining silent they had gained nothing
and that with their relatives still in prison, there was nothing left to lose.
As a result, around the core of diehard activists there formed an outer circle
of people willing to take a stand, if somewhat more discreetly, on some
human rights issues.
These shifts were reinforced by the spread of new communication technologies
that connected activists, in real time and at minimal expense, with
domestic and international audiences. Able to exchange information and
opinions securely and anonymously, their link to larger networks encouraged
activists to persevere despite repression. It also encouraged them to formulate
their demands for change in terms of human rights, a universal and
nonpartisan framework that their audience could endorse whatever their
political orientation.
At the same time, governments started to recognize that they could not ignore
their human rights image. Leaders who had once tried to discredit human
rights as a Western concept alien to local culture began in the 1990s to create
and promote their own human rights commissions.
By 2000 such commissions operated in nearly every country in the region. In
practice, most of them put a positive spin on the government’s record while
trying to divert attention from violations. The point here is not the objectivity
of such commissions; rather, the fact that they reflect governments’ recognition
of human rights as a critical factor by which they were being judged, both
domestically and internationally.
Another indicator of human rights awareness in these countries was the
remarkably high number of victims or witnesses who agreed to provide evidence
to human rights investigators. When seeking people’s accounts about,
say, torture and unjust imprisonment, our researchers explain that we are
preparing a public report to expose abuses and pressure the government to
clean up its act. Given how little we can promise victims and witnesses, it is
surprising and moving how consistently they agreed to tell their stories.
Narrating their experiences gave them a sense of dignity or of honoring victims,
reframing what might otherwise be a random, local act of cruelty and
injustice as a human rights event that fit an international framework built on
treaties their government had committed to respect. Testifying about an
unlawful killing also connected families to one other, establishing patterns of
abuse that undermined governments’ efforts to minimize violations by misrepresenting
them as isolated events.
The year’s events remind us that asserting one’s rights against repressive
governments does not mean embracing all rights for all people. Human rights
demands may have energized the protests that shook the Middle East and
North Africa in 2011. But protecting rights, especially for vulnerable sectors of
the population, remains an uphill battle in the countries where authoritarian
rulers have toppled, not just in those where they still rule.
In the months since Ben Ali and Mubarak fell from power, for example,
women demonstrating in Tunisia and Egypt to demand gender equality have
been slapped, groped, or threatened by counter-demonstrators. Protesters in
Tunis ransacked a cinema in June and burned a television executive’s home
in October to protest programming they deemed insulting to Islam. In Libya
rebels have mistreated thousands of sub-Saharan African migrant workers on
the pretext that they were mercenaries for Muammar Gaddafi. And in Egypt
deadly sectarian violence has cast a pall over the Muslim-Christian unity seen
during the anti-Mubarak protests.
This newly volatile region is likely to bring more surprises in 2012. Just as rising
expectations for a dignified life shook several governments of the region
in 2011, they may yet motivate revolts against successor governments, in Tunisia or elsewhere, should those governments fall short in this regard. We
didn’t see the Arab Spring coming because we missed signs of the thaw. But
we would do well to keep in mind what Arab peoples showed us about the
power of the aspiration for dignity, a power that they are unlikely to surrender
anytime soon.
Eric Goldstein is deputy director of the Middle East and North Africa Division at
Human Rights Watch.
A=K<I K?< F8CC:
Hopes and Lessons 20 Years after the Collapse
of the Soviet Union
By Rachel Denber
Twenty years ago, in July 1991, I was poised to start a job researching human
rights violations in the Soviet Union. A month later, the failed coup to unseat
Communist Party leader Mikhail Gorbachev precipitated rapid political
changes that would ultimately lead to the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Watching these events, my family told me I would no longer have a job when
the position was to start in September. Like many of us, they assumed that
the end of communism would usher in a new era of democracy, rule of law,
and human rights protection in the Soviet Union’s successor states. I started
my new job as planned and it took five minutes to see that such assumptions
were wrong.
Now is a good time to take stock of some lessons learned from 20 years of
efforts to bring better human rights protections to former Soviet Union
countries. Where were our assumptions faulty? What could be done better, or
differently, to promote human rights during tectonic societal shifts? It is an
exercise worthy in its own right, and one that has relevance beyond the
region, particularly given the ongoing historic upheaval in the Middle East
and North Africa.
The differences between 1991 and its aftermath and the 2011 Arab uprisings
are vast, and the task of comparing these two historic moments is tantalizing
but alas beyond the scope of this essay. Still, I hope that these reflections 20
years after the fall of the Soviet Union will be relevant and useful to
observers, policymakers, and human rights communities focused on the former
Soviet Union and beyond.
1. There is Nothing Inevitable about Transitions to Democracy
The first lesson is about heady assumptions. Watching decades of
authoritarianism come to an end in Egypt and Tunisia was thrilling; who does
not hope that it will usher in a new era of democracy and rule of law? But
Soviet Union watchers have seen how the collapse of a repressive, authoritarian
regime—while it brings months of euphoria and sets complex political
transformations in motion—in no way guarantees the arrival of governments
committed to human rights protection. As the dust settles, the historical
forces that have shaped the society for decades come again to the fore and,
absent deep institutional change, can be accompanied by reemergence of
authoritarian rule.
To be sure, the end of communism ushered in freedoms unthinkable during
the Soviet era. While circumstances varied widely across the former Soviet
Union in the early years after the break-up, people could worship more freely,
travel abroad, own property, and express their ethnic identity in ways they
could not under communism. There was a vigorous debate about Soviet history
and Stalinism, even as the monstrous crimes of the Stalin era remained
unpunished.
But in many parts of the region, governments’ human rights records have
been poor. Year after year, chapters on most former Soviet Union countries in
this volume have born grim testament to that. The reasons for this vary, but in
several Central Asian countries the leaders and political classes in 1991 had
no interest whatsoever in relinquishing power. Rather than commit to a post-
Communist transition, many leaders used police, the military, intelligence
services, and the criminal justice system to consolidate their personal rule.
They worked to neuter alternative political forces demanding more profound
change. As a result, the institutional reforms necessary for accountable government,
pluralism, and effective rights protection never happened.
A focus on political elites also helps, albeit only partially, to explain why
reforms were much more far-reaching in Eastern Europe than in former Soviet
Union states. For the most part, Soviet-era political elites in those states, as well as in the Baltic states were swept aside. This left more space for new
political actors who were more serious about building strong institutions,
instituting checks and balances, and implementing legislative reforms prioritizing
due process and human rights protection. But there were certainly
other critical factors at work, such as a legacy of pre-World War II democratic
government in many cases and a real prospect of European Union membership
for most.
The Soviet successor states run the gamut in levels and styles of repression.
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan are surely among the most repressive governments,
not only in the region but the world. Their brands of authoritarianism
fossilized very early after the 1991 collapse. Turkmenistan is a one-party state
that allows no independent civic activism, arbitrarily limits citizens’ ability to
travel abroad, and blocks virtually all independent human rights monitoring.
There is no press freedom, and the authorities imprison stringers for foreign
news outlets. In Uzbekistan the government barely tolerates a handful of
independent human rights activists, routinely sentencing them to long prison
terms on trumped up charges, and the media is heavily censored. Police torture
is endemic. The government has also imprisoned, on charges of religious
“fundamentalism,” thousands of devout Muslims who practice their faith outside
state controls or belong to unregistered religious organizations.
Russia itself is no role model. Under Russia’s “soft authoritarianism,” perfected
under eight years of Vladimir Putin’s rule, independent civil society is tolerated
but whistleblowers have been killed and threatened, and very little is
left of the media freedoms that had blossomed during the glasnost era. There
is no genuine political competition or public accountability. Putin’s
announcement in the 20th anniversary year that he would again run for president,
conceivably putting him in power for a total of 24 years, prompted parallels
to Leonid Brezhnev’s 18-year reign.
Many of the region’s political elites preside over eye-popping corruption, and
have used political power to enrich themselves and their vast patronage networks.
It is no surprise that they use authoritarian mechanisms of control—
media censorship, repression of critics, phony elections—to cling to power.
Political ouster means not only loss of power but loss of wealth and possibly
worse. In countries like Azerbaijan, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Kazakhstan
hydrocarbon wealth exponentially increases the stakes.
In much of the region, entrenched, post-Soviet authoritarian leaders allowed
for some openings, but held onto power, resulting in political and social stagnation.
In Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan this stagnation was broken by a
second round of political changes a decade after the fall of the Soviet Union,
this time driven by popular uprisings full of hope for meaningful change. In
scenes not dissimilar from those we saw in the Arab world in 2011, people in
Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan took to the streets demanding fair elections,
an end to corruption, and public accountability. But the experience of
the so-called colored revolutions of 2003 to 2005 is a sobering reminder that
popular uprisings do not automatically or necessarily lead to good human
rights outcomes.
Kyrgyzstan’s “Tulip Revolution” in 2005 succeeded in ousting then-President
Askar Akaev, but hopes for reform under his successor, Kurmanbek Bakiev,
were quickly dashed. Bakiev proved far more interested in enriching his family
and patronage networks, and within a year his government started harassing
human rights activists and independent journalists. His record deteriorated
precipitously from then through his violent ouster in April 2010.
In Ukraine’s 2004 “Orange Revolution” thousands of Ukrainian citizens
peacefully protested the government’s manipulation of the presidential election
in favor of Viktor Yanukovich. The pro-reform, pro-Western candidate,
Viktor Yushchenko, defeated Yanukovich in repeat elections. But
Yushchenko’s government found itself mired in serial political crises and corruption
and unable to deliver on social and economic reform. It was also
poorly equipped to deal with Ukraine’s myriad human rights problems,
including torture and ill-treatment in detention, violations of the rights of
migrants and asylum seekers, and violations that fuel the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Yushchenko left office after losing badly at the polls in 2010.
Georgia’s 2003 “Rose Revolution” brought Mikheil Saakashvili to the presidency
with aspirations of judicial, police, and economic reform. Reforms
brought some positive results, but the government’s use of excessive force
against demonstrators in 2007 suggested the fragility of its commitment to
human rights and the rule of law. Today Georgia’s human rights record is
mixed. Saakashvili is bound by the constitution to leave office in 2013, but
because he has dominated the political system there are real doubts about
what will come next. Nine years later the Rose Revolution paved the way for a
leader who professed a commitment to rights, but it is not clear whether it
succeeded in creating a competitive political system that can protect rights.
2. Guard against Misplaced Blame
In the aftermath of political upheaval, many people become disillusioned as
they cope with economic, political, and social instability. Many come to
blame “democracy” for their suffering. Supporters of human rights and
democracy need to fight this misplaced blame. There are surely rocky times
ahead in the post-uprising Middle East, so this lesson has relevance there, too.
The end of the Soviet era brought about real and colossal privations for millions
who lost their life savings, jobs, and sense of identity. In Russia, for
example, corruption was seemingly boundless: privatization programs under
Yeltsin favored a handful of Kremlin cronies who bought up the most valuable
state assets at bargain-basement prices in exchange for crucial political backing.
Unsurprisingly, many blamed their struggles not on the deeply-rooted
flaws of the ancien regime or the corruption of power, but on “democracy”
and human rights movements, seeing them as the handmaiden of chaos.
Putin exploited this anger and a growing sense of public nostalgia for the
Soviet era to his advantage. His team willfully conflated chaos and democracy
to justify reforms in 2004, making it more difficult for opposition parties to
gain seats in the Duma, and instituting the appointment, rather than election,
of regional governors. After the “colored revolutions” the Kremlin accused
NGOs of being fronts for foreign governments that sought to interfere with
Russia’s internal affairs, and started a campaign of bureaucratic harassment against them. The overall result was the weakening, beyond recognition, of
the checks and balances that are inherent in an accountable political system.
A related lesson here is that Western policymakers who care about human
rights need to support institutions rather than individual leaders. The enthusiastic
support the West at times showed Yeltsin during the chaotic 1990s, or
Saakashvili during the early days after the Rose Revolution, backfired in the
long run. As popular opinion about the democratic credentials of each
soured, so too did popular backing for more far-reaching democratic and
human rights reforms.
3. Institutionalize Strong Minority Rights Protections
Both during and after the shattering of the Soviet Union, many parts of the
region succumbed to armed conflicts whose roots, for the most part, lay deep
in the Soviet past, including regime attempts to manipulate ethnic tensions
to its advantage through favoritism and calculated border designations, as
well as Soviet policies suppressing national, ethnic, and religious identity.
New governments—in some cases buoyed by national reawakening—clashed
with minority or marginalized populations, who felt strongly that the new
leadership should recognize the rights and opportunities that the previous
regime had long denied them. Toward the end of the Soviet era and after,
both the Kremlin and several Soviet successor states responded to new
nationalist demands and movements with force. In some cases, such as
Abkhazia and the first Chechnya war, governments stumbled into armed conflict.
But the consequences in both scenarios were disastrous.
It is beyond the scope of this essay to analyze the causes of secessionist
wars in Nagorno Karabakh, South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Chechnya, and
Transdnestria, and of devastating communal violence in places like Osh and
Ingushetia. (Tajikistan’s civil war took place along regional, not ethnic fault
lines, but is also worth noting). However, in each case the civilian population
bore terrible suffering from serious violations of humanitarian law, and, in
some cases, long-term displacement. Twenty years later, some of the conflicts have morphed, some are frozen, and well over a million people remain
displaced. The lasting harm of these intractable conflicts should serve as an
important warning to governments and civil societies alike in the Middle East
about the need to respect minority rights and build tolerance among minority
and majority populations.
New governments need to acknowledge and address past minority grievances,
ensure language and confessional rights, give minorities a place in
law enforcement and security agencies, act swiftly to protect minorities from
violence, and initiate public discussions that emphasize tangible common
interests that transcend interethnic and interconfessional differences. They
also need to act quickly to disarm both separatist and pro-state militias, pursue
accountability for war crimes, and undertake security sector reform.
4. International Institutions Matter
Another lesson is the importance of motivating states in transition to join
international institutions and processes that champion human rights. The former
Soviet Union is perhaps unique in this regard given the critical role in former
Soviet states of the prospect of membership in the EU and Council of
Europe. But the lesson is a more general one: the international system now
includes a panoply of institutions dedicated to human rights protection and
reform of judiciaries, security services, and other government bodies critical
to advancing human rights. These institutions should not take at face value
regional states’ ratification of human rights treaties. It is essential that they
become actively involved in supporting democratic and human rights reform
in countries “in transition.”
As prospective EU member states, many Eastern European countries were
motivated to carry out thorough reforms of their political and judicial systems.
EU membership was not in the cards for former Soviet countries, apart
from the Baltic states. But some—including Russia, Ukraine, and the South
Caucasus states—were offered membership in the Council of Europe. They
were expected to undertake significant institutional reforms as part of the
accession and membership process. For example abolishing the death penalty, overhauling the prosecutor’s office to strengthen the courts, and transferring
prisons from internal affairs to justice ministries. The impact of these
reforms should not be overstated. For example, the prosecutor’s office in
almost all of the post-Soviet Council of Europe member states is still disproportionately
powerful, and courts still lack independence. But the reforms
were historic and important.
Most important, membership has given their citizens access to the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), providing them an avenue of justice when
their own deeply flawed justice systems fail them.
At the same time, each of these countries was invited to join prematurely,
before government practices had come close enough to meeting Council of
Europe standards. At the time accession proponents argued that it was better
to bring the states in sooner rather than later, even if they did not meet standards.
More would be accomplished, they argued, by continuing to engage on
reform once these states were Council of Europe members. Ten years later,
however, many of the same human rights violations that plagued these states
prior to accession have worsened, and the organization’s monitoring procedure
has struggled to secure compliance. Azerbaijan, for example, was
admitted in 2000, days after a blatantly manipulated parliamentary vote.
Elections since then have been largely empty exercises and sparked political
violence in 2003 and 2005.
Although Russia was admitted to the Council of Europe in the midst of its first
horrific war in Chechnya, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
(PACE) had the political courage to suspend Russia’s voting rights for six
months because of grave violations of humanitarian law during the second
Chechnya conflict. However, PACE restored the voting rights without getting
any guarantees that perpetrators of massacres, torture, and forced disappearances
would be held accountable. And 10 years later, they still have not.
The Council of Europe’s addition of former Soviet states with poor human
rights records gave millions access to justice through the ECtHR, but it has
also stretched the court’s resources. This would not be an insurmountable problem, if it were not for states’ failure to implement the ECtHR’s judgments.
This failure threatens the court’s integrity and floods the court with similar
cases. A glaring example is Russia’s stubborn failure to implement roughly
170 judgments in which the European Court found Russia responsible for
enforced disappearances, torture, executions, and other serious human
rights abuses in Chechnya.
5. Establish Concrete Human Rights Benchmarks
and Give Them Teeth
Experience in the former Soviet Union region, particularly in Central Asia,
highlights the importance of setting out human rights benchmarks as a condition
for international engagement and unrelentingly pursuing their implementation.
One of the most disappointing developments in this regard was the EU’s failure
to hold firm in demanding human rights improvements in Uzbekistan as a
condition for dropping sanctions imposed on the government following the
May 2005 killings by government forces of hundreds of civilian protesters,
most of them unarmed, in the city of Andijan. The sanctions were mild and
targeted, a symbolic arms embargo and a visa ban on a handful of government
officials. But almost as soon as the sanctions were adopted several EU
states set about openly undermining them, sending mixed messages that
could not have been lost on the Uzbek government.
The EU had made the release of imprisoned human rights activists a condition
for lifting the sanctions but when it ended the sanctions regime in 2009,
12 remained in prison. In a move that could only have encouraged Uzbek government
intransigence, the EU justified the lifting of the sanctions by referring
to “positive steps” taken by the Uzbek government, such as agreeing to hold
harmless but meaningless human rights dialogues with the EU. After two
years the dialogues have had absolutely no bearing on the human rights situation
in Uzbekistan.
The lesson here is not that sanctions can never work, but that they can work
only if states are united in demanding rigorous implementation. Regional officials
are no fools. They know when their interlocutors are serious about their
rhetoric and when they are not, or when rhetoric will have real consequences
and when it will not.
A related lesson is that assigning an abusive government exceptional status
in light of its strategic importance sabotages efforts to get it to improve its
human rights record. Western policymakers EU policymakers like to point to
Kazakhstan as a regional leader in a rough neighborhood. Led by Germany
and France, the EU warmly supported Kazakhstan’s bid to chair OSCE in 2010
and host an OSCE summit, though Kazakhstan’s brand of soft authoritarianism
made it an inappropriate choice for an organization with a mandate to
promote democracy and human rights.
The gamble that the chairmanship would prod reform turned out to be misguided.
It’s been a year since the summit and chairmanship year have ended,
and Kazakhstan’s record has deteriorated. For example, they adopted a new
repressive law on religion in October, returned the prison system to Ministry
of Internal Affairs jurisdiction, and imprisoned one of the country’s top
human rights activists.
International actors should also learn from the post-Soviet experience that
viewing human rights and security interests as tradeoffs is exactly the false
choice repressive leaders want them to make, and that bargaining with
dictators over human rights concerns will not lead to a good outcome, almost
by definition.
Too often, Western actors resist seeing the leverage they have in relationships
with abusive governments. For example, eager to secure alternative
routes to Afghanistan to avoid less stable Pakistan, the US has developed the
so-called Northern Distribution Network (NDN)—a transit corridor that runs
through Russia and Central Asia—which supplies non-lethal cargo to
Afghanistan. To sweeten its relationship with Uzbekistan, a pivotal state in
the network, the US is waiving restrictions on assistance, including military aid, to the Uzbek government that were established in 2004 over human
rights concerns.
What policymakers seem to minimize are the financial and other benefits the
NDN brings Uzbekistan, which should be used to stymie bullying by Uzbek
officials over rights issues. Instead, by dropping all restrictions on aid—
including military aid—without insisting on improvements, the US is creating
a huge windfall for an extremely repressive government, and may ultimately
create long-term instability in Uzbekistan and Central Asia. It also sends the
detrimental message to ordinary Uzbeks that the US is indifferent to their
plight.
6. Support a Strong Civil Society
A resoundingly positive lesson of the last 20 years has been the importance
of support for civil society in countries in, and beyond, transition. These are
the organizations and media outlets that, in the absence of checks and balances
in post-Soviet authoritarian regimes, are doing the most to hold their
governments accountable, often providing services to help the public access
their often opaque governments and exposing government corruption and
wrongdoing.
In many countries these communities are now so deeply rooted and vibrant
that it is easy to forget that they are in fact quite new. At the same time, no
one should take their vitality for granted. The past 10 years have witnessed
how one government after another in the region adopted laws restricting
NGOs and used an arsenal of bureaucratic tools to harass and overburden
them, and, in some countries, imprison them. The creation of civil societies
throughout the region was one of the signal achievements of the glasnost
era, and policymakers need to support these communities now more than
ever.
The differences between the fall of the Soviet Union and today’s Arab Spring
upheaval are significant. But 20 years of post-Soviet experience should lead
policy makers to embrace the opportunity for change in the Middle East, guided not by heady optimism, but by an enduring commitment to universal principles,
far-reaching institutional reforms, and strong support for the people
who continue to fight for both.
Rachel Denber is deputy director of the Europe and Central Asia division at
Human Rights Watch.
ELIFG<’J ONE HLD8E R@>?KJ CI@J@J
By Benjamin Ward
To many friends of human rights in Europe, the Arab Spring has been the
most thrilling period since the fall of the Berlin Wall. Judging from their soaring
rhetoric about yearning for freedom among Arab peoples, European Union
leaders share that enthusiasm. Today there is an opportunity, the optimists
proclaim, to have an arc of human rights-respecting countries around much of
the Mediterranean rim.
The reality of human rights policy in Europe itself and toward its
Mediterranean perimeter has been far less edifying. Documents discovered in
Libya by Human Rights Watch in September 2011 evidenced British complicity
in rendition to Libya under Muammar Gaddafi. Italy, which was willing to send
African migrants and asylum seekers back to Libya during the Gaddafi era to
face abuse and worse, moved quickly to sign a migration cooperation agreement
with the transitional authorities there (although at this writing it has yet
to resume forced returns). EU governments have proved reluctant to help
migrants and others fleeing war-torn Libya. The arrival of thousands of
Tunisian migrants in Italy beginning in January led leading EU governments to
question free movement inside the EU, one of its fundamental pillars.
Move beyond the fine words and human rights in Europe are in trouble. A new
(or rather a resurgent old) idea is on the march: that the rights of “problematic”
minorities must be set aside for the greater good, and elected politicians
who pursue such policies are acting with democratic legitimacy.
At first glance, the idea of a human rights crisis in Europe might seem farfetched.
But scratch beneath the surface and the trends are truly worrying.
Four developments stand out: the rollback of civil liberties in state responses
to terrorist attacks; the debate around the place of minorities and migrants in
Europe, a debate too often laced with xenophobia; the rise of populist
extremist parties and their baleful influence on public policy; and the diminishing
effectiveness of traditional human rights institutions and tools. Unless governments wake up to the scale of the threat, the next generation of
Europeans may see human rights as an optional extra instead of a core value.
Counterterrorism and the Attack on Rights
Terrorist violence in Europe is nothing new. Nor is human rights abuse as part
of the effort to counter it. But the 9/11 attacks, and the subsequent attacks in
Madrid and London, triggered policy responses in Europe that caused lasting
damage to the human rights cause.
In the past decade, European governments too often have shown a willingness
to chip away at the absolute global prohibition of torture, exposing terrorism
suspects to violent abuse and illegal detention overseas, using the
fruits of that torture at home, and denying terrorism suspects the rights
accorded to others accused of crimes. Even now, we do not know the full
extent of European complicity in US abuses (rendition, “black sites,” and torture)
under the Bush administration. (Some governments, like Norway, have
resisted the temptation, responding to terrorist violence using the rule of law).
While many of these laws and policies were deeply problematic, and in some
cases remain unchanged today (especially where courts or national parliaments
were unable or unwilling to curb them), the rhetoric around them
arguably represents an even worse legacy.
Many EU governments sought to construct a new paradigm in which human
rights had to take second place to security or be set aside entirely. As
then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair claimed after the July 2005 suicide
attacks in London, “the rules of the game are changing.” While public concern
about terrorism has been largely supplanted by worries about jobs and
social services (even though the threat remains), these poisonous ideas have
taken root.
European politicians mounted a three-pronged attack on universal human
rights in the context of combating terrorism. The first was that terrorism suspects
deserve fewer rights than others. The second was that Europe could
have security or human rights, but not both. The third was that human rights are a zero sum game, so that rights for the majority can only be secured by
sacrificing the rights of the minority suspected of terrorism.
Driven by fear, many in Europe accepted these arguments. Offered a chance
to trade away those rights to assuage their fear, people willingly did so, especially
when the rights at risk were not, or did not seem to be, theirs.
The Place of Migrants and Minorities
Intolerance towards migrants and minorities in Europe is widespread. Polling
data from 2010 shows that a majority in eight EU states shared the view that
there are too many immigrants, with as many as half concluding the same
of Muslims.
Fears about loss of culture, terrorism, crime, and competition for economic
resources all help explain rising intolerance in Europe. Europe’s current economic
and financial crisis and resulting austerity is likely to exacerbate the
intolerance.
Europe’s Muslims and Roma experience persistent hostility and discrimination
across the region, as an EU Fundamental Rights Agency survey from 2009
showed. Undocumented African migrants face significant problems, including
discrimination and violence. While individual attacks are common in the
region, in some cases this has spilled over into mob violence, including in
Italy (against African migrants and Roma), in Greece (against migrants), and
in Eastern Europe (against Roma).
European governments have responded in ways that are deeply corrosive of
respect for universal rights. Rather than emphasizing that Europe’s history
has been shaped by migration, pointing to the many contributions made by
minorities and migrants and forcefully condemning racism and intolerance,
they have played on these fears.
Cultural and religious practices can of course violate human rights, and those
who engage in discriminatory or abusive conduct must be held to account.
But what is happening in Europe goes far beyond concern with the conduct of
specific individuals.
The response has included blaming marginalized communities for the conduct
of a handful of people (as with Roma in Italy); seeking to close Europe’s
borders at the EU and national levels; restrictive and abusive asylum procedures
and abusive migrant detention conditions (notably in Greece), with
unaccompanied migrant children at particular risk; and in the name of integration,
telling migrants (even second or third generation) that they must
embrace majority culture, and if they do not, face sanction, or leave (in
Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark and elsewhere).
Muslims in Europe have borne the brunt. Fears of so-called home-grown terrorism
after the Madrid and London bombings, a string of alleged terrorism
plots, and concerns over loss of culture prompted by the more visible presence
of observant Muslims have put the continent’s diverse Muslim communities
under scrutiny, their loyalty implicitly challenged.
Fear of Muslims has impacted wider policy debates about “integration,” a
byword for a whole basket of anxieties and concerns about the place in society
of migrants, especially Muslim migrants, and has led to calls for action.
At heart the anxiety about the place of Muslim migrants in Europe, as a recent
report by the think tank Chatham House pointed out, is cultural. The headscarf
and face-covering niqab, and to some degree minarets and mosques,
have played such an important role in these debates because they are visual
reminders that Muslims live in Europe and are here to stay.
Fear of the place of Muslims in Europe did not begin with al Qaeda’s attacks
on September 11, 2001. What changed that day was the characterization of
Bangladeshi, Pakistani, Moroccan, and Turkish migrants in Europe. While
many European officials sought to draw a clear distinction between the acts
of a small group and Muslim communities as a whole, policy responses and
debates about how to counter the home-grown threat frequently created the
impression that Muslim communities were suspect.
The impact on human rights in Europe is real. On a practical level, forced integration
and a concept of integration that requires no accommodation by the
wider society is doomed to fail. When policymakers play into public fears
about loss of culture and pursue policies that increase rather than lessen
xenophobia, they put the rights of European minority communities at risk.
Perhaps worse, they reinforce the dangerous zero-sum conception of rights—
minorities must be forced to accept majority culture (or “Christian values” as
the German chancellor suggested in 2010) and if they refuse to do so their
rights must be set aside for the greater good.
Among Roma, Europe’s largest minority, the picture on human rights is bleak.
At the EU level there is recognition that the persistent discrimination and marginalization
experienced by Roma requires positive intervention and support,
and officials have devised a strategy to that end. But Roma continue to be
stigmatized at national levels across the EU. And like migrant communities,
Roma are likely to be disproportionately affected by austerity measures.
The experience of Roma migrants from Eastern to Western Europe and the
problematic policy responses to them have some parallels with those faced
by Muslims, but with fears of a purported epidemic of crime taking the place
of fears of terrorism, and with economic rather than cultural concerns predominating.
Forced evictions and expulsions of Eastern European Roma, who
are EU citizens, by France and Italy exemplify the impact of these fears.
Forced evictions remain a common feature of Roma policy across the EU.
Further east, in Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, and
Slovakia, the situation is even more alarming, with violent attacks and anti-
Roma rhetoric and little progress towards ending housing and school segregation
despite hundreds of millions of euros of EU funding and rulings of the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR, a Council of Europe court that binds
EU states).
This is bad news for Roma. But it is also bad news for human rights in general.
Once again, policymakers in Europe prefer to yield to, and in some cases exacerbate, public concerns at the expense of an unpopular minority rather
than saying loud and clear that Europe’s values demand rights for all.
Populist Extremism
The failure of leadership and negative rhetoric by European governments is
connected to a third worrying trend: the rise of populist extremist parties.
The terrorist act in July 2011 by Anders Breivik that left 77 Norwegians dead
was a stark reminder that extremism and political violence are not confined
to those acting in the name of Islam. Breivik’s twisted manifesto cited with
approval populist extremist parties across Europe, though the decision to
engage in terrorism was his alone.
The growing success of these parties at ballot boxes across the continent is
having a profound impact on mainstream politics. Where populist extremist
parties form part of ruling coalitions (as in Italy and Switzerland), or formally
support minority governments (as in the Netherlands), the impact on mainstream
politics is immediately evident. More generally, mainstream parties
have responded to the growing electoral share of populist extremist parties in
ways that move away from human rights-respecting policies.
In Western Europe, extremist parties have put the place of Muslims and their
alleged threat to European culture at the forefront. Some, like Italy’s Northern
League, also focus on migrant communities more generally.
The focus on Muslims and fears of terrorist attacks allows these parties to
more easily resist accusations of racism and xenophobia (some even distinguishing
“good” minority communities from Muslim minority communities)
and to present the views held by conservative Muslims on women’s rights
and homosexuality as illustrative of the threat even though conservative
Christians with similar views have not faced the same vilification.
Populist extremist parties in the eastern part of the EU are more focused on
Roma than Muslims. Examples include Jobbik, the third largest party in
Hungary’s parliament, which has links to a paramilitary group implicated in attacks on Roma, and the Slovak National Party, part of the ruling coalition,
whose leader recently called for the creation of a separate Roma state.
At a time of growing voter anger over austerity measures and mass unemployment,
these messages risk attracting greater support.
Many in Europe continue to defend the rights of migrants and minorities and
the importance of universality. But rather than standing up against populist
extremism, mainstream parties have responded with co-option through coalition
politics, adopting watered-down versions of the same policies or rhetoric,
or in the case of some centre-left parties, with paralysis and silence.
In some cases, it is argued that the electoral success of the parties mean
that it would be undemocratic for mainstream parties not to take account of
their views.
Far from neutralizing the political challenge posed by populist extremist parties,
these strategies have served instead to legitimize them and make them
respectable, sending a message to voters that xenophobic, anti-Muslim, or
anti-Roma sentiment is acceptable rather than a cause for shame.
The growth of populist extremist parties poses a real challenge for human
rights in Europe. It engenders divisive politics. It reinforces the idea that the
rights of the majority can only be upheld and respected if those of the minority
are set aside, moving us further away from universality. And it legitimizes
abusive policies on democratic grounds.
Declining Leverage
There is always a risk in a democracy that without responsible leadership the
majority will support measures that harm the interests of the minority. This
dilemma helps explain why human rights protections, which are designed in
part to protect against “tyranny of the majority,” are more essential than ever.
It is particularly alarming then that Europe’s human rights tools and institutions
are proving ineffective in tackling these negative trends.
One often valuable tool—naming and shaming—only works when the government
being identified is embarrassed by the disclosure that it is not playing
by the rules. But the state of politics in many EU states today means governments
are no longer embarrassed to pursue abusive policies, arguing that
doing otherwise would risk losing ground to populist extremist parties.
Criticisms of abusive policies and rhetoric from human rights NGOs, from the
Council of Europe, from the United Nations, from religious leaders, and even
in some cases from EU institutions, are brushed aside. Examples include
France’s forced evictions and expulsions of Roma, Spain’s incommunicado
detention of terrorism suspects, Italy’s interdiction and pushbacks of
migrants to Libya under Gaddafi, and Greece’s abusive detention of migrants.
The perceived domestic political benefits of engaging in these kinds of policies
frequently outweigh the inconvenience caused by international or regional
condemnation.
Two institutions remain hard to ignore: the ECtHR and the EU’s European
Commission.
The ECtHR still has real clout, although EU governments (notably Italy on terrorism
expulsions) have begun to ignore some of its interim rulings and the
court faces more general political attacks (particularly in the UK) for “straying”
into domestic issues.
The European Commission has long had the power to hold EU states to
account for breaking EU law. And after the Lisbon treaty, that includes human
rights, with a dedicated fundamental rights commissioner.
France’s expulsion of Roma in the summer of 2010 showed the commission’s
potential. Having ignored UN, Council of Europe, and European Parliament
criticism of its policy, Paris reacted with fury when the commission took it to
task.
Sadly, the commission eventually backed down, accepting in August 2011
legislative changes that did not address the fundamental discrimination motivating
the expulsions. Its approach to Hungary’s media law and to Greece’s broken asylum system demonstrated a similar half-heartedness. In both
cases, commission enforcement action was initiated but later discontinued or
put on hold without adequately addressing the triggering problems.
Human rights are supposed to be integral to the European project. If the commission
does not find more courage to hold member states to account when
they break the rules, Europe’s downward slide on rights looks set to continue.
Conclusion
Europe’s declining respect for human rights has not gone unnoticed.
Governments around the world have seized on abusive counterterrorism
measures, attacks on migrants, Roma, and other minorities, and hostility
towards Muslims both as justification for their own abusive policies and to
undercut criticism by the EU. The European Parliament noted in 2009 the
damage to the credibility of EU external human rights policy as a result.
Above all, Europe’s human rights crisis matters for its own sake. If these dangerous
ideas—that some deserve fewer rights than others, and that the democratic
will of the majority can choose to set aside rights for minorities—are
left unchecked, the ideals of those who tore down the Berlin Wall will be
betrayed, and the loss incalculable.
Benjamin Ward is deputy director of the Europe and Central Asia Division at
Human Rights Watch.
FIFD P8K<IE8C@JD KF D@>E@KP:
Respecting the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
By Shantha Rau Barriga
Good intentions do not always make for good policy.
That is particularly true for people with disabilities, who are often stripped of
the most fundamental of human rights—the right to make choices about their
own lives—under the guise of “protecting” them from the challenges of decision-
making and living independently.“It happens to all persons with disabilities,”
Jennifer, a woman with a physical disability in northern Uganda, told
Human Rights Watch. “It is as if we weren’t human.”1
In Croatia, for example, Human Rights Watch found that more than 70 percent
of persons with intellectual or mental disabilities living in nine institutions
that we visited were there without their consent or the opportunity to challenge
the decision to keep them there. Living out grim and regimented days,
they cannot even take a shower in private and are deprived of the ability to
make even basic decisions, including what to eat and what time to sleep.
Many residents have been there for most of their lives. As one young woman,
Marija, told us, “Once you enter, you never leave.”
Meanwhile in Peru the government excluded more than 23,000 people with
intellectual and mental disabilities from the voter registry before the April
2011 national election. The decision was based on assumptions that people
with such disabilities cannot make decisions on their own, and that the government
was “protecting” individuals with disabilities from being penalized
for not voting.2 Pressured by local disability rights advocates and the
Ombudsman’s Office, the government invited people with disabilities to register.
But with limited time and poor communication regarding the about-turn
in policy, fewer than 60 people with disabilities were added back to the roster
before the election.
As these examples show, restrictions on legal capacity are based on law, policy,
accepted state practices, or arbitrary decision-making by state officials.
Government laws and policies restricting or removing legal capacity of persons
with disabilities reflect an understanding of disability as a medical
issue. As Human Rights Watch’s country-specific research has shown over the
last two years, deprivation of legal capacity profoundly impacts people with
disabilities, for example, when it comes to the right to health, political participation,
access to justice, and freedom from arbitrary detention. Indeed in
many countries, national laws recognize persons with disabilities as unequal
citizens, sometimes allowing them fewer rights than children.
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)—the most
recent comprehensive human rights treaty—reaffirms that persons with disabilities
have rights, and challenges the inequality and discrimination inherent
in laws that infantilize individuals with disabilities.3 Disability is
described as long-term physical, mental, intellectual, or sensory impairments
that—because of physical, communication, and attitudinal barriers—limit
inclusion and full participation in society.4 Respect for inherent dignity, independence,
individual autonomy including the freedom to make one’s own
choices, and non-discrimination are among the CRPD’s core principles.5
The convention compels us to start with the premise that people with disabilities
have the same rights and equal recognition under the law as all others.
The CRPD also acknowledges that persons with disabilities may, in certain situations,
need support exercising their rights.
However, the convention does not spell out how the right to legal capacity
and supported decision-making should be implemented. As a result, disability
advocates, legal experts, and governments find themselves trying to interpret
the scope of these provisions, while providing rights-affirming alternatives
to old patterns of guardianship and substituted decision-making.
Disabled peoples’ organizations (DPOs) and persons with disabilities, who
were key actors in advocating for and drafting the treaty, must be engaged
and take the lead in this process. Indeed, the CRPD itself requires that states involve DPOs and experts with disabilities in implementing and monitoring
the treaty.
The Impact of Legal Capacity Restrictions
Losing one’s legal capacity can be devastating. For example, Milica, a
woman with an intellectual disability in Croatia, was stripped of her legal
capacity by a court decision and forced to live in an institution for approximately
20 years.6 She even had to ask her sister for permission before
marrying her husband.7
In Peru, Roberto, a 37-year-old man with a mild intellectual disability, went to
a regular school and now has a job, yet was denied the chance to open a
bank account because of an arbitrary decision of bank officials. His national
identity card is labeled “mentally disabled” on the back. His father told us,
“The bank staff looked at him strangely. He understood. He felt bad, I felt
bad.… Roberto doesn’t need to wear a sign on his chest [that he has a
disability].”8
In the United States, some immigrants with mental disabilities are unjustifiably
detained for years on end, sometimes with no legal limits.9 Why?
Because they do not get the support they need, such as legal representation,
to make claims against their deportation.
Despite the protections outlined in the CRPD, most countries still maintain a
system of guardianship for those deprived of legal capacity. Guardians are
usually appointed by a court and make decisions on behalf of the individual.
With such power comes plenty of opportunity for abuse, emotionally, financially,
sometimes even physically. What we once considered well-intended
protection for persons with disabilities often resulted in abuses in access to
justice.
To combat these abuses inherent in the guardianship system, governments
must adapt their laws to ensure that an individual’s rights, will, and preferences
are respected. So far no government has completed the complex transition
from substituted decision-making to a system of autonomous decisionmaking with adequate support mechanisms, as the CRPD requires. Some
countries have set out on the right track, and others should benefit from
these experiences.
Living in the Community
Persons with disabilities are at particular risk of arbitrary deprivation of liberty.
This is because their compulsory placement and confinement in an institution
may not be considered as “detention” under domestic law, especially
when—as in a number of countries—it is done under the decision of a
guardian.
“There, I was free,” Marija, a young woman with mild intellectual and mental
disabilities told Human Rights Watch about her experience living in a home in
the community.10 She now lives in an institution.
The CRPD recognizes the right to live in the community on an equal basis as
others, including the choice of residence and development of a supportive
and independent living arrangement.11 There are a number of examples of
how it can be done: Senada, who lived in an institution in Croatia for more
than seven years, has lived in the community since 2006. Although she initially
needed support from staff in her community living program, she now
lives alone, has her own key, buys her own food, and cooks. She has a job
and decides how she spends the money she earns.12 In other words, she lives
just like others.
Even long-term residents of institutions have shown they can successfully
transition into community life. For example, Milica and her husband, whom
she met in the institution, are able to cook, go to the market together, and
take care of their daily living needs.13 But because Milica has difficulty with
numbers, she receives assistance with financial matters such as paying her
bills and buying groceries.14 Based on interviews with former residents of
Croatian institutions, it is clear they took particular pride in their ability to live
in the community, even if they did need support to make that possible. For them, independent living has led to a better, more productive life and given
them a purpose and reason to live.
Political Participation
Disenfranchisement of people with disabilities, as seen in Peru, is not
uncommon. However, Peru is also an example of where local disability groups
and the Ombudsman’s Office used the CRPD to advocate for change. In
October 2011 the government reversed its policy and pledged to take prompt
action to reinstate voting rights to the more than 20,000 persons with disabilities
who were unable to vote in the presidential elections.15 However, the victory
was not complete as Peru’s civil code still limits the rights of some people
with disabilities to participate in the political process.
The practice of excluding those perceived as lacking the capacity to vote has
a long history, and currently most democratic countries have capacity-related
qualifications for voting.16 In Germany, for example, the electoral law prevents
some citizens from voting based on disability, including if someone is
“not eligible to vote owing to a judicial decision, … a custodian has been
appointed … and he or she is accommodated in a psychiatric hospital...”17
The constitutions of Thailand, Kenya, India, and Ghana limit the right to vote
for people with “unsound mind.” In Hungary the new constitution adopted in
June 2011 states that no one should be discriminated against based on disability,
but also permits a judge to remove the right to vote from those with
“limited mental ability.” Similarly, the Council of Europe’s advisory body on
constitutional matters, known as the Venice Commission, has been considering
amendments to protect the right to political participation of persons with
disabilities, yet to date has deemed acceptable laws and practices that
enable judges to restrict their right to vote.
The CRPD, however, requires governments to “ensure that persons with disabilities
can effectively and fully participate in political and public life on an
equal basis with others, directly or through freely chosen representatives,
including the right and opportunity for persons with disabilities to vote and
be elected.”18 The convention allows for no exceptions. The CRPD’s treaty body has recently said that disability-based discrimination should be prohibited
in all laws, “particularly those governing elections” and that “urgent
adoption of legislative measures to ensure that the right of persons with disabilities,
including persons who are currently under guardianship or trusteeship,
can exercise their right to vote and to participate in public life on an
equal basis with others.”19
There is not, and cannot be, a clear and objective measure of knowledge
related to participating in an electoral process. Already in any election, people
vote for a range of reasons, including preference for a candidate’s agenda
or their image. Some publicly state their intention to vote for candidates randomly
or to write in fictional candidates. En masse exclusion of persons categorized
as “disabled” clearly violates the right of political participation.
Especially when read together with its provisions on non-discrimination and
legal capacity, the CRPD makes clear that there should be no case-by-case
restrictions on this right on the grounds of disability. Governments can and
should do much more to honor the right of citizens with disabilities to participate
in the political process and provide them the necessary support to exercise
this basic right.
Informed Consent
Free and informed consent is one of the pillars of the right to health and to
legal capacity. For people with disabilities, this principle is often violated and
undermined by paternalistic attitudes and actions. For example, Human
Rights Watch found that women and girls with disabilities in Argentina are
infantilized in the reproductive health system, and stripped of their capacity
to make decisions about available services. One woman told Human Rights
Watch that some doctors thought her incapable of remembering to take her
daily contraceptive pill because she is blind.
The coerced sterilization of women and girls with disabilities is another issue
of serious concern. In Nepal, women and girls with intellectual disabilities
were sterilized without their free and informed consent. In these cases, the
decision to perform the sterilization was made by the parents in consultation with a doctor.20 Dr. Lalitha Joshi, mother of a young man with Down’s
Syndrome in Nepal, told Human Rights Watch: “If parents and society really
care for children with disabilities, there’s no need to sterilize them. We can
train them to look after themselves.”21
It is particularly common in institutions and other closed settings to deny
people with mental or intellectual disabilities the right to consent to decisions
that impact their lives. In visits to two psychiatric institutions in Peru,
for example, staff told Human Rights Watch that if residents refuse to take
their medications, they simply disguise the medications in meals or inject
them with the drugs.22 In some cases, as noted by the United Nations special
rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, forced medical treatment can amount to torture and ill-treatment
without the person’s free and informed consent.23
The Way Forward
Legal capacity is a most fundamental right: it is what makes a human being a
subject in the legal system, rather than a mere object of the law. It is no coincidence
that the CRPD calls on governments and communities not only to
guarantee the rights of people with disabilities, but also to guarantee their
human dignity.
In transitioning to community-based services and independent living programs,
all relevant stakeholders—including governments, development agencies,
society, and legal and health professionals—should share the experiences,
models, and lessons they have learned. The continued leadership of
individuals with disabilities is critical to this effort, as is the activism of local,
regional, and international advocacy organizations. After all, the call to protect
the rights and dignity of people with disabilities is never more powerful
than when it comes from the very people who experience these injustices
themselves.
Shantha Rau Barriga is researcher and advocate in the Health and Human
Rights Division at Human Rights Watch.
1 Human Rights Watch, “As if We Weren’t Human”: Discrimination and Violence against Women
with Disabilities in Northern Uganda, August 2010, p.8,
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/08/24/if-we-weren-t-human
2 Human Rights Watch interview with Malena Pineda Angeles, chief, Program for the Defense and
Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, July 26, 2011, Lima, Peru. Jorge Yrivarren
Lazo, “DERECHOS PARA TODOS, Los derechos de las personas con discapacidad,” El
Comercio, October 18, 2011 http://elcomercio.pe/impresa/notas/derechos-personas-discapacidad/
20111018/1319463
3 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), adopted December 13, 2006, G.A.
Res. 61/106, Annex I, U.N. GAOR, 61st Sess., Supp. (No. 49) at 65, U.N. Doc. A/61/49 (2006),
entered into force May 3, 2008.
4 Ibid, art. 2.
5 Ibid, art. 3.
6 Human Rights Watch “Once You Enter, You Never Leave”: Deinstitutionalization of Persons with
Intellectual or Mental Disabilities in Croatia, ISBN: 1-56432-686-1, September 23, 2010,
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/09/23/once-you-enter-you-never-leave-0
7 Ibid.
8 Human Rights Watch interview with Marcelino Velazco, father of three young men with intellectual
disabilities, Lima, Peru, October 22, 2011.
9 Human Rights Watch, Deportation by Default: Mental Disability, Unfair Hearings, and Indefinite
Detention in the US Immigration System, ISBN: 1-56432-665-9, July 25, 2010,
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2010/07/26/deportation-default-0
10 Human Rights Watch, “Once You Enter, You Never Leave,” p.1.
11 CRPD, art. 19.
12 Human Rights Watch, “Once You Enter, You Never Leave,” p.49.
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 RENIEC (Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil), Resolución Jefatural Nº 508-2011-
JNAC/RENIEC )October 10, 2011),
http://www.reniec.gob.pe/portal/TransparenciaAdm?id=005&anno=&valorInicial=16&valorMen
u=13 (accessed November 16, 2011).
16 Marta Mendiondo, Pamela Teaster and Susan Lawrence, “Public Guardianship: In the Best
Interests of Incapacitated People?,” August 10, 2011, ISBN: 0313378274.
17 Federal Electoral Law (Bundewahlgesetz, BGW), s. 1. art. 13.
18 CRPD, art. 29a.
19 Concluding observations of the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
regarding Tunisia; Fifth session, April 11-15, 2011, paras. 13 and 35.
20 Human Rights Watch, Futures Stolen: Barriers to Education for Children with Disabilities in
Nepal, August 2011, http://www.hrw.org/reports/2011/08/24/futures-stolen.
21 Human Rights Watch interview with Dr. Lalitha Joshi, gynecologist and president of the Down’s
Syndrome Association, Kathmandu, Nepal, March 30, 2011.
22 Human Rights Watch interview with staff members at Hospital Hermilio Valdizan, Lima, Peru,
October 25, 2011. Human Rights Watch interview with a nurse at Hospital Victor Larco Herrera,
Lima, Peru, October 26, 2011.
23 Report of the special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment,
Manfred Nowak. A/63/175, July 28, 2008.
A L8E;D8IB V@:KFIP =FI DFD<JK@: WFIB<IJ:
New Convention Establishes First Global Labor
Standards for Millions of Women and Girls
By Nisha Varia and Jo Becker
If someone had told me 45 years ago that we would be here today, I
would not have believed it. We do not have to be slaves anymore.
—Myrtle Witbooi, chair of the International Domestic Workers
Network and former domestic worker from South Africa, Geneva,
June 10, 2011
On June 16, 2011, with the world’s attention consumed by street protests in
the Middle East and a stubbornly bleak global economy, a quiet revolution
took place. Overcoming initial skepticism and resistance, members of the
International Labour Organization (ILO)—governments, trade unions, and
employers’ associations—voted overwhelmingly in favor of a new groundbreaking
treaty that, for the first time, established global labor standards for
the estimated 50 to 100 million domestic workers worldwide who clean, cook,
and care for children and the elderly in private households.
ILO Convention 189 Concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers did not
topple any dictators, but it does radically change how domestic workers—the
vast majority of whom are women and girls—and their work inside the home
are valued, recognized, and protected. Its desperately needed and long overdue
protections shake deeply entrenched gender discrimination in social and
legal norms, and, in some countries, the lingering legacies of slavery.
Many countries exclude domestic workers from labor laws partially or completely,
denying them basic labor protections that most other categories of
workers can take for granted, such as a minimum wage or limits to hours of
work. Such exclusion—together with discrimination and a profound devaluation
of work associated with traditional, unpaid female roles has—led to a
wide and disturbing range of abuses against domestic workers around the world, many of whom are migrants and an estimated 30 percent of whom are
children under the age of 18.
Over the past 10 years, Human Rights Watch’s research in countries as
diverse as Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, the United States, Morocco, Guinea, and
El Salvador has documented pervasive abuses and labor exploitation, including
excessively long working hours without rest; unpaid wages for months or
years; forced confinement in the workplace; food deprivation; verbal, physical,
and sexual abuse; and forced labor including debt bondage and trafficking.
Domestic workers who suffer such abuses typically have little access to
redress.
Governments overwhelmingly voted in favor of the ILO convention, which
guarantees domestic workers labor protections equivalent to those of other
workers, including for working hours, minimum wage coverage, overtime compensation,
daily and weekly rest periods, social security, and maternity leave.
The new standards oblige governments to address the minimum age for children
in domestic work and their right to attend school, protect domestic
workers from violence and abuse, regulate recruitment agencies and fees,
and set out measures for effective monitoring and enforcement.
While adoption of the convention was a major victory worthy of celebration,
the toughest work lies ahead: ensuring that the convention is ratified, incorporated
into domestic laws worldwide, and enforced. This essay describes
the situation that domestic workers currently face, analyzes how a constellation
of forces came together in 2011 to get the ILO convention adopted, and
outlines steps that need to be taken now to ensure that this positive development
leads to tangible improvements in the lives and working conditions of
domestic workers.
Abuses against Domestic Workers
I woke up at 5 a.m., cleaned the house and made breakfast for the
children and worked all day. I went to sleep at 3 a.m. I never got a
chance to rest…. The wife of the employer shouted and beat me
every day…. The employer had my passport. The door was locked.
I was not allowed to go out or even talk to the neighbors. I never
received my salary.
—Chain Channi, Cambodian domestic worker, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, April 12, 2011
Domestic workers play a critical economic role globally, helping households
manage responsibilities of child care, cooking, and cleaning. They also free
up their employers to participate in the workforce themselves and provide
care for the industrialized world’s increasingly aging population. Migrant
domestic workers send home billions of dollars in remittances to developing
countries each year, but despite their economic contributions, sending governments
have largely ignored protection concerns.
Domestic workers, who often make extraordinary personal sacrifices to support
their families, have routinely been denied basic protections guaranteed
others workers and are among the most exploited workers in the world. Gaps
in legal protections, isolation in private homes, and social norms that have
sanctioned exploitation of a “servant” class have given rise to abuses ranging
from endemic labor exploitation in which workers toil around the clock for little
or no pay, to trafficking into domestic servitude and slavery.
In a review of 72 countries’ labor laws, the ILO found that 40 percent did not
guarantee domestic workers a weekly rest day, and half did not limit hours of
work. Many national child labor laws currently exclude domestic workers,
meaning employers can employ young children and make them labor for long
hours, often at the cost of their education and health. A Human Rights Watch
study in Indonesia found that only 1 in 45 child domestic workers interviewed
was attending school.
Many domestic workers are international migrants who confront additional
risks posed by language barriers, precarious immigration status, excessive
recruitment fees, and employers’ confiscation of passports. Human Rights
Watch investigations across Asia and the Middle East have documented the
failure of many governments to monitor recruitment agencies that impose
heavy debt burdens or to ensure that migrant domestic workers have access
to courts, information about their rights, and support services when they face
abuse.
Trade unions have begun organizing domestic workers in recent decades in
places such as South Africa, Hong Kong, and Brazil, but for the most part the
organized labor movement has been slow to take up domestic workers’ concerns
and the particular risks faced by children and migrants. The process of
negotiating global labor standards on domestic work brought together a
diverse alliance of domestic worker organizations, NGOs, and trade unions
working to reverse this dynamic.
Forging Global Labor Standards
The lack of protection for domestic workers represents a significant
gap in the coverage of international labor standards…. Domestic
workers around the world are looking to the ILC [International
Labour Conference] to adopt a convention that would help to
overcome past injustices and give domestic workers a better future.
—Maria Luisa Escorel, minister counselor, permanent mission
of Brazil, Geneva, June 2011
The ILO convention adopted in June 2011 was unthinkable just a few years
ago. It represents the culmination of years of efforts by domestic workers,
advocates, and officials to shine a spotlight on a long-ignored but significant
sector of the workforce. These efforts properly focused on the ILO, with its
unique tripartite structure in which workers’ groups, employers’ groups, and
governments (183 countries are members) negotiate international standards,
with all three component groups having a vote.
The push for new global labor standards began in earnest in March 2008
when domestic worker advocacy groups, migrants’ groups, and global trade
unions successfully pressed to get domestic work formally on the ILO agenda.
This was followed by a series of intensive consultations with ILO members
and opportunities for them to comment on draft instruments between 2008
and 2010, and two rounds of on-the-floor negotiations at the International
Labour Conference in Geneva in June 2010 and June 2011.
Many governments initially expressed hesitation or direct opposition to a
legally binding convention on domestic work, citing the impracticality of monitoring
work in private households and their reluctance to add to a growing
body of international labor standards, many of which had poor rates of ratification.
However, the ILO survey of laws and practices around the world, opening
statements at the negotiations by the workers’ group and key governments,
and lobbying by domestic workers’ organizations and NGOs made a
strong case that the pervasive exploitation and abuse in this sector could no
longer be neglected.
The workers’ position was formally represented by the International Trade
Union Confederation (ITUC), the global umbrella for national trade union federations,
and supported by the ILO unit assisting workers (ACTRAV). The
newly formed International Domestic Workers Network (IDWN), supported by
the main global trade union for food workers (IUF), ensured domestic workers’
voices were represented in the negotiations. They brought domestic
workers from around the world to participate in and observe the negotiations,
and several of them were selected for their country’s official worker delegations,
including those from Mexico, Brazil, South Africa, Jamaica, the US, and
the United Kingdom. Anti-Slavery International facilitated a delegation of
child domestic workers to share their experiences and recommendations to
the negotiating committee.
The employers’ position was formally represented by the International
Organization of Employers (IOE), which had little previous experience with the
issue.
From the outset of the negotiations, the employers pushed strongly for a nonbinding
recommendation in lieu of a legally binding convention, and were
particularly concerned by additional regulation of private employment agencies
that they feared was unrealistic and impractical. However, a change in
leadership between the second and third years of negotiations, engagement
with NGOs to learn more about abusive practices by recruitment agencies in
some parts of the world, and a clear signal of overwhelming support for a
binding convention led the employers to back down from their opposition.
The employers’ representative spoke strongly on behalf of the new standards
during the final vote, and more than half of the employers cast their votes in
favor of adopting the convention.
Some of the most contentious debates during the negotiations included regulation
of employment agencies, elements of written contracts for domestic
workers, provisions on social security and a healthy working environment,
and how to account for working hours when domestic workers are not actively
working but must be available to be “on-call.” Surprisingly, provisions on
monitoring and inspections of private homes garnered little controversy during
the final debate.
From the outset of negotiations, key governments provided decisive support,
advocating strongly for binding standards that would extend equal labor protections
to domestic workers. Delegates from Australia, Brazil, South Africa
(speaking on behalf of the Africa group), the US, Argentina, and Uruguay
spoke up repeatedly to introduce and defend strong provisions and to point
to effective country-level examples of legislation and implementation.
Although European Union countries, with the exception of the UK and the
Czech Republic, cast their final votes in favor of the convention, the EU
played a disappointing role during the negotiations, often attempting to
weaken suggested provisions. In part, this emanated from the EU’s desire to
avoid highly politicized debates on migrants’ rights in their home countries
and, in general, to work around specific provisions in EU directives and reflect
existing national legislation. ILO members made a number of concessions in
order to accommodate EU concerns, hoping to win their support and avoid
the credibility problems faced by the United Nations Migrant Worker Convention, which has been primarily ratified by migrant-sending countries
and ignored by migrant-receiving countries.
As negotiations progressed, support for the convention grew. Some states
with initially hostile attitudes changed their positions as they heard evidence
of the abuses against domestic workers and concrete examples of how legislation
in a diverse array of countries could improve domestic workers’ rights.
Members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, the
United Arab Emirates (UAE), and Saudi Arabia), along with Bangladesh,
Indonesia, and India, reversed early opposition to a legally binding convention
and expressed support in the final vote.
On June 16, 2011, the newly negotiated standards won overwhelming support,
with 396 delegates (representing governments, workers, and employers’
associations) voting for the convention, 16 voting against, and 63 abstaining.
Swaziland was the only government to vote against the convention.
Translating Standards into Change on the Ground
While we celebrate this historic moment, we also know that there
are many challenges to face in our struggle to ensure that these
rights, now enshrined in Convention form, are upheld, protected,
and defended.
—Migrant Forum in Asia, statement, Manila, June 16, 2011
Adopting a new convention is only the first step in a long, difficult campaign
for widespread ratification and implementation. However, the process of
negotiating the convention has already played a critical role in raising awareness
about a labor sector once largely hidden from public view. This has
already begun to shift attitudes away from perceiving household work as
informal labor, to recognizing it as work deserving of comprehensive protections.
The negotiations also served as a focal point to mobilize a diverse array
of actors committed to enshrining these standards in national laws and practices
on the ground.
Two ratifications are required for the convention to come into force, and several
countries have already expressed their intention to ratify, including
Belgium, Brazil, Namibia, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, and Uruguay.
National consultations on the convention are taking place in others. Whether
governments are close to ratifying the convention or not, they will feel pressure
to respect the standards it sets forth. For example, several countries are
currently drafting or revising legislation on domestic work, such as Kuwait,
the UAE, Lebanon, Indonesia, and the Philippines, and they will consult the
standards as they finalize their laws. Singapore and Malaysia, two of the nine
countries that did not vote in the convention’s favor, will find it in their interest
to introduce reforms anyway to remain an attractive destination for
migrant domestic workers who can increasingly opt for better working conditions
and pay elsewhere.
Discrimination and exploitative practices are deeply entrenched and recognition
and respect for domestic workers’ rights will not improve overnight. To
make the new standards count, domestic workers’ groups, migrants’ groups,
trade unions, the ILO, NGOs, and other advocates must strengthen efforts at
the national level to replicate their success in Geneva at the international
level. They must also raise public awareness among key constituencies such
as national labor officials, employers, trade unions, and media. They will then
need to mobilize and build momentum around national consultations, ILO
ratification, and related legislative reforms.
Because the strength and diversity of the domestic workers’ movement varies
greatly by country and region, a third priority is to provide international support
to national and regional groups as needed. This may entail working to
ensure freedom of association for domestic workers, providing financial and
organizational support to fledgling groups, or building alliances among
domestic workers, labor, migrants, women’s rights, and children’s rights
organizations.
Finally, dissemination of best practices and lessons learned, particularly on
experiences with implementing domestic worker protections and instituting monitoring mechanisms, will be crucial for ensuring that strong global standards
turn into concrete improvements in local practices.
As Myrtle Witbooi, the IDWN chair quoted earlier, said when celebrating adoption
of the ILO convention:
The fight is not over. We need to go back home. We need to campaign.
We need to be sure that what we vote for is implemented.
We must not rest until our governments ratify the convention.
We cannot be free until we free all the domestic workers.
Nisha Varia is senior researcher in the Women’s Rights Division at Human Rights
Watch; Jo Becker is advocacy director of the Children’s Rights Division.
UPRISING
PHOTOGRAPHS FROM THE ARAB SPRING
On December 17, 2010, a 26-year-old Tunisian man set himself ablaze
after abusive police confiscated his unlicensed vegetable cart, his only
source of income. This desperate act of protest inspired a movement
that swept the country and ignited calls for reform throughout the
region. Thousands of Tunisians took to the streets to denounce their
tyrannical government and, within weeks successfully ousted
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali from power. On January 25, 2011,
Egyptians came together by the thousands to launch a massive
pro-democratic movement that within 18 days ended President
Hosni Mubarak’s 30-year reign. Emboldened anti-government
protests quickly erupted in Jordan, Yemen, Algeria, Bahrain, Iran,
Iraq, Syria, Oman, and Libya.
EGYPT A crowd celebrates Mubarak’s resignation
in Tahrir Square, Cairo, on February 11, 2011.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine
EGYPT Laila Said with Wael Ghonim. Laila is the mother of 28-year-old Khaled
Said, whose torture and murder by Egyptian police on June 6, 2010, helped to
spark the discontent that eventually led to the Tahrir Square protests and
President Hosni Mubarak's downfall. Laila, who spoke out about the murder
of her son, became known as the "Mother of Egypt," and as an emblem of the
consequences of endemic police torture and impunity. Wael is a Google
regional marketing executive who administered the "We are all Khaled Said"
Facebook page after the young man’s killing.
© 2011 Platon for Human Rights Watch
EGYPT Ramy Essam, 23, is a charismatic
singer, guitarist, and songwriter who
became famous during the Tahrir Square
protests as “The Singer of the Square.”
Detained and tortured by the Egyptian
military after President Hosni Mubarak
fell, Ramy has written “The Square,” an
album of songs based on his experiences
during and after the protests.
© 2011 Platon for Human Rights Watch
YEMEN A poster of Yemen’s President Ali Abdullah Saleh on a roof
of a house in the old city of Sanaa. After more than three decades
of autocratic rule, Saleh bowed to unrelenting street protests and
signed an agreement on November 23, 2011, to relinquish power
over three months.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine
TUNISIA A protester rests during a day
marked by clashes with the police in Tunis
on January 21, 2011. The slogan behind him
reads: “Death to dictatorship.”
© 2011 Alex Majoli/Magnum
BAHRAIN The funeral procession of
anti-government protester Abdul Ridha
BuHameed in Malkiya on February 22, 2011.
BuHameed was shot in the head when
Bahraini military and security forces
attacked peaceful anti-government
demonstrators marching toward the Pearl
Roundabout, in the capital, Manama.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine
SYRIA A cell phone image of Ismail Bakir who was
reportedly tortured and killed by Syrian security
forces while trying to cross the border with Turkey.
© 2011 Stanley Greene/NOOR
LIBYA A Libyan reacts while touring Libyan leader
Muammar Gaddafi’s massive Bab al-Aziziya
compound in central Tripoli, which opposition
fighters overran in August 2011.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine
AE>FC8
In 2011 President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, in power for 32 years, faced an
unprecedented wave of criticism. Inspired by the pro-democracy Arab Spring
movements, Angola witnessed an incipient movement of anti-government
protests. In response, authorities used excessive force to crack down on the
protests, most of which were organized via the internet, and curtailed media
coverage of the demonstrations.
More broadly, Angola’s government continued restrictions on the rights to freedom
of expression, association, and assembly, despite strong guarantees protecting
these rights in the 2010 constitution.
Freedom of Media
Media face a wide array of restrictions that impair free expression and encourage
self-censorship. The ruling party limits access to information and, by controlling
the state-owned as well as some private media, severely restricts media
criticisms of the government. Educated urban classes often use the internet
and social media as channels to criticize the government due to constraints on
traditional media. At this writing the necessary by-laws and other complementary
laws to the 2006 press law that would lift administrative restrictions on private
radio broadcasting had yet to be tabled before parliament.
On March 31 parliament passed an information technology crime bill that
undermined freedom of expression and information. After domestic and international
criticism, parliament eventually withdrew the bill, but government officials
announced that some of its provisions would be integrated into a new
criminal code that parliament has yet to pass.
Defamation remains a criminal offense in Angola, and offenses, such as “abuse
of press freedom,” defined by the 2006 press law, are vague and open to use
against journalists and media outlets.
On March 3 a judge of the provincial court of Namibe sentenced Armando
Chicoca, a journalist for Voice of America and the private weekly newspaper Folha 8, to one year in prison for defamation. On April 6 he was released on bail
while awaiting appeal. On October 10 a court gave William Tonet, director of
Folha 8, a one-year suspended sentence for defaming four senior government
officials. He was also ordered to pay US$100,000 in damages, an unusually
high sum. Tonet’s appeal was pending at this writing.
In September the police arrested and briefly detained several journalists, who
intended to cover anti-government rallies; individuals apparently acting under
police instructions physically attacked and injured several journalists. Their
equipment was confiscated or destroyed.
Right to Peaceful Assembly
The 2010 constitution guarantees freedom of assembly and peaceful demonstration,
and Angolan laws explicitly allow public demonstrations without government
authorization. However, since 2009 the government has banned or
obstructed a number of anti-government demonstrations, and the police have
prevented the majority of peaceful demonstrations from taking place.
Since early 2011 a non-partisan youth movement, inspired by the pro-democracy
Arab Spring movements, has organized a number of demonstrations in
Luanda, the capital, calling for freedom of expression, social justice, and the
president’s resignation. The authorities responded in high-handed fashion,
intimidating protesters and organizers and spreading fear among the population
by alleging an imminent risk of civil war. On September 15 the Luanda
provincial government banned all demonstrations in Luanda’s city center, effectively
undermining the right to peaceful assembly. The banning order was withdrawn
after opposition parties appealed at the Constitutional Court.
On March 7, police briefly detained 17 rap musicians who intended to join an
anti-government rally organized anonymously via the internet at Luanda’s
Independence Square; three journalists of the private weekly newspaper Novo
Jornal, who intended to cover the events, were also arrested. Representatives of
three opposition parties who planned to join the protests withdrew following
anonymous death threats. In order to discourage people from participating, the
ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) party organized a campaign to discredit anti-government protests as an attempt to throw the
country back to civil war, and on March 5 the ruling party organized a nationwide
peace march.
On April 2 several hundred people from the same youth movement demonstrated
peacefully at the Independence Square in Luanda. The protests took place
without any incident. However, protesters said they received anonymous death
threats and were subject to other forms of intimidation ahead of the protests.
On May 25 police dispersed a demonstration organized by the youth movement,
and briefly detained 12 protesters.
On September 3 police violently dispersed an anti-government rally of several
hundred youth, and arrested at least 24 people. During the rally, groups of
unidentified men acting under police coverage attacked and injured demonstrators.
Several journalists and demonstrators were injured. On September 12 a
police court convicted 18 demonstrators to prison sentences of 45 to 90 days
for alleged disobedience, damage, and the injuring of four police agents. The
detainees were denied due process, as well as access to lawyers and family
members ahead of the hearings, and defense witnesses said they were intimidated
and threatened by supposed state security agents.
Twenty-seven people were arrested at a September 8 protest that called for the
release of the detainees. The police also briefly detained two journalists from
the state news agency Angop and the private weekly newspaper Continente,
who were covering the protests. On September 19 a police court acquitted for
lack of evidence all 27 detainees of charges of disobedience, incitement to violence,
and damage. On October 14 the Supreme Court ordered the release of
the demonstrators convicted on September 12, admitting lack of evidence.
Police have also used excessive force to disperse spontaneous demonstrations
in Cabinda, Bié, and Benguela. On September 8, policemen killed two alleged
demonstrators in Kuito, Bié, as motorcycle taxi drivers protested against police
violence. On September 26, police briefly arrested a dozen protesters for
alleged illegal land expropriation in Benguela.
Cabinda
An intermittent conflict with a separatist movement has persisted in the
enclave of Cabinda since 1975, despite a 2006 peace agreement. In March the
government officially resumed military counter-insurgency operations in the
enclave. The authorities continued using the conflict to justify restrictions on
freedom of expression, assembly, and association.
In December 2010 all political dissidents who had been convicted and imprisoned
following the armed attack on the Togolese soccer (football) team during
the Africa Cup of Nations in Cabinda on January 8, 2010, were released, following
a parliamentary review of the abusive 1978 state security crime law under
which they were sentenced.
However, on February 13 the government banned anti-government protests in
Cabinda, and on March 7 and April 10 the police briefly detained a number of
alleged protesters. They were released without charge. On July 26, police arrested
nine activists who intended to present a letter to a visiting delegation of
European Union ambassadors. Although a judge acquitted them on August 3,
ruling that the police maltreated them upon arrest, the police sued a Voice of
America journalist who covered the event for defamation, as well as two of his
interviewees who commented on police violence and arrests. At this writing
there had been no progress in the case.
Mass Expulsions of Irregular Migrants
On July 7 a law seeking to prevent and punish perpetrators of domestic violence
entered into force. The law defines sexual violence more broadly than in previous
legislation. While this is a positive step, the government failed to investigate
and punish those who perpetrated sexual violence against female immigrants
during the most recent wave of mass expulsions of irregular migrants
that started in October 2010.
In March the United Nations special rapporteur on torture and the UN special
rapporteur on violence against women questioned Angola’s government on new
allegations of serious human rights abuses, including widespread sexual violence
against irregular, mostly Congolese migrants during the recent wave of mass expulsions in the Cabinda, Zaire, and Lunda Norte provinces. As in previous
years, the government denied the allegations, claiming that it was cleared
by a commission set up to investigate such allegations.
Following the visit of Margot Wallström, UN special representative on sexual
violence in conflict, to Angola in March, the Angolan government said it could
verify only one isolated case of rape that was being addressed through the
courts. The authorities have not published any report of their own investigation,
as promised to the UN, nor have they disclosed any detail on the alleged court
case.
However, accounts gathered by Human Rights Watch in Kamako and Muanda in
May and June suggest the urgent need for a credible, independent, and thorough
investigation on both sides of the border of Angola and the Democratic
Republic of Congo. Human Rights Watch research found that members of the
security service—including border police, rapid intervention police, and immigration
officials—continue to routinely commit violence against female
Congolese migrants in a number of transit prison facilities where migrants are
detained before deportation. Corroborated abuses targeting women include
rape, sexual coercion, beatings, deprivation of food and water, and—in some
cases—sexual abuse in the presence of children and other female inmates.
Key International Actors
Angola remains one of Africa’s largest oil producers and China’s second most
important source of oil and most important commercial partner in Africa. This
oil wealth, and Angola’s regional military power, has greatly limited leverage of
other governments and regional and international organizations pushing for
good governance and human rights.
In August Angola took over the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC)
chair. Yet, the government refuses to grant entry visas to regional NGO activists
planning to attend parallel events during the August SADC heads of state summit.
BLILE;@
Violence increased in Burundi in 2011 as the country’s political situation failed
to stabilize. Reciprocal killings by members of the ruling National Council for
the Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) and
the former rebel group the National Liberation Forces (FNL) increased, particularly
in Bujumbura, the capital, and in Bujumbura Rural Province. Impunity for
these crimes remains one of the most serious obstacles to peace. The single
largest incident of killings took place in September in Gatumba, near the
Congolese border.
The political space in 2011 continued to narrow, with the CNDD-FDD still in a
position of near-monopoly following the main opposition parties’ boycott of the
2010 elections. The government continued to harass and intimidate journalists,
lawyers, and civil society actors who exposed abuses, often labeling them
opposition supporters.
The creation of a National Independent Human Rights Commission (CNIDH),
whose members were sworn in in June, was a positive step, but the CNIDH’s
activities in 2011 were poorly funded.
Political Space
The CNDD-FDD continued to dominate political space, sending contradictory
messages to the opposition. On the one hand, President Pierre Nkurunziza, during
his Independence Day speech on July 1, appealed to exiled opposition leaders
to return to Burundi peacefully and help contribute to the construction of
the country. On the other, the government and the opposition were unable to
agree on the preconditions for dialogue, despite international appeals to do so.
The situation was exacerbated by the disarray of the opposition and the lack of
official recognition of the opposition coalition, ADC-Ikibiri.
Escalation of Political Violence
After exiting the political process in 2010, some FNL members again took up
arms and began launching attacks inside Burundi and from neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo. A number of other unknown armed groups have
also emerged. In response, the CNDD-FDD increased attacks on FNL members
and former members, notably through its imbonerakure youth wing and the
National Intelligence Services (SNR).
Killings targeted prominent members of the FNL as well as the rank and file.
Demobilized FNL commander Audace Vianney Habonarugira was shot dead in
July 2011. He had first been shot and seriously injured by a policeman in March
2011, and he was repeatedly threatened and sought after by state security
agents in the months before his death. Dédithe Niyirera, FNL representative in
Kayanza province, was killed in Kayanza in late August after receiving numerous
death threats. Médard Ndayishimiye, a local FNL leader in Mwaro province
who was also threatened, was found dead in Rutana province in October after
being abducted in Gitega town where he had fled for his safety. Demobilized
FNL combatants were also pressured to join the SNR and the imbonerakure or
face death, in an effort to recruit members who can more easily identify current
and former FNL members. Many FNL members and former members went into
hiding after receiving threats.
In response to these attacks, armed groups, some of whom were believed to be
associated with the FNL, increased attacks on CNDD-FDD members and local
officials. Among the victims were Pascal Ngendakumana and Albert
Ntiranyibagira, two low-ranking CNDD-FDD members, killed on April 6 by individuals
believed to be associated with the FNL.
On September 18, gunmen killed around 40 people in an attack on a bar in
Gatumba, Bujumbura Rural province. It was the largest massacre in the country
in several years. The majority of victims were not known to be affiliated with a
particular political party. Nine days later the intelligence services blamed FNL
leaders for the attack. However, the findings of the commission of inquiry have
not yet been published.
Impunity
Following the Gatumba killings, President Nkurunziza announced that the government
would find the perpetrators within one month. A special commission was established to conduct an investigation and submitted its report to the
prosecutor general in October. By the end of October, 20 people were in pretrial
detention in connection with the Gatumba attack. Other commissions have
been established since late 2010 to investigate extrajudicial killings and other
abuses before, during, and since the 2010 elections. At this writing none of
these commissions had published their findings.
Almost all political killings by individuals affiliated with the CNDD-FDD or the
security forces were conducted with impunity. In some cases, the police or the
prosecutor opened investigations, but these rarely led to arrests. When crimes
were believed to have been perpetrated by opposition groups, the typical government
response was to arbitrarily target FNL or ex-FNL members, even when
there was no credible evidence that the individuals punished were responsible
for these crimes.
Hearings into the killing of Ernest Manirumva, vice-president of the anti-corruption
organization OLUCOME, have stalled since 2010. Eleven suspects remain in
preventive detention since 2009 while high-level security force suspects have
still not been questioned.
Journalists, Civil Society Activists, and Lawyers
Jean Claude Kavumbagu, a journalist charged with treason following his 2010
article questioning the army’s ability to respond to attacks from al-Shabaab,
was released on May 13, 2011. He was found guilty of “publishing an article
likely to discredit the state or economy” and sentenced to eight months, but
was released shortly after the trial since he had spent 10 months in pre-trial
detention.
Bob Rugurika, chief editor of African Public Radio (RPA), was summoned multiple
times to the public prosecutor’s office and questioned about RPA’s radio
broadcasts. He was accused of disseminating information that “incites the population
to civil disobedience” and “incites ethnic hatred” after broadcasting
programs that called for dialogue with the opposition. Rugurika also faced
questions about programs that touched on the composition of a committee set
up by the government to prepare a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
Patrick Mitabaro, editor-in-chief of Radio Isanganiro, was also summoned after
his station aired an interview with former spokesperson of the FRODEBU party,
Pancrace Cimpaye. He was accused, among other things, of disseminating
information that could affect state security. Neither journalist was charged.
The National Security Council issued a one month media blackout on the
Gatumba killings, prohibiting journalists from reporting, commenting on, or
analyzing the incident and any other case under investigation. Five radio stations
and one newspaper briefly defied the order.
Civil society leaders were likewise harassed by the authorities and accused of
siding with the opposition. Pierre-Claver Mbonimpa, president of the human
rights organization APRODH, and Gabriel Rufyiri, president of OLUCOME, were
repeatedly summoned for questioning by the public prosecutor’s office, but
were not charged with any offense. In late August President Nkurunziza publicly
warned that civil society organizations should be “on guard” in a response to
their criticism of state pressure on journalists, lawyers, and civil society
activists.
In April the government refused to allow civil society leaders to march in support
of justice for Manirumva. When the organizations attempted to march without
permission, two members were arrested and detained for several hours
before being released.
State authorities also targeted lawyers. On July 15 lawyer Suzanne Bukuru was
arrested on espionage charges after facilitating an interview between her
clients and journalists. Isidore Rufyikiri, president of the Burundi Bar
Association, was arrested on July 27 on charges of “insulting magistrates” after
organizing a rally in defence of Bukuru. Bukuru was released on August 1 and
the charges were dropped. Rufyikiri was released on August 4 after paying a
fine.
François Nyamoya, lawyer and spokesman for the opposition party Movement
for Solidarity and Democracy (MSD), was arrested on July 29 on charges of witness
tampering in a 2004 murder trial. At this writing he remained in detention.
Nyamoya, who is also the lawyer for journalist Rugurika of RPA, had previously
been arrested in 2010 on charges of “threatening state security.”
National Independent Human Rights Commission
CNIDH began working in June and issued its first public statement on an alleged
extrajudicial execution by the police. However, the commission’s activities in
2011 were poorly funded. Following pressure from the Burundian government
and other African governments, the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC)
hastened the termination of the mandate of the UN independent expert on the
situation of human rights in Burundi, on the basis that a national human rights
commission had been created.
Transitional Justice
After years of delay, measures were put in place relatively quickly to prepare
the establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) to cover
grave crimes in Burundi since 1962. The government appointed a technical
committee in July to create a framework for a TRC, and in October the committee
submitted its report to the president. At this writing the report had not been
officially published. The government has not made a commitment to establish a
special tribunal to investigate past war crimes.
Key International Actors
On January 1 the UN Security Council adopted a resolution scaling down the UN
Office in Burundi (BNUB). Staffing reduction affected BNUB’s human rights
monitoring capacity.
In June the UN independent expert on the situation of human rights in Burundi
presented his first report since September 2008. Burundi officials and the
African Group at the HRC had repeatedly blocked previous publication
attempts. The expert called for measures to end impunity and promote greater
respect for freedom of expression.
International diplomats in Bujumbura continued to follow high-profile court proceedings
including that of Kavumbagu. In May European diplomats in Burundi,
in a joint statement, expressed concern over reports of extrajudicial executions
and torture in 2010 and 2011. The UN secretary-general and several governments, including those of the United States and Belgium, condemned the
Gatumba attack and called for an investigation. The United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development (DFID) announced that it would close
its aid programme in Burundi in 2012, citing internal reprioritization. Other
international donors expressed concerns over state corruption.
CoK< ;’IMF@I<
At least 3,000 people were killed and more than 150 women and girls raped
during the six months of political violence and armed conflict which followed
the November 28, 2010 presidential run-off election between opposition leader
Alassane Ouattara and incumbent President Laurent Gbagbo. Despite internationally
recognized results proclaiming Ouattara the winner, Gbagbo refused to
step down. Large-scale violence ended in May, after the April capture of
Gbagbo and Abidjan, the commercial capital, by pro-Ouattara troops.
After consolidating power President Ouattara made repeated commitments to
investigate and ensure impartial justice for the massive human rights and international
humanitarian law violations that characterized the period. However,
one-sided domestic justice efforts, which excluded charges against any member
of his camp, threatened further communal divisions and undermined the
return to the rule of law.
International actors that had rightfully taken a hardline stance against the
Gbagbo camp’s abuses during the conflict—including the United Nations, the
European Union, France, and the United States—appeared less willing to publicly
pressure Ouattara’s government on the same issues and on the importance
of impartial accountability.
Post-Election Violence
From December 2010 to late February 2011 the post-election violence was primarily
perpetrated by security forces and allied militia loyal to Gbagbo, which
sought to maintain power by systematically targeting real or perceived Ouattara
supporters. Pro-Gbagbo forces “disappeared” neighborhood political leaders
from Ouattara’s coalition, gang-raped women and girls who had helped mobilize
voters, and violently suppressed any demonstration against Gbagbo’s
refusal to step down. State-controlled media routinely incited hatred and violence
against northern Ivorians and West African immigrants. As a direct consequence,
pro-Gbagbo militias established roadblocks around Abidjan and killed
scores from these typically pro-Ouattara groups during moments of tension.
In early March forces loyal to Ouattara—composed primarily of soldiers who
fought with his prime minister, Guillaume Soro, during the 2002 to 2003 conflict
and its aftermath—launched a military offensive to remove Gbagbo from
power. Once the crisis escalated to armed conflict, it was marked by war crimes
and likely crimes against humanity by both sides.
The west of the country, which has long been its most volatile region, was the
scene of massacres committed by both sides in late March. In Bloléquin and
Bédi-Goazon, pro-Gbagbo militiamen and Liberian mercenaries killed at least
130 men, women, and children from groups that largely supported, or were perceived
to support, Ouattara. In Duékoué, the Republican Forces and allied militias
killed several hundred men from pro-Gbagbo ethnic groups after taking
control of the town on March 29. Throughout the west, pro-Ouattara forces
killed, raped, and burned villages. At the conflict’s peak more than 180,000
Ivorians fled to Liberia; at this writing most refugees remained there, often without
a home to return to, and afraid of abuse should they return to villages that
still exist. Several hundred thousand more remain internally displaced for similar
reasons.
After taking over the west, the Republican Forces advanced to Abidjan in several
days as most Gbagbo fighters laid down their weapons and fled. However,
intense fighting engulfed Abidjan in early April, before Gbagbo’s April 11 capture.
In subsequent days pro-Gbagbo militiamen rampaged in areas they still
controlled, killing hundreds of perceived Ouattara supporters. The Republican
Forces engaged in widespread summary executions, torture, arbitrary detention,
and looting as they consolidated control of the commercial capital.
National-Level Justice and Accountability
The capture of Gbagbo and his wife Simone began a wave of arrests against the
former regime’s military and political leaders. At this writing military and civilian
prosecutors had brought charges against at least 118 of these officials
including Gbagbo, Simone, Charles Blé Goudé, Gen. Guiai Bi Poin, and Gen.
Bruno Dogbo Blé. The civilian prosecutor primarily limited the charges to economic
crimes and crimes against the state—including charges against
Gbagbo—whereas the military prosecutor included charges for murder, rape, and other violent crimes. In stark contrast, at this writing not a single member
of the pro-Ouattara forces had been charged for crimes committed during the
post-election crisis.
Almost immediately after the conflict ended Ouattara called for a Dialogue,
Truth, and Reconciliation Commission (DTRC) and then named former Prime
Minister Charles Konan Banny as the commission’s president. The commission
formally began working on September 28. The DTRC’s potential efficacy was
undermined by inadequate consultation with Ivorian civil society, lack of independence
from the presidency, an unclear relationship with prosecution efforts,
and ill-defined powers.
The president also established a national commission of inquiry to provide conclusions
on how and why massive human rights violations occurred. The commission,
which began its work on September 13 and had a six-month mandate
that could be extended for another six months, was tasked most importantly
with identifying individuals who should be subject to criminal prosecution.
However, the nomination of a commissioner perceived to be close to the president,
as well as the process that created the commission, raised concerns
about its independence from the presidency and commitment to faithfully and
impartially investigate abuses perpetrated by both sides.
International Criminal Court
In December 2010 and again in May 2011 Ouattara confirmed the authority of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate crimes under its jurisdiction.
Although not a state party to the Rome Statue, the Ivorian government
under Gbagbo had accepted the ICC’s jurisdiction in April 2003. However, in
Ouattara’s May request reconfirming the court’s jurisdiction, he asked it to limit
its investigation to crimes committed after November 28, 2010. Ouattara did
publicly express his expectation that the ICC would examine both sides’ crimes,
and that the government would cooperate in handing over any individuals
requested.
On June 23 the ICC prosecutor asked the pre-trial chamber for authorization to
open an investigation, limiting his inquiry into post-election crimes. This request for a temporal restriction drew criticism from many, including a coalition
of Ivorian civil society organizations that stressed the importance of investigations
going back to 2002, given the gravity, scale, and complete impunity
for these crimes.
On October 3 the pre-trial chamber authorized the prosecutor’s investigation
into the post-election crimes and requested that he provide further information
on crimes committed between 2002 and 2010 to determine possible expansion
of the investigation.
Ongoing Insecurity and Reestablishing the Rule of Law
Widespread recruitment of ethnic-based militia by both sides, as well as longstanding
weaknesses within the Ivorian judiciary, contributed to ongoing levels
of criminal and political violence countrywide, illuminating the urgent need for
a credible disarmament program. Several cross-border attacks on Ivorian villages
by former Gbagbo militiamen, who have taken refuge in Liberia raised
concerns about continued instability in the long-volatile west.
At this writing most gendarmes and police—particularly outside Abidjan—were
still unarmed, leaving security functions largely in the hands of soldiers and
youth volunteers loyal to Ouattara. The result is an extra-judicial system similar
to that which plagued the north when controlled by Soro’s forces after 2002:
arbitrary detention, disputes “resolved” by soldiers, and extortion. By
September the Ouattara government had notably removed most roadblocks
along the main roads, and threatened to dismiss soldiers found extorting the
population. These steps helped combat the rampant checkpoint extortion that
has impacted northern and southern Côte d’Ivoire since 2002.
Legislative elections were scheduled for December 11. If free and fair, they offer
an important step in the return to rule of law, instead of rule by presidential
decree.
Key International Actors
Gbagbo’s refusal to recognize defeat elicited widespread condemnation by the
international community, notably the UN, Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), EU, France, and the US. Concerted diplomatic pressure on
Gbagbo to step down was exerted through repeated demarches, threat of military
intervention by ECOWAS, and economic strangulation. The Central Bank of
West African States cut off funds, and the EU and US imposed targeted sanctions
against leading members of the regime and key Ivorian entities supporting
the regime financially.
The UN, which had for years failed to adequately confront Gbagbo on his
human rights record and the repeated delays in organizing elections, took a
committed stand on enforcing the election result. The UN’s endorsement of
Ouattara’s victory led to repeated threats and attacks by Gbagbo’s forces
against peacekeepers and civilian UN staff, and at times a closing of humanitarian
space.
Citing Gbagbo’s use of heavy weapons in indiscriminate attacks that killed civilians,
the UN Security Council authorized the UN Operations in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) to use “all necessary means” to protect civilians, including through
“prevent[ing] the use of heavy weapons against [civilians].” UNOCI and French
forces deployed since 2004 quickly began targeting heavy weapons, culminating
in an attack on Gbagbo’s residence that led to his arrest. Throughout the
conflict, UNOCI played a key, if inconsistent, role in civilian protection, including
reinforcing its presence in the west ahead of legislative elections.
The UN Human Rights Council established a commission of inquiry in late
March to investigate post-election crimes. In mid-June it presented the Council
with its report that found both sides responsible for war crimes and likely
crimes against humanity. The Council then established an independent expert
on the situation of human rights in Côte d’Ivoire. The commission of inquiry’s
report included an annex containing names of individuals deemed to merit
criminal investigation for their role in crimes. While this annex has been provided
to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, it had not been
made available to relevant Ivorian authorities at this writing, thereby failing to contribute to accountability. The UN Security Council has also not published
the findings of the 2004 commission of inquiry that investigated serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law during the 2002 to
2003 armed conflict. The report was delivered to the UN secretary-general in
November 2004.
D<DF:I8K@: R<GL9C@: F= CFE>F
The human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) remained
grave. All sides in the country’s ongoing armed conflicts continued to attack
civilians and commit other serious human rights abuses. Military operations
against foreign and domestic armed groups in the east and north were on a
smaller scale than in previous years. Efforts to integrate armed groups into the
national army were hampered by former rebel leaders, such as Bosco
Ntaganda, who flouted orders from the army’s central command and pursued
their own interests. Ntaganda is facing an International Criminal Court (ICC)
arrest warrant but remains in charge of military operations in eastern Congo.
Preparations for elections preoccupied Congolese authorities and international
partners for much of the year. The months before the elections were marked by
threats and physical attacks against opposition members, media, and human
rights defenders. The United Nations peacekeeping mission in Congo (MONUSCO)
continued to implement its civilian protection mandate and supported
logistics for the elections, but was hampered by a serious shortage of helicopters,
which impeded its mobility and effectiveness.
Presidential and Legislative Elections
Much attention was focused on preparing for elections set for late 2011 as
President Joseph Kabila sought a second term. In January Kabila’s government
pushed a hasty constitutional change altering the voting system for presidential
elections from a two-round to a single-round poll. A month later a close Kabila
ally, Pastor Daniel Mulunda Ngoy, was sworn in as head of the National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI). Opposition groups protested the
changes, which they said were designed to benefit Kabila.
Politically motivated human rights violations increased as elections
approached. UN investigators reported 188 cases before the official campaign
began in October. Violence perpetrated by police and other state security services
included restrictions on political activities, unnecessary force against
demonstrators, and arbitrary arrests primarily directed toward opposition parties,
their supporters, and journalists. For example, on October 6 the police violently crushed a demonstration by the Union pour la Democratie et le Progres
Social (UDPS) opposition party in Kinshasa, using teargas and firing live rounds
in the air. One person was killed and at least 10 others were wounded. Some
candidates and their supporters also used inflammatory language and hate
speech, inciting youth groups and others to use violence against their opponents.
Attacks on Civilians
The east and the north of the country remained volatile and were marked by frequent
attacks on civilians, particularly sexual violence against women and girls.
Nearly 1.7 million people are displaced, including the newly displaced, and a
further 476,000 are refugees in neighboring countries.
In the east, the army continued military operations against the Democratic
Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), a predominately Rwandan Hutu
rebel group, and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), a Ugandan rebel group,
though on a reduced scale from previous years. The government opened secret
negotiations with the FDLR to encourage the group to disarm and resettle in
another part of Congo, but the talks failed.
As in the past, government soldiers frequently killed and raped civilians and
pressed them into forced labor or looted their belongings. In one case, on the
night of January 1 soldiers raped at least 67 women and girls and arbitrarily
detained and tortured dozens of other civilians in Fizi, South Kivu. Also in
January soldiers raped at least 47 women and girls in Bushani, North Kivu, and
looted and burned some 100 homes.
Government soldiers also attacked civilians while fighting in the north against
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a Ugandan rebel group with a long record of
atrocities. The worst attacks were against the Mbororo nomadic cattle herders
who frequently traverse the border between Congo and the Central African
Republic (CAR). At least 35 Mbororo women and girls were raped. Some women
were taken to army camps where they were held and repeatedly raped. Soldiers
also beat and arbitrarily detained Mbororo men and pillaged their cattle. The army claimed the Mbororo were aligned with the LRA, but provided no evidence
to support the claim.
Armed groups also attacked civilians. In the east, the FDLR and Congolese
armed groups occupied areas vacated by government soldiers when they were
temporarily recalled for training, attacking civilians who resided there. For
example, in May FDLR combatants attacked numerous villages in Masisi territory,
killing six civilians, raping two women, and abducting at least 48 people
whose whereabouts remain unknown. In Bwale, South Kivu, in January and
February at least 65 women and girls were raped by FDLR combatants during
four attacks.
In the north the LRA carried out at least 250 attacks against civilians and continued
to abduct children and adults, although deadly attacks were less frequent
than in previous years. In LRA-affected areas in Congo, CAR, and South
Sudan, 2,400 people were killed and 3,400 were abducted by the LRA since
September 2008. The Ugandan army, in coalition with armed forces from neighboring
countries, continued its military operations against the LRA. No progress
was made in apprehending three of the LRA’s top leaders sought by the ICC for
war crimes committed in northern Uganda, and relations between the coalition
partners began to deteriorate. Congolese army and MONUSCO efforts to protect
civilians in LRA-affected areas remained inadequate, though some efforts were
made to avert attacks around the 2010 Christmas period, a time of previous LRA
violence.
Abuses by Bosco Ntaganda
The Congolese army’s attempts to restructure and integrate former armed
groups into its ranks continued to be fraught with problems. The creation of
new regiments mixing government soldiers with former rebels caused confusion
and weakened command and control. It further permitted former rebel leader
Bosco Ntaganda to increase his power base by expanding his parallel command
over parts of the army and local administration.
Ntaganda continued his brutal campaign against perceived opponents, both
military and civilian, by ordering assassinations, arbitrary arrests, and other forms of intimidation. Troops under his command were implicated in attacks on
civilians. He continued to recruit children and thwarted efforts to demobilize
them. He blocked judicial investigations into abuses committed by his loyalists,
violated a government export ban on minerals from eastern Congo, and
used his influence in the military to confiscate land and expand his business
interests.
Despite the flagrant abuses, the government did not enforce the ICC arrest warrant
against Ntaganda. Officials said they feared his arrest could disrupt the
integration of former rebel groups into the army and harm diplomatic relations
with Congo’s neighbor, Rwanda, which supports Ntaganda. Failure to arrest
Ntaganda further harmed peace and stabilization efforts.
Journalists and Human Rights Defenders
Congolese human rights defenders and journalists continued to be targeted in
2011. On June 21 Witness-Patchelly Kambale Musonia—a journalist and talk
show host at Radio Paysanne, a community radio station in Kirumba, North
Kivu—was shot dead by unidentified armed men following a broadcast about
the trafficking of weapons. On March 24, government soldiers in Baraka, South
Kivu, threatened a human rights defender from Federation des Femmes pour la
Paix for her activities in defense of rape victims.
Threats increased as elections approached. On September 6, unidentified
armed men threw tear gas, gasoline, and incendiary grenades into the studio of
Radio Lisanga Télévision (RTLV), a private television station favorable to opposition
candidate Etienne Tshisekedi. In June armed men attacked and injured
an RTLV presenter. In Fungurume, Katanga province, Dédé Ilunga, a journalist
with Radio Océan, was arbitrarily arrested and detained by police for 17 days in
September following a broadcast criticizing President Kabila’s development
program. He was released without charge.
Journalists covering demonstrations and political rallies were also repeatedly
targeted. In August security guards at a ruling party congress at a Kinshasa stadium
attacked cameraman Serge Kembila of Radio Télévision Groupe l’Avenir
(RTGA) for filming empty seats and confiscated his footage.
Congolese authorities have largely failed to investigate and prosecute those
responsible for the attacks. In one exception, a military court in Kinshasa found
five senior police officers guilty of murdering Floribert Chebeya Bahizire, the
executive director of Voice of the Voiceless, and his driver, Fidèle Bazana, in
June 2010. At this writing three of the five remained at large. Congolese human
rights groups criticized the trial for failing to take into account the role of the
national police chief in the murder.
Justice and Accountability
There was mixed progress in the government’s efforts to hold perpetrators of
serious violations to account.
Congo’s judicial officials had some notable successes in prosecuting sexual
violence and other crimes. Following the January mass rape in Fizi, South Kivu,
a military court found 10 soldiers and their commanding officer guilty of crimes
against humanity. In March another military court sentenced 11 soldiers, including
three officers, for crimes against humanity committed in Katasomwa in
September 2009. On March 25 the High Military Court in Kinshasa began the
trial of Gen. Jérôme Kakwavu, on war crimes charges for rape and torture.
Kakwavu is the first general in Congo’s history to be arrested on rape charges.
No progress was made in apprehending the perpetrators of a mass rape of 387
women, men, and children, committed by a coalition of armed groups in
Walikale territory, North Kivu, in July and August 2010. One of those facing an
arrest warrant for the crime against humanity of rape, Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, ran
as a candidate for the National Assembly. Efforts to combat impunity also suffered
a serious blow with the promotion and growing power of Ntaganda, living
openly in Goma, and the escape from prison of Gedeon Kyungu Mutanda and
many of his co-perpetrators, who had been found guilty of crimes against
humanity in 2009. Authorities had ignored many earlier requests from civil society
to incarcerate Mutanda at a maximum security prison.
The Congolese government took action in response to the 2010 human rights
“mapping report” published by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), which documented 617 incidents of serious violations of international humanitarian law between 1993 and 2003. In August the government
presented a draft law to parliament to establish a specialized mixed
court with national and international judicial staff to try those responsible for
the most serious crimes. Congolese civil society groups strongly supported the
draft legislation, but the Senate rejected it and asked the government to harmonize
its proposal with other draft laws to combat serious human rights violations.
International trials against those responsible for crimes continued. In Germany
two FDLR leaders stood trial for war crimes and crimes against humanity. At the
ICC three former Congolese armed group leaders were tried for similar crimes
and judges deliberated whether the case of a Rwandan FDLR leader would
move forward to trial.
Key International Actors
International actors focused their attention on the elections. The UN Security
Council renewed MONUSCO’s mandate with a continued focus on protecting
civilians, though UN member states failed to provide it with the logistical capabilities
it required.
OHCHR took few steps to follow-up on its “mapping report.” Few diplomats and
UN officials raised public concerns about the government’s failure to arrest
Ntaganda, though some said they raised it privately.
United States President Barack Obama announced in October that the US
would send 100 military advisors to central Africa to help regional forces apprehend
LRA leaders and end the group’s violence. The US also said it would withhold
US$1.3 million in foreign military financing until the Congolese government
takes concrete steps to end its use of child soldiers.
EHL8KFI@8C GL@E<8
Equatorial Guinea remains mired in corruption, poverty, and repression under
President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who has been in power since
1979. Vast oil revenues fund lavish lifestyles for the small elite surrounding the
president, while most of the population lives in poverty. The government regularly
engages in torture and arbitrary detention. Journalists, civil society groups,
and members of the political opposition face heavy government repression.
President Obiang, who became Africa’s longest-serving ruler with the fall of
Muammar Gaddafi, continued seeking to enhance his international standing. In
2011 he assumed the one-year rotating presidency of the African Union but
failed to persuade the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) to award a long-stalled prize in his name.
Despite some positive steps, including the release of 22 political prisoners,
overall human rights conditions remained poor and, in some respects, worsened
as freedoms were clamped down on ahead of the AU summit President
Obiang hosted in June. Constitutional changes proposed in March were not
open to debate and seemed designed to transfer power from the president to
his eldest son. Obiang and his family remained ensnared in multiple foreign
corruption investigations, which gathered momentum during the year.
Economic and Social Rights
Fulfillment of key socio-economic rights, such as the right to education and
basic healthcare, remained poor, despite significant oil revenues and the country’s
small population, which make Equatorial Guinea’s per capita gross domestic
product—at approximately US$30,000 according to UN figures—among the
highest in the world, and the highest in Africa.
Although the country saw notable progress in reducing rates of maternal and
child mortality, these rates still remained high. For example, 2010 UN and
World Bank statistics indicate that nearly one in every eight child dies before
his or her fifth birthday. A reduction of the high incidence of malaria resulted
from a prevention campaign largely funded by Western oil companies.
The quality of education remained poor in Equatorial Guinea. According to
UNESCO figures, nearly one-quarter of primary students repeat a grade. The
government acknowledged problems in its education system in October when a
workshop on girls’ education identified barriers to learning, including inadequate
facilities, a high student-to-teacher ratio, low teacher quality, and poor
nutrition. Although the country ratified the African Charter on Human and
People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa—the Maputo Protocol—in
June, there is no indication that it will be implemented vigorously.
The government increased social spending levels but prioritized public investments
in projects that have little benefit for the poor, such as a lavish $830 million
resort complex built for the AU summit.
Ongoing legal challenges in France, Spain, and the United States, as well as a
complaint before the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, allege
misuse of Equatorial Guinea’s oil funds. In connection with their investigation,
in September French police seized 11 luxury cars belonging to President
Obiang’s eldest son and minister of agriculture and forestry—known by the
nickname Teodorín—from outside his Paris residence. Also in September a
French court ruled against President Obiang’s claims of defamation against the
French NGO CCFD-Terre Solidaire for its 2009 report on the ill-gotten gains of
the president and other public officials. In October US authorities filed legal
claims against Teodorín’s US assets—including a Malibu mansion, luxury vehicle,
and valuable collectables—alleging they were illegally purchased with the
proceeds of corruption.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Equatorial Guinea is notorious for its lack of press freedom. Freedom of expression
was curtailed even further in 2011. Journalists from state-owned media outlets
are not permitted to criticize the government. The few private media outlets
that exist are generally owned by persons close to President Obiang; self-censorship
is common. Foreign news is available to those with access to satellite
broadcasts and the internet, which is a small minority of the population; others
have access only to limited foreign radio programming.
In February the government ordered the staff of state radio and TV not to cover
the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements. In March the host of a French-language
state radio program was removed after he referred briefly to Libya on air.
In an official statement denying claims of censorship, the government said he
was sacked for “his lack of rigor and professionalism.”
The government is also intolerant of critical views from abroad. It denies visas
and uses surveillance, harassment, and detention to hamper independent foreign
journalists. In March 2011 the government informed Reporters Without
Borders that it would not grant a visa to carry out a fact-finding visit “as long as
the offensive references to our President continue to appear on your website.”
Some foreign journalists reported being detained and forced to delete photographs
before and during the AU summit. In one incident, security agents
detained and interrogated journalists from the German television network ZDF
and deleted some of their footage, including images of poverty.
In February novelist, blogger, and editor Juan Tomás Ávila Laurel began a
hunger strike calling for democratic reforms. He soon left for Spain, claiming
that he was harassed.
In March the government banned demonstrations and blocked an opposition
party from staging a rally. Activists from another opposition party were prevented
from staging a Labor Day protest in May.
Human Rights Defenders
The government imposes restrictive conditions on the registration and operation
of NGOs, and the country has no legally registered independent human
rights groups. As reported by EG Justice, a US-based NGO, a local organization
was told its registration application would not be approved until it removed the
reference to human rights.
The few local activists who seek to address human rights related issues are vulnerable
to intimidation, harassment, and reprisals. In July authorities demanded
that a local organization—Centro de Estudios e Iniciativas para el Desarrollo
(CEID)—halt a series of civil society training seminars it had been conducting.
The head of CEID, Alfredo Okenve Ndo, had previously been removed from two posts at the National University after critiquing the government’s transparency
record at a May 2010 event in Washington, DC.
After more than a year of unsuccessfully seeking permission to hold an event in
Malabo to discuss follow-up to the government’s commitments under its UN
Universal Periodic Review, CEID and other local organizations moved the meeting
to Madrid.
Political Parties and Opposition
The ruling Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea (PDGE) maintains a monopoly
over political life and the government continued its harsh repression of political
rights and civil liberties during the year.
In March, in the wake of the Arab Spring events, President Obiang announced
that he would introduce constitutional reforms. Far from signaling a democratic
opening, however, the process was conducted in a heavy-handed manner. In
October the president set a November 13 date for a national referendum to
approve the changes, which had not been open to debate and were not shared
with political parties until the day before the campaign opened. Instead, various
government bodies rubber-stamped proposals that increase the nearabsolute
powers of the presidency. Although the changes create some new
institutions, including an audit body, these are controlled by the president. The
proposals also provide for the creation of a vice-presidential post filled at his
discretion. Observers consider the creation of a vice-presidency a further move
to position his son, Teodorín, to replace him. Teodorín was named to head the
national election campaign to promote the referendum. A year earlier he was
made the vice-president of the ruling party.
Most political parties are aligned with PDGE; members of the only two political
parties that maintain independence—the Convergence for Social Democracy
(CPDS) and the People’s Union (UP)—are pressured through various means,
including arbitrary arrest and harassment. For example, in November police
arrested and held for three days a prominent CPDS figure and civil society
activist, Marcial Abaga Barril, on a dubious pretext.
The opposition is also hampered by the ruling party’s virtual monopoly on
power, funding, and access to national media. Both beleaguered parties were
further weakened during the year by internal splits. At least one CPDS leader
left the party for a government post.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Unfair Trials
There is no independent judiciary in Equatorial Guinea. The government commonly
conducts arbitrary arrests and denies detainees due process, for example
by holding them indefinitely without telling them the charges against them.
Basic fair trial standards are disregarded. Torture remains a serious problem
despite a national law prohibiting it. The International Committee of the Red
Cross, which resumed prison visits in the country in 2009 after a one-year suspension,
opened an office in Equatorial Guinea in 2011.
Political activists and others were detained in the lead-up to the AU summit. In
May security forces detained more than 100 young people and some political
opponents in Bata. Migrants were also rounded up between April and June.
According to Amnesty International, many of them were reportedly ill-treated.
The organization also received reports of road blocks and arbitrary searches by
security forces.
In June President Obiang released 22 political prisoners on his 69th birthday.
The release was consistent with past patterns of amnesties on special occasions.
Those remaining in custody included relatives and associates of escaped
prisoners—one a former military officer—who have been held without charge for
over a year in apparent retribution for the October 2010 escape. Among those
being held was a child under the age of two and his mother.
Key International Actors
As AU chair, President Obiang gained a prominent platform during the year. He
traveled widely in that capacity, including to the G-20 summit of world leaders
in France, and also sought new or improved bilateral ties. Equatorial Guinea is
slated to co-host the African Cup of Nations soccer (football) tournament in
early 2012.
UNESCO resisted President Obiang’s efforts to reinstate a long-stalled prize in
his name. He secured an AU resolution that forced the issue back onto
UNESCO’s agenda but UNESCO diplomats deferred any decision until May 2012.
The US is Equatorial Guinea’s main trading partner and US companies dominate
the country’s oil sector. Although some US diplomats have defended President
Obiang in press interviews and leaked cables, the US government took steps to
hold Equatorial Guinea to global standards, notably maintaining a strong
stance at UNESCO against the Obiang prize.
Spain, the former colonial power, generally has declined to apply pressure on
Equatorial Guinea regarding human rights issues. However, the Spanish government
opposed the UNESCO prize, as did the European Union.
Germany opened an embassy in the country during the year. Following the
deportation of German journalists in June, the German Foreign Ministry summoned
the Equatorial Guinean ambassador in Berlin.
EI@KI<8
Eritrea marked 20 years of independence in 2011, but its citizens remain victimized
by one of the world’s most repressive governments. They suffer arbitrary
and indefinite detention; torture; inhumane conditions of confinement; restrictions
on freedom of speech, movement, and belief; and indefinite conscription
and forced labor in national service.
Arbitrary Detention
Since September 2001 or even before, Eritreans from all walks of life—government
officials, leaders of government-controlled labor unions, businesspeople,
journalists, and national service evaders or escapees—have been jailed for
explicit or inferred opposition to President Isaias Afwerki and his policies. The
number of Eritreans jailed for such opposition is difficult to confirm, but ranges
from 5,000 to 10,000, excluding national service evaders and deserters, who
may number tens of thousands more. Twenty prominent critics and journalists
have been held in incommunicado isolation for a decade; nine are feared dead.
Prisoners are often held indefinitely without access to family members, prison
monitors, or lawyers. There are no public trials and no appeals. Persons inquiring
about a relative’s whereabouts risk being jailed themselves.
Families are punished for the acts of one of its members, especially for draft
evasion or desertion. The family is given no opportunity to defend itself.
Families are fined Nakfa 50,000 (US$3,333) for evasion or desertion. Those who
do not or cannot pay are jailed and may have property confiscated.
Forced Labor and Other Abuses in “National Service”
Since 2002 Eritrea has misused its national service system to keep a generation
of Eritreans in bondage. Service is indefinitely prolonged, extending for
much of a citizen’s working life. Pay is barely sufficient for survival. Recruits are
used as cheap labor for civil service jobs, development projects, and the ruling
party’s commercial and agricultural enterprises. Female recruits have reported
sexual abuse by higher-ranking officers.
Thousands of Eritreans, mostly of younger generations, flee the country
because of the harsh conditions in national service. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported in early 2011 that 220,000
Eritreans, about 5 percent of the population, have fled. During a visit to a
refugee camp in Ethiopia in mid-2011, an assistant high commissioner said she
was shocked to see such a “sea of young faces.” The new refugees included a
significant number of unaccompanied children, some as young as six-years-old.
Among the most prominent defectors in 2011 were 13 members of a 25-member
soccer (football) team who refused to return after a regional tournament in
Tanzania. Such defections are not new. In 2009, 12 soccer players absconded
in Kenya. Earlier in 2011, fearful of further defections, the government refused
to allow a soccer team that won a first-round game in Eritrea to play a return
match in Kenya.
A UN Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea found strong evidence that highlevel
Eritrean officials facilitate escapes to earn hard currency: “People smuggling
is so pervasive that it could not be possible without the complicity of
Government and party officials, especially military officers….” Military officers
charge about $3,000 per person for a border crossing and up to $20,000 for
smuggling escapees through Sudan and Egypt. According to the UN group,
receipts are funneled through Eritrean embassy staff into a Swiss bank account.
Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment
Escaping Eritreans, including prison guards, report that torture and other forms
of cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment in detention are systematic and
routine. Aside from severe beatings, punishments include mock drowning,
hanging by the arms from trees, being tied up in the sun in contorted positions
for hours or days, and being doubled up inside a tire. One investigative technique
is to tighten handcuffs so that circulation to the hands is cut off and pain
from the swelling hands becomes unbearable.
Many prisoners are held in unlit underground bunkers and in shipping containers
with broiling daytime and freezing nighttime temperatures. Prisoners are
held in isolation or are packed tightly in severely crowded cells. Food rations generally consist of lentils and a bread roll once a day and tea twice a day.
Deaths in prison from torture, disease, inadequate food, and other harsh conditions
are frequent.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The government destroyed Eritrea’s private press in September 2001 and arrested
its journalists. Since then propaganda outlets run by the Ministry of
Information—television, radio, and newspapers—serve as the only domestic
sources of news. Information inconsistent with President Isaias’s preconceptions
is suppressed. It took a month for government media to mention the
Tunisian, Libyan, and Egyptian revolutions. When they did, it was to assert that
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s government deserved to fall for not adopting
Isaias’s policy of self-reliance.
According to Reporters Without Borders, four additional journalists were
detained in 2011 and remain in custody: Neibel Edris, Ahmed Usman,
Mohammed Osman, and Tesfalidet Mebratu.
Internet access is available but difficult. Penetration is under 4 percent, primarily
through cyber cafés in Asmara. Users are closely monitored. Some users were
reportedly arrested in early 2011.
No political or civic organizations are permitted except those controlled by
Isaias’s People’s Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ). Nongovernmental public
gatherings of over seven persons are prohibited. Critical questions at government-
convened meetings constitute grounds for arrest.
Freedom of Religion
In 2002 the Eritrean government banned religious activities, except those
organized by four registered religious organizations: Sunni Islam, the Eritrean
Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Evangelical (Lutheran)
Church of Eritrea. It deposed the Orthodox patriarch in 2005, has held him in
house arrest since 2007, and chose his successor. The government also
appointed the current Sunni mufti.
Adherents of “unrecognized” religions are seized in raids on churches and
homes and imprisoned and tortured until they renounce their faiths. Jehovah’s
Witnesses are especially victimized. As of April 2011, the Jehovah’s Witness
media website lists 51 Witnesses incarcerated as conscientious objectors, for
participation in religious meetings, or for unknown reasons; three conscientious
objectors have been imprisoned for 17 years.
Usually reliable sources who monitor religious persecutions reported continuing
persecution of religious practitioners in 2011. Thirty members of an evangelical
Christian church were arrested in Asmara in January. In May and June
authorities reportedly arrested over 90 members of unrecognized Christian
churches, including 26 college students. Two women and one man in their
twenties, arrested in 2009 for participating in prayer meetings while serving in
national service, reportedly died in captivity at military camps in 2011. A 62-
year-old Jehovah’s Witness arrested in 2008 died in July, a week after he was
placed in solitary confinement in a metal shipping container.
United Nations Sanctions and Horn of Africa Relations
The UN Security Council imposed sanctions on Eritrea in 2009 for providing
political, financial, and logistical support to insurrectionary groups in Somalia
and for occupying Djibouti territory it had invaded in 2008. In 2011 the council’s
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea reported that Eritrea was still funneling
funds through its embassies to al-Shabaab and other groups fighting the
UN-recognized Somali government. Although Eritrea had withdrawn from
Djibouti territory by 2011, it continues to hold 19 Djiboutian prisoners of war to
whom it has not permitted third-party access.
The Monitoring Group also concluded that Eritrea had sponsored an unsuccessful
attempt to bomb an African Union Heads of State Summit in Addis Ababa,
the Ethiopian capital, in January 2011. Eritrea and Ethiopia have been bitter
enemies since Eritrea began a border war in 1998. The bitterness continues
partly because of animosity between the leaders of the two countries, and partly
because Ethiopia refuses to vacate land that a neutral boundary commission,
whose decision both countries agreed would be binding, held belongs to
Eritrea.
Key International Actors
Eritrea received modest amounts of foreign aid from China (in the form of soft
loans), the United Arab Emirates, Iran, Libya, and Qatar in recent years; no
loans or grants were announced in 2011. The European Union provides some
development and emergency assistance, but the bulk of this remains undisbursed
because of concerns about transparency and accountability.
The Isaias government lost a key political and financial supporter with the
death of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi. The emir of Qatar and president of
Sudan remain important supporters. Qatar is financing a four-star resort on
Dahlak Kebre island, not far from a notorious underground prison. In October
2011 Sudan refouled over 300 Eritreans without screening them for refugee status,
ignoring an agreement with the UNHCR calling for such screening.
Eritrea in 2011 began to re-engage with other African countries, announcing that
it would rejoin the regional organization, the Intergovernmental Authority for
Growth and Development.
Eritreans who fled the country in 2011 report a lack of food and soaring prices
for what food remains available because of a serious regional drought, but
Eritrea insists it needs no food assistance. It has not allowed access by humanitarian
organizations to assess needs. In 2009 Isaias privately told the UN
Children’s Fund that Eritrea was suffering from famine even as he publicly
denied food shortages. It continues to receive UN funding for health, sanitation,
and safe-water projects, but it ended its relationship with the World Bank in
2011.
Isaias told Eritreans in May 2011 that international NGOs harbor “a pathological
compulsion for espionage.”
EK?@FG@8
Ethiopian authorities continued to severely restrict basic rights of freedom of
expression, association, and assembly. Hundreds of Ethiopians in 2011 were
arbitrarily arrested and detained and remain at risk of torture and ill-treatment.
Attacks on political opposition and dissent persisted throughout 2011, with
mass arrests of ethnic Oromo, including members of the Oromo political opposition
in March, and a wider crackdown with arrests of journalists and opposition
politicians from June to September 2011.
The restrictive Anti-Terrorism Proclamation (adopted in 2009) has been used to
justify arrests of both journalists and members of the political opposition. In
June 2011 the Ethiopian House of Federations officially proscribed two armed
groups—the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) and the Oromo Liberation
Front (OLF) and one opposition party, Ginbot 7—labeling them terrorist organizations.
Political Repression, Pre-Trial Detention, and Torture
In March 2011, authorities arrested more than 200 members and supporters of
registered Oromo opposition parties—the Oromo Federal Democratic Movement
(OFDM) and the Oromo People’s Congress (OPC)—during mass roundups. Those
arbitrarily arrested and detained included former members of parliament, longserving
party officials, and candidates in the 2010 regional and parliamentary
elections. They were publicly accused of being involved with the banned OLF; at
least 89 have been charged with a variety of offenses, some relating to terrorism.
On August 27 Bekele Gerba, deputy chairman of OFDM; Olbana Lelisa, a
spokesman for OPC; and seven other opposition party members were arrested
on charges of involvement with the OLF. They were held in pre-trial detention at
the Federal Police Crime Investigation Department, also known as Maekelawi,
where torture is reportedly common. At least 20 other ethnic Oromo were arrested
in this same sweep.
On September 8 popular actor Debebe Eshetu was arrested and accused of
belonging to the banned opposition party Ginbot 7. The following week, on
September 14, Andualem Aragie, vice-chairman of the opposition party Unity for
Democracy and Justice (UDJ), two other active members of UDJ, and the general
secretary of another opposition party, the Ethiopian National Democratic Party
(ENDF), were arrested in Addis Ababa, the capital, on similar accusations.
Human Rights Watch continues to receive credible reports of arbitrary detention
and serious abuses of civilians alleged to be members or supporters of ONLF.
These civilians were being held in detention facilities in Ethiopia’s Somali
region.
Long-term pre-trial detention without charge, often without access to counsel,
is common, notably under the Anti-Terror law, which allows police to request
additional investigation periods of 28 days each from a court before filing
charges, for up to four months. Human Rights Watch is aware of at least 29
opposition party members, journalists, and an actor who at this writing were
currently held in remand detention under the Anti-Terror law.
No independent domestic or international organization has access to all of
Ethiopia’s detention facilities; it is impossible to determine the number of political
prisoners and others arbitrarily detained or their condition.
Freedom of Expression and Association
What little remains of the private independent media and foreign media faced
further attacks and restrictions during 2011. Self-censorship is rampant.
Journalists working for the few remaining “independent” domestic newspapers
have faced regular harassment and threats. Several journalists were arbitrarily
arrested and detained in 2011.
On June 19 and 21 respectively Woubshet Taye of Awramba Times and Reeyot
Alemu of Feteh, journalists for two newspapers often critical of the government,
were arrested, along with seven other individuals, including two ENDP members,
and accused of conspiring to commit terrorist acts. After almost three
months of detention, without access to their lawyers, the two were charged on
September 6 of several counts of terrorism. Charges were also leveled against Elias Kifle, editor of the online Ethiopian Review, in absentia. One ENDP member,
Zerihun Gebre-Egzabiher, was also charged.
On September 14, 2011, veteran journalist Eskinder Nega was arrested on
charges of involvement with Ginbot 7. Eskinder, like Elias Kifle, was among the
121 opposition party members, journalists, and human rights activists arrested
following the 2005 elections, and accused of treason and other related crimes,
and among the 76 who were later convicted. He has faced ongoing harassment
since his release and has been repeatedly denied a license to practice journalism.
Journalists working for foreign media have not been spared from these attacks.
In September 2011 the Ethiopian correspondent of the Kenyan Daily Nation,
Argaw Ashine, was forced to flee the country after he was named in an unedited
WikiLeaks United States diplomatic cable regarding planned attacks, by the
governmental Communication Affairs Office (GCAO), on journalists from the
Addis Neger newspaper. The GCAO and Federal Police summoned Argaw for
questioning regarding his sources within the GCAO. Addis Neger editors and
journalists were forced to close their newspaper and flee the country in
November 2009 after threats of arrest under the Anti-Terror law.
Independent reporting on the conflict-affected areas of the Somali region
remains severely restricted. On July 1, 2011, two Swedish journalists who had
entered Ethiopia in order to report on the situation were arrested. They were
held without charge for two months in Jijiga and Addis Ababa before being
charged on September 6 with terrorism. Their trial continued at this writing.
Restrictions on Human Rights Reporting
The restrictive Charities and Societies Proclamation, adopted in 2009, which
prohibits organizations receiving more than 10 percent of their funding from
abroad from carrying out human rights and governance work, continues to
severely hamper basic rights monitoring and reporting activities. Two former
leading rights organizations, the Ethiopian Women’s Lawyers Association
(EWLA) and the Human Rights Council (HRCO, formerly EHRCO), have had to slash their budgets, staff, and operations. Their bank accounts, which the government
arbitrarily froze in December 2009, remain frozen.
The government-affiliated Ethiopian Human Rights Commission lacks independence
and is not yet compliant with the Paris Principles, which the United
Nations General Assembly adopted in 1993 and which promote the independence
of national human rights institutions.
On August 27, 2011, an Amnesty International delegation to Ethiopia was
ordered to leave the country following a series of meetings with members of the
political opposition; two of these members were arrested after their meeting
with Amnesty International.
Discrimination in Government Services
In October 2010 Human Rights Watch published Development without Freedom:
How Aid Underwrites Repression in Ethiopia, a report that documented discrimination
in the administration of foreign donor-funded government services,
including agricultural assistance, food-for-work programs, educational training
opportunities, and civil-service reform programs. The report also showed how
donor-funded facilities, such as schools and teacher training colleges, underwrite
the indoctrination of civil servants and school children in political propaganda.
Human Rights Watch’s research suggested that donors in the
Development Assistance Group (DAG), including the US, Canada, the United
Kingdom, and the European Union, were aware of such allegations, but were
taking insufficient steps to investigate the misuse of their aid money.
DAG denied that aid was politicized, citing as evidence a UK Department for
International Development-led report, “The Aid Management and Utilization
Study,” which concluded that existing monitoring mechanisms would not
detect politicization if it were occurring. That report also promised a second
phase, a field investigation, which it said was crucial to establishing whether or
not politicization was occurring on a broad scale. In April 2011 DAG told Human
Rights Watch that this second phase, the field investigation, had been cancelled.
A 2009 US diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks said that the US
embassy in Ethiopia was “keenly aware that foreign assistance … is vulnerable to politicization,” but that monitoring the problem, “risks putting the assistance
programs themselves in jeopardy from a ruling party that has become
confident that its vast patronage system is largely invulnerable.”
Key International Actors
International donor assistance continues to pour into Ethiopia, one of the
world’s largest recipients of aid, but this has not resulted in greater international
influence in ensuring government compliance with its human rights obligations.
Conversely, donors appear to be reluctant to criticize the Ethiopian government’s
human rights record so as not to endanger the continuity of their
assistance programs.
Nonetheless, government spending remains hugely reliant (between 30 and 40
percent) on foreign assistance, and donors retain significant leverage that they
could use to greater effect to insist on basic measures, such as the repeal or
amendment of the Charities and Societies Proclamation and the Anti-Terrorism
Proclamation, admission of UN special rapporteurs on human rights, the
release of political prisoners, and better monitoring of foreign-funded programs
to make sure they are not being used to bolster the ruling party.
GL@E<8
President Alpha Condé, who was elected in largely free and fair elections in
December 2010, made limited progress in addressing the serious governance
and human rights problems he inherited. The elections ended a period of profound
political instability that began in December 2008, when Captain Moussa
Dadis Camara seized power in a coup after the death of Lansana Conté,
Guinea’s authoritarian president of 24 years.
Progress towards a full transition to democratic rule and greater respect for the
rule of law was undermined by delays in organizing parliamentary elections, rising
ethnic tension, the president’s frequent use of the presidential decree, and
inadequate gains in strengthening the chronically neglected judiciary.
Continued indiscipline by members of the security services and the July
attempted assassination of President Condé, allegedly by disgruntled members
of the army, illuminated the fragility of recent democratic gains. However, there
were some efforts to professionalize and reduce the size of the 45,000-strong
security sector, which has long been steeped in a culture of indiscipline and
impunity.
There was inadequate progress for ensuring accountability for past atrocities,
notably the 2007 and 2009 massacres of unarmed demonstrators by security
forces. Preliminary moves towards establishing a reconciliation commission
and independent human rights body were positive steps; however, inadequate
consultation with civil society about the composition and mandate of these
institutions threatened to undermine their efficacy. President Condé took a few
concrete actions to improve the state of the judiciary and address endemic corruption.
International actors—including France, the United States, European Union,
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and African Union—
exerted pressure on President Condé to organize parliamentary elections, but
they remained virtually silent on the need for justice for past crimes.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Independent
Human Rights Institution
In June Condé issued a presidential decree creating a “Reflection Commission”
to promote reconciliation, and in August appointed two leading religious figures
as co-presidents. There was, however, inadequate consultation with civil
society about the mandate, composition, or powers of the commission. While
the president appeared to limit its mandate to promoting reconciliation, local
human rights groups pushed for a commission that could meaningfully address
impunity, including the inclusion of provisions to recommend individuals for
prosecution.
Communal violence in the southeast that left some 25 dead in May, the
appointment by the president of a disproportionate number of senior civil servants
from his Malinke ethnic group, and rising tension between the Malinke
and Peuhl communities demonstrated the urgent need for a truth and reconciliation
mechanism with the capacity to make recommendations aimed at
addressing the root causes of communal conflicts.
The new 2010 constitution mandated the establishment of Guinea’s first-ever
independent national human rights institution. In July the ad hoc parliamentary
body passed a law establishing the National Human Rights Commission, to be
comprised of 20 members from all over the nation. Civil society groups have
raised concerns over inadequate consultation about the mandate and composition
of the commission.
Parliamentary Elections and Governance
The president’s insistence on redoing the electoral register and a leadership crisis
within the national electoral body delayed parliamentary elections (not held
since 2002) and generated considerable frustration within Guinean civil society
and among the country’s international partners. Progress on addressing corruption
included eliminating discretionary funds within various ministries, passing
a new mining code envisioned to improve management of Guinea’s extensive
natural resources, and establishing a hotline to report cases of graft and state
corruption.
On several occasions the president appeared to use the security forces and
judiciary for partisan ends. In April the government banned a gathering to welcome
back to Guinea an opposition leader. Several opposition supporters were
later tried and convicted for their participation in the gathering. In July all media
outlets were banned from reporting on the attack against the president, and in
September the government disallowed a ceremony by human rights groups and
a march by the political opposition to commemorate the 2009 massacre. In the
absence of a functioning parliament, the president frequently issued presidential
decrees.
Judiciary and Detention Conditions
Decades of neglect and manipulation of the judiciary by successive regimes
have led to striking deficiencies in the sector and have allowed perpetrators of
all classes of abuses to enjoy impunity for crimes.
Allocations for the judiciary for several years, including 2011, have stood at less
than 0.5 percent of the national budget. This led to severe shortages of judicial
personnel and insufficient infrastructure and resources that, when coupled with
unprofessional conduct and poor record-keeping, contributed to widespread
detention-related abuses, notably prolonged pre-trial detention and poor prison
conditions. Prison and detention centers are severely overcrowded and inmates
and detainees lack adequate nutrition, sanitation, and medical care. The
largest detention facility—designed for 300 detainees—accommodates over
1,000. Between 80 and 90 percent of prisoners in Guinea are held in prolonged
pre-trial detention.
Concrete progress in this sector included the removal of several judges and
other judicial personnel who were implicated in corrupt practices, the July
swearing-in of 38 new judges into the Conakry Court of Appeals, and the May
liberation of numerous detainees who had been held in extended pre-trial
detention for minor offenses.
Accountability for the September 28, 2009 Massacre
and Other Crimes
There was insufficient progress in holding to account members of the security
forces implicated in the September 28, 2009 massacre of some 150 people and
the rape of over 100 women during the military regime of Dadis Camara. A 2009
report by the United Nations-led International Commission of Inquiry concluded
that the abuses committed by security forces very likely constituted crimes
against humanity. In 2010 the then-government committed to bringing the perpetrators
to justice, and appointed three investigating judges to the case.
At this writing there was little public evidence of the investigation’s progress,
and no evidence of government efforts to locate the over 100 bodies believed to
have been disposed of secretly by the security forces. The government’s refusal
for much of the year to provide security to the investigating judges and
President Condé’s appointment of two men implicated in the massacre to highlevel
positions within his administration brought into question his commitment
to ensure justice for the crimes.
The International Criminal Court (ICC), which in October 2009 confirmed that
the situation in Guinea was under preliminary examination, visited the country
in March, April, and October to assess progress made in national investigations.
The ICC has expressed its willingness to take on the case should the
Guinean government fail to do so. Meanwhile, there have been no attempts by
the authorities to investigate, much less hold accountable, members of the
security forces responsible for the 2007 killing of some 130 demonstrators.
Conduct of the Security Forces
The July 19 attack on the residence of President Condé, allegedly by disgruntled
members of the military, resulted in the arrest of at least 38 individuals, including
25 soldiers. The arrest and detention of some of the military personnel was
accompanied by physical abuse and, in a few cases, torture. The attempt illuminated
the continuing divisions along ethnic and regional lines within the military
and the fragility of the political process.
Allegations of excessive use of lethal force in responding to protestors diminished
in 2011, although security forces killed at least five protestors during
opposition marches in April and September. During the violence, the security
forces also engaged in theft, robbery, sexual violence, and assault. Throughout
the year soldiers were credibly implicated in numerous acts of criminality. There
were no attempts to investigate, discipline, or prosecute those implicated. The
emergence of a militia recruited from the president’s ethnic group was cause
for alarm.
Efforts by the military hierarchy to professionalize the army resulted in a
reduced presence of soldiers on the streets, and some responsibilities that had
long been held by the army were relinquished to police and gendarmes.
Meanwhile police were repeatedly implicated in extortion and soliciting bribes.
Crime victims are frequently required to pay for investigations, while authorities
commonly fail to conduct adequate investigations and, in some cases, free
alleged criminals. Police leadership made no effort to address these problems.
Key International Actors
Guinea’s key international partners—notably the EU, ECOWAS, the UN Office in
West Africa, France, and the US—remained primarily focused on ensuring
progress in the long-delayed parliamentary elections. However, Guinea’s partners
remained largely silent on the need for those responsible for the
September 28, 2009 violence to be held accountable for their crimes. They did
successfully exert pressure on the government to overturn a ban on media
reporting about the assassination attempt against Condé.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the EU took the
lead in strengthening Guinea’s judicial system. However, much of the EU’s support
was conditioned on the conduct of transparent legislative elections. During
a March visit the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay urged the
government to step up its efforts to address impunity. The UN Office on West
Africa led the other international partners in advising the government how to
reform the security sector.
K<EP8
Human rights developments in Kenya were dominated by the implementation of
a new constitution and related judicial and police reforms, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) cases against six Kenyans whom the ICC prosecutor
accused of crimes against humanity. The alleged crimes were committed
during Kenya’s post-election violence in 2007 and 2008. Kenyan politicians
resisted the ICC process, claiming the judicial and police reforms underway
gave sufficient cause to return the cases to Kenya. But there was little progress
on the ground in terms of accountability for post-election violence or human
rights violations by security forces.
The New Constitution and the Reform Process
The new 2010 constitution propelled a series of reforms, including in the judiciary
and the police. It transferred many powers of the attorney general—a political
appointee—to the newly autonomous Directorate of Public Prosecutions;
this was a critical shift, given that outgoing Attorney General Amos Wako’s
record was marked by refusing to prosecute, or arbitrarily terminating, cases
against political heavyweights, including for political violence and large-scale
corruption.
The constitution provided for new appointments for chief justice, deputy chief
justice, director of public prosecutions, and attorney general. In an initial false
start in January, President Mwai Kibaki unilaterally announced appointments for
the first three positions. Civil society groups filed a lawsuit against Kibaki,
charging that the move violated the constitutionally mandated consultative
process for appointments, and a court ruled in their favor. Parliament also
rejected the appointments as unconstitutional. Under pressure, Kibaki withdrew
the appointments. In May the Judicial Services Commission conducted a
transparent interview process, leading to the naming of Dr. Willy Mutunga and
Nancy Baraza, well-respected reformers, as chief justice and deputy chief justice.
However, the procedure for selecting the director of public prosecutions
was not transparent. Further reforms included the naming of judges to a new
Supreme Court.
Police reform proceeded slowly. In August and September parliament passed
two police reform bills that bring the Kenya Police and the previously separate
(and often politicized) Administration Police under one command structure, and
establish a civilian National Police Service commission, which will play a role in
police recruitment, training, and disciplinary proceedings. In November, parliament
passed an Independent Policing Oversight Authority bill, which could be
critical in assuring accountability. Police attempted to initiate a purely internal
vetting process in June, but the process was suspended over criticism of the
lack of civilian oversight.
The ICC Kenya Cases
In December 2010 ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno Ocampo requested summonses
for six Kenyans suspected of organizing and funding crimes against humanity
during Kenya’s post-election violence in 2007 and 2008. Although the government
has regularly pledged cooperation with the ICC, the naming of suspects—
Francis Muthaura, Uhuru Kenyatta, and Hussein Ali in one case, and William
Ruto, Henry Kosgey, and Joshua arap Sang in another—provoked attempts by
the government and parliament to avoid ICC jurisdiction.
In December 2010 parliament called on the government to withdraw from the
Rome Statute. The government did not heed parliament’s call, but launched an
unsuccessful campaign to convince the United Nations Security Council that
the Kenya cases should be deferred, claiming they posed a threat to international
peace and security.
Kenya then filed an “admissibility challenge,” claiming the ICC could not exercise
its jurisdiction as a court of last resort because Kenya was already investigating
the election violence. The ICC rejected the challenge, finding no evidence
that Kenya was investigating the same suspects for the same crimes.
In September the court initiated “confirmation of charges” hearings to determine
whether the cases should continue to trial. The hearings were marked by
attempts by opponents of accountability to intimidate persons perceived to
support the ICC. In September relatives of one ICC witness were physically
assaulted and forced to relocate.
Accountability and Impunity in Kenya’s National Justice System
Efforts to convince the ICC of progress toward bringing election violence suspects
to book in Kenya were not matched by concrete actions. President Kibaki
announced in December 2010 that the government would establish a local tribunal,
but took no steps toward doing so. A few election violence cases proceeded
through the justice system, with one new murder conviction in 2011, but
cases that resulted in convictions did not target planners of the violence. At
this writing no security officers had been convicted for hundreds of killings and
scores of rapes attributed to them during the election violence. At least 19 victims
of police shootings have won civil suits, but the government has not paid
the court-ordered compensation.
The government continued to deny responsibility for extrajudicial executions,
enforced disappearances, and torture during a 2008 security operation in Mt.
Elgon region. NGOs filed cases against the government at the East African Court
of Justice, the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,
and the African Commission on Human and People’s Rights. Local organizations
documented over 300 cases of persons “disappeared” between 2006 and
2008, some by the Sabaot Land Defence Forces, a militia, but most by the
army. The government took no new steps to investigate the “disappearances,”
with the exception of one inquest, or to exhume mass graves.
Extrajudicial killings attributed to the police remained unpunished. No one was
arrested for the killings of police whistleblower Bernard Kiriinya in 2008;
human rights activists Oscar Kamau King’ara and John Paul Oulu in 2009; or
Kenneth Irungu, a teacher killed in March after inquiring into the abduction and
murder of two of his cousins by suspected police. Police caught on camera
shooting unarmed civilians on Nairobi’s Langata Road in January 2011 were suspended
but later reinstated. In one exception to the impunity trend, in May a
Kilifi magistrate filed murder charges against four police suspected of killing
unarmed civilians in 2007; the case was proceeding at this writing.
The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission began public hearings in April
on human rights violations committed in Kenya from 1963 to 2008. The hearings
afforded victims an important opportunity to testify about abuses by state agents in an official forum, but the commission’s insufficient funds, short operational
time frame, and organizational shortcomings limited its impact.
A witness protection agency was formally launched in mid-2011, but has been
unable to operate due to inadequate funding.
Human Rights Defenders
In September 2010, Ugandan police arrested Al-Amin Kimathi, director of the
Nairobi-based Muslim Human Rights Forum, when he visited Uganda to observe
proceedings against Kenyans accused of the July 2010 Kampala bombings who
had been rendered to Uganda without due process. Kimathi, charged with terrorism,
murder, and attempted murder, was held in pre-trial detention in
Uganda for a year before the charges were dropped in September 2011. In May
Kenya deported Clara Gutteridge, a British fellow with the Open Society Justice
Initiative who was researching abuses by East African governments in the context
of counterterrorism operations, including Kimathi’s case. Kenya claimed
Gutteridge’s activities were “a threat to national security.”
Somalia and Refugee Rights
In March Kenya intervened in Somalia’s civil war, supporting pro-Transitional
Federal Government militias that committed human rights violations. In
October, following the abduction of four foreigners from Kenya by Somali militants
or pirates, Kenyan troops invaded areas of Somalia controlled by the militia
group al-Shabaab.
Police arrested and unlawfully returned some Somali asylum seekers crossing
into Kenya. Most reached Kenya’s refugee camps via dangerous back roads to
avoid police arrest and extortion, exposing themselves to bandits who rob and
rape. The Liboi screening center near the border remained closed.
Kenya delayed opening two new camps—Ifo Extension and Kambios—claiming
they would attract more Somalis. Instead, it proposed building new camps in
Somalia, a dangerous proposition given the ongoing fighting. By August when
the two camps finally opened, over 400,000 refugees lived in three camps built for 90,000. Movement to the new camps encountered delays due to local community
opposition. Reports of rape in the camps increased dramatically and
almost always went unpunished. People with disabilities, especially mental
disabilities, had limited access to medical and social services.
Women’s, Children’s, and LGBT Rights
The Kenyan government undertook to improve access to pain treatment and
palliative care. Access to such care has been poor, particularly for hundreds of
thousands of children suffering pain from cancer, HIV/AIDS, or other diseases.
Eleven government hospitals are in the process of creating palliative care units,
and at least three were functional by September. In August the government
launched the first National Cancer Control Strategy, which recognizes the
importance of pain treatment and palliative care.
Kenya’s maternal mortality ratio remains high, at 488 deaths per 100,000 live
births. About 3,000 fistula injuries occur annually. The department of reproductive
health is developing a fistula policy, but the government has failed to effectively
address recurrent health system problems, including inadequate emergency
obstetric care facilities and lack of accountability, which contribute to fistula
and maternal deaths.
In December 2010 the Kenyan High Court ruled in favor of Richard Muasya, an
intersex individual, for the inhuman and degrading treatment Muasya suffered
at Kamiti Maximum Prison. Muasya and other intersex individuals are appealing
the court’s decision not to recognize intersex persons in Kenyan law. Kenyan
law continues to criminalize homosexual conduct, despite mounting evidence
that the law inhibits effective HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment programs.
Key International Actors
The African Union supported Kenya’s drive to defer ICC cases against post-election
violence suspects, increasing concerns over the body’s commitment to
accountability. The UN Security Council, however, did not grant the deferral
request.
The United States supported counterterrorism initiatives in Kenya and East
Africa. FBI agents were involved in the interrogations of Kimathi and other
Kenyans held in Uganda, despite their knowledge of due process violations
against the suspects.
The UN and most donor states appropriately rejected Kenya’s suggestion that
camps be built in south-central Somalia to house Somalis fleeing conflict,
human rights abuses, and famine.
M8C8N@
The human rights situation in Malawi deteriorated significantly in 2011, with
President Bingu wa Mutharika’s government acting in an increasingly repressive
manner. Fuel and foreign currency shortages and increasing food prices have
taken a toll on the country, reversing the economic gains made during
Mutharika’s first term in office.
The government’s failure to adequately address the country’s economic problems
and the clampdown on its critics triggered a protest by civil society
activists. The government reacted to these street protests with increasing
heavy-handedness.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
In the past year Mutharika signed repressive new legislation, including Section
46 of the penal code, which allows the minister of information to ban publications
deemed “contrary to the public interest.” The president also signed the
Injunctions Law, which prevents Malawians from filing civil suits against government
officials. These new laws, which were severely criticized by civil society
activists, limit the ability of the media to operate freely and deny Malawians the
protection of the law.
Authorities also intimidated and harassed university lecturers and students
who have been at the forefront of criticizing the government’s poor human
rights and governance records. In September plainclothes police interrogated
staff of the Polytechnic University of Malawi about the existence of a political
group, Youth for Freedom and Democracy (YFD). A week later Robert Chasowa—
vice-president of YFD, university student, and outspoken government critic—
was found dead at the Polytechnic campus with a deep cut to his head.
Although police ruled his death a suicide, civil society activists accused the
government of involvement in Chasowa’s death.
In February the inspector general of police, Peter Mukhito, interrogated
University of Malawi lecturer Blessing Chisinga after he delivered a lecture on
the causes of mass protests in Malawi. In reaction, university lecturers boycotted classes, demanding an apology from Mukhito and calling on the authorities
to respect academic freedom. The Chancellor College section of the
University of Malawi’s academic staff union supported the boycott and Jessie
Kabwila Kapusula, the union’s acting president, received anonymous death
threats. Kapasula and three colleagues were later dismissed by the university
for supporting the boycott.
The government has also shown increasing intolerance towards peaceful
demonstrations. On October 11, police arrested five civil society activists—
Habiba Osman, Billy Mayaya, Brian Nyasulu, Ben Chiza Mkandawire, and
Comfort Chiseko—on charges of “holding an illegal demonstration.” They were
taking part in a small demonstration outside parliament, calling on Mutharika
to hold a referendum, for his resignation, and an early election. The activists
were released on bail five days later.
The most brutal crackdown on a peaceful demonstration took place on July 20
when police fired live ammunition and tear gas at unarmed demonstrators and
bystanders Lilongwe, the capital, Blantyre, and Mzuzu, killing 19 and leaving
scores more wounded. The police also arrested around 500 demonstrators. The
demonstrators were protesting deteriorating economic conditions and increasing
repression by the authorities. On August 10 Mutharika said he would establish
an independent commission of inquiry into the July killings. However, at
this writing the government had not set up the commission and there had been
little progress in investigating and bringing to account those responsible for the
killings.
Further civil society vigils and demonstrations were planned for August 17 and
18 to commemorate those killed in July and to raise concerns about the economy
and human rights situation. These nationwide protests were indefinitely
postponed by the organizers after the High Court issued an injunction banning
them. Persons believed to be affiliated with the ruling Democratic Progressive
Party (DPP) had applied for the injunction.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
There is a climate of fear in the country as journalists and civil society activists
who attempt to report on the human rights situation have come under increasing
attack from security forces and supporters of the DPP. Several human rights
activists have received death threats and been forced to go into hiding. In
September unknown assailants threw petrol bombs at the homes and offices of
several government critics, including activists Mcdonald Sembereka and Rafiq
Hajat and opposition politician Salim Bagus. Human rights activists alleged
that the government and DPP supporters orchestrated the attacks. At this writing
the police had neither conducted any investigations nor arrested those
responsible for the attacks.
Freedom of Press
Police and DPP supporters have also been implicated in the intimidation, arbitrary
arrest, and beating of journalists attempting to report on political events in
the country.
On October 11, police summoned deputy editor Innocent Chitosi and reporter
Archibald Kasakura, both of Malawi News, as well as George Kasakula of
Weekend Nation, after the two papers published stories about the death of student
activist Chasowa. On September 12, police arrested journalist Ernest
Mhwayo for allegedly taking pictures of President Mutharika’s farm without permission.
Police conducted a violent crackdown on journalists attempting to cover the
July protests. According to the Media Institute of Southern Africa, police beat 14
journalists, arrested three, and harassed 10 more, as they attempted to cover
the protests in Lilongwe and Blantyre. Authorities also prevented independent
radio stations from reporting on the protests. On July 20 the Malawi
Communications Regulatory Authorities, the state broadcasting regulator,
directed three independent radio stations, Capital FM, Joy Radio, and Zodiak
Broadcasting Station (ZBS), to stop live coverage of the demonstrations
because this was viewed as perpetuating violence. Although all the stations
complied with the directive, they were taken off air for several hours on the following day, a move that denied Malawians vital information about how best to
negotiate a dangerous situation.
Key International Actors
The deteriorating human rights situation in the country has led to increasing
concern from the international community and donors. In October the Malawian
government faced widespread international criticism and condemnation by
local and international civil society groups when it invited and hosted
Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir at the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA) summit in Lilongwe. Despite being a state party to
the International Criminal Court, Malawi did not arrest al-Bashir—who is wanted
by the court on charges of genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes—
upon his arrival in the country.
In August the United Nations pushed for dialogue between the Malawian government
and civil society activists to address the political and economic crisis
in the country. However, dialogue broke down after human rights activists
alleged that the government orchestrated attacks against them, accusations
that the government rejected.
In July the United Kingdom, Malawi’s biggest bilateral donor, withheld US$30
million of direct aid in reaction to the expulsion of the UK high commissioner,
Fergus Cochrane Dyet, and concerns over the deteriorating human rights situation.
President Mutharika’s brother, Justice Minister Peter Mutharika, visited the
UK in October in an attempt to repair relations between the two governments.
On July 26 the United States government said it would suspend a $350 million
aid package in reaction to the July killings of 19 protesters and bystanders.
N@><I@8
Deeply entrenched human rights problems, as well as the growing threat posed
by a militant Islamist group, underscored the pressing need for President
Goodluck Jonathan to strengthen and reform the institutions that ensure security
and the rule of law. National elections in April were heralded by many as
Nigeria’s fairest. Still, campaign violence, allegations of vote rigging, and inflation
of results—particularly in the rural areas of southeastern Nigeria, President
Jonathan’s stronghold—marred the elections.
Episodes of intercommunal violence continued to claim hundreds of lives,
including ongoing violence in Plateau State, and post-presidential election riots
and sectarian killings in northern Nigeria that left more than 800 dead.
Meanwhile abuses by government security forces and the ruling elite’s mismanagement
and embezzlement of the country’s vast oil wealth continued largely
unabated. Endemic corruption, poverty, poor governance, and unchecked
police abuses have created an environment where militant groups thrive and
find ready recruits in the vast cadre of Nigeria’s unemployed youth.
A series of bombings and numerous targeted killings by the Boko Haram militant
Islamist group in northern Nigeria had at this writing left more than 425
people dead in 2011, raising concern about the government’s use of heavyhanded
tactics in responding to the problem. Suspected members of the group
carried out dozens of attacks in the northern city of Maiduguri, gunning down
police officers, politicians, traditional leaders, and opposing clerics. The group
also claimed responsibility for the November bombings in the town of
Damaturu, Yobe State, that left at least 100 people dead, and a suicide bomb
attack in August on the United Nations building in Abuja that killed 24 people
and injured more than 100 others.
The administration took some steps to improve government transparency. In
May the National Assembly passed, and President Jonathan signed into law,
the Freedom of Information Act, which guarantees the public the right to access
public records. Free speech and the independent press remained robust.
Nigeria’s judiciary continued to exercise a degree of independence but was
dogged by public allegations of corruption. Meanwhile, many of the corruption cases against senior political figures remained stalled in the courts. Foreign
partners took some important steps to confront endemic corruption in Nigeria,
but appeared reluctant to exert meaningful pressure on the government over its
human rights record.
Intercommunal and Political Violence
Intercommunal, political, and sectarian violence has claimed more than 16,000
lives since the end of military rule in 1999. Protests by opposition supporters in
12 northern states following the April 16 presidential election degenerated into
three days of violent riots and sectarian killings between Christians and
Muslims that left hundreds dead, including at least 680 in Kaduna State.
Episodes of intercommunal violence continued in Plateau State, in central
Nigeria. At this writing more than 350 people had died in 45 separate incidents
in 2011. Victims, including children, were hacked to death, shot, burned alive,
and dragged off buses and killed, in many cases simply based on their ethnic
or religious identity. Intercommunal clashes in 2011 in Bauchi, Benue,
Nassarawa, Niger, and Taraba states left more than 120 dead and hundreds
more displaced.
State and local government policies that discriminate against “non-indigenes”—
people who cannot trace their ancestry to what are said to be the original
inhabitants of an area—continue to exacerbate intercommunal tensions and
perpetuate ethnic-based divisions. Federal and state authorities failed to break
the cycle of violence by holding the perpetrators of these crimes accountable.
Conduct of Security Forces
As in previous years, the undisciplined Nigeria Police Force was implicated in
frequent human rights violations, including extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary
arrests, and extortion-related abuses. The police routinely solicit bribes
from victims to investigate crimes and from suspects to drop investigations.
Embezzlement of police funds is rife among senior police officials who also
often demand monetary “returns” from money extorted from the public by their
subordinates. Meanwhile, soldiers were implicated in several attacks on villages in Plateau State in August and September, and in extrajudicial killings in
response to Boko Haram attacks in Maiduguri.
In July the attorney general’s office filed criminal charges against five police
officers, including three assistant commissioners of police, for the 2009 extrajudicial
killing of the Boko Haram leader Mohammed Yusuf and his followers.
But the authorities have still not prosecuted members of the police and military
for the unlawful killing of more than 130 people during the November 2008 sectarian
violence in Plateau State, the soldiers who massacred more than 200
people in Benue State in 2001, or the members of the military involved in the
complete destruction of the town of Odi, Bayelsa State, in 1999.
Government Corruption
Nigeria made only limited progress with its anti-corruption campaign in 2011.
The Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) at this writing had
arraigned 35 nationally prominent political figures on corruption charges since
2003, including in 2011 a former federal minister, four former state governors,
and a former speaker and deputy speaker of the House of Representatives.
But executive interference with the EFCC, a weak and overburdened judiciary,
and the agency’s own failings have undermined the effectiveness of its work. At
this writing the commission had only secured four convictions of senior political
figures, and they faced relatively little or no prison time. The EFCC has failed
to prosecute other senior politicians widely implicated in corruption, and the
political elite continues to squander and siphon off the country’s tremendous
oil wealth, leaving poverty, malnutrition, and mortality rates among the world’s
highest.
Violence and Poverty in the Oil-Producing Niger Delta
The 2009 amnesty—which saw a few thousand people, including top militant
commanders, surrendering weapons in exchange for cash payments—has
reduced attacks on oil facilities, but kidnappings, mostly of family members of
wealthy Nigerians, continued in the Niger Delta and southeastern Nigeria. The
government made little effort to address the environmental damage from oil pollution, state and local government corruption, and political sponsorship of
armed groups, which drive and underlie violence and poverty in the oil-rich
region.
Decades of oils spills—from multinational oil company operations, sabotage of
pipelines, and bunkering (theft) of crude oil—and widespread gas flaring have
left the Niger Delta heavily polluted. A UN report in August found that oil pollution
in the Ogoniland region of Rivers State may require the world’s largest
clean up ever, at an initial cost of US$1 billion, and take up to 30 years. The UN
team found that oil contamination had migrated into the groundwater in at
least eight spill sites that Shell—the largest oil company in Nigeria—had
claimed they had remediated.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Sharia
State governments in 12 northern states apply Sharia law as part of their criminal
justice systems, which include sentences—such as the death penalty,
amputations, and floggings—that amount to cruel, inhuman, and degrading
punishment. In September a court in Zamfara State sentenced two men to
amputation of their right hands. At this writing the case was under appeal.
Serious due process concerns also exist in these proceedings, and evidentiary
standards in the Sharia codes applied in these states discriminate against
women, particularly in adultery cases.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Nigeria’s federal criminal code punishes consensual homosexual conduct with
up to 14 years in prison. In states applying Sharia, consensual homosexual conduct
among men is punishable by death (stoning), and by flogging and six
months in prison in the case of women. Federal legislation that would criminalize
anyone who enters into or assists a “same gender” marriage was introduced
in the Senate in July. Similar legislation has been introduced in the National
Assembly at least twice before and stalled amid opposition from domestic and
international human rights activists.
Health and Human Rights
Widespread lead poisoning from artisan gold mining in Zamfara State has killed
at least 500 children since 2010. At this writing 1,500 children were being treated
for lead poisoning, but hundreds of other affected children had not received
any medical care. The government has also failed to adequately clean up the
environment and regulate ongoing mining practices.
Freedom of Expression and Media
Civil society and the independent press openly criticize the government and its
policies, allowing for robust public debate. Yet journalists are still subject to
arrest and intimidation when reporting on issues implicating Nigeria’s political
and economic elite. The police arrested six journalists from the Nation newspaper
in October after they published a purported letter from former President
Olusegun Obasanjo. In October Zakariyya Isa, a journalist with the state
National Television Authority, was gunned down in Maiduguri. Boko Haram
claimed responsibility for the killing.
Key International Actors
Because of Nigeria’s role as a regional power, Africa’s leading oil exporter, and
a major contributor of troops to UN peacekeeping missions, foreign governments—
including the United States and the United Kingdom—have generally
been reluctant to publicly criticize Nigeria over its poor human rights record.
US government officials did speak out forcefully against the country’s endemic
government corruption, but they were less willing to condemn the serious abuses
committed by Nigeria’s security forces. The UK government continued to play
a leading role in international efforts to combat money laundering by corrupt
Nigerian officials, demonstrated by the April extradition from Dubai of powerful
former Delta State governor James Ibori. However, the UK increased funding to
£180 million ($280 million) in aid to Nigeria in 2011, including security sector
assistance, without demanding accountability for government officials or members
of the security forces implicated in corruption or serious human rights
abuses.
During the UN secretary-general’s visit to Nigeria in May he expressed concern
about intercommunal violence, but failed to put meaningful pressure on the
Nigerian government to allow a mission to Plateau State by his special adviser
on the prevention of genocide, after the government failed to approve the visit.
RN8E;8
Progress continued in Rwanda in 2011 in the fields of development, delivery of
public services, health, and the economy. Draft revisions of the laws on genocide
ideology and media contained some positive amendments, but leave open
the possibility for inappropriate prosecutions for “genocide ideology.”
Moreover, freedom of expression and political space are still severely restricted.
Members of opposition parties, journalists, and other perceived critics of
the government were arrested, detained, and tried, some solely for expressing
their views. Charges such as endangering state security and inciting public disobedience
were increasingly used to prosecute government critics.
Community-based gacaca courts had almost completed their work by the end of
the year, after trying more than 1.2 million cases related to the 1994 genocide
since 2005. A number of applications for review of gacaca decisions remained
pending.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) ruled that the case of
Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi should be transferred to Rwanda’s national courts.
Government Opponents and Other Critics
Bernard Ntaganda, leader of the PS-Imberakuri opposition party, was tried and
sentenced to four years imprisonment in February 2011. He was found guilty of
endangering national security, divisionism, and attempting to organize demonstrations
without authorization.
The trial of Victoire Ingabire, leader of the FDU-Inkingi opposition party, began
in earnest in September after multiple adjournments. Ingabire faces six
charges: creating an armed group, complicity in terrorist acts, complicity in
endangering the state through terrorism and armed violence, inciting the public
to rise up against the state, genocide ideology, and divisionism. She was being
tried alongside four current or former members of the Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), an armed group operating in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, composed partly of individuals who participated in the Rwandan genocide. All four have incriminated Ingabire. The trial was ongoing at
this writing.
Other FDU-Inkingi and PS-Imberakuri members were harassed and intimidated.
FDU-Inkingi representatives Anastase Hagabimana and Norbert Manirafasha
were arrested on April 20 in connection with a draft statement by their party
criticizing the increase in the cost of living in Rwanda. Manirafasha was
released on May 3 without charges. Hagabimana was held in pre-trial detention
until August 26, when he was provisionally released. He was tried on charges of
endangering state security. At this writing the judgment was expected in
November.
There was no progress in the case of the July 2010 murder of André Kagwa
Rwisereka, vice-president of the opposition Democratic Green Party of Rwanda.
No one has been charged with his murder.
Four former senior government and army officials turned outspoken critics, now
in exile—Faustin Kayumba Nyamwasa, Patrick Karegeya, Gerald Gahima, and
Théogène Rudasingwa—were tried in absentia by a military court in January. The
trial focused on the defendants’ public criticisms of the government and
President Paul Kagame. They were found guilty of endangering state security,
destabilizing public order, divisionism, defamation, and forming a criminal
enterprise. Karegeya and Gahima were each sentenced to 20 years imprisonment
and Nyamwasa and Rudasingwa to 24 years, with an additional charge of
army desertion. The trial of six people accused of involvement in a failed assassination
attempt on Nyamwasa in 2010 opened in South Africa in June and
hearings continued through October. At this writing the trial had not yet concluded.
Nyamwasa’s brother, Lt.-Col. Rugigana Ngabo, held incommunicado since his
arrest in August 2010, appeared before a military court in January, charged with
endangering state security. Details of his alleged offenses were not disclosed in
the initial hearings. At the military prosecutor’s request, subsequent hearings
were held behind closed doors.
Less prominent individuals were also punished for criticizing state policies.
Abbé Emile Nsengiyumva, a priest in eastern Rwanda, was arrested following a Christmas sermon in December 2010 in which he had opposed a state policy to
destroy thatched houses and proposals for family planning restrictions. He was
accused of endangering state security and inciting civil disobedience. In July he
was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment.
The law on genocide ideology, which has been used to target critics, went
through a process of revision. If adopted, some draft amendments would help
limit the scope for misuse of the law by defining the offense more precisely and
requiring that intent behind the crime be proven. However, vague offenses such
as approving of the genocide by “mocking” a person or group on the basis of
shared characteristics are included in the draft and are ripe for abuse. The new
draft law proposes a reduction in penalties.
Independent Media
The government made draft amendments to media laws, which, if adopted,
would lift some of the burdensome restrictions on journalists and introduce
self-regulation by media. However, after years of intimidation and a further
crackdown on independent media in 2010, there are almost no independent
Rwandan journalists operating in Rwanda. Several leading independent journalists
remain in exile.
In February Agnès Nkusi Uwimana and Saidati Mukakibibi, of the newspaper
Umurabyo, were tried and sentenced to 17 years and 7 years, respectively, for
publishing articles critical of the government and President Kagame. The court
ruled that the two women had incited the public to rise up against the state and
found them both guilty of endangering public order. Uwimana, the newspaper’s
editor, was also found guilty of minimizing the genocide, divisionism, and
defamation.
In September the Supreme Court heard the appeal of Didace Nduguyangu and
Antoine Karemera, convicted of the murder of Umuvugizi journalist Jean-
Léonard Rugambage in 2010. The case rested on the theory that they had killed
Rugambage to avenge the death of a relative, whom Rugambage had allegedly
killed during the genocide. Both men were sentenced to life imprisonment in
2010. On appeal, Nduguyangu’s sentence was reduced to 10 years and Karemera was acquitted. Judicial authorities are not known to have pursued
leads suggesting that Rugambage may have been killed because of his investigative
work as a journalist.
Human Rights Defenders
The government’s intolerance of criticism and hostility toward human rights
organizations means there is little scope for Rwandan organizations to report
on human rights violations by the state. Threats and intimidation of human
rights defenders by individuals close to the government, combined with a
degree of self-censorship, have ensured that few Rwandan civil society groups
publicly criticize the government’s human rights record.
In August Joseph Sanane and Epimack Kwokwo, the president and acting executive
secretary of the Regional Human Rights League in the Great Lakes Region
(LDGL)—one of the few remaining active human rights organizations in
Rwanda—were prevented from travelling to Burundi and were detained by the
police. They were questioned about the LDGL’s internal administration and
finances, and accused of helping its former secretary general leave the country.
Kwokwo was released the same day; Sanane was detained overnight. Neither
was charged with any criminal offense.
Senior government officials and pro-government media continued to discredit
international human rights organizations in public speeches, articles, and interviews.
Pro-government media and websites also launched personal attacks
against human rights defenders, academics, and other individuals for painting
a negative picture of the human rights situation in Rwanda.
Justice for the Genocide
Community-based gacaca courts, which have tried more than 1.2 million genocide-
related cases since 2005, had almost completed their work by the end of
2011. They leave behind a mixed legacy, with a number of positive achievements—
including the swift work of the courts, the extensive participation of the
local population, and the revelation of information about events during 1994—
alongside violations of the right to a fair trial, intimidation of witnesses, corruption of judges and other parties, and political interference. As gacaca prepares
to close, the government is considering how to handle applications for reviewing
gacaca courts’ decisions.
In June the referral chamber of the ICTR ruled that the case of Jean-Bosco
Uwinkindi should be transferred to Rwanda’s national jurisdictions. In the past
the ICTR and jurisdictions in other countries had declined to transfer genocide
cases to Rwanda due to fair trial concerns. Uwinkindi’s appeal against the decision
was pending at this writing. In October the European Court of Human
Rights held that the extradition of Sylvère Ahorugeze from Sweden to Rwanda
would not expose him to a real risk of a flagrant denial of justice, and so would
not violate the European Convention on Human Rights. Ahorugeze was arrested
in Sweden in 2008 following an extradition request by Rwanda.
Trials Linked to 2010 Grenade Attacks
Twenty-nine people were tried in connection with a series of grenade attacks in
Rwanda in 2010 and previous years. Most of the defendants plead guilty.
Several stated in court that they had been illegally detained in military detention
for several months and tortured. The trial, which began in February, was
ongoing at this writing.
In a separate case, university professor Lambert Havugintwari was arrested in
Huye on February 9 and held illegally in military custody in an undisclosed location
for several weeks. He and his co-accused, Alexandre Munyentwali, were
accused of bringing grenades into the country and charged with endangering
state security and forming a criminal gang. They were tried in November and
were awaiting the court’s verdict at this writing.
Cases Related to the Democratic Republic of Congo
There was no progress on the case of Laurent Nkunda, former leader of the
Congolese armed group National Congress for the Defense of the People
(CNDP), who remained illegally detained under house arrest in Kigali, the capital,
since January 2009, with no access to lawyers and occasional access to relatives. Continued attempts to get his case heard in Rwandan courts remained
blocked.
Rwandan authorities are not known to have taken any action in response to
allegations of grave crimes committed by the Rwandan army in Congo in 1996
and 1997, contained in the 2010 mapping report of the United Nations Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Refugee Protection
Rwanda placed considerable pressure on states hosting Rwandan refugees and
on the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to invoke the
1951 UN Refugee Convention’s “cessation clause” by December 31, 2011, under
which host countries can declare that a given group of refugees no longer
needs protection and should return home. The Zambian government and
UNHCR announced steps to prepare cessation on September 5. In a joint communique
with the Rwandan government on October 7, UNHCR recommended
that states invoke cessation by December 31, 2011, effective from June 30,
2012. International NGOs voiced concern about human rights violations in
Rwanda, as well as fears that countries hosting large numbers of Rwandan
refugees may not have adequate procedures to process claims for exemption
under the clause.
Key International Actors
Most foreign governments continued to broadly support the Rwandan government
and to applaud its development successes. However, some governments
expressed increasing concern about restrictions on free speech and political
space following the 2010 elections. A warning by the London Metropolitan
Police about security threats against two Rwandans living in the United
Kingdom in May affected Western perceptions of the government’s human
rights record, particularly in the UK, one of Rwanda’s most important partners.
However, these developments did not fundamentally alter the foreign and
development policies of most Western governments.
Following the resumption of diplomatic relations between Rwanda and France
and French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s visit to Kigali in 2010, President
Kagame visited Paris for the first time in September 2011.
SFD8C@8
The year was marked by ongoing fighting in Somalia and abuses by the warring
parties, including indiscriminate attacks harming civilians. While the armed
Islamist al-Shabaab group continued to control more territory than any other
group in South and Central Somalia, the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia (TFG)—with the support of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and militias aligned to the TFG, notably Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a (ASWJ)
and Raskamboni—gained control over new areas in Mogadishu, the capital, and
small areas along the border with Kenya and Ethiopia. On August 6 al-Shabaab
withdrew from Mogadishu, citing tactical reasons, but has continued to attack
the capital, including with suicide bombings.
Al-Shabaab continued to administer arbitrary justice in the areas it controls,
including beheadings, beatings, and torture. TFG forces and TFG-aligned militias
also committed serious abuses against civilians, and the TFG has largely
failed to protect the basic human rights of the population in areas under its
control. The war contributed directly to the worsening humanitarian emergency
and famine that struck Somalia in mid-2011. Abuses by al-Shabaab and to a
lesser extent the TFG restricted humanitarian aid from reaching intended beneficiaries
in the country.
Violations of the Laws of War
Indiscriminate attacks were committed by all parties to the conflict during a
series of military offensives led by the TFG, with the support of AMISOM and
ASWJ, in late 2010 and between February and May 2011. Al-Shabaab regularly
fired mortars indiscriminately from densely populated areas towards TFG/AMISOM
positions, often unlawfully placing civilians at risk. TFG and AMISOM
forces frequently responded with indiscriminate counter-attacks, notably in and
around Bakara market. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO),
between January and late September three hospitals in Mogadishu treated
8,430 casualties for weapon-related injuries. Hospital records show that a significant
proportion of civilian casualties were women and children.
Indiscriminate fire on civilian areas has also occurred during offensives by TFGaffiliated
militias in the border areas of Dhobley and Baardhere during clashes
with al-Shabaab. An outburst of renewed fighting between Raskamboni and
other TFG-affiliated militias against al-Shabaab in Dhobley in early October
resulted in at least 11 civilian deaths, reportedly due to crossfire.
There have been no attempts to hold to account those responsible for indiscriminate
attacks.
On October 4 a suicide bombing in Mogadishu, claimed by al-Shabaab,
occurred outside a compound housing several government ministries, including
the Ministry of Education. At least 100 civilians were killed, including students
and parents awaiting exam results at the ministry.
Abuses in TFG-Controlled Areas
Many civilians were killed and wounded during fighting between TFG forces and
insurgents and during TFG “law enforcement” operations. In an incident in late
January TFG forces reportedly fired on civilians in Mogadishu, killing between 12
and 20 people and wounding at least 30.
TFG forces and aligned militias have committed a range of abuses against internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Mogadishu, including looting food aid in IDP
camps, carrying out arbitrary arrests and detentions, and raping. Despite the
TFG’s public claims that it would consider a moratorium on the death penalty,
the military court has tried and sentenced at least 17 TFG soldiers and one civilian
to death since August, when TFG President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
declared a state of emergency in areas of Mogadishu. On August 22 two TFG
soldiers were executed.
In areas under the control of TFG-affiliated militias, civilians have been arbitrarily
arrested and detained. In March in Bula Hawo ASWJ arbitrarily arrested hundreds
of civilians, including women and children, after a bomb attack. Those
fleeing to Kenya via Dhobley reported being arrested and accused of being al-
Shabaab sympathizers by men in uniform they believed to be associated with
the TFG. Individuals alleged or perceived to support al-Shabaab were also
unlawfully killed. At least three civilians were summarily executed by ASWJ following their takeover of Bula Hawo in March; one was reportedly a 17-year-old
boy. In May media quoted an ASWJ spokesperson as saying the group would
execute those found spying for al-Shabaab.
Indiscriminate shooting by AMISOM has also resulted in civilian deaths; some
incidents have led to internal investigations. On September 2, AMISOM forces
in Mogadishu shot dead a Malaysian journalist and injured his colleague. An
internal investigation found three Burundian soldiers responsible for the killing.
The three have been returned to Burundi, reportedly to face trial.
Abuses in Opposition Controlled Areas
Al-Shabaab remained in control of most of southern Somalia where every area
of people’s lives is regulated by an extreme form of Islamic law. Women and
girls in particular have suffered from these harsh laws. Freedoms previously
enjoyed by women in Somali culture have been severely curtailed to prevent
them from mixing with men. This has also limited women’s ability to engage in
small-scale commercial enterprises. Harsh punishments—notably floggings,
summary executions, and public beheadings—are common. Such punishments
generally take place after summary proceedings without due process. On
August 23 al-Shabaab publicly executed three men accused of spying for the
TFG in the Daynile district of Mogadishu.
Children Associated with Armed Forces and Groups
Schools have featured heavily in al-Shabaab’s combat operations. The group
has fired on AMISOM and TFG forces from schools, deliberately exposing students
and teachers to retaliatory fire and, in some cases, directly attacking students
and school buildings and interfering with teaching. As a result of ongoing
attacks, teachers have fled and—where schools have not shut down entirely—
children, deprived of any meaningful education and afraid for their safety, have
dropped out in large numbers. Forced recruitment of adults and children by al-
Shabaab is widespread and ongoing. Al-Shabaab routinely uses children in its
ranks. Children continue to also be found within the TFG armed forces and TFGaffiliated
militias; the TFG has at this writing failed to ensure that all its recruits, including those formerly associated with aligned militias, undergo effective age
vetting to prevent the recruitment of children.
Restrictions on Humanitarian Assistance
On July 20 the regions of South Bakool and Lower Shabelle were declared to be
in a state of famine and by August the United Nations had declared six areas,
primarily in southern Somalia, to be in a state of famine. As of August 2011
more than half of the Somali population—an estimated 4 million people—was
in need of food aid.
Al-Shabaab restrictions on humanitarian assistance persisted despite the
unfolding humanitarian disaster. It continued to prohibit over a dozen humanitarian
organizations from working in areas under its control, with continued
attacks on humanitarian workers.
Al-Shabaab has also imposed taxation, both monetary and on livestock, on the
population under its control, causing significant hardship. It also severely
restricted the movement of those in need of assistance, preventing people, particularly
boys and young men, from fleeing to Kenya for assistance. In late
September al-Shabaab prevented IDPs from reaching Mogadishu, stopping
them in the Afgooye corridor on the outskirts of the city and transporting them
back to their places of origin. It also returned IDPs from Baidoa to rural areas.
The diversion of humanitarian aid within Mogadishu and the perpetration of
violence during food distribution by TFG forces and allied militias have further
limited IDPs’ access to greatly needed assistance. On August 5 at least three
civilians were killed in a Badbado camp after militias reportedly allied to the
TFG opened fire on a food distribution site. Newly appointed Prime Minister
Abdiweli Mohamed Ali created a committee to investigate the incident. In addition,
United States sanctions on terrorist groups have restricted US aid going
into southern and central Somalia and support for certain humanitarian organizations.
Key International Actors
Western governments, the UN, the AU, and neighboring countries, with the
exception of Eritrea, are united in supporting the TFG as the legitimate government
of Somalia. Support for the TFG was forthcoming despite concerns about
political infighting and lack of progress on the basic priorities of the Djibouti
agreement, such as the drafting of the constitution, the reformation of the parliament
and addressing issues of corruption.
Eritrea uses Somalia as a convenient theater in its proxy war against Ethiopia.
In July the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea reported Eritrea’s continued
support for al-Shabaab.
Kenya closed its border with Somalia in January 2007; it has forcibly returned
Somalis, including asylum seekers, to their country and has repeatedly called
for Somalis to receive assistance only within Somalia, and yet at this writing
Kenya continues to accommodate the arrival of around 1,000 new Somali
refugees daily in the sprawling refugee camps around the northern town of
Dadaab.
Kenya and Ethiopia have trained and offered military support to TFG-affiliated
militia groups, notably Raskamboni and ASWJ. Reports suggest that both
Ethiopian and Kenyan forces have also entered Somalia for security operations
near the border. On October 16, Kenyan military forces entered Somalia and
declared war on al-Shabaab, following a series of kidnappings of foreigners in
Kenya.
The US military has carried out targeted strikes using aerial drones on alleged
al-Shabaab targets.
The UN Security Council has authorized an AU force of 12,000 peacekeepers for
Somalia, but thus far only 9,000 Ugandan and Burundian troops have been
deployed, despite calls by the AU for an increase in the number of troops.
The UN independent expert on Somalia and some other key international actors
have recognized that accountability for past abuses in Somalia is crucial to
establishing a meaningful and inclusive peace process, but they have not prioritized this issue. Such accountability efforts should include documenting abuses
since the end of the Siad Barre regime in 1988 and, ultimately, a UN commission
of inquiry into war crimes committed since then.
SFLK? A=I@:8
South Africa continues to grapple with corruption, growing social and economic
inequalities, and the weakening of state institutions by partisan appointments
and one-party dominance. Attacks on freedom of expression, particularly
attempts by the ruling African National Congress (ANC) to tamper with media
independence, raised serious concerns about the government’s commitment to
the protection of basic civil and political rights. In April 2011, images of the brutal,
public murder by the police of Andries Tatane during a peaceful protest in
Ficksburg to demand better service delivery elicited public ire regarding police
brutality. Despite these concerns, institutions of democracy, among them the
South African Human Rights Commission and the Public Protector, remain highly
active.
The Foreign Policy White Paper, published in late May, failed to clarify the
thrust of South Africa’s international agenda, dashing hopes that a country with
strong constitutional protections of rights at home is ready to assume a leadership
position on the realization of rights worldwide.
Freedom of Expression
Following year-long deliberations, the Ad-Hoc Committee on the Protection of
Information Bill tabled a new draft for parliamentary approval in September
2011. The bill is designed to regulate classification procedures of state information
and proposes prison sentences of 15 to 20 years for publishing information
deemed to threaten national security. Public engagement on the bill has been
vociferous, with civil society arguing that, if promulgated, the bill would silence
the media and whistleblowers and condone overreaching state secrecy. Despite
improvements to the bill—such as the establishment of an independent
Classification Review Panel and limitations on institutions that can classify
information—it remains flawed. The absence of a public interest defense, permitting
the publication of information that serves the public, is its most notable
weakness. Public pressure—coordinated through the Right2Know Campaign, a
civil society network of organizations opposed to the Protection of Information
Bill—forced the ANC’s bill on September 20 to allow for further consultation.
Concerns regarding the ANC’s attempts to curtail freedom of media persist. The
party periodically invokes the spectre of a media appeals tribunal, which would
see statutory regulation of the media. Also of concern is ANC’s growing hold
over the country’s public broadcaster, the South African Broadcasting
Corporation.
Vulnerable Workers
Despite legislation protecting the rights of workers and being highly organized,
workers in various sectors of the economy continue to face severe challenges;
farmworkers are particularly vulnerable. The failure of the government to
enforce labor and tenure laws renders them defenseless against powerful
employers. Human Rights Watch’s research in the Western Cape, the secondrichest
province with the largest number of farmworkers in South Africa, uncovered
a number of exploitative conditions under which farmworkers interviewed
work and live. These range from occupational health and safety hazards,
including exposure to harmful pesticides; evictions without access to shortterm
shelter and poor housing conditions on farms; difficulties in forming or
joining unions; and unfair labor conditions, such as pay below minimum wage.
In response to a report that was the outcome of the Human Rights Watch
research, and the efforts of other civil society organizations, several South
African government officials committed to addressing abuses and enforcing
labor laws, in spite of negative reactions from farm owners.
Women’s Rights
South Africa’s maternal mortality ratio has more than quadrupled in the last
decade, increasing from 150 to 625 deaths per 100,000 live births between
1998 and 2007, with HIV playing a role in many of the deaths. The United
Nations estimates that 4,500 women die each year in South Africa due to preventable
and treatable pregnancy-related causes. This is despite South Africa’s
wealth, reasonably good health infrastructure, and strong legal and policy
framework, which includes a constitutional guarantee of the right to health.
Generally poor health outcomes—especially maternal and child mortality—are a
result of various factors, including fragmentation; inequalities between the public and private health sectors regarding the availability of financial and
human resources; the accessibility and delivery of health services; and a high
disease burden, particularly HIV/AIDS. The government’s failure to provide
effective oversight for the implementation of existing reproductive and sexual
health-related laws and policies contributes to South Africa’s high and increasing
maternal death rate, as does a lack of accountability for recurrent problems
in the health system, including abuses committed by health personnel.
The country’s women and girls continue to live with insecurity despite efforts to
curb violence against women, specifically sexual violence, which has been on
the rise. Several studies indicate that the failure of the criminal justice system
to investigate and punish sexual violence has created a culture of impunity for
rape. The rulings of magistrates and judges sometimes trivialize the gravity of
rape. Judge Mogoeng Mogoeng’s nomination and subsequent appointment as
chief justice by President Jacob Zuma could erode the gains that have been
made in addressing violence against women. Many civil society groups have
accused Mogoeng of undermining the rights of women and girls by issuing
lenient sentences in cases of rape and domestic violence, and invoking in his
rulings myths about rape that often blame the victims and excuse perpetrators.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
During the 17th UN Human Rights Council session, South Africa successfully
pushed through the adoption of the first-ever UN resolution on sexual orientation
and gender identity. This action affirmed South Africa’s endorsement of the
rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people worldwide, but
does not address the concerns of the LGBT community at home. A 2011 Human
Rights Watch report found that, despite the country’s progressive legislation,
discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity is widespread
in the society and evident in the behavior of government officials,
including the police and teachers. Black lesbians and transgender men are
especially vulnerable and live under constant threat of verbal, physical, and
sexual violence from acquaintances and strangers. Civil society pressure following
recent cases of rape, torture, and murder of black lesbians and transgender
people has prompted the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development to form a multi-sectoral task team to formulate legal and judicial
responses to violence against members of the LGBT community.
Refugee Rights
In 2011 South Africa prevented Zimbabwean asylum seekers from entering the
country, and forcibly returned registered Zimbabwean asylum seekers because
they did not possess “travel documents,” an unlawful requirement under international
law. On June 1 South Africa closed its largest refugee reception office
in Johannesburg. Local groups and Human Rights Watch raised concerns this
would further exacerbate registration problems faced by refugees and asylum
seekers, lead to increased unlawful deportation, and further increase the backlogs
in a system already struggling to process over 250,000 cases.
Some South African officials indicated that the country was considering moving
refugee reception offices to its borders with Mozambique and Zimbabwe and
detaining all asylum seekers while their cases were being considered. Local
civil society voiced concerns this would bring chaos and possibly a humanitarian
crisis to the South Africa-Zimbabwe border area in particular and lead to a
sharp deterioration of already poor decision-making, which would likely lead to
increased refoulement of genuine refugees.
International Role
South Africa’s role as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council has
been mixed. In Cote d’Ivoire, for example, as forces loyal to former President
Laurent Gbagbo were killing Ivorians known or suspected of supporting rival
and current President Alassane Ouattara, South Africa chose to focus on the
validity of the contested November 2010 elections, which it claimed were inconclusive.
That foot-dragging stalled international and regional efforts to resolve
the electoral crisis and protect civilians under siege.
In the case of Libya, South Africa surprised its critics by voting in favor of UN
Security Council Resolutions 1970 and 1973; the latter permitted military action
against to protect civilians Muammar Gaddafi’s regime. Zuma was harshly criticized
by his African Union peers, as well as some within his administration and the ANC, for this vote. Zuma later backtracked, claiming that South Africa was
misled into supporting a NATO-led, Western regime-change agenda. Afterward
the Zuma administration failed to criticize the abusive actions of the Libyan
regime, as the human rights situation in the country deteriorated. Since then
the government of South Africa has used the Libya situation to explain its failure
to support UN Security Council action on country situations such as Syria.
In an unprecedented development President Zuma’s more assertive leadership
as Southern African Development Community (SADC) mediator on Zimbabwe
saw SADC taking a tougher stance against President Robert Mugabe’s continued
repressive rule. At a SADC meeting in Livingstone, Zambia, in March SADC
leaders challenged Mugabe on his failure to institute agreed reforms under the
Global Political Agreement. Later Mugabe launched a scathing attack against
Zuma and his mediation panel for interfering in Zimbabwe’s affairs.
SFLK? SL;8E
Following an overwhelming vote for secession from Sudan in the January 2011
referendum, South Sudan declared independence on July 9. The new nation
faces major human rights challenges. However, officials have expressed the
new government’s intention to ratify major human rights treaties.
An influx of refugees and returnees from the North has presented severe
humanitarian challenges to South Sudan. Between January and August political,
inter-communal, and resource-driven clashes killed over 2,600 people,
according to the United Nations. The government failed to fulfill its responsibility
to protect civilians from this violence, as security forces fighting against
armed militias committed serious abuses against civilians. Across the country,
lack of capacity and inadequate training of police, prosecutors, and judges
have resulted in numerous human rights violations in law enforcement and in
the administration of justice.
Political and Legislative Developments
The January referendum was held under the terms of Sudan’s 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which ended over two decades of civil war.
Southern Sudanese cast ballots either for the continued unity of Sudan or for
secession from the North. Over 98 percent of votes were cast in favor of
separation.
In late January the president of the new nation, Salva Kiir, established a constitutional
review committee to draft a transitional constitution. Opposition political
parties complained of the committee’s work being dominated by the ruling
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM), and several withdrew in protest.
The Transitional Constitution entered into force on July 9 for a period of four
years, to be followed by national elections and the adoption of a permanent
constitution. It expanded presidential powers and created a new and enlarged
bicameral legislative body, which incorporated South Sudanese who left legislative
positions in Sudan’s former Government of National Unity. It also provided for the transformation of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
into the South Sudan Armed Forces.
Tensions along the North-South Border
Tensions between Sudan and South Sudan rose steadily throughout 2011.
Negotiations between the southern ruling SPLM and the Sudan’s ruling National
Congress Party (NCP) regarding post-secession issues—such as oil revenue
sharing, border management, and the status of the contested area of Abyei—
stalled on several occasions. Many issues remain unresolved.
Conflict in border areas has had a significant impact on South Sudan. In May
Sudan’s violent occupation of Abyei displaced an estimated 110,000 people,
mostly to Warrap state in South Sudan. Fighting between the Sudan Armed
Forces (SAF) and elements of the SPLA in Southern Kordofan drove some
20,000 people to South Sudan’s Unity state. Approximately 4,000 more people
arrived in Upper Nile state following the September clashes between Sudanese
government forces and the SPLM-North in Southern Kordofan. Humanitarian
agencies are struggling to meet the health, nutrition, and security needs of
these displaced people and refugees.
South Sudanese continue to return from the North, with over 340,000 arriving
between October 2010 and October 2011, according to the UN. Many moved in
the months prior to the referendum. Returnees cited a rise in anti-southerner
sentiments and uncertainty of citizenship status in the North as reasons for
their decision to return. Less than two weeks after the secession of the South,
Sudan amended its nationality law, raising concerns that people of South
Sudanese origin residing in Sudan will be discriminatorily stripped of citizenship,
and as a consequence might be made stateless.
Clashes between SPLA and Armed Militia Groups
Armed insurgencies by rebel militia groups against the South Sudan government,
originally triggered by disapproval of the outcome of the April 2010 general
elections, continued in 2011. Hundreds of civilians, including women and children, were killed, and tens of thousands of people were displaced, primarily
in Upper Nile, Unity, and Jonglei states.
Both opposition militias and government soldiers have failed to take adequate
precautions to protect civilians. Human Rights Watch documented grave human
rights abuses and violations of humanitarian law by SPLA soldiers in the course
of fighting in Upper Nile, including unlawful killings of civilians and the destruction
of homes and civilian property. According to UN reports, SPLA soldiers in
May opened fire indiscriminately on civilians during a confrontation with a militia
group in Jonglei.
President Kiir has offered a general amnesty for armed militias in exchange for
the promise to lay down arms and integrate their forces into the national military.
Several militia leaders have entered into ceasefire agreements with the
government, but others continue to clash with government forces.
Inter-Communal Violence
Cyclical fighting between ethnic communities caused by cattle-raiding, competition
over land resources, and kidnapping of women and children continued to
put civilians at risk of injury and death. The most intense clashes occurred
between the Lou Nuer and Murle communities in Jonglei state, where over
1,000 people were killed between April and August.
The government has taken some steps to promote reconciliation between
neighboring communities. However, both the government and the UN peacekeepers
have been unable to protect civilians and prevent these often predictable
outbreaks of violence. Land mines and ongoing insecurity have hampered
humanitarian access. The government has also failed to conduct public
investigations into abuses against civilians and ensure accountability.
Attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army
Attacks and abductions by the Lord’s Resistance Army, a Ugandan rebel group,
continued to pose a threat to civilians. The UN reported over 25 separate
attacks in 2011, mostly in western areas of the country bordering the Democratic Republic of Congo and Central African Republic. The displacement
of populations in response to this violence has threatened food security,
according to local officials. The SPLA and Ugandan People Defence Force (UPDF)
continued efforts to improve safety, relying frequently on a local defense group
known as the Arrow Boys.
Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice
Human Rights Watch has documented numerous violations by security forces.
These include unlawful killings, beatings, and looting, particularly when conducting
forcible community disarmament operations, as well as unlawful
arrests and detentions. Security forces have also used arrests and intimidation
to suppress opponents of the ruling party and independent journalists.
UN and humanitarian aid groups have reported that police, soldiers, and local
authorities have harassed staff, hijacked vehicles, and stolen aid supplies. In
August police officers in Juba severely assaulted the UN human rights chief in
South Sudan, forcing him to seek medical treatment. President Kiir has warned
security forces against such abuses.
There are serious human rights violations in the administration of justice such
as prolonged periods of pre-trial detention and poor conditions of detention.
Children are often detained with adults, while persons with mental disabilities
languish in prison without any legal basis for their detention and do not receive
treatment. Lack of legal aid also renders defendants vulnerable to due process
violations.
Economic and Social Rights
Millions of South Sudanese suffer from lack of access to education, health
care, food, and water. The government estimates that 47 percent are undernourished.
Less than half of primary school age children are in schools and
only 16 percent of women are literate. The maternal mortality rate of 2,054 per
100,000 live births is the highest in the world.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Women and girls are routinely deprived of the right to choose a spouse or to
own and inherit property. They are subjected to degrading practices such as
forced and early marriage, wife-inheritance, the use of girls to pay debts, and
various forms of domestic violence. Domestic disputes are resolved by traditional
courts that often apply discriminatory customs.
Key International Actors
There was a high level of international engagement in support of the January
referendum. Some 600 international observers—including delegations from the
African Union (AU), the Arab League, the European Union, and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development—monitored the polling process,
which was found to comply with international standards
Sudan officially recognized the Republic of South Sudan on July 8, and many
other countries immediately followed suit. Approximately 30 heads of state as
well as UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon attended independence ceremonies
in Juba. South Sudan became a UN member on July 14 and joined the AU on July
27.
When the mandate of the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) expired with the independence
of South Sudan, the Security Council unanimously approved a successor
mission, the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), to include 7,000 military
personnel. It has the mandate to “consolidate peace and security,” to help
establish conditions for development, and to strengthen the capacity of South
Sudan to govern effectively and democratically.
The AU’s High-Level Implementation Panel continued to play a key role in facilitating
negotiations between the SPLM and the NCP, including a June agreement
for the demilitarization of Abyei and monitoring by Ethiopian troops. This led
the Security Council to establish the UN Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
to comprise a maximum of 4,200 troops.
At its 18th session, the UN Human Rights Council did not appoint an independent
expert as it did for Sudan, but instead called for the identification of areas for technical assistance and capacity-building to promote respect for human
rights in South Sudan and requested that the high commissioner for human
rights present a report on the human rights situation in the country at its
September 2012 session.
SL;8E (NFIK?)
South Sudan seceded from Sudan on July 9 under the terms of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) that ended Sudan’s 22-year civil war.
The split was peaceful but Sudan saw increasing popular unrest and widening
armed opposition in the months that followed. In Khartoum, the capital, government
authorities pursued familiar repressive tactics including harassing, arresting,
detaining, and torturing perceived opponents of the government; censoring
media; and banning political parties.
Volatile areas north of the South Sudan border descended into conflict while a
peace agreement signed by the government and one rebel group did not end
simmering conflict or improve the human rights situation in the western
province of Darfur. At this writing Sudan’s proposed new constitution had not
been adopted amid calls by President Omar al-Bashir to impose a strict version
of Islamic law without exception for religious and ethnic minorities.
New Conflict Near South Sudan Border
The ruling National Congress Party (NCP) and the South’s ruling Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM) remained deadlocked on the disputed territory of
Abyei. In May Sudan conducted a military offensive to take over Abyei in which
government forces and allied militia burned and looted homes and other property,
causing more than 100,000 civilians to flee. In June the parties agreed to
demilitarize the area and deploy an Ethiopian peacekeeping force under the
auspices of the United Nations.
In June fighting started in Southern Kordofan between Sudan government forces
and elements of the South’s Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) after weeks
of growing tension over security arrangements and a state election in which
Ahmed Haroun—whom the International Criminal Court (ICC) wants for war
crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur—narrowly won the governorship
in May.
In Kadugli, the capital of Southern Kordofan, government soldiers and militia
shot civilians and arrested suspected SPLM supporters during house-to-house searches and checkpoint stops, and looted and burned churches and homes. A
report released in August by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights documented patterns of unlawful killings and
widespread attacks on civilian properties that could amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Sudan bombed indiscriminately across the Nuba Mountains, forcing the population
to seek shelter in caves and mountains where they lacked food, shelter,
and hygiene. The government refused to allow aid groups to affected areas,
effectively blockading much of the Nuba Mountains.
In early September conflict spread to the Blue Nile state, with fighting between
government forces and an armed opposition linked to SPLM-North, the successor
to the SPLM in Sudan. Tens of thousands of civilians fled across the border
to Ethiopia to escape the conflict. The Sudanese government bombed areas
held by opposition forces, and again blocked aid groups from accessing the
area.
Ongoing Conflict in Darfur
In December 2010 and early 2011 a surge in government-led attacks on populated
areas in North and South Darfur killed and injured scores of civilians,
destroyed property, and displaced more than 70,000 people, largely from ethnic
Zaghawa and Fur communities with perceived links to rebel groups. The
fighting followed a break between the government and Minni Minawi, the only
major Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) rebel leader to have signed the 2006 Darfur
Peace Agreement.
Much of Darfur remained off limits to the African Union/UN Mission in Darfur
and aid groups, curtailing the peacekeepers’ ability to protect civilians or monitor
the human rights situation. The vast majority of Darfur’s displaced population,
estimated at 2.5 million people, remained in camps in Darfur and Chad.
On several occasions, security forces carried out violent search-and-cordon
operations, arresting dozens of camp residents. Government forces were also
responsible for sexual violence against displaced women and girls.
A peace agreement signed in July by the Sudanese government and one rebel
group, the Liberation and Justice Movement, did not stop sporadic fighting or
address ongoing human rights abuses and impunity. The government, with support
from AU/UN peacekeepers, pursued controversial plans for a “domestic
political process” to end the Darfur conflict.
Although President al-Bashir announced in March that he would lift the state of
emergency in Darfur, he had not done so at this writing. Authorities relied on
emergency and national security laws to detain perceived opponents for long
periods without judicial review, often subjecting them to ill-treatment or torture
while in detention. Those detained in 2011 included Sudanese employees of
the AU/UN peacekeeping mission and of an international aid group. Four displaced
leaders, held under emergency laws in North Darfur since 2009,
remained in prison.
Crackdown on Protesters
In January in response to demonstrations inspired by the popular uprisings in
Egypt and Tunisia, security forces arrested more than 100 protesters in
Khartoum and Omdurman alone. The National Intelligence and Security Service
(NISS) detained dozens of protesters for several weeks, subjecting them to
beatings, sleep deprivation, electric shock, and other forms of physical and
mental abuse, including death threats and threats of rape.
Throughout the year security forces used violence to disperse peaceful protests
across the country, often at universities where students gathered to protest a
range of government policies and price hikes, and detained many. Security officials
were also implicated in sexual violence and harassment of female
activists, including the brutal rape in mid-February of Safiya Ishaq, a youth
activist who was forced to flee the country after speaking out about her ordeal.
Arrest and Detention of Perceived Opponents
The NISS also targeted opposition party members, activists, and other perceived
opponents. In January officials arrested and detained opposition figure Hassan al-Turabi and members of his Popular Congress Party for four months
after he warned of an uprising if the government refused to make reforms.
In June, when fighting broke out in Southern Kordofan, security forces rounded
up ethnic Nuba suspected to be SPLM members or supporters. Among those
arrested by NISS was Dr. Bushra Gammar Hussein Rahma, a prominent Nuba
human rights activist, who remained in detention without charge at this writing.
In September, when fighting spread to Blue Nile, security forces, including
NISS, arrested more than 100 suspected party members of SPLM-North, including
the well-known Sudanese writer, artist, activist, and former state adviser on
cultural affairs, Abdelmoniem Rahma. Some were released following renunciations
of their political affiliation to the party. In September the government also
banned 17 political parties including SPLM-North citing their southern links.
Media Restrictions
Sudanese authorities continued to stifle the media by arresting, detaining, and
prosecuting journalists reporting on sensitive topics, and by confiscating publications.
Between October 30 and November 2, 2010, NISS arrested a group of Darfuri
journalists and activists affiliated with Radio Dabanga, a news service reporting
on Darfur, and subjected them to beatings and other ill-treatment and torture
while in detention for weeks and months. Seven faced criminal charges, including
espionage, punishable by death.
In May security officials detained and interrogated two Sudanese journalists
because they tried to report on elections in Southern Kordofan. In June and
September security officials arrested Al Jazeera journalists attempting to cover
events in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.
Two prominent journalists were charged with defamation for their coverage of
the February rape of Safiya Ishag by security officials. Other journalists have
also been harassed or threatened with defamation charges for reporting on the
case.
NISS officials confiscated editions of major newspapers for their coverage of
conflicts or because of articles critical of the ruling party. Authorities also suspended
a dozen newspapers, including opposition paper Ajras al Hurriya, citing
their links to South Sudan.
Justice and Accountability
In 2005 the UN Security Council referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC,
which has issued arrest warrants for three individuals, including President al-
Bashir, on charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
Sudan continued to refuse cooperation with the ICC in its cases for crimes in
Darfur or to meaningfully prosecute the crimes in its own courts. Despite the
appointment of several special prosecutors for Darfur, Sudan has done little to
promote accountability and made none of the justice reforms recommended by
the AU’s High-level Panel on Darfur, headed by former South Africa President
Thabo Mbeki, in its 2009 report.
Key International Actors
World leaders congratulated Sudan for allowing the South’s secession, but
were largely mute in response to the human rights and laws of war violations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. Neither the UN nor the AU condemned the
serious violations, despite calls by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights for an investigation into possible war crimes and crimes against
humanity, or took other action to protect civilians from the conflicts.
Three ICC member states—Djibouti, Chad, and Malawi—welcomed al-Bashir to
their territories, flouting their obligation to arrest him. China also welcomed
him.
The European Union, United States, United Kingdom, Germany, and France criticized
the visits and urged Sudan and other states to cooperate with the court,
including in the surrender of ICC suspects. Malaysia cancelled an anticipated
visit by al-Bashir after public outcry.
The Mbeki-led AU Panel mediated between Sudan and South Sudan on critical
outstanding issues, such as oil revenue sharing, border management, and the
status of the contested area of Abyei. Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi
and UN and US special envoys played key roles. In June the UN authorized
4,200 Ethiopian peacekeepers for Abyei. The US also played a major role mediating
a new peace agreement for Darfur, signed by the government and one
rebel group at Doha.
However, key international actors did not take a unified approach to addressing
the protection of civilians and ending human rights violations, particularly in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. The mandate of the UN peacekeeping mission
in Sudan (UNMIS) expired in July, effectively ending international monitoring
in Sudan, except in Darfur, where the AU/UN mission continued to face significant
restrictions.
In September the UN’s Human Rights Council renewed the mandate of the UN
expert on Sudan for another year, but the resolution fell short of reflecting the
gravity of the situation on the ground and of calling for an international investigation
or any other meaningful response to the human rights and humanitarian
crisis in Sudan’s border regions of Abyei, South Kordofan, and Blue Nile.
SN8Q@C8E;
The Kingdom of Swaziland, ruled by King Mswati III since 1986, is in the midst
of a serious crisis of governance. Years of extravagant expenditure by the royal
family, fiscal indiscipline, and government corruption have left the country on
the brink of economic disaster.
Under Swazi law and custom, all powers are vested in the king. Although
Swaziland has a prime minister who is supposed to exercise executive authority,
in reality, King Mswati holds supreme executive powers and control over the
judiciary and legislature. The king appoints 20 members of the 65-member
house of assembly and approves all legislation that parliament passes.
Political parties have been banned in the country since 1973.
Swaziland has one of the highest HIV prevalence rates in the world at 26 percent,
but has failed to secure sufficient treatment for its population, including
anti-retroviral drugs. With 80 percent of the population subsisting on less than
US$2 per day, a 40 percent unemployment rate, and thousands of civil servants
facing wage cuts, Swazi authorities have faced increasing pressure from civil
society activists and trade unionists to implement economic reforms and open
up the space for civil and political activism. Dozens of students, trade unionists,
and civil society activists have been arrested during protests against the
government’s poor governance and human rights record.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
The government has intensified restrictions on freedom of association and
assembly in the past few years. The Swazi constitution guarantees these rights,
but the provisions protecting these rights have been undermined by clauses
that permit restrictions by the state. Authorities have also restricted political
participation and banned political parties.
Permission to hold political gatherings is often denied, and police routinely disperse
and arrest peaceful demonstrators. On September 7, police beat and
injured several students in Mbabane as they attempted to deliver a petition to the minister of labour and social security. Police detained two students, later
releasing them without charge.
On September 5, local civil society groups, trade unionists, workers, and students
embarked on a week of action calling for, among other things, multi-party
democracy, the release of political prisoners, and a freeze on wage cuts for civil
servants. The week of action was supported by various trade union groups
around the world, including the Congress of South African Trade Unions
(COSATU), which sent representatives to Swaziland. The demonstrations turned
violent. On September 7, police attempted to prevent the deputy president of
COSATU, Zingiswa Losi, from addressing a rally and fired live ammunition, rubber
bullets, and tear gas at crowds, resulting in several injuries in the town of
Siteki. Losi and the deputy head of COSATU’s international department, Zanele
Matebula, were later deported.
On September 9, police attempted to prevent leaders from the political movement
Peoples’ United Democratic Movement (PUDEMO) from speaking at a rally
in Manzini, beating PUDEMO and trade union leaders.
On April 12, authorities responded to civil society plans for a mass demonstration
against poor economic and human rights conditions by arresting about 150
civil society and trade union leaders. Police and security forces detained and
beat several activists and placed many others under house arrest.
Human Rights Defenders
Police harassment and surveillance of civil society organizations increased in
2011. Political activists were arrested, detained, and tried under security legislation.
They have also faced common law charges such as treason.
Civil society activists and government critics have reported increased incidents
of harassment, searches, and seizures of office materials, as well as monitoring
of electronic communications, telephones calls, and meetings by the authorities.
Police and other security officials routinely use excessive force against
political activists. Local activists reported that police often use torture and
other ill-treatment against activists with impunity. No independent complaints
investigation body exists for victims of police abuses.
Freedom of Expression and Media
Journalists and the media face continued threats and attacks by the authorities.
Self-censorship in media is widespread. Publishing criticism of the ruling party
is banned. On July 12, police stormed the offices of the Times newspapers and
served the editor with a court order to stop publishing any articles related to
the chief justice. A high court later rescinded the order after finding no basis for
it.
The government has passed draconian security legislation such as the Sedition
and Subversive Activities Act, which severely curtails the enjoyment of freedom
of expression, among other rights, and allows for extensive imprisonment without
the option of a fine if one is found guilty. The act has been used to harass
activists and conduct searches of their homes and offices.
Rule of Law
Serious deficiencies in Swaziland’s judicial system persist. In an ominous
precedent for the independence of the judiciary, Chief Justice Michael
Ramodibedi in August suspended Justice Thomas Masuku for insubordination
and for insulting the king, among other charges, in reaction to a January judgment
by Justice Masuku in which he said King Mswati was speaking with a
“forked tongue.” On August 11 Justice Masuku appeared before the Judicial
Services Commission (JSC), whose six members are appointed by the king. On
September 27 the king relieved Judge Masuku of his duties for “serious misbehavior.”
Justice Masuku had in the past made several rulings in favor of human
rights.
Control over the daily allocation of cases for hearings, including urgent ones,
has been placed solely in the hands of the chief justice, creating what is perceived
by lawyers as an unacceptable bias in the administration of justice. In
August the Law Society of Swaziland instituted a boycott of the courts to
protest these developments and the failure of the authorities to hear its complaints
regarding the running of the courts, including the chief justice’s allocation
of cases. On September 21, Law Society members delivered a petition to the minister of justice calling for action to address the decisions of the chief
justice and the general administration of justice in the court system.
Victims of human rights abuses and those seeking to advance the protection of
human rights through the courts have little or no access to effective legal remedies.
In June the chief justice published a directive protecting the king from civil
law suits in the high court or any other courts, a clear violation of a citizen’s
right to be protected by the law and to be heard before an independent judiciary.
Key International Actors
In August the International Monetary Fund expressed serious concerns about
Swaziland’s deepening fiscal crisis and called on the government to implement
significant fiscal reforms.
On August 3 South Africa agreed to a $355 million loan to help ease Swazi economic
woes. However, in a move widely lauded by civil society groups in
Swaziland and South Africa, the South African government insisted on political
and economic reforms as conditions for the loan. The Swazi authorities
declined the conditions, leading to delays in the loan’s disbursement.
U>8E;8
During demonstrations in April, following February’s presidential elections, the
unnecessary use of lethal force by Ugandan security forces resulted in the
deaths of nine people. Opposition politicians and hundreds of supporters were
arrested and charged with unlawful assembly and incitement to violence, and
state agents beat and harassed journalists covering the unrest.
Several bills with negative implications for human rights, including the Anti-
Homosexuality Bill, which proposes the death penalty for some consensual
same-sex activity, failed to advance but remain in parliament.
Freedom of Assembly and Expression
Security forces’ unjustified use of lethal force remains a significant problem. In
April military and police shot and killed nine people—six in Kampala, the capital,
two in Gulu, and one in Masaka—during demonstrations. None of the dead
carried weapons or posed a serious threat. At least two were shot in the back
as they fled and two, including a child, were inside buildings.
The protests began in April when Activists for Change, a non-profit group, called
on the public to “foster peaceful change in the management of public affairs.”
The first action was a “Walk to Work” to protest rising fuel and food prices. The
government argued that these walks constituted an unlawful assembly.
The government responded by unleashing security forces on the protesters. In
some instances protestors were aggressive, throwing stones and setting debris
alight. State forces failed to distinguish between individuals actively participating
in violence and those uninvolved, firing randomly into crowded areas and
throwing tear gas at people or into houses. Passersby were forced at gunpoint
or on threat of violence to clear burning debris. Security forces beat or shot at
over 30 journalists, confiscated audio recorders and cameras, and deleted
images of the violence. Several opposition politicians, including two former
presidential candidates, were violently arrested and charged with unlawful
assembly and inciting violence. All charges were eventually dropped.
In mid-October at least 27 members of Activists for Change were arrested and
charged with incitement to violence, concealment of treason, or treason as the
group planned more protests to highlight corruption and inflation. Opposition
leader Kizza Besigye was arrested several times throughout the year while walking
to work and held in “preventative detention” at his home.
The government has not conducted effective criminal investigations into the
April killings and other state abuses, although there was one arrest for the
killing of a child in Masaka. In some instances, the government paid families
money following cursory inquiries. The government has a history of not holding
state actors to account for the unnecessary use of lethal force. In protests in
September 2009 at least 40 persons were killed, but there has been no meaningful
attempt to investigate and prosecute those responsible.
Torture, Extrajudicial Killings, and Arbitrary Detention
The Rapid Response Unit (RRU), a section of the police created to combat
armed crimes, continues to arrest and in some instances torture criminal suspects.
RRU frequently illegally detains people without charge beyond the constitutionally
mandated 48 hours in its headquarters in Kireka, Kampala, and
other locations. RRU officers routinely use unlawful force during arrests, including
beating suspects, using torture during interrogations to extract confessions,
and the alleged extrajudicial killings of at least six individuals in 2010 alone.
No one has been charged for the May 2010 killing of Henry Bakasamba while he
was in RRU custody, or for four suspects who were gunned down by RRU operatives
on the Kyengera-Natete road in January 2010. In a positive step, three RRU
officers were arrested for the August 2010 killing of detainee Frank Ssekanjako,
though the trial has not taken place. This case could be the first time that RRU
officers are held criminally accountable for murder. In past incidents, alleged
perpetrators have been arrested only to be granted bail and never brought to
trial.
Due Process Violations
Uganda’s military court system violates international standards on fair trials
and due process by its infrequent sessions, painfully slow processes, lack of
adequate defense preparation, and lack of legal expertise among the army officers
who act as judges. Suspects have waited in some cases up to nine years
for trial resolutions. Some await trial for periods exceeding the maximum sentence
for their charges. The military court has in the past admitted into evidence
confessions extracted by torture. Suspects on remand often feel they
must plead guilty to conclude their case. In contravention of international legal
standards and Ugandan constitutional law, military courts have routinely prosecuted
civilians, particularly for gun possession, although there were indications
during 2011 that this practice would end.
The slow pace of the civilian justice system also violates human rights law.
Fifty-five percent of the Ugandan prison population is held on remand, though
international law requires pre-trial detention be an exception and as short as
possible. While the donor-driven Justice Law and Order Sector program has
made progress in reducing the case backlog, detainees are still in custody for
several years, pending trial. Most detainees, including those accused of serious
crimes and face long remand times, lack legal representation or the practical
ability to apply for bail without counsel.
Health Care and Forced Labor in Prisons
Uganda’s prisons are at 225 percent of capacity. Thousands of convicted and
remanded prisoners are forced to work long hours on prison farms, private
land, or prison staff’s fields, and are brutally beaten if slow. The funds raised
from prison labor are never fully accounted for, fueling corruption. A lack of
basic necessities, as well as the use of abusive corporal punishment, remained
widely reported, in contradiction of international standards.
A 2008 survey found HIV and tuberculosis rates for prisoners approximately
double those in the general population. Meanwhile, only 63 of Uganda’s 223
prisons have health workers, and only one prison hospital provides comprehensive HIV and tuberculosis treatment. Medically unqualified officers routinely
assess the health needs of prisoners and deny access to care.
The International Crimes Division
The new International Crimes Division of the High Court (ICD), created following
failed peace talks with the insurgent Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in 2008,
brought Uganda’s first domestic war crimes prosecution. In July LRA combatant
Thomas Kwoyelo faced 12 counts of grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions
and 53 counts of penal code violations, including murder, kidnapping, and
aggravated robbery. His lawyers challenged the state’s failure to grant amnesty,
which was granted to over 12,000 LRA combatants since 2000. In September
the constitutional court ruled that the amnesty act was constitutional, and thus
Kwoyelo should be granted amnesty, and his prosecution cease. At this writing
the government appeal was pending.
Defendants arrested for the July 2010 bombings also face trial before the ICD.
Al-Shabaab, the militant group fighting to overthrow the government of
Somalia, claimed responsibility as retaliation for the Ugandan army’s role in the
African Union mission in Somalia. Ugandan police arrested scores of Muslims
and detained many for months without charge, torturing some to elicit confessions.
Kenyan police handed over suspects without respect for national extradition
requirements. Twelve Muslim men from Uganda, Somalia, Tanzania, and
Kenya were on trial at this writing; two others pled guilty to conspiracy and terrorism
and were sentenced.
Bills Violating Human Rights Law
Due to a motion to maintain the legislative agenda of the previous parliament,
several repressive bills remain. The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which proposes
the death penalty for some consensual same-sex activities, and the
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act, which criminalizes intentional or attempted
transmission of HIV, could still come up for debate and vote. The Public
Order Management Bill, which grants police overly broad discretionary powers
in the management of all public meetings, was also presented in parliament.
Human Rights Defenders
Prominent Kenyan Muslim rights defender Al-Amin Kimathi, who had been
charged with terrorism in Uganda for the July 2010 bombings, was released in
September after a year in prison without trial. Six other human rights activists
(one from the United Kingdom, five from Kenya) on two occasions were denied
entry to Uganda while trying to observe legal proceedings or meet with authorities
to raise due process concerns.
A leading lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) activist who advocated
against the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, David Kato of Sexual Minorities Uganda,
was murdered in January, allegedly by an acquaintance who confessed. The
defendant pled guilty and was sentenced to 30 years in prison.
Key International Actors
The rights of the LGBT community, corruption, and governance mismanagement
dominated international attention, although after the brutal responses to the
protests, the United States spoke out in support of Ugandans’ rights to free
expression and assembly.
Donor countries criticized President Yoweri Museveni’s massive off-budget
expenditures to support elections, pay-outs to parliamentarians, and the procurement
of several fighter jets worth over US$740 million. As inflation rose,
the International Monetary Fund delayed approval of Uganda’s economic framework
because government spending was found to be out of compliance with
agreed-upon principles of macroeconomic stability.
The UK and Ireland suspended a €2 million (US$2.7 million) police training program
focusing on public order management after the April protests, but support
from both countries remains strong, with the UK providing £390 million ($614.5
million) over the next three years despite concerns about corruption.
The US reliance on the Ugandan army has to some extent shielded Uganda from
meaningful criticism of its poor domestic human rights record. The Ugandan
army continued to receive logistical support and training from the US for counterterrorism,
for the African Union mission in Somalia, and for operations against the LRA. In October US President Barack Obama announced the
deployment of 100 US military advisors to provide assistance in ending the
LRA conflict.
Z@D989N<
Zimbabwe’s inclusive government has made significant progress in improving
the country’s economic situation and reversing the decline of the past decade.
For example, Zimbabwe has seen a marked improvement in its health system.
However, despite a decline in HIV prevalence over the past decade and adoption
of new guidelines on treatment in 2011, the number of HIV-positive
Zimbabweans requiring but not receiving treatment remained high. Huge challenges
also remain on the political front, with elections a key point of contention
within the Government of National Unity (GNU).
The two main parties to the GNU, the Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic
Front (ZANU-PF) and the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), differ sharply
over when elections should be held and the role of the security forces, often
seen as staunch allies of President Robert Mugabe and ZANU-PF. ZANU-PF
insists that the environment in the country is conducive to the holding of free,
fair, and credible elections while the MDC contends that elections should not
take place in the absence of human rights and electoral reforms. Questions
also remain over the independence of key institutions that are vital to the proper
implementation of free and fair elections, such as the electoral commission
and the judiciary.
Mugabe’s announcement in December 2010 that elections would be held in
2011 triggered an increase in violence and abuses across the country. The
beginning of the year saw ZANU-PF and elements within the security forces
resort to old campaign tactics of violence, intimidation, and harassment. State
security agents, police, and ZANU-PF supporters have been implicated in beatings,
arbitrary arrests, and harassment of members of the MDC, cabinet ministers,
human rights activists, and journalists, deepening the pervasive climate of
fear in the country. In reaction to the abuses, Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai
threatened to withdraw the MDC from the inclusive government in March.
Political Violence
After a period of relative calm, 2011 saw an increase in politically motivated violence
across the country. Tensions flared between the ZANU-PF and the MDC as a result of the anticipated elections. The main perpetrators of the violence have
been ZANU-PF supporters and youth who have attacked scores of people, mainly
MDC supporters and members, in the high-density neighborhoods of Harare,
the capital, as well as outside of Harare. Over several days of violence in early
February, scores of MDC supporters were injured and some were hospitalized
as a result of attacks by alleged ZANU-PF youth in Mbare.
Police and prosecutors have been highly partisan and biased in their investigations
and prosecution of acts of violence between supporters of the two parties.
Groups allied to ZANU-PF continue to beat and intimidate citizens in the highdensity
suburbs of Harare with impunity, while MDC activists accused of violence
are disproportionately arrested. In March police raided the MDC party
headquarters and arrested three MDC officials and seven MDC youth on assault
charges. Three days later they were all released. Several MDC parliamentarians
and officials are facing various criminal charges, including inciting and participating
in violence. In contrast, there have been few arrests or charges laid
against ZANU-PF supporters implicated in violence.
Human Rights Defenders
The Zimbabwean authorities continue to use repression and intimidation to
silence human rights advocates and to prevent them from exposing abuses and
promoting respect for human rights. Harassment and arbitrary arrests of human
rights defenders have intensified since January 2011. For example, on February
8, police arrested two employees of the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum as
they tried to conduct a survey on transitional justice. In the same period police
also raided the offices of a number of human rights NGOs and questioned the
employees.
On May 23, police in Matabeleland North arrested two activists from the human
rights organization ZimRights for convening a workshop on torture and its
effects. Lawyers were denied access to the activists for three days before they
were released.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
Minimal changes to repressive laws such as the Public Order and Security Act
(POSA) and the Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act (AIPPA) have
failed to open up space for the political opposition and civil society. ZANU-PF
continues to selectively apply these laws and others, such as the Criminal Law
(Codification and Reform) Act, to justify arrests that violate basic rights and systematically
deny civil society activists the right to peacefully assemble and
associate. The police use provisions of POSA to strictly monitor and prevent
public meetings or disrupt peaceful demonstrations.
On September 21, police arrested 12 activists from the organization Women of
Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA) during a peaceful march commemorating the international
day of peace. Ten of the activists were released without charge but two
leaders of the organization, Jenni Williams and Magodonga Mahlangu, spent 13
days in custody.
On February 19, police arrested 45 activists who were meeting in Harare to discuss
events in the Middle East. Six of the activists spent three weeks in custody
before they were released on bail, initially charged with treason and attempting
to overthrow the government by unconstitutional means. On September 14 the
trial of the activists began in Harare, but the charges were revised to allegedly
conspiring to commit public violence and participating in a gathering with
intent to promote public violence.
The Office of the Attorney General has often been accused of a strong partisan
bias toward ZANU-PF and of using criminal laws to prevent peaceful political
activism. Prosecutors routinely invoke section 121 of the Criminal Procedure
and Evidence Act to deny bail to political and civil society activists despite judicial
rulings granting them bail, thus nullifying judicial checks on the excesses
of the executive.
Freedom of Expression
There continue to be serious limits on the rights to freedom of expression and
information in Zimbabwe, particularly in the form of threats of closure of independent
media organizations, as well as the intimidation, arbitrary arrest, and criminal prosecution of journalists. The government’s actions seem primarily
designed to inhibit criticism of government officials and institutions, and to
muzzle reporting and commentary on the political situation in the country.
While the government has allowed independent local daily papers to resume
operations, it has not fully reformed media-related laws as promised. It has
also not reviewed criminal defamation laws that impose severe penalties,
including prison terms, on journalists. Media laws such as AIPPA give the
Zimbabwe authorities discretionary control over which individuals may practice
journalism and operate a media outlet, as well as broad powers to prosecute
persons critical of the government. Laws such as AIPPA and POSA continue to
be selectively used to restrict the media. Journalists and media practitioners
routinely face arrest for allegedly violating the state’s repressive media laws.
Journalists and media outlets have also been subjected to threats and harassment
from the authorities and security forces, creating major obstacles to
reporting on Zimbabwe’s political system and continuing abuses by ZANU-PF.
Human Rights Violations in Marange Diamond Fields
While violence has decreased in the Marange diamond fields over the past
year, Human Rights Watch research in June found that Zimbabwe police and private
security guards employed by mining companies in the Marange diamond
fields were implicated in abuses against local unlicensed miners. Private security
guards working with the police routinely beat and set dogs to attack and
maul local miners who stray into areas of the fields controlled by the companies.
During patrols, police also fired live ammunition at miners as they fled the
fields.
These findings contradict claims by the Zimbabwe government and some
members of the international diamond monitoring body, the Kimberley Process,
that areas controlled by private mining companies are relatively free of abuses
and that diamonds from these companies should be certified and allowed on to
international markets. The violence followed claims in June by the government
and the chairman of the Kimberley Process, Mathieu Yamba, that conditions in
the Marange fields are sufficient for it to be allowed to resume exports of
diamonds.
Key International Actors
Leaders of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) grew increasingly
frustrated with the slow pace of political and human rights reforms in
Zimbabwe, in particular ZANU-PF’s reluctance to implement key parts of the
Global Political Agreement (GPA), which paved the way for the formation of the
GNU. Throughout the year SADC and South African President Jacob Zuma,
appointed by SADC to facilitate reforms, exerted concerted pressure on the GNU
to increase the pace of reforms and to adhere to a SADC-drafted electoral road
map that would lead to free, fair, and credible elections.
At an extraordinary meeting held in Zambia in March, President Zuma reported
back to SADC leaders on the situation in Zimbabwe. The report highlighted concerns
about widespread human rights violations, including violent attacks on
MDC supporters and arbitrary arrests. SADC issued a strong communiqué in
support, demanding an end to political violence and arbitrary arrests and calling
for an expanded facilitation team to engage with the GNU. ZANU-PF’s
response to the communiqué was highly critical of Zuma’s facilitation, publicly
accusing SADC of interfering in the country’s sovereignty and its right to hold
elections at a time of its choosing. Subsequent communiqués issued by SADC
at an extraordinary meeting in June and at its annual summit in August called
for greater progress in the implementation of the GPA and the creation of a conducive
environment to hold free and fair elections “under conditions of a level
playing field.”
SADC and Zuma’s more robust engagement has led to progress in implementing
certain parts of the GPA, including the formation of the electoral road map,
finalizing the constitution making process, appointing a new election commission,
and the introduction of the Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission Bill and
the Electoral Amendment Bill. Zuma and his facilitation team’s insistence that
the environment in the country was not conducive to the holding of free and fair
elections forced Mugabe and ZANU-PF to relent on holding the elections in
2011. Meanwhile SADC has been unable to make any gains on important issues
such as security sector reform, accountability for past abuses, and ending politically
motivated violence and other human rights abuses.
The United Nations Human Rights Council’s first Universal Periodic Review of
Zimbabwe took place in October 2011. Zimbabwe rebuffed at the outset all recommendations
pertaining to investigating allegations of violations, combating
impunity, and bolstering protection in the Marange region, and related to freedoms
of assembly and expression, including repealing or amending the POSA.
Due to the absence of meaningful human rights improvements, the European
Union and United States have maintained targeted sanctions on Mugabe and
others within his government.
AI><EK@E8
Argentina continues to make significant progress prosecuting military and
police personnel for enforced disappearances, killings, and torture during the
country’s “dirty war” between 1976 and 1983, although trials have been subject
to delays.
Argentina adopted comprehensive legislation to regulate broadcast and print
media in 2009, and was still in 2011 considering bills to promote access to
information. The impact of this legislation on freedom of expression will
depend on how it is implemented by a new regulatory body established in
the law.
Significant ongoing human rights concerns include deplorable prison conditions,
torture, and arbitrary restrictions on women’s reproductive rights.
Confronting Past Abuses
Several important human rights cases from Argentina’s last military dictatorship
(1976-1983) were reopened in 2003 after Congress annulled the 1986 “Full
Stop” law, which had stopped prosecution of such cases, and the 1987 “Due
Obedience” law, which granted immunity in such cases to all members of the
military except those in positions of command. Starting in 2005, federal judges
struck down pardons that then-President Carlos Menem issued between 1989
and 1990 to former officials convicted of or facing trial for human rights violations.
As of October 2011, according to the Center for Legal and Social Studies (CELS),
379 cases involving killings, “disappearances,” and torture (in which CELS participated)
were under judicial investigation or being tried in court. Of 1,774
alleged perpetrators, 749 were facing charges for these crimes, and 210 had
been convicted.
Trials have been subject to delays at the appellate level, with appeals normally
taking more than two years to be heard after the sentence of the trial court. At this writing the Supreme Court had confirmed final sentences in only four of the
cases reactivated after the annulment of the amnesty laws.
In March 2011 the First Federal Oral Court sentenced an army general to life
imprisonment and three agents to prison terms between 20 and 25 years for the
murder, torture, and illegal arrest of detainees held in the 1970s in a secret
detention center in Buenos Aires, the capital, known as Automotores Orletti. It
was the first conviction in Argentina of participants in Plan Condor, a scheme
by which the military rulers of the region coordinated the abduction, interrogation,
and “disappearance” of political opponents. More than 30 Uruguayans
abducted in Argentina in 1976 were held at Automotores Orletti, before some
were transferred back to Uruguay. Others “disappeared.”
Security of witnesses in human rights trials continues to be a concern. Jorge
Julio López, 79, a former torture victim who disappeared from his home in
September 2006, the day before he was due to attend one of the final days of a
trial, remains missing.
Freedom of Expression and Access to Information
A bill to regulate the broadcast media, which Congress approved in October
2009, aims to promote diversity of views by limiting the ability of corporations
to own large portions of the radio frequency spectrum. The law contains vague
definitions of what “faults” could lead to sanctions—including the revocation of
broadcasting licenses—and establishes a new regulatory body to interpret and
implement its provisions. The law has faced numerous legal challenges. In
October 2010 the Supreme Court upheld an injunction suspending application
of an article of the law that would oblige companies to sell within a year outlets
that exceed the new legal limits.
The Supreme Court has defended the right of print media not to be discriminated
against in the allocation of official advertising. In March 2011 it unanimously
upheld an administrative court ruling in favor of Perfil publications, which had
filed a petition for an injunction against the government for refusing to allocate
advertising to Noticias and Fortuna magazines, and to the Perfil newspaper,
because of their editorial positions. The Supreme Court had published a similar ruling in 2007 against the provincial government of Neuquén in a complaint
filed by the Rio Negro newspaper.
In September 2011 a judge subpoenaed Argentina’s leading newspapers to provide
the contact information of journalists and editors who have covered the
Argentine economy since 2006, so that he could question them about their
sources. Official statistics on the inflation rate have been widely questioned in
recent years and many newspapers rely for inflation estimates on private consultancies,
one of which the Commerce Secretary had accused of willfully falsifying
the figures, a criminal offense in Argentina. The subpoenas threatened the
press’s freedom to freely publish information of public interest.
A proposed law to ensure public access to information held by state bodies has
been stalled in the Chamber of Deputies since it received Senate approval in
September 2010.
Conditions in Detention Facilities
Overcrowding, inadequate physical conditions, abuses by guards, and inmate
violence continue to be serious problems in detention facilities. Following a
visit to the province of Buenos Aires in June 2010, the Organization of American
States’ special rapporteur on the rights of persons deprived of their liberty
reported that, according to official figures, 4,040 inmates (out of a provincial
prison population of 30,132) were being held in police lockups not designed or
equipped to hold detainees for long periods. The special rapporteur expressed
concern about the abusive use of pre-trial detention, torture and ill-treatment
by police guards, poor sanitary conditions, and deficient medical attention in
these facilities.
According to CELS, the situation in February 2011 had scarcely improved.
Despite a slight decline in the number held in preventive detention and in
police lockups, conditions remained deplorable, and overcrowding and violence
in the prison system had increased. According to CELS, there were 124
prison deaths due to abusive conditions in 2010.
Torture
Torture and ill-treatment are common problems. Government authorities and
the legislature have taken some steps to curb abuse of detainees. In December
2010 the Public Defender’s Office set up a National Register of Torture and Illtreatment,
a torture data bank aimed at registering, documenting, and following
up on denunciations of torture, “other forms of institutional violence,” and
inhumane conditions of detention. Legislation creating a national system of torture
prevention, drafted by a wide range of civil society groups, was approved
unanimously in the Chamber of Deputies in September 2011. It awaits a final
vote in the Senate to become law. Argentina is a party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention against Torture, which it ratified in September 2004.
Transnational Justice
At this writing no one had been convicted for the 1994 bombing of the Jewish
Argentine Mutual Association in Buenos Aires in which 85 died and over 300
were injured. Criminal investigations and prosecutions have been hindered by
judicial corruption and political cover-ups in Argentina, and by the failure of
Iran, which is suspected of ordering the attack, to cooperate with the Argentine
justice system. An Argentine federal court issued an international warrant for
the arrest of former Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani and six
Iranian officials in 2006, but demands for their extradition fell on deaf ears.
President Fernández de Kirchner has repeatedly called for justice in annual
speeches at the United Nations since taking office in 2007, as did her husband,
former President Néstor Kirchner, who died in 2010. In September 2011 she told
the UN that she would accept an Iranian government proposal to open a dialogue
about the case, but only if it brought concrete results.
Reproductive Rights
Abortion is illegal, with limited exceptions, and women and girls face numerous
obstacles to reproductive health products and services such as contraception,
voluntary sterilization procedures, and abortion after rape. The most common
barriers are long delays in obtaining services, unnecessary referrals to other
clinics, demands for spousal permission (contrary to law), financial barriers, and, in some cases, arbitrary denials. In addition, government oversight of
reproductive health care and accountability practices are woefully deficient. As
a result of these barriers, women and girls may face unwanted or unhealthy
pregnancies. Approximately half-a-million illegal abortions occur every year,
and unsafe abortions have been a leading cause of maternal mortality for
decades. Several proposals to decriminalize abortion were pending before the
Chamber of Deputies at this writing.
Key International Actors
In December 2010 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights took the
case of Jorge Fontevecchia and Héctor D’Amico, founder and director respectively
of the magazine Noticias, to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. In
2001 the Supreme Court ordered the two journalists and Perfil Publications (the
owner of Noticias) to pay damages of US$60,000 to former President Carlos
Menem for articles published in 1995 about his extramarital affair with a former
schoolteacher, on the grounds that the articles violated his right to privacy. It
was the first time the court has been asked to deliver a judgment on a privacy
claim for damages involving a question of public interest.
Argentina has continued to positively engage on human rights issues at the UN
Human Rights Council and in other international settings. At the Council
Argentina has consistently voted in a principled way to ensure scrutiny of
human rights violators. In 2011, for example, it co-sponsored special sessions
on Libya and the Côte d’Ivoire, and voted in favor of all resolutions addressing
country situations that were put to a vote.
BFC@M@8
Bolivian courts made some progress in clarifying responsibilities for human
rights abuses in 2011, including convicting seven high-ranking military officers
and politicians for deaths in the 2003 street protests. However, lack of accountability
remains a serious problem. The fate of scores who “disappeared” before
democracy was re-established in 1982 has still not been clarified, and trials of
those responsible for killings during marches and demonstrations in recent
years have been subject to long delays. The insistence of military courts on trying
military accused of abuses continues to be an obstacle.
Laws passed in 2010 and 2011 posed risks to the media’s ability to freely criticize
the government. However, in 2011 President Evo Morales took some steps
to address objections from media groups by amending some disputed laws.
Accountability for Past Human Rights Abuses
In August 2011 a Supreme Court panel sentenced five generals to 10 to 15 years
imprisonment for killing at least 60 people during anti-government protests in
September and October 2003, when the army used lethal force to quell violent
demonstrations in the highland city of El Alto (an event known as Black
October). Two members of former President Gonzalo Sánchez de Losada’s cabinet
received three-year suspended sentences. Sánchez de Losada and other
accused senior government members left the country immediately after the
events.
The trial, which began in May 2009, followed an impeachment procedure
known as a “trial of responsibilities.” The law, which dates from 2003 and was
rewritten in 2010, requires that trials of heads of state and ministers must first
be authorized by the vote of two-thirds of Congress, after which the Supreme
Court’s criminal bench must approve the charges. The full Supreme Court then
conducts the trial without the criminal bench. All members of the six-person
panel that heard the case were appointed by pre-established and lawful procedures,
without credible evidence of government interference.
Trial Delays in Political Violence Cases
Trials of opposition leaders, local government officials, and others accused of
killings during violent clashes between supporters and opponents of President
Morales have been subject to long delays. In September 2011 a La Paz court
was still hearing evidence against 26 defendants in connection with a massacre
in Porvenir, Pando department, on September 11, 2008, in which at least nine
pro-Morales demonstrators were killed. The former prefect of Pando department,
Leopoldo Fernández, who was indicted in October 2009 on charges of
homicide, terrorism, and conspiracy, had been held for three years in a maximum
security prison in La Paz, the capital.
A trial of former members of the regional government of Chuquisaca and former
Sucre city officials in connection with a incident in May 2008, in which Morales
supporters were taken hostage and made to strip to the waist, kneel, and beg
forgiveness in the city square, did not start until March 2011. The trial has since
been repeatedly postponed.
Military Jurisdiction
The determination of Bolivia’s military courts to assert jurisdiction over human
rights abuses has been an obstacle to accountability for many years. The military
has often refused to allow members of the armed forces to testify before
civilian courts, instead insisting on trying the cases in military court, which
invariably ends in acquittals.
In a case involving a 26-year-old conscript, Gróver Poma, who died in February
2011 following a hand-to-hand combat training exercise—allegedly after instructors
beat him on the head and chest—the Supreme Military Tribunal insisted
that a military court try three implicated officers. A military investigation
claimed Poma’s death had been accidental, while the human rights ombudsman
concluded that he had been brutally beaten. The military disregarded the
ombudsman’s requests to hand the case to a civilian court. It also disregarded
a Senate resolution ordering it to do so, appealing the resolution before the
Constitutional Court. Meanwhile, an investigation by a civilian prosecutor continued.
At this writing the military still insisted on retaining jurisdiction. In September 2011 the civilian prosecutor began criminal proceedings against four
junior officers who allegedly participated in the beating, but at this writing the
military had still insisted on retaining jurisdiction.
In October 2010 the armed forces did agree to order four officers to appear
before a civilian judge in a case involving the water torture of a recruit during a
training exercise, after President Morales ordered that a civilian court try those
responsible. In April 2011 the judge dropped charges against four suspects
after accepting a defense argument that torture could only be committed
against someone in detention, and ordered their release. However, in July an
appeals court overruled this decision, and the case continued at this writing.
Excessive Use of Force
In September 2011, police in riot gear used tear gas and batons to disperse
demonstrators marching against a proposed highway project through the
Isiboro-Sécure National Park, a protected indigenous territory in the Bolivian
tropics. More than one hundred protesters were injured, according to the
Bolivia office of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on Human
Rights. The previous day, after skirmishes in which some police were reportedly
wounded by arrows, the marchers had detained Foreign Minister David
Choquehuanca, who had come to negotiate with them on the government’s
behalf, and forced him to march with them before releasing him. By the time
the police acted the foreign minister had been released and the skirmishes had
ended. On September 28 President Morales publicly apologized for the crackdown,
saying there had been no presidential order to disperse the protesters.
Freedom of Media
Bolivia enjoys vibrant public debate, with a variety of critical and pro-government
media outlets. However, in what remains a politically polarized atmosphere,
President Morales sometimes aggressively criticizes the press, accusing
journalists of distorting facts and seeking to discredit him.
Under a law against racism and other forms of discrimination passed in October
2010, media that “authorize or publish racist or discriminatory ideas” can be fined and have their broadcasting licenses suspended. Journalists “spreading
ideas based on racial superiority or hatred” could face up to five years in
prison. Media outlets protested these provisions, claiming they were so broad
they could be used against media and journalists critical of the government.
Regulations governing the application of the law, which Morales signed into law
in January 2011, addressed these criticisms in part by defining punishable
offenses more precisely. The regulations stipulate that outlets could not be suspended
for longer than 360 days at a time. Media would not be liable under the
law if they report on expressions of racism, or if they broadcast racist expressions
by third parties in live transmissions provided they caution or cut off the
speaker.
A law governing the October 16, 2011 elections to the Supreme Court and
Constitutional Court, promulgated in June 2010, would have banned any media
comment on the candidates in the final three months before the elections,
allowing only the Supreme Court to give information about them. Following criticism
by opposition and media groups, the Supreme Court presented an amendment
at Morales’s invitation, which Congress approved. It allowed candidates
to participate in debates and give press interviews, while the press was permitted
to praise and criticize candidates as well as publish information different
from that issued by the Supreme Court. Paradoxically, however, media were still
banned from showing opinion programs on the candidates or giving them
space to publicize their candidacy.
A draft law on telecommunications tabled in Congress in May 2011 has a clause
obliging all radio and TV outlets as well as cable networks to broadcast presidential
messages to the nation at their own expense. The absence of any limitations
in this provision raises concerns that it may be abused in situations
where there is no public interest to justify state intervention in broadcasting
content.
Human Rights Defenders
In April 2011 a public prosecutor brought charges against lawyers Jorge Quiroz
and Claudia Lecoña, who were representing the parents of two students killed after police broke up a protest in May 2010 in Caranavi, a department of La Paz.
They were accused of desacato (“lack of respect”) toward Marcos Farfán,
deputy minister for the interior and police, for saying that he had committed a
“cowardly act” by accusing them of procuring women for sex. Even though
many Latin American nations have abolished desacato provisions, Bolivia still
retains them: insulting a government minister can incur a three-year prison sentence.
In 2010 government officials had accused Quiroz of a string of offenses, including
drug-trafficking, immigration irregularities, trafficking prostitutes, and acting
as an “infiltrator” for the United States embassy in the Caranavi protests.
However, no proof was provided or charges leveled, raising concerns that the
government was targeting Quiroz because of his accusations that government
officials and police were responsible for the deaths of the Caranavi students.
Key International Actors
The US government has failed to reply to a request by the government of
Bolivia, first made in November 2008, to extradite former President Gonzalo
Sánchez de Lozada and two of his ministers so they can stand trial in Bolivia for
the Black October events. In September 2011 UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights Navi Pillay welcomed the sentences handed down by the Supreme Court
as “an important step in the fight against impunity.”
BI8Q@C
Brazil is among the most influential democracies in regional and global affairs,
yet it continues to confront very serious human rights challenges at home.
Faced with high levels of violent crime, some Brazilian police units engage in
abusive practices with impunity, instead of pursuing sound policing practices.
Justice officials who seek to hold police officers accountable for unlawful practices
face threats of violence. In August 2011 Judge Patricia Acioli was gunned
down outside her home in the state of Rio de Janeiro, apparently in retaliation
for ordering the detention of police officers suspected of murder.
Detention centers in various states are severely overcrowded, lengthy pre-trial
detention is the norm, and torture continues to be a serious problem. Forced
labor persists in some states despite federal efforts to eradicate it.
Public Security and Police Conduct
Widespread violence perpetrated by criminal gangs and abusive police plague
many Brazilian cities. Violence especially impacts low-income communities. In
Rio de Janeiro, for example, drug gangs that routinely engage in violent crime
and extortion control hundreds of shantytowns. In November 2010, drug gangs
unleashed a wave of attacks in the streets of Rio, setting vehicles ablaze and
staging mass robberies, leading to massive deployment of police and armed
forces to the Complexo do Alemão community.
Police abuse, including extrajudicial execution, is also a chronic problem.
According to official data, police were responsible for 372 killings in the state of
Rio de Janeiro and 252 killings in the state of São Paulo in the first six months
of 2011. Police often claim these are “resistance” killings that occur in confrontations
with criminals. While many police killings undoubtedly result from
legitimate use of force by police officers, many others do not, a fact documented
by Human Rights Watch and other groups and recognized by Brazilian criminal
justice officials.
Reform efforts have fallen short because state criminal justice systems rely
almost entirely on police investigators to resolve these cases, leaving the police largely to regulate themselves. In 2010 São Paulo’s attorney general took
an important step to address the problem of police violence by establishing
that all cases involving alleged police abuse be investigated by a special unit
of prosecutors.
The state of Rio de Janeiro launched the System of Goals and Results Tracking
in 2009, whereby police are awarded financial compensation for meeting crime
reduction targets. These targets were redesigned in January 2011 to include
police homicides. In addition, almost 20 Pacifying Police Units (UPP) have been
installed in Rio since 2008, in order to establish a more effective police presence
at the community level. However, the state has not yet taken adequate
steps to ensure that police who commit abuses are held accountable.
Many Rio communities formerly controlled by drug dealers are now in the hands
of militias composed of police, jail guards, firefighters, and others who coerce
residents to pay for illegal utility hookups, transportation, and security. These
militias have been implicated in execution-style killings, far-reaching extortion
schemes, and the kidnapping and torture of a group of journalists investigating
their activities. In October 2011 Rio Congressman Marcelo Freixo announced his
decision to leave Brazil temporarily due to escalating death threats. He
presided over a parliamentary commission of inquiry that investigated militia
activity in Rio in 2008 and has been outspoken in denouncing links between
certain militia groups and local elected officials.
Judges and magistrates who take on cases of violence by illegal militia face
threats of violence. In August 2011 Judge Patricia Lourival Acioli was gunned
down outside her home in the city of São Gonçalo, apparently in retaliation for
ordering the detention of police officers suspected of murder. She had received
four death threats prior to her murder. The head of Rio’s military police subsequently
resigned and several São Gonçalo police officers were indicted.
Nevertheless, the Brazilian Association of Judges has reported that the number
of judicial workers requesting government protection increased 400 percent
since Acioli’s killing.
Detention Conditions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment of Detainees
Many Brazilian prisons and jails are violent and severely overcrowded.
According to the Ministry of Justice’s Penitentiary Information Integrated System
(INFOPEN), Brazil’s incarceration rate tripled over the last 15 years and the
prison population now exceeds half a million people. Delays within the justice
system contribute to the overcrowding: almost half of all inmates are in pre-trial
detention. On July 4, 2011, Congress passed a law prohibiting pre-trial detention
for crimes punishable by less than four years in jail.
Torture is a chronic problem throughout Brazil’s detention centers and police
stations. A 2010 report by the Pastoral Prison Commission documented cases
of torture in 20 out of 26 Brazilian states. HIV and tuberculosis prevalence rates
in Brazilian prisons are far higher than rates in the general population; inhumane
conditions facilitate the spread of disease, and prisoners’ access to medical
care remains inadequate. In early September 2011, hundreds of detainees
in Maranhão state rioted against prolonged pre-trial detention, unsanitary facilities,
limited access to drinking water, and sexual abuse by prison wards. Rival
factions killed at least 18 prisoners.
On September 30, 2011, President Dilma Roussef proposed legislation to create
a national mechanism—the National System to Prevent and Combat Torture—to
monitor detention centers throughout the country and investigate allegations of
torture and ill-treatment.
Women’s Health and Reproductive Rights
Although Brazil has significantly lowered its maternal mortality rate over the
last two decades, national statistics mask severe disparities based on race,
economic status, region, and urban or rural settings. In August 2011 the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women held that in the case of Alyne da Silva Pimental, who died after being
denied timely care at a public health facility, Brazil failed to fulfill its obligation
to guarantee timely, nondiscriminatory, and appropriate maternal health services.
The Brazilian Criminal Code criminalizes abortion except in cases of rape or
when necessary to save a woman’s life. Women and girls who undertake the
procedure voluntarily may be sentenced to up to three years in jail, and their
doctors to up to ten years. Raids on family planning clinics and aggressive prosecution
of abortion further limit women’s and girls’ access to reproductive
health services. There are currently more than 40 draft laws before the House of
Representatives proposing to further restrict access to contraception or punish
abortion more harshly. The Health Ministry estimates that more than one million
illegal abortions are performed every year and hundreds of women and
girls annually seek hospital attention due to complications arising from illicit
abortions.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In May 2011 the Supreme Court unanimously decided to legalize same-sex civil
unions in light of the constitutional guarantee of non-discrimination. Same-sex
spouses now have the same legal rights as their heterosexual counterparts:
broader health insurance coverage, hospital visits, pension plans, and inheritance
rights. The following month a trial court in the state of São Paulo recognized
the first same-sex civil marriage in Brazil. The Superior Justice Court followed
suit in October, setting an important precedent by interpreting the
Brazilian Civil Code as allowing same-sex marriages.
Forced Labor
The federal government has taken important steps to eradicate forced labor
since 1995, including creating mobile investigation units to examine conditions
in rural areas and publishing a “black list” of employers found to have used
forced labor. Official data suggests that more than 39,000 workers have been
freed since 1995. However, the Pastoral Land Commission reported that more
than 4,000 workers were subject to forced labor in 2010. Criminal accountability
for offending employers remains relatively rare.
Rural Violence
Indigenous leaders and rural activists continue to face threats and violence.
According to the Pastoral Land Commission, 34 people were killed and 55 were
victims of attempted murder throughout the country in 2010. Over 1,900 rural
activists have received death threats over the past decade; of these 42 have
been killed. The south of Pará state has long been a focal point of rural violence,
but frontier areas where illegal loggers and ranchers operate in
Maranhão, Mato Grosso, and Rondônia states are becoming dangerous for environmentalists
and government officials alike.
Confronting Past Abuses
Brazil has granted over US$1 billion in financial compensation to more than
12,000 victims of abuses committed by state agents during the military dictatorship
from 1964 to 1985. On October 26, 2011, Congress approved a law creating
a truth commission charged with “examining and clarifying” human rights
abuses committed between 1946 and 1988.
However, there has been little progress in prosecuting those responsible for
atrocities. A 1979 amnesty law has thus far been interpreted to bar prosecutions
of state agents, an interpretation that the Supreme Court reaffirmed in
April 2010.
Freedom of Expression and Access to Information
In July 2009 the Federal District Court of Justice issued an injunction prohibiting
the newspaper O Estado de São Paulo from publishing stories containing information
on the “Operação Faktor” police investigation involving Fernando
Sarney, son of Senate President José Sarney. Despite strenuous criticism from
national and international press freedom organizations, the Supreme Court
upheld the ruling in December 2009.
On June 15, 2011, the Supreme Court unanimously held that peaceful demonstrations
calling for marijuana to be legalized are protected under the constitutional
guarantees of freedom of expression and assembly. Certain state judges have prohibited such demonstrations on the grounds that they encouraged or
glorified drug use.
In September 2011 the host of a radio show on Radio Frontera, Vanderlei
Canuto Leandro, was shot by unidentified assailants in the city of Tabatinga,
Amazonas state, purportedly in retaliation of his investigations of corruption by
local government officials. It was the fifth such killing of a journalist in Brazil in
2011, according to the Inter-American system’s special rapporteur for freedom
of expression.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American system has played an important role in addressing key
human rights issues. In November 2010 the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights ruled that Brazil’s amnesty law cannot prevent the investigation and
prosecution of serious human rights violations and crimes against humanity
committed by state agents during the military regime. In resolutions in February
and September 2011 the court also instructed the state of Espírito Santo to take
steps to address alleged abuses against juveniles detained at the Unidade de
Internação Socioeducativa (UNIS) detention center.
In April 2011 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued precautionary
measures for Brazil due to an alleged failure to consult with indigenous
groups prior to beginning the construction of the Belo Monte hydroelectric dam,
slated to be the world’s third largest. The Rousseff administration publicly
rejected the commission’s findings and characterized them as “premature and
unjustified.” On July 29, 2011, the commission modified its precautionary measures
on the basis of information provided by the Brazilian government. A federal
judge in the state of Pará enjoined work at the Xingu River basin in
September 2011 in order to protect local fish stocks deemed essential to the
livelihood of indigenous communities. The consortium building the dam
appealed the decision in November.
In May 2011 the UN special rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery
encouraged Brazil to strengthen efforts to close loopholes perpetuating the
practice of slavery, including forced labor in the country’s rural areas.
Brazil has emerged as an important and influential voice in debates over international
responses to human rights issues at the UN. At the UN Human Rights
Council during the July 2010 to June 2011 period, Brazil consistently voted in
support of resolutions addressing country situations, including on Sudan, North
Korea, Iran, Belarus, and Syria. However, at the UN Security Council in October
2011 it refused to support a resolution condemning state-sponsored violence in
Syria.
C?@C<
Sebastián Piñera’s government has reformed Chile’s counterterrorism law and
military justice system, eliminating important elements that were incompatible
with international standards of due process. Nonetheless, while military courts
no longer exercise jurisdiction over civilians, they continue to try police
accused of human rights abuses. And while the Piñera administration has not
pressed “terrorism” charges against indigenous protesters, some prosecutors
have continued to charge them under the counterterrorism law for actions that
should be considered common crimes.
The government took some important steps in 2011 to remedy overcrowding
and inhumane conditions in Chilean prisons, but they remain a serious problem.
Most recorded cases of extrajudicial executions and enforced disappearances
committed during military rule (1973-1990) have been heard in court or are now
under judicial investigation. Judges continue to convict former military personnel
for these crimes. However, given the seriousness of the crimes, final sentences
are often unacceptably lenient.
Police Abuses
Cases of excessive use of force by police when dealing with detainees during
demonstrations and Mapuche land occupations continue to be reported. In
August 2011 a carabinero (uniformed policeman) shot and killed a 16-year-old
student, Manuel Gutiérrez Reynoso, who had been watching a demonstration
from a Santiago footbridge during a national strike. A police general—who had
brushed aside accusations that the police were responsible for the incident—
was fired, together with the alleged culprit and several other junior officers. A
military prosecutor was investigating the case at the end of September.
Since 2002, police have been responsible for the deaths of at least three
Mapuches (Chile’s largest indigenous group). A military court trial of a police
sergeant who, in August 2009, shot dead Jaime Mendoza Collío, a 24-year-old
Mapuche who had been participating in a land occupation near Ercilla, continued in 2011. Police claimed the officer acted in self- defense, but forensic
reports indicated the bullet hit Mendoza’s back and that he had not fired a
weapon.
Military Jurisdiction
Following the recommendations of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in
its 2005 ruling against Chile in the Palamara case, legislation introduced by
Piñera’s administration— and approved by Congress in September 2010—finally
ended the jurisdiction of military courts over civilians. However, the reforms did
not address jurisdiction over abuses against civilians by police, which is still
exercised by military courts that are not fully independent.
Counterterrorism Laws
The inappropriate use of counterterrorism legislation to deal with common
crimes against property, such as arson committed by indigenous Mapuche
activists, remains an important due process issue. In September 2010, following
concern expressed by the United Nations and regional human rights bodies
and a hunger strike by Mapuche prisoners, the government amended the counterterrorism
law. Some due process guarantees were strengthened, such as
allowing witnesses whose identity can be concealed by prosecutors to be crossexamined
by defense attorneys. However, the inclusion in the law of crimes
against property without violence to persons was left unchanged, and public
prosecutors continued to apply the law to such cases.
In February 2011 a court in Cañete, in the Araucanía region, sentenced a
Mapuche leader to 25 years in prison and three others to 20 years for “the
attempted murder” of a senior prosecutor and the “robbery with intimidation”
of a landowner. The charges were initially brought under the counterterrorism
law, but the court dismissed terrorism charges against all the defendants, and
acquitted 17 other defendants. Defense lawyers appealed the convictions,
alleging the court had allowed counterterrorism procedures such as the use of
anonymous witnesses during the trial even though it had thrown out counterterrorism
charges. In June the Supreme Court downgraded the murder charge to one of “wounding” and reduced the 25 and 20 year sentences to 14 and 8 years
respectively.
In May 2011 the National Institute of Human Rights, an official body created in
2009 to promote and defend human rights, issued a statement criticizing use of
counterterrorism law against Mapuches.
Prison Conditions
Conditions in many prisons are deplorable. Sanitation, ventilation, and nutrition
are poor and potable water insufficient. Despite conditions conducive to illhealth
and the spread of infectious disease, access to medical care remains
inadequate. In December 2010, 81 prisoners died and 14 were seriously injured
in a fire at Santiago’s San Miguel prison that started after a fight between
inmates in which a flame thrower made from gas cylinder was used. The prison,
which has room for 1,100 inmates, held 1,900 prisoners at the time; only four
prison guards were reportedly on duty inside the building.
In his annual address in March 2011 Chief Justice Milton Juica stated that the
prison system was in “absolute collapse” and constituted a “grave lack of
respect for the rights and guarantees of those who are deprived of their liberty.”
Government officials acknowledged that prisons were 60 percent over capacity,
reaching 200 percent in the worst affected ones. According to a report issued in
March 2010 by a government-appointed prison review commission, the problems
stem from delays in building new facilities, the introduction of faster criminal
procedures and harsher sentencing policies, and the failure to effectively
implement alternatives to prison.
Responding to the crisis, the Ministry of Justice has introduced legislation to
allow the release of low-risk prisoners, and to strengthen alternatives to custodial
sentences. In August 2011 the Senate approved two bills to this effect: the
first allows the release of individuals imprisoned for non-payment of fines, and
would prevent their future incarceration by replacing prison sentences for this
offense with community service; the second allows the release of convicted
prisoners already on day release and women who had served two-thirds of their sentence, unless serious crimes were involved. At this writing approval of the
legislation depended on a vote in the Chamber of Deputies.
Confronting Past Abuses
More than three-quarters of the 3,186 documented killings and “disappearances”
under military rule have been heard by courts or are now under court
jurisdiction, according to Diego Portales University’s Human Rights
Observatory, an NGO that monitors progress in human rights trials. By the end
of May 2011, 1,446 judicial investigations into human rights abuses under military
rule had been completed or were underway, and 245 former security service
agents had been convicted and sentenced in the final instance. However,
only 66 were actually serving prison sentences at the end of May.
In many cases, the Supreme Court has used its discretionary powers to reduce
sentences against human rights violators in recognition of the time elapsed
since the criminal act. Often the sentence finally imposed is low enough to
exempt those convicted from going to prison. This practice raises concerns
about Chile’s fulfillment of its obligation to hold accountable perpetrators of
crimes against humanity by imposing appropriate punishment or sanctions.
Reproductive Rights
Chile is one of only three countries in Latin America (El Salvador and Nicaragua
are the other two) with an absolute prohibition on abortion, even in cases of
medical necessity. The prohibition has existed in Chile’s Constitution since
1989. Women prevented from receiving therapeutic abortions sometimes turn
to unsafe and clandestine procedures that can threaten their life and safety.
Such an absolute prohibition violates a woman’s fundamental right to the highest
attainable standard of health, life, nondiscrimination, physical integrity,
and freedom from cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment. Legislation pending
before Congress would provide avenues for legal therapeutic abortions in certain
cases.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In August 2011 Piñera tabled a bill in the Senate seeking to legalize informal
unions, whether of heterosexual or gay couples, a reform he had promised during
the 2009 electoral campaign. Some 2 million Chileans currently live in informal
unions without the legal rights that married couples enjoy.
Following the presentation of a writ asking for protection of their constitutional
rights by two gay couples, the Santiago Appeals Court asked the Constitutional
Tribunal to rule on the constitutionality of a civil code article affirming that marriage
is a contract between a man and a woman. In November the court ruled
that the regulation of marriage was a legal and not a constitutional matter, and
was therefore subject to a vote in the legislature.
In November the Senate voted to include discrimination based on gender or
sexual orientation in an anti-discrimination bill currently under debate in the
legislature.
Key International Actors
In August 2011 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights took the case
of seven Mapuche leaders and a pro-Mapuche activist who were tried in 2003
under Chile’s counterterrorism law to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
alleging their prosecution under the law was discriminatory.
CFCFD9@8
Colombia’s internal armed conflict continued to result in serious abuses by
irregular armed groups in 2011, including guerrillas and successor groups to
paramilitaries. Violence has displaced millions of Colombians internally, and
continues to displace tens of thousands every year. Armed actors frequently
threaten or attack human rights defenders, journalists, community leaders,
teachers, trade unionists, indigenous and Afro-Colombian leaders, displaced
persons’ leaders, and paramilitaries’ victims seeking land restitution or justice.
During its first year in office, President Juan Manuel Santos’ administration
showed a greater concern for human rights than the government of former
President Álvaro Uribe, which was racked by scandals over extrajudicial killings
by the army, a highly questioned paramilitary demobilization process, and
abuses by the national intelligence service. In 2011 President Santos won the
passage of the Victims and Land Restitution Law, which aims to return millions
of acres of land to displaced persons and provide financial compensation to
victims of human rights abuses and of violations of international humanitarian
law.
However, paramilitary successor groups continue to grow, maintain extensive
ties with public security force members and local officials, and commit widespread
atrocities. There has also been ongoing violence against rights defenders,
community leaders, and trade unionists. Candidates campaigning for the
nationwide and local elections in October 2011 were also frequently killed amid
reports of alleged links between candidates and armed groups. According to
the Colombian NGO Mision de Observacion Electoral, 40 candidates were killed
in 2011, representing a 48 percent increase in such crimes reported during the
2007 local elections. Moreover, new constitutional reform proposals promoted
by the Santos administration could facilitate impunity for human rights abuses
by giving a greater role to military courts in prosecuting military abuses, and by
opening the possibility for amnesties for serious violations by all actors.
Guerrilla Abuses
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation
Army (ELN) continue to commit serious abuses against civilians. The FARC especially
is often involved in killings, threats, forced displacement, and recruiting
and using child soldiers. On May 22, 2011, presumed FARC members attacked a
boat traveling down the Atrato River in Choco department, killing three civilians
and injuring another two.
The FARC and ELN frequently use antipersonnel landmines and other indiscriminate
weapons. The government reported 16 civilians killed and 104 injured by
landmines and unexploded munitions between January and August 2011. On
July 9, 2011, the FARC set off a car bomb and fired homemade explosives in the
town of Toribio in Cauca department, killing three civilians, injuring 122, and
destroying dozens of homes.
Guerrilla groups are believed to be responsible for some of the threats and
attacks against candidates in the local October 2011 elections. On May 30,
2011, the FARC reportedly killed two mayoral candidates in the municipality of
Campamento in Antioquia department.
In November 2011 the Colombian military killed top FARC leader Guillermo León
Sáenz, alias “Alfonso Cano,” during a military operation in Cauca department.
Paramilitaries and Their Successors
Since 2003 more than 30,000 individuals have participated in a paramilitary
demobilization process, although there is substantial evidence that many of
the participants were not paramilitaries, and that a portion of the groups
remain active.
Implementation of the Justice and Peace Law, which offers dramatically
reduced sentences to demobilized paramilitaries who confess their atrocities,
has been slow and uneven. At this writing, more than six years after the law
was approved, special prosecutors had only obtained three convictions and
recovered a small fraction of paramilitaries’ illegally acquired assets.
Paramilitary leaders’ confessions in the Justice and Peace process suffered a setback when former President Uribe extradited most paramilitary leaders to
the United States between May 2008 and August 2009 to face drug trafficking
crimes.
Successor groups to the paramilitaries, led largely by members of demobilized
paramilitary organizations, have grown to have approximately 5,700 members,
according to official numbers as of October 2011. Toleration of the groups by
public security force members is a main factor for their continued power. At
least 180 police officers were jailed in 2011 because of alleged ties to successor
groups.
Like the paramilitary organizations that demobilized, the groups engage in drug
trafficking; actively recruit members, including children; and commit widespread
abuses against civilians, including massacres, killings, rapes and other
forms of sexual violence, threats, and forced displacement. They have repeatedly
targeted human rights defenders, Afro-Colombian and indigenous leaders,
trade unionists, and victims’ groups seeking justice and recovery of land.
Successor groups appear to be responsible for the 34 percent increase in cases
of massacres registered in 2010 and the continued rise in cases reported during
the first half of 2011. (The government defines a massacre as the killing of four
or more people at the same time.) In January 2011 Colombia’s national police
chief publicly stated that such groups are the largest source of violence in
Colombia.
Paramilitary Accomplices
Colombia’s Supreme Court has in recent years made considerable progress
investigating Colombian Congress members accused of collaborating with paramilitaries.
In the “parapolitics” scandal, more than 120 former Congress members
have been investigated, and approximately 40 convicted. In February 2011
former Senator Mario Uribe—former president of the Colombian Congress and
second cousin of former President Uribe—was convicted for ties with paramilitaries.
While demobilized paramilitaries have also made statements about
extensive collaboration with local politicians, senior military officers, and businesspersons,
the Attorney General’s Office’s investigations into such persons
have advanced slowly.
There are concerns of ongoing infiltration of the political system by paramilitaries
and their successor groups. As of September 2011 the Supreme Court had
opened investigations against 10 current members of Congress for allegedly
having had ties to paramilitaries. Colombia’s Ombudsman’s Office reported
that 119 municipalities faced a high risk of electoral violence or interference by
paramilitary successor groups during the October 2011 local elections.
In 2011 two former paramilitaries publicly claimed that former President Uribe
had been directly involved with a paramilitary group while governor of
Antioquia department in the 1990s. Uribe has denied the allegations.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Over the past decade the Colombian Army has committed an alarming number
of extrajudicial killings of civilians. In many cases—commonly referred to as
“false positives”—army personnel murdered civilians and reported them as
combatants killed in action, apparently in response to pressure to boost body
counts. The executions occurred throughout Colombia and involved multiple
army brigades.
The government does not keep statistics for cases of “false positives” as a separate
category of crimes, but the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Colombia estimates that more than
3,000 people may have been victims of extrajudicial killings by state agents,
and that the majority of cases were committed by the army between 2004 and
2008. There has been a dramatic reduction in cases since 2008; however,
some alleged cases of extrajudicial killings attributed to state agents were
reported in 2010 and 2011.
Investigations into such cases have advanced slowly: as of September 2011 the
Human Rights Unit of the Attorney General’s Office was investigating 1,622
cases of alleged extrajudicial killings committed by state agents involving
2,788 victims, and had obtained convictions for 77 cases. In July 2011 a judge
convicted former army Col. Luis Fernando Borja Giraldo, the highest-ranking
military officer to be sentenced for “false positives” at this writing.
Accountability achieved to date is due to the fact that civilian prosecutors are
investigating most cases. However, as of July 2011, more than 400 cases involving
alleged extrajudicial killings remained in the military justice system, where
there is little chance that justice will be obtained.
At this writing the government had backed two constitutional reform proposals
that threaten to facilitate impunity for military abuses: a “justice reform” bill
that would increase the likelihood that military abuse cases are handled by military
courts, and a “transitional justice” bill that would allow Congress, at the
president’s behest, to authorize the Attorney General’s Office to drop prosecutions
for human rights violations, including those committed by members of the
military.
Abuses by National Intelligence Service
In October 2011 President Santos dissolved the National Intelligence Service
(DAS), the Colombian intelligence service that answers directly to the president’s
office, and announced the creation of a new intelligence agency. In
recent years media and judicial investigations revealed that the DAS, during the
Uribe presidency, had illegally spied on the Supreme Court, as well as trade
unionists, human rights defenders, journalists, and opposition politicians. The
DAS has also been implicated in other criminal activity, including death threats,
smear campaigns against government critics, and collaboration with paramilitaries.
In September 2011 Jorge Noguera Cotes, who directed the DAS from
2002 to 2005, was convicted of having put the intelligence agency at the service
of paramilitary groups, including in the 2004 killing of a university professor.
Violence against Trade Unionists
While the number of trade unionists killed every year is less today than a
decade ago, it remains higher than any other country in the world: 51 trade
unionists were murdered in 2008, 47 in 2009, 51 in 2010, and 26 from January
to November 15, 2011, according to the National Labor School (ENS),
Colombia’s leading NGO monitoring labor rights. Threats against trade unionists—primarily attributed to paramilitary successor groups—have increased
since 2007.
Impunity for anti-union violence is widespread: Colombia has obtained convictions
for less than 10 percent of the more than 2,900 trade unionist killings
reported by the ENS since 1986. As of June 2011 the Attorney General’s Office’s
sub-unit of prosecutors dedicated to anti-union violence had opened investigations
into 787 cases of trade unionist killings and reached a conviction for more
than 185 such killings.
The sub-unit has made virtually no progress in obtaining convictions for recent
killings. Of the more than 195 trade unionist killings that have occurred since
the sub-unit started operating in 2007, the special office had obtained convictions
in only six cases as of May 2011. It had not obtained a single conviction
for the more than 60 homicide attempts, 1,500 threats, and 420 forced displacements
reported by the ENS during this period.
Internal Displacement
Tens of thousands of Colombians continue to be forcibly displaced every year.
The state agency Social Action has registered 3.7 million displaced persons
between 1997 and May 2011, compared to 5.3 million that the respected
Colombian NGO CODHES reports between 1985 and June 2011. Social Action
registered more than 100,000 newly displaced people in 2010, while CODHES
reports nearly 300,000 newly displaced during that year. The Permanent Human
Rights Unit of the Personería of Medellín documented an 81 percent increase in
reported cases of intra-urban displacement during the first half of 2011 in
Medellín, where paramilitary successor groups are active. Massive displacements
(affecting more than 10 households or 50 people) also increased in 2011,
with Social Action reporting 80 cases between January and early November
2011, as compared to 59 in all of 2010.
The government’s land restitution efforts have coincided with a rise in attacks
and threats against leaders of displaced communities campaigning for land
recovery. Nine leaders of displaced persons involved in such activity were murdered
during the first half of 2011, according to CODHES.
Sexual Violence
Impunity remains a problem in cases of sexual violence, particularly conflictrelated
violence. In a 2008 decision the Constitutional Court recognized that
sexual violence against women is “a habitual, extended, systematic and invisible
practice in the context of the Colombian armed conflict … [perpetrated] by
all illegal armed groups, and in some isolated cases, by individual agents of
the public security forces.” It instructed the Attorney General’s Office to further
investigate specific cases. Progress in these cases has been slow.
Legal Capacity of People with Disabilities
Colombia ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in
May 2011. To comply with the standards established in the convention, it will
need to adjust domestic legislation and policies to ensure that people with disabilities
are not stripped of their legal capacity, resulting in restrictions on the
right to vote, property rights, and the right to free and informed consent.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are routinely threatened and attacked. In June 2011 a
death threat signed by a paramilitary successor group called the “Rastrojos”
targeted numerous rights organizations and individual defenders, including
several prominent advocates for the rights of women and internally displaced
persons.
The Ministry of Interior runs a protection program that covers more than 8,000
members of vulnerable groups, including human rights defenders and trade
unionists.
Key International Actors
The US remains the most influential foreign actor in Colombia. In 2011 it provided
approximately US$562 million in aid, about 61 percent of which was military
and police aid. Thirty percent of US military aid is subject to human rights conditions,
which the US Department of State has not enforced. In September 2011 the State Department certified that Colombia was meeting human rights conditions.
In October 2011 US President Barack Obama signed into the law the USColombia
Free Trade Agreement, a treaty the US Congress had delayed ratifying
for nearly five years, in part due to violence against trade unionists and impunity
for that violence. In April 2011 Colombia and the US signed an “Action Plan”
outlining key steps that Colombia had to take to protect workers’ rights as a
precondition for ratification; however, the commitments failed to address the
paramilitary successor groups believed to be responsible for a large portion of
anti-union violence.
The United Kingdom reportedly reduced military assistance to Colombia in
2009, apparently due to scandals over illegal surveillance and extrajudicial
executions. The European Union provides social and economic assistance to
Colombia.
The Organization of American States’ Mission to Support the Peace Process in
Colombia, charged with verifying paramilitary demobilizations, issued a report
in 2011 expressing alarm over the activities of paramilitary successor groups
and noting that, “massacres have continued, wiping out entire families.”
The Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court continued to
monitor local investigations into human rights crimes. OHCHR is active in
Colombia, and in November 2010 its mandate in the country was extended for
three years. The International Committee of the Red Cross is also active in
Colombia, and its work includes providing assistance to internally displaced
persons.
In October 2010 Colombia was elected as a non-permanent member of the UN
Security Council for 2011-2012.
CL98
Cuba remains the only country in Latin America that represses virtually all forms
of political dissent. In 2011 Raúl Castro’s government continued to enforce
political conformity using short-term detentions, beatings, public acts of repudiation,
forced exile, and travel restrictions.
In 2011 the Cuban government freed the remaining 12 political prisoners from
the “group of 75” dissidents—human rights defenders, journalists, and labor
leaders who were sentenced in 2003 in summary trials for exercising their basic
rights—having forced most into exile in exchange for their freedom. Also in 2011
the government sentenced at least seven more dissidents to prison for exercising
their fundamental rights, and human rights groups on the island said
dozens more remain in prison.
The government increasingly relied on arbitrary arrests and short-term detentions
to restrict the basic rights of its critics, including the right to assemble
and move about freely. Cuba’s government also pressured dissidents to choose
between exile and continued repression or even imprisonment, leading scores
to leave the country with their families during 2011.
Political Prisoners
Cubans who criticize the government are subject to criminal charges. They are
exempt from due process guarantees, such as the right to a defense or fair and
public hearings by a competent, independent, and impartial tribunal. In practice,
courts are “subordinated” to the executive and legislative branches, denying
meaningful judicial protection.
Dozens of political prisoners remain in Cuban prisons, according to respected
human rights groups on the island. In June 2011 the Cuban Council of Human
Rights Rapporteurs issued a list of 43 prisoners whom it said were still incarcerated
for political reasons. In May 2011, four dissidents from Havana—Luis
Enrique Labrador, David Piloto, Walfrido Rodríguez, and Yordani Martínez—were
prosecuted on charges of contempt and public disorder for demonstrating in
Havana’s Revolutionary Square and throwing leaflets with slogans such as “Down with the Castros.” They were sentenced to three to five years in prison.
The council estimates that there are many more political prisoners whose cases
they cannot document because the government does not let independent
national or international human rights groups access its prisons.
Arbitrary Detentions and Short-Term Imprisonment
In addition to criminal prosecution, Raul Castro’s government has increasingly
relied on arbitrary detention to harass and intimidate individuals who exercise
their fundamental rights. The Cuban Commission for Human Rights and
National Reconciliation documented 2,074 arbitrary detentions by security
forces in 2010, and 2,224 between January and August 2011. The detentions are
often used preemptively to prevent individuals from participating in meetings or
events viewed as critical of the government.
Security officers hardly ever present arrest orders to justify detentions, and
threaten detainees with criminal prosecution if they continue to participate in
“counterrevolutionary” activities. Victims of such arbitrary arrests said they
were held incommunicado for several hours to several days, often at police stations.
Some received an official warning (acta de advertencia), which prosecutors
may later use in criminal trials to show a pattern of delinquent behavior.
Dissidents said these warnings aimed to dissuade them from participating in
future activities considered critical of the government.
For example, on July 24, 2011, state security agents arbitrarily detained 28
human rights activists for 4 to 30 hours in Palma Soriano, Santiago de Cuba
province, when they tried to participate in a religious service to pray for the
release of political prisoners.
Forced Exile
The death of political prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo in February 2010 following
his 85-day hunger strike, and the subsequent hunger strike by dissident
Guillermo Fariñas, pressured the Cuban government to release the remaining
political prisoners from the “group of 75,” who were detained during a 2003
crackdown on dissent. Yet while the final 12 prisoners from the group were released in March 2011, most were forced to choose between ongoing prison
and forced exile.
Since that time dozens of other prominent dissidents, journalists, and human
rights defenders have been forced to choose between exile and ongoing
harassment or even imprisonment. For example, Néstor Rodríguez Lobaina, an
outspoken human rights activist, former political prisoner, and president of a
dissident youth group in Guantánamo, was arrested in December 2010. Held for
months while awaiting trial, he said authorities told him that unless he agreed
to go into exile, he would be sentenced to five years of prison. He accepted
forced exile to Spain in April 2011.
Freedom of Expression
The government maintains a media monopoly on the island, ensuring there is
virtually no freedom of expression. The government controls all media outlets in
Cuba, and access to outside information is highly restricted. Limited internet
access means only a tiny fraction of Cubans can read independently published
articles and blogs.
Although a few independent journalists and bloggers manage to write articles
for foreign websites or independent blogs, they must publish work through
back channels, such as writing from home computers, saving information on
memory sticks, and uploading articles and posts through illegal internet connections;
others dictate articles to contacts abroad.
Independent journalists and bloggers are subjected to short-term arrests and
harassment by police and state security agents, as well as threats of imprisonment
if they continue to work. For example, independent journalists Magaly
Norvis Otero Suárez and Roberto de Jesús Guerra Pérez were detained and beaten
in Havana on February 23, 2011, as they walked to an event with two members
of the Women in White—a respected human rights group comprised of
wives, mothers, and daughters of political prisoners—to honor the one year
anniversary of Orlando Zapata Tamayo’s death. They later said they were transported
to a police station, where they were assaulted and held incommunicado
for roughly 14 hours.
Bloggers and independent journalists have also been the victims of public
smear campaigns, such as a March 2011 episode of a government-produced
news program—broadcast widely on public television—which referred to independent
bloggers as “cyber-mercenaries” and “puppets of the empire.”
The Cuban government uses the granting of press credentials and visas, which
foreign journalists need to report from the island, to control coverage of Cuba
and punish media outlets considered overly critical of the regime. In
September, for example, the government refused to renew the press credentials
of a journalist from Spain’s El Pais newspaper, arguing he presented a biased
and negative image of Cuba.
Human Rights Defenders
Refusing to recognize human rights monitoring as a legitimate activity, Cuba’s
government denies legal status to local human rights groups and uses harassment,
beatings, and imprisonment to punish human rights defenders who try to
document abuses. For example, Enyor Díaz Allen, Juan Luis Bravo Rodríguez,
and Óscar Savón Pantoja—members of a human rights group in Guantanamó—
were trying to enter a hospital on March 10 to visit a dissident on a hunger
strike when security forces detained and transferred them without explanation
to a police station and held them for three days in solitary confinement, Díaz
Allen said.
Travel Restrictions and Family Separation
The Cuban government forbids the country’s citizens from leaving or returning
to Cuba without first obtaining official permission, which is often denied. For
example, well-known blogger Yoani Sanchez, who has criticized the government,
has been denied the right to leave the island to accept awards and participate
in conferences at least 16 times in the past four years. The government
uses widespread fear of forced family separation to punish defectors and
silence critics, and frequently bars citizens engaged in authorized travel from
taking their children with them overseas, essentially holding the latter hostage
to guarantee their parents’ return.
The government restricts the movement of citizens within Cuba by enforcing a
1997 law known as Decree 217. Designed to limit migration to Havana, the
decree requires that Cubans obtain government permission before moving to
the capital. It is often used to prevent dissidents from traveling to Havana to
attend meetings, and to harass dissidents from other parts of Cuba who live in
the capital.
Prison Conditions
Prisons are overcrowded, unhygienic, and unhealthy, leading to extensive malnutrition
and illness. Prisoners who criticize the government, refuse to undergo
ideological “reeducation,” or engage in hunger strikes and other protests are
often subjected to extended solitary confinement, beatings, and visit restrictions,
and denied medical care. Prisoners have no effective complaint mechanism
to seek redress, giving prison authorities total impunity.
Key International Actors
The United States’s economic embargo on Cuba, in place for more than half a
century, continues to impose indiscriminate hardship on Cubans, and has
failed to improve human rights in the country. At the United Nations General
Assembly in October, 186 of the 192 member countries voted for a resolution
condemning the US embargo; only the US and Israel voted against it.
In January 2011 US President Barack Obama used his executive powers to ease
“people-to-people” travel restrictions, allowing religious, educational, and cultural
groups from the US to travel to Cuba, and permitting Americans to send
remittances to assist Cuban citizens. In 2009 Obama eliminated limits on travel
and remittances by Cuban Americans to Cuba, which had been instituted during
George W. Bush’s administration.
In March US citizen Alan Gross—a subcontractor for the US Agency for
International Development—was sentenced to 15 years in jail for distributing
telecommunications equipment for religious groups in Cuba. Gross was
detained in December 2009 and accused by state prosecutors of engaging in a “subversive project aiming at bringing down the revolution.” Cuba’s highest
court upheld his sentence in August. He remains in prison.
The European Union continues to retain its “Common Position” on Cuba, adopted
in 1996, which conditions full economic cooperation with Cuba on its transition
to a pluralist democracy and respect for human rights.
At this writing Cuba’s government had yet to ratify the core international human
rights treaties—the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights—which it
signed in February 2008. Cuba is currently serving a three-year term on the UN
Human Rights Council, having been re-elected in May 2009.
E:L8;FI
In a referendum held in May 2011, President Rafael Correa obtained a popular
mandate for constitutional reforms that could significantly increase government
powers to constrain media and influence the appointment and dismissal of
judges.
Those involved in protests in which there are outbreaks of violence may be
prosecuted on inflated and inappropriate terrorism charges. Criminal defamation
laws that restrict freedom of expression remain in force and Correa has
used them repeatedly against his critics. Some articles of a draft communications
law in the legislature since 2009 could open the door to media censorship.
Misuse of Anti-Terror Laws in Dealing with Social Protests
Prosecutors have applied a “terrorism and sabotage” provision of the criminal
code in cases involving protests against mining and oil projects and in other
incidents that have ended in confrontations with police. Involvement in acts of
violence or obstructing roads during such protests should be ordinary criminal
offenses. Yet Ecuador’s criminal code includes, under the category of sabotage
and terrorism, “crimes against the common security of people or human groups
of whatever kind or against their property,” by individuals or associations
“whether armed or not.” Such crimes carry a possible prison sentence of four to
eight years. In July 2011 the Center for Economic and Social Rights, an
Ecuadorian human rights group, reported that 189 indigenous people were facing
terrorism and sabotage charges. Most of them were in hiding and only eight
had been convicted.
Accountability
Impunity for police abuses is widespread and those responsible for murders
often attributed to a “settling of accounts” between criminal gangs are rarely
brought to justice. In June 2010 a truth commission created by the Correa
administration published a report documenting 68 extrajudicial executions and 17 enforced disappearances between 1984 and 2008, and named 458 alleged
perpetrators of abuses. According to the commission, few of those responsible
for the abuses had been held accountable, due to statutes of limitations, jurisdictional
disputes, and procedural delays. In October 2010 the attorney general
appointed a team of prosecutors to reopen investigations into cases reported
by the commission. As of September 2011 the prosecutors were reported to
have renewed investigations into several key cases, but no suspects had been
charged.
Freedom of Expression
Ecuador’s Criminal Code still has provisions criminalizing desacato (“lack of
respect”), under which anyone who offends a government official may receive a
prison sentence up to three months and up to two years for offending the president.
In September 2011 the Constitutional Court agreed to consider a challenge
to the constitutionality of these provisions submitted by Fundamedios,
an Ecuadorian press freedom advocacy group. A new criminal code presented
by the government to the National Assembly in October does not include the
crime of desacato, but if approved would still mandate prison sentences of up
to three years for those who defame public authorities.
Under the existing code, journalists face prison sentences and crippling damages
for this offense. According to Fundamedios, by October 2011 five journalists
had been sentenced to prison terms for defamation since 2008, and 18
journalists, media directors, and owners of media outlets faced similar charges.
President Correa frequently rebukes journalists and media that criticize him
and has personally taken journalists to court for allegedly defaming him. In July
2011 a judge in Guayas province sentenced Emilio Palacio, who headed the
opinion section of the Guayaquil newspaper El Universo, and three members of
the newspaper’s board of directors, to three years in prison and ordered them
to pay US$40 million in damages to the president for an article the judge considered
defamatory. In an opinion piece Palacios had referred to Correa as a
“dictator” and accused him of ordering his forces to fire on a hospital, which
was “full of civilians and innocent people,” during the September 2010 police
revolt.
In September 2011 a three-person appeals court confirmed the prison sentence
and the fine by majority vote. Correa said in a press conference that he would
consider a pardon if the newspaper confessed that it had lied, apologized to
the Ecuadorian people, and promised to be more “serious, professional and
ethical” in the future.
In order to rebut media criticism the government has also used a provision of
the broadcasting legislation that obliges private broadcasters to interrupt
scheduled programs to transmit government messages known as cadenas.
According to an independent media observation group, between January 2007
and May 2011, there were 1,025 cadenas totaling 151 hours of broadcasting
time, many of which included attacks on government critics.
Legislation to regulate broadcasting and print media has been under congressional
debate since 2009. In the May 2011 referendum voters supported, by a
small majority, a proposal to create an official council to regulate the content of
television, radio, and print media. Proposals by six ruling party legislators
under discussion in the National Assembly in July 2011 would grant broad powers
to this council, allowing it to punish media that disseminate “information of
public relevance that harms human rights, reputation, people’s good name,
and the public security of the state,” terms so vague that they could easily lead
to sanctions against critical outlets.
Judicial Independence
Corruption, inefficiency, and political influence have plagued the Ecuadorian
judiciary for many years. Correa’s efforts to reform the system could lead to a
significant increase in the government’s influence over the appointment and
dismissal of judges. Voters in the May 2011 referendum approved a proposal to
dissolve the Judicial Council, a body composed of independent jurists responsible
for the selection, promotion, and dismissal of judges, whose efficiency had
been widely questioned. It was to be replaced for 18 months by a tripartite transitional
council to be appointed by the president, the legislature (in which
Correa has majority support), and the “Transparency and Social Control
Function,” the citizens’ branch established in the 2008 Constitution. This transitional
council dismissed scores of judges in August and September 2011.
Also approved in the referendum was a constitutional reform giving the executive
branch and its appointees a direct role in a new judicial council that would
eventually replace the one dissolved. One of the new council’s five members
would be chosen by the executive; its other members would include the attorney
general and the public defender.
In September 2011, at the request of the transitional council, Correa declared a
“state of emergency in the judicial branch,” to resolve the “critical situation” of
the justice system. The decree declared a “national mobilization, especially of
all the personnel of the judicial branch.” Lack of clarity about the meaning of
“mobilization” could threaten judges’ independence by suggesting they must
get behind government goals or risk dismissal.
Human Rights Defenders
The Correa administration has proposed to tighten regulations regarding the
operation of both domestic and international NGOs in the country, including
those working on human rights and the environment. In a draft decree
announced in December 2010, domestic NGOs, including those working on
human rights, would have to re-register and submit to continuous government
monitoring. The decree would give the government broad powers to dissolve
groups for “political activism,” and “compromising national security or the
interests of the state,” ill-defined terms that could seriously compromise NGOs’
legitimate activities. At this writing the proposed decree had not been adopted.
Another presidential decree adopted in July 2011, regulating international NGOs
with offices in Ecuador, allows the government to monitor all their activities and
rescind their authorizations if they engage in activities different from those
described in their application, or “attack public security and peace.” In August
the government announced it planned to halt the operations of 16 foreign NGOs
because they had failed to provide information about their activities.
In a radio broadcast in June Correa accused Fundamedios and another NGO,
Participación Ciudadana (Citizen Participation), of trying to destabilize his government,
and questioned their alleged receipt of funds from foreign donors. In
response to a statement by Fundamedios pointing out that its receipt of foreign funding complied with the law, the communications secretary accused NGOs of
implementing “political strategies and military tactics aimed at creating confusion
or promoting currents of public opinion favorable to the interests of some
of their funders.”
Key International Actors
In August 2011 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights filed a case
accusing Ecuador of violating the right to due process of 27 Supreme Court justices
who were arbitrarily dismissed by Congress during a constitutional crisis
in 2004.
In October 2011 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights held a thematic
hearing on freedom of expression in Ecuador. Addressing the ongoing
use of criminal libel laws to prosecute people for criticizing public authorities
over matters of public interest, the commission noted that the protection of reputation
in such cases must be guaranteed only through civil sanctions. The
commission also expressed its “deepest concern” at a government broadcast
(which all television and radio stations had to air) seeking to discredit
Fundamedios, whose representatives had testified at the hearing.
GL8K<D8C8
Guatemala’s weak and corrupt law enforcement institutions have proved incapable
of containing the powerful organized crime groups and criminal gangs
that contribute to one of the highest violent crime rates in the Americas. Illegal
armed groups are believed to be responsible for ongoing threats and targeted
attacks against civil society actors and justice officials.
Although impunity remains the norm for human rights violations, there were
significant advances for accountability in 2011, including convictions of four former
officers for a notorious massacre in 1982 and the first arrest of a top-ranking
official for human rights violations.
Public Security, Police Conduct, and the Criminal Justice System
Illegal armed groups and criminal gangs significantly contribute to violence and
intimidation, which they use to further political objectives and illicit economic
interests, including drug-trafficking.
Powerful and well-organized youth gangs, including the Mara Salvatrucha and
Barrio 18, have also contributed to escalating violence. The gangs use lethal
violence against those who defy their control, including gang rivals, former
gang members, individuals who collaborate with police, and those who refuse
to pay extortion money. They are believed responsible for the widespread
killing of bus drivers targeted for extortion. According to local media, 183 bus
drivers or their assistants were murdered in 2010, and 105 in the first eight
months of 2011.
Mexican drug cartels, in particular the Zetas, have added to violence and lawlessness
in Guatemala. In December 2010 President Alvaro Colom declared a
state of siege and martial law in Alta Verapaz, a department near Guatemala’s
northern border with Mexico, claiming the Zetas’s criminal activities had made
the region ungovernable. The state of siege, which was renewed for a further
month in January, enabled the security forces to prohibit meetings and carry out
arrests and searches without warrants. However, violence by the Zetas continued.
In May 2011 the group claimed responsibility for a massacre at a ranch in neighboring Petén department, in which 27 peasants were murdered in cold
blood and all but two were beheaded.
Guatemala’s justice system has proved largely incapable of curbing violence
and containing criminal gangs and mafias. According to official figures, there
was 95 percent impunity for homicides in 2010. Deficient and corrupt prosecutorial
and judicial systems and police, as well as the absence of an effective
witness protection system, all contribute to Guatemala’s alarmingly low prosecution
rate. In addition, members of the judicial system are routinely subject to
attacks and intimidation. Despite these enormous obstacles, there were a number
of successful prosecutions in 2011, due partly to the work of Attorney
General Claudia Paz y Paz, and the key role played by the United Nations’s
International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG).
Police have used repressive measures to curb gang activity, including arbitrary
detentions and extrajudicial killings. As part of an investigation into police
involvement in extrajudicial executions in 2010 and 2011, CICIG assisted in the
prosecution of two former members of the National Police’s criminal investigation
division, who were sentenced in June 2011 to 25 years in prison for the
enforced disappearance of an alleged extortionist in October 2009.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Guatemala continues to suffer the effects of its 36-year civil war. A UN-sponsored
Commission on Historical Clarification (CEH) estimated that as many as
200,000 people were killed during the conflict. The CEH attributed 93 percent
of the human rights abuses it documented to state security forces and concluded
the military had carried out “acts of genocide.”
Very few of those responsible for the abuses have been prosecuted. However,
2011 saw the first arrest of a top-ranking official for human rights violations. In
June Gen. Héctor Mario López Fuentes, former defense minister in the de facto
government of Gen. Oscar Humberto Mejía Victores, was detained for his
alleged role in massacres committed in 1982 to 1983. A judge also issued a
warrant for the arrest of Mejía Victores, who seized power in a coup in 1983, but as of October 2011 he was in the hospital after having suffered a stroke, according
to his lawyer.
In August 2011 a court sentenced four other former army officers to a total of
6,050 years in prison for participating in a brutal massacre in 1982 in Dos Erres,
in which more than 250 people, including children, were murdered. Of 626 documented
massacres, the Dos Erres case was only the fourth to have led to a
conviction.
Guatemala’s first conviction for the crime of enforced disappearance occurred
in August 2009, when an ex-paramilitary leader was sentenced to 150 years in
prison for his role in “disappearing” individuals between 1982 and 1984. The
verdict was made possible by a landmark ruling by the country’s Constitutional
Court in July 2009, which established that enforced disappearance is a continuing
crime that is not subject to a statute of limitations, as long as the whereabouts
or fate of the victims are still unknown.
The discovery in July 2005 of approximately 80 million documents of the disbanded
National Police, including files on Guatemalans killed or “disappeared”
during the conflict, could play a key role in prosecutions for past human rights
violations. Documents from the archive led to the arrest in March 2009 of two
former National Police agents for their participation in the “disappearance” in
1984 of student leader and activist Edgar Fernando García. In October 2011 a
court sentenced both men to 40 years in prison for the crime. Jorge Alberto
Gómez—the former head of a unit that coordinated police and army counterinsurgency
operations, who was arrested in April 2011—and ex-Col. Héctor Bol de
la Cruz—the National Police’s former director, who was arrested in June—are
currently facing trial for their alleged responsibility for García’s “disappearance.”
In September 2008 Congress passed the Law of Access to Public Information,
which prohibits “information related to investigations of violations of fundamental
human rights or crimes against humanity” from being classified as confidential
or reserved under any circumstances. In March 2009 President Colom
created the Military Archive Declassification Commission, tasked with sorting
and declassifying military documents from 1954 to 1966. In June 2011 the government made 12,287 declassified documents publicly available. According to a
commission member, 55 were kept secret on national security grounds, but
could be consulted by a court if required.
Labor Rights and Child Labor
Freedom of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively are
endangered by a high level of anti-union violence, including attacks on trade
union offices and threats, harassment, and killings of trade unionists. The
International Trade Union Confederation reported the killing of 16 trade unionists
in 2009 and 10 in 2010. In May 2011 two unidentified men on a motorcycle
shot and killed Idar Joel Hernández, finance secretary of the Izabal Banana
Workers’ Union (SITRABI). In April Oscar González—another SITRABI official who
worked at a Del Monte subsidiary in Morales, Izabal—was shot to death.
Guatemala has one of the highest rates of child labor in the Americas. The
International Labour Organization reported in 2008 that 16.1 percent of children
aged five to fourteen are obliged to work, many in unsafe conditions. Some of
these children are employed in the construction, mining, and sex industries.
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women is a chronic problem in Guatemala and most perpetrators
are never brought to trial. According to the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, investigations into crimes against
women are often inadequate and obstructed by investigating police operating
with a gender bias.
Palliative Care
Available palliative care is very limited in Guatemala, even though more than
10,000 people die of cancer or HIV/AIDS each year, many in severe pain. The
government has not made oral morphine available in most of the country and
has failed to ensure health care workers are adequately trained in modern pain
treatment methods. Guatemala has some of the most restrictive regulatory policies
in the region, discouraging doctors from prescribing pain medication and preventing patients in severe pain from accessing treatment. As a result, thousands
of Guatemalans unnecessarily suffer from severe pain and other distressing
symptoms every year.
Human Rights Defenders
Attacks and threats against human rights defenders are common, significantly
hampering human rights work throughout the country. There is a routine failure
to prosecute those responsible. In a rare exception, in July 2011 a court handed
down a three-year prison sentence to a man found guilty of repeatedly threatening
Norma Cruz Córdoba, director of the Fundación Sobrevivientes, a group that
supports women who are victims of violence, and her coworker Gloria Ayala
Pinto. The sentence was commuted to a fine.
In August 2011 four forensic experts from the Guatemalan Forensic
Anthropology Foundation (FAFG) received death threats after giving evidence in
the Dos Erres case. Four days earlier someone had slashed the tire of a pickup
truck belonging to FAFG’s director while he was waited in traffic in Guatemala
City. As of October the Attorney General’s Office had not identified those
responsible for these threats.
Key International Actors
The CICIG, established in 2007, plays a key role in assisting the Guatemalan
justice system in prosecuting violent crime. The commission’s unique mandate
allows it to work with the Attorney General’s Office, the police, and other government
agencies to investigate, prosecute, and dismantle the criminal organizations
operating in Guatemala. The CICIG can participate in criminal proceedings
as a complementary prosecutor, provide technical assistance, and promote
legislative reforms. As of September 2011 it had initiated 62 investigations,
and was directly participating in 20. The Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights has maintained an office in Guatemala since
2005 that provides observation and technical assistance on human rights practices.
In January 2011 Jorge Sosa Orantes, a former army officer who faces charges in
Guatemala as the commander responsible for the Dos Erres massacre, was
detained in Calgary, Canada, after fleeing from the United States where he was
accused of lying in an immigration application. Both Guatemala and Spain
sought Sosa’s extradition on war crimes charges. In September a Calgary judge
ordered that he be extradited to the US to be tried for immigration fraud.
H8@K@
Still reeling from the devastating January 12, 2010 earthquake and subsequent
deadly cholera epidemic, Haiti inaugurated Michel Joseph Martelly as president
on May 14, 2011, after a contested electoral process. The government stalled for
over four months as parliament failed to ratify two consecutive nominees for
prime minister, before confirming Martelly’s third pick, Garry Conille, on
October 4, 2011.
Weakened by the electoral and political crises, reconstruction efforts made little
progress in rebuilding government or private structures. Despite this, the
number of people living in informal settlements created after the earthquake
dropped from some 1.3 million people in late 2010 to approximately 550,000 by
September 2011.
The continuing humanitarian crisis created by the earthquake and cholera epidemic
hindered Haiti from addressing many of the chronic human rights problems
exacerbated by the quake, including violence against women and girls,
inhuman prison conditions, and impunity for past human rights abuses.
Moreover, increasing pressure to close camps on both private and public land
has led to a growing number of evictions.
The Justice System
Haiti has been plagued by high levels of violent crime for years, but the United
Nations secretary-general noted that trends since the earthquake demonstrate
an increase in all major categories of crimes, including murder, rape, and kidnapping.
Violent demonstrations and civil unrest related to the extended and
contested electoral process contributed to this rise.
The weak capacity of the Haitian National Police (HNP) has contributed to overall
insecurity in Haiti. The reform and strengthening of police remains a priority
of the government and of the UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
There has been progress in adding to HNP ranks, but obstacles such as the continued
employment of compromised officers threaten Haiti’s stability.
Police abuses and deaths in detention in select commissariats threaten to taint
HNP’s improving reputation of professionalism. In 2011 MINUSTAH and the
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) investigated
several alleged cases of extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests, and ill-treatment
of detainees and urged the police and judiciary to make systematic responses
to cases of abuse. A trial in the case of alleged police killings in Les Cayes
prison on January 19, 2010, began in mid-October. The outcome of the trial was
unknown at this writing.
Haiti’s justice system, long-troubled by politicization, corruption,
resource shortages, and lack of transparency, worked slowly to recover
in 2011. Some tribunal buildings were constructed and some
magistrates received training in the country, while others did so in
France. President Martelly appointed a chief judge and one other judge
approved by the Senate to the Supreme Court of Haiti in October, but a
political stalemate between President Martelly and the Senate
prevented the remaining four vacant positions from being filled.
Detention Conditions
Haiti’s chronically and severely overcrowded prison system suffered damage in
the earthquake, leading to even more limited cell space as well as dire prison
conditions. Reconstruction projects increased cell space by 28 percent this
year. The percentage of pre-trial and illegal detainees is still very high, but
international actors worked with prison and judicial officers to review cases of
potential illegally detained inmates, leading to the release of several hundred
people.
The negative health impact of substandard prison conditions became lifethreatening
with the arrival of cholera. In the first month of the epidemic, the
HNP announced that 19 prisoners nationwide had died from the disease. In
January a recent deportee from the United States died of cholera-like symptoms
after less than two weeks in detention, leading the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights to grant a petition for precautionary measures calling for the
suspension of further deportations from the US.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
High rates of sexual violence existed before the earthquake, but the precarious
safety and economic situation after the earthquake has left some women and
girls even more vulnerable to such abuse. Many women lost their homes and
livelihoods in the quake and now live in informal settlements or rely on host
families for shelter. The UN and HNP have increased their security presence in
some camps, and the UN Population Fund and humanitarian organizations have
worked to increase lighting in many camps. Yet Human Rights Watch found that
some victims have difficulty accessing post-rape medical services in sufficient
time to prevent unwanted pregnancy.
Some women and girls in post-earthquake Haiti lack access to family planning
and prenatal and obstetric care. Pregnancy rates in camps for displaced people
are three times higher than urban rates of pregnancy were before the earthquake.
Human Rights Watch found that many women and girls in camps do not
know where to get birth control or prenatal care even though these services
exist. Many have given birth in tents or some on the street en route to the hospital
because of transportation difficulties.
Human Rights Watch also found that women’s lack of access to economic security
leads some women to trade sex for food or other necessities without using
contraception, compounding the impact of their lack of access to reproductive
health services and increasing chances for unintended pregnancy and disease.
In particular, pregnant women and lactating mothers face increased hardships,
as do women with disabilities and elderly women, due to constrained mobility
and greater need for health services, food, and water.
Women also have difficulty participating in decision-making about recovery and
reconstruction.
Children’s Rights
Prior to the earthquake, only about half of Haiti’s primary school-age children
attended school. The UN Children’s Fund estimates that the quake damaged or
destroyed almost 4,000 schools and that 2.5 million children experienced prolonged
interruption in their education. Schools resumed several months after
the earthquake; however, many experienced a sharp drop in enrollment.
President Martelly introduced a plan for free universal education early in his
administration, and classes began October 3, 2011, with the first phase of his
plan in place.
The use of child domestic workers in Haiti, known as restavèks, continues.
Restavèks are children, 80 percent of whom are girls, from low-income households
sent to live with other families in the hope they will be cared for in
exchange for performing light chores. These children are often unpaid, denied
education, and physically and sexually abused. UN and civil society organizations
warn that a number of unaccompanied minors remaining in camps are
vulnerable to this form of forced labor or to trafficking.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Former President-for-Life Jean-Claude Duvalier returned to Haiti on January 16,
2011, after nearly 25 years in exile. He was quickly charged with financial and
human rights crimes allegedly committed during his 15-year tenure.
From 1971 to 1986 Duvalier commanded a network of security forces that committed
serious human rights violations, including arbitrary detentions, torture,
enforced disappearances, rape, and summary executions. Thousands of
Haitians were victims of extrajudicial killings or otherwise died from torture or
inhuman detention conditions. Many more were forced to flee the country,
building the modern Haitian diaspora.
Duvalier’s prosecution faces many obstacles, including the fragility of Haiti’s
justice system and the absence of a safe environment for his continued investigation
and prosecution. Lack of political will from the international community
to support the prosecution leaves the government without the adequate
resources or technical assistance needed for a robust judicial process. Victims and their families feel intimidated by Duvalier’s lawyers and supporters, who
have interrupted victims’ audiences before the investigative judge, yelled at
victims in public markets, and otherwise created an environment that discourages
witnesses and victims from coming forward. In September Duvalier’s
lawyers disrupted an Amnesty International press conference supporting the
prosecution.
Key International Actors
MINUSTAH has been present in Haiti since 2004, playing a prominent role in
increasing stability. A contingent of the peacekeeping mission stationed in central
Haiti is alleged to be the source of the cholera epidemic, leading to demonstrations
against the force during the year. A UN independent investigation
found that the cholera epidemic was caused by a confluence of circumstances,
while numerous scientific analyses claim evidence that MINUSTAH soldiers
most likely introduced the strain.
In September media outlets released a video of Uruguayan soldiers harassing
an 18-year-old Haitian young man in a sexually explicit manner. The boy alleges
he was raped, and members of the Uruguayan contingent were sent home to
face a criminal investigation. The incident fueled anti-MINUSTAH sentiments
ahead of the renewal of its mandate in October. The Security Council nevertheless
extended the mission’s mandate through October 15, 2012, with a reduction
in the number of troops to pre-quake levels.
The Interim Haiti Recovery Commission (IHRC), provided for in the state of emergency
law that parliament passed in April 2010, continued to operate through
most of 2011. An extension of the IHRC did not pass parliament before the end
of its mandate, making its future uncertain at this writing. The commission’s
mandate is to oversee billions of dollars in reconstruction aid and to conduct
strategic planning and coordination among multi-lateral and bilateral donors,
NGOs, and the private sector. Former US President Bill Clinton remains a cochair
of the IHRC and UN special envoy for Haiti.
HFE;LI8J
Honduras failed in 2011 to hold accountable those responsible for human rights
violations under the de facto government that took power after the 2009 military
coup. Impunity remained a serious problem, despite the government’s
establishment of a truth commission in May 2010 to examine events surrounding
the coup, and efforts by the human rights unit in the Attorney General’s
Office to investigate abuses.
Violence and threats against journalists, human rights defenders, political
activists, and transgender people continued. Those responsible for these abuses
are rarely held to account.
Lack of Accountability for Post-Coup Abuses
Following the 2009 military coup, the de facto government suspended key civil
liberties, including freedom of the press and assembly. In the ensuing days the
military occupied opposition media outlets, temporarily shutting down their
transmissions. Police and military personnel responded to generally peaceful
demonstrations with excessive force. This pattern of the disproportionate use
of force led to several deaths, scores of injuries, and thousands of arbitrary
detentions.
In July 2011 a truth commission, established by President Porfirio Lobo’s administration
to investigate events before and after the coup, delivered its report.
The commissioners documented the cases of 20 people, 12 of whom they concluded
had been killed due to excessive police or army force, and eight of
whom had died in selective killings by government agents. The commission
also reported that police and army officials were responsible for “systematic
obstruction” of investigations into these abuses, including altering crime
scenes and official documents, criminal negligence, and helping suspects
escape.
According to information provided in October 2011 by the Human Rights Unit of
the Attorney General’s Office, no one had been held criminally responsible for
any of the serious abuses attributed to the security forces that occurred after the coup in the context of protests in support of Manuel Zelaya, the former
president. Human rights prosecutors continue to face obstacles conducting
investigations, including limited collaboration by security forces, lack of sufficient
resources, and lack of implementation of a witness protection program.
Attacks on Journalists
Between President Lobo’s January 2010 inauguration and November 2011, at
least 12 journalists died—including three in 2011—at the hands of unidentified
attackers. Many victims had opposed the coup or reported on corruption or
human rights abuses. Other journalists have received death threats.
In July 2011 Nery Jeremias Orellana, a 26-year-old radio journalist, was riding to
work on his motorbike in Candelaria, Lempira department, when unidentified
assailants shot him in the head. He died in the hospital a few hours later.
Orellana managed Radio Joconguera de Candelaria, which reported on human
rights abuses in the area and had frequently aired the views of coup opponents.
He had reportedly received death threats.
The individuals responsible for most of these crimes have not been identified
or charged. In March 2011 the minister for human rights told the United Nations
Human Rights Council that four cases were in court and six were still under
investigation. Several government officials, including the minister of security
and the minister of justice and human rights, have rejected suggestions that
the killings were related to the victims’ professional activities.
Rural Violence
More than 30 people were killed between January and August 2011 in the Bajo
Aguan valley, a fertile palm oil-producing zone in northern Honduras. A longsimmering
land conflict erupted in May when peasants occupied land being
cultivated by large privately owned agricultural enterprises. Many victims were
members of peasant associations who were allegedly gunned down by security
guards working for the enterprises. In addition, four security guards were shot
and killed in August 2011, when individuals armed with assault rifles and other
arms reportedly tried to take over a ranch. In the absence of criminal investigations, the circumstances of each incident remained unclear. By September no
one had been charged for the killings in the Bajo Aguán region.
Excessive Use of Force against Demonstrators
There were credible reports in March 2011 that members of the national police
fired tear gas canisters indiscriminately and beat people with batons during
demonstrations by teachers’ unions protesting proposed changes in the public
education system. Ilse Velázquez Rodríguez, a teacher and member of a human
rights organization, passed out after a tear gas bomb allegedly struck her forehead
and was killed a few minutes later when a car ran her over.
Violence against Transgender Persons
Bias-motivated attacks on transgender people are a serious problem in
Honduras. Six transgender women were murdered between November 2010 and
January 2011 on the streets or in their homes in Tegucigalpa, the capital, and in
the cities of Comayagüela and San Pedro Sula. The attacks ranged from gunshots
to setting the victims on fire. Some victims appeared to have been tortured
before being killed. Four additional murders of transgender women have
been documented by local rights advocates between January and November
2011.
The alleged involvement of members of the Honduran police in some of these
violent abuses is of particular concern. They are rarely followed by rigorous
investigations, let alone criminal convictions. In January 2011 the minister of
justice and human rights condemned “hate crimes” against members of the
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community. In February the government
established a special unit in the Attorney General’s Office to investigate
killings of transgender women among other vulnerable groups, and in
November a similar unit was established in San Pedro Sula.
Honduras lacks anti-discrimination legislation, and current criminal laws
expose LGBT community members to arbitrary arrest for vaguely defined conduct
such as “offenses against decency.”
Judicial Independence
Until recently the Supreme Court enjoyed absolute powers over personnel matters.
In May 2010 it abused these powers by firing four judges who had publicly
opposed the coup on grounds that they had participated in politics, while taking
no action against judges who had publicly supported the ouster of former
President Zelaya. In August 2011 the Council of the Judicial Career upheld the
dismissal of three of the judges, ordering monetary compensation for only one
of them, and reinstated the fourth judge.
In February 2011 the Honduran Congress approved constitutional reforms creating
a new body, the Council of the Judiciary and Judicial Career, an elected body
responsible for appointing and dismissing judges. In November 2011, after long
delays due to political disagreements, Congress approved key articles of a law
regulating the council’s membership and powers. Legislators agreed not to
include a representative of the executive branch on the council, whose five
members would be elected by Congress after public hearings.
Human Rights Defenders
Government officials have sometimes fueled hostility among some sectors of
the public towards human rights advocates who defend the rights of victims of
police abuses. In May 2011 the head of the Human Rights Unit of the Attorney
General’s Office, Sandra Ponce, received intimidating text messages after the
deputy minister of security publicly criticized her for opening an investigation
into the deaths of seven alleged youth gang members in Ciudad Planeta, near
San Pedro Sula.
Leo Valladares, one of Honduras’s most distinguished human rights advocates
and a former president of the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights, told
Human Rights Watch that he had received intimidating phone calls, and noticed
people monitoring his home and following him after he questioned the increasing
power of the Honduran military since the 2009 coup.
Key International Actors
In June 2011 the Organization of American States General Assembly voted to
readmit Honduras, having suspended its membership immediately after the
2009 coup. A few days earlier Zelaya returned to Honduras from exile after a
Honduran appeals court dropped corruption charges against him.
In June 2011 the Center for Constitutional Rights filed a complaint under the
United States Alien Tort Statute against former de facto president Roberto
Micheletti on behalf of the parents of Isis Obed Murillo, a teenager who was
shot and killed by members of the Honduran military in July 2009 during a
demonstration against the coup. At this writing the civil action was pending
before a US District Court in the Southern District of Texas.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has played a critical role in
Honduras since the coup, producing comprehensive reports documenting abuses,
including killings, threats, and attacks on journalists.
Since August 2010 the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
has maintained a human rights advisor in Honduras, who provides advice to
the government on strategies to protect and promote human rights, and advice
and support to civil society groups defending human rights.
President Lobo continued in 2011 to support the creation of a UN-backed international
commission against impunity in Honduras, in the context of international
efforts to assist governments combating organized crime, drug-trafficking,
and corruption in Central America.
M<O@:F
Mexico has experienced a dramatic surge in homicides in recent years, driven
in large part by the violent struggle between and within powerful criminal
organizations to control the drug trade and other lucrative illicit businesses
such as human trafficking. Efforts by the administration of President Felipe
Calderón to combat organized crime have resulted in a significant increase in
killings, torture, and other abuses by security forces, which only make the climate
of lawlessness and fear worse in many parts of the country.
Journalists, human rights defenders, and migrants are targeted for attack by
criminal groups and members of security forces, yet Mexico has failed to provide
these vulnerable groups with protection or to adequately investigate the
crimes against them.
Efforts to implement comprehensive reform of the criminal justice system,
which would address endemic problems such as torture to extract confessions,
continued to progress slowly in 2011, leaving in place a system rife with
abuses.
Impunity for Military Abuses
President Calderón has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related violence
and organized crime. While engaging in law enforcement activities, the
armed forces have committed serious human rights violations, including
killings, torture, and enforced disappearances. Mexico’s National Human Rights
Commission has issued detailed reports of nearly 90 cases since 2007 in which
it found that members of the army had committed serious human rights abuses,
and it has received complaints of nearly 5,800 additional human rights violations
from 2007 to October 2011.
In September 2011 Gustavo Acosta, 31, and his family awoke to the sound of
shooting outside their house in Apodaca, Nuevo León. Several armed members
of the navy banged on their front door and, when Acosta opened it, they
demanded to know why the family had been shooting at them. When Acosta
responded that they were unarmed, one of the navy officers shot him dead, according to his father and brother, who witnessed the shooting. At this writing
no members of the navy had been charged in the crime.
One of the main reasons military abuses persist is because soldiers who commit
human rights violations against civilians are almost never brought to justice.
Such cases continue to be investigated and prosecuted under military
jurisdiction, despite rulings by Mexico’s Supreme Court and the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights that civilian prosecutors and courts should handle military
abuses. The Military Prosecutor’s Office opened 3,671 investigations into
human rights violations committed by the army against civilians from 2007 to
June 2011. Only 15 soldiers were convicted during that period. An additional 14
army members were sentenced in a case in November 2011.
Criminal Justice System
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crimes and human rights violations. The causes of this failure are varied and
include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and abusive policing
practices without accountability.
Torture remains a serious problem and is most often applied in the period
between when victims are arbitrarily detained and when they are handed to
prosecutors, a period in which they are routinely held incommunicado.
Common tactics include beatings, asphyxiation with plastic bags, waterboarding,
electric shocks, and death threats.
One perpetuating factor is the acceptance by some judges of confessions
obtained through torture and other ill-treatment, as well as the complicity of
public defenders entrusted with safeguarding detainees’ rights. Another is the
failure to investigate and prosecute most cases of torture, including the failure
of authorities to insist that legally mandated medical tests, designed to assess
the physical and psychological condition of a potential victim of torture, are
adequately carried out.
In June 2008 Mexico passed a constitutional reform that creates the basis for
an adversarial criminal justice system with oral trials, and contains measures
that are critical for promoting greater respect for fundamental rights, such as including presumption of innocence in the Constitution. The government has
until 2016 to implement the reform. At this writing only a handful of states have
undertaken substantive changes.
In addition to its positive aspects, the reform also introduced the provision of
arraigo, which allows prosecutors, with judicial authorization, to detain individuals
suspected of participating in organized crime for up to 80 days before they
are charged with a crime, a power that is inconsistent with Mexico’s due
process obligations under international law.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists, particularly those who have reported on drug trafficking or have
been critical of security forces and authorities, have faced serious harassment
and attacks. From 2000 to September 2011, 74 journalists were killed, including
at least eight killed in 2011. While many attacks on the press in 2011 were
attributed to organized crime, evidence points to the possible involvement of
state officials in some instances.
Participants in social media networks have increasingly been the targets of violence
and intimidation. In September 2011 three mutilated bodies were left in
public places with notes warning against the use of social media networks,
such as Twitter, to report on violence by organized crime groups.
Authorities have routinely failed to adequately investigate and prosecute
crimes against members of the press or to protect journalists who face serious
risk, fostering a climate of impunity and self-censorship. While Mexico broadened
the mandate and autonomy of its special prosecutor for crimes against
the press in 2010, the special prosecutor’s office has since failed to improve on
its poor record of prosecuting cases. Similarly, while the Calderón administration
created a protection mechanism for journalists in December 2010, it lacks
clear functions and operating guidelines, and has until now failed to offer effective
protection to journalists under threat.
Domestic Violence, Reproductive Rights, and
Same-Sex Marriage
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual abuse. Some provisions, including those that make the severity
of punishments for some sexual offenses contingent on the “chastity” of the
victim, contradict international standards. Women who have suffered human
rights violations generally do not report them to authorities, while those who do
report them are generally met with suspicion, apathy, and disrespect. Such
underreporting undercuts pressure for necessary legal reforms and leads to
impunity for violence against women and girls.
In August 2008 the Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of a Mexico
City law that legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Since that
time more than 15 of Mexico’s 32 states have adopted reforms that recognize
the right to life from the moment of conception. In September 2011 the Supreme
Court upheld the state reforms as constitutional by a single vote. In May 2010
the Supreme Court ruled that all states must provide emergency contraception
and access to abortion for rape victims. However, only five states have
reformed their procedural codes accordingly and efforts to inform women and
girls of their rights have been very limited.
In August 2010 the Supreme Court recognized the right of same-sex couples in
Mexico City to adopt children and to marry, and ruled that all states in Mexico
must recognize same-sex marriages that take place in Mexico City.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity continues to be obstructed by agreements
negotiated between management and pro-management unions. These agreements
often fail to provide worker benefits beyond the minimums mandated by
Mexican legislation. Workers who seek to form independent unions risk losing
their jobs, as loopholes in labor laws and poor enforcement generally fail to
protect them from retaliatory dismissals.
Migrants
Hundreds of thousands of migrants pass through Mexico each year and many
are subjected to grave abuses en route, including physical and sexual assault,
extortion, and theft. Approximately 18,000 migrants are kidnapped annually,
often with the aim of extorting payments from their relatives in the United
States. Authorities have not taken adequate steps to protect migrants, or to
investigate and prosecute those who abuse them. Migration officials rarely
inform migrants of their rights, such as the right to seek asylum, and the
authorities themselves are often the perpetrators of abuses.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders continue to suffer harassment and attacks, sometimes
directly at the hands of state officials. Meanwhile authorities consistently fail to
provide defenders with adequate protection or investigate the crimes against
them.
In February 2011 the homes of human rights defenders María Luisa García
Andrade and Sara Salazar—both of whom worked with the organization Return
our Daughters in Ciudad Juárez—were set ablaze in separate incidents. They followed
a series of attacks and threats against these and other defenders, including
the disappearance of two of Salazar’s children and her daughter-in-law,
who were later found dead. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
had granted García and Salazar protection measures in June 2008, but federal
and state authorities failed to take adequate steps to protect them. They later
fled Ciudad Juárez with their families.
In July 2011 President Calderón signed an agreement pledging to create a mechanism
to protect human rights defenders. However, at this writing it was
unclear what progress, if any, had been made towards creating that mechanism.
Key International Actors
The US has allocated US$1.6 billion in aid to Mexico through the Merida
Initiative, a multi-year aid package agreed upon in 2007 to help Mexico combat
organized crime. Fifteen percent of select portions of the assistance can be disbursed
only after the US secretary of state reports to the US Congress that the
Mexican government is meeting four human rights requirements: ensuring that
civilian prosecutors and judicial authorities investigate and prosecute federal
police and military officials who violate basic rights, consulting regularly with
Mexican civil society organizations on Merida Initiative implementation, enforcing
the prohibition on use of testimony obtained through torture or other illtreatment,
and improving transparency and accountability of police forces.
However, the impact of these requirements has been undermined by the fact
that the US has repeatedly allocated the conditioned funds despite evidence
that Mexico has not met the requirements, most recently in September 2010.
While the US State Department announced in September 2010 that it would
withhold an additional $26 million in Merida aid for 2010, it pegged the funds
to a different set of conditions, and then released the funds in 2011. In January
2011 US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that Mexico needed to “make
sure that any human rights violations committed by the military against civilians
are tried in civilian courts.”
In November 2009 the Inter-American Court ruled that Mexico was responsible
for the 1974 enforced disappearance of Rosendo Radilla Pacheco, and had
failed to adequately investigate the crime. The binding decision ordered Mexico
to modify its Code of Military Justice to ensure that “under no circumstances
can military jurisdiction be applied” in cases where the military violates the
human rights of civilians.
In August 2010 the court found that members of the army had in 2002 raped
and tortured Valentina Rosendo Cantú and Inés Fernández Ortega, indigenous
women from Guerrero, and again ordered Mexico to modify its military code.
The ruling was repeated in December 2010, when the court found Rodolfo
Montiel and Teodoro Cabrera—peasant leaders from Guerrero state involved in
environmental activism—had been arbitrarily detained and tortured by the military. Despite these four binding rulings, Mexico continues to judge soldiers who
commit abuses in military jurisdiction.
The United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
conducted a fact-finding mission to Mexico in March 2011. In its preliminary
observations, it concluded that “enforced disappearances happened in the
past and continue to happen in the present [in Mexico],” and that “the
increased numbers of newly admitted cases in 2010 and the high number of
new allegations received during the visit could indicate a deterioration regarding
enforced disappearances in Mexico.” Among its recommendations, the
group suggested Mexico create a national database of the disappeared, and
end the practice of requiring victims’ families to gather evidence of the disappearance
of relatives and possible participation of state officials before opening
investigations.
P<IL
In the June 2011 elections, Ollanta Humala, a former army colonel, won a narrow
victory over Keiko Fujimori, daughter of former President Alberto Fujimori.
Fujimori is serving a 25-year prison sentence for human rights violations during
his first presidency.
Progress in holding others responsible for abuses during Peru’s internal armed
conflict remained slow. Top officials in the government of President Alan
García, whose term ended in July 2011, often criticized judicial investigations. In
2010 García signed a decree amounting to a blanket amnesty that would leave
most of the crimes unpunished. The measure was eventually withdrawn after
national and international protests. Still, the military’s refusal to provide information
continues to obstruct judicial investigations, and most perpetrators
have evaded justice.
In recent years there have been a rising number of social conflicts involving
communities protesting actions by the government or mining and other private
companies. These have in several cases resulted in violent clashes between
protesters and police, and fatalities on both sides.
Confronting Past Abuses
Peru’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission estimated that almost 70,000 people
died or were subject to enforced disappearances during the country’s internal
armed conflict between 1980 and 2000. Many were victims of atrocities
committed by the Shining Path and other insurgent groups, as well as human
rights violations by state agents.
Efforts to prosecute those responsible for these abuses have had mixed results.
In August 2011 the Constitutional Tribunal rejected former President Fujimori’s
appeal requesting annulment of the verdict of a Supreme Court panel that had
unanimously confirmed his 25-year prison sentence for killings and “disappearances”
in 1991 and 1992. In July 2011, amid rumors that Fujimori might have
cancer, politicians linked to President García’s party and presidential candidate Keiko Fujimori advocated that he receive a “humanitarian pardon,” but he continued
to serve his sentence at this writing.
Progress in other cases has been slow. According to the Institute for Legal
Defense (IDL), a rights organization that monitors trials, by December 2010 the
National Criminal Court—which was given jurisdiction in many human rights
cases in 2004—had handed down only 20 sentences, of which 85 percent were
acquittals. The only sentence of note by another court was the conviction of 19
former military personnel for kidnapping and killing 35 victims in three different
incidents during Fujimori’s government.
A major obstacle has been the military’s failure to cooperate by identifying officers
present at army bases during the conflict. The low conviction rate also
reflects the National Criminal Court’s insistence there be direct and documentary
proof of the responsibility of superior officers, and its unwillingness to
credit the testimony of victims’ relatives.
Senior officials of García’s administration, including the minister of defense
and the vice-president, frequently criticized human rights trials. In August 2010
García signed a decree that would have halted prosecutions in many cases by
applying a statute of limitations. He later withdrew it after intense domestic and
international criticism. Officials of the current government have also opposed
human rights trials, including the current minister of defense, retired Gen.
Daniel Mora, who said in a September 2011 radio interview: “I think that we
should arrive at a full-stop solution and reconciliation of the country.”
Unjustified Use of Lethal Force
In June 2011 the human rights ombudsman reported more than 200 ongoing
social conflicts, many related to new mining ventures. Several have resulted in
violent clashes between protesters and police, in which the latter appear to
have used unlawful force. In April 2011, for example, three civilians were killed
and more than 31 injured in Islay province when police reportedly opened live
fire to clear a roadblock during protests against a proposed copper mining project.
In May 2011 a civilian judge opened trial proceedings against two police
generals and three other police officers for killing protesters during violent clashes in June 2009 in Utcubamba and Bagua provinces, in which 23 police
and 10 civilians were killed. The trial was underway at this writing.
Torture
Beatings by police and military personnel, prison guards, and members of
municipal security patrols is a serious problem in Peru, according to the
National Human Rights ombudsman. In April 2011, police in San Borja, Lima,
detained 26-year-old Gerson Falla, reportedly after he sought refuge in a bakery
thinking he was going to be robbed. Police arrested him and allegedly beat him
brutally. Falla died 48 hours later. A police video featured on television showed
officers twisting his arm behind his bruised back and dragging him across the
floor.
Military Justice
Military courts that lack independence and impartiality continue to conduct trials
of police and military officials accused of human rights abuse. Decrees
1094, 1095, and 1096—issued by President García in September 2010—gave
military officers on active service powers to investigate and judge abuses committed
by police and military personnel engaged in policing duties. This violates
international principles on fair trial and earlier rulings of Peru’s Supreme
Court and Constitutional Tribunal.
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Peru have the right to seek therapeutic abortions in specific
cases of medical necessity. The United Nations Human Rights Committee in the
2005 case K.L. v. Peru concluded that Peru needed to provide clear national
protocols for when abortions may be performed legally. Human Rights Watch
found that the absence of such protocols endangers the lives and health of
women and girls, because it is nearly impossible to have an abortion in a public
facility without clear guidelines on the legality of procedures. Women prevented
from receiving therapeutic abortions sometimes turn to unsafe and clandestine
procedures that can threaten their lives and safety, and violate a women’s fundamental right to the highest attainable standard of health, life, non-discrimination,
physical integrity, and freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
The Ministry of Health is currently reviewing national protocols.
Disenfranchisement of People with Disabilities
People with disabilities face systematic barriers to political participation.
Prior to presidential elections in April and June 2011, el Registro Nacional de
Identificación y Estado Civil (RENIEC), the government agency responsible for
the electoral rolls, excluded more than 23,000 persons with intellectual and
mental disabilities from the voter registry.
After pressure from the disability community, people with disabilities were
invited to re-register. But with limited time and poor communication about this
decision, less than 60 people were added back to the registry before the election.
In September 2011 RENIEC acknowledged this disenfranchisement of certain
people with disabilities and pledged to rectify the situation.
People living in institutions and those under guardianship also face restrictions
in the right to vote. Other barriers to political participation include lack of
Braille ballots, ramps at polling sites, and easy-to-understand information
about candidates and the political process.
Freedom of Media
Journalists in Peru’s provinces face intimidation and threats. Individuals supporting
or working for municipal authorities have assaulted and even murdered
journalists who publicize abuses by local government officials. In 2010, in a
measure intended to ensure these cases are brought to justice, the judiciary’s
executive branch placed violent crimes against journalists under the jurisdiction
of the Lima-based National Criminal Court. The court specializes in serious
crimes like human rights violations and terrorism.
In July 2011 a parliamentary commission approved a bill to end the imprisonment
of journalists convicted of criminal defamation. If passed in the plenary,
the bill will replace prison sentences of up to three years, as stipulated in the current law, with community service and fines. When the bill was approved,
several journalists faced prison for criticizing public officials. They included
Francisco Andrade Chávez, a journalist for America TV in Chepén province, who
was sentenced in July 2011 to two years in prison, a fine, and civil damages, for
defaming a municipal official. As of October 2011 President Humala had not yet
signed or endorsed the bill.
Radio La Voz de Bagua faced legal reprisals in 2011 for its coverage of the civil
unrest in Bagua. In June 2009 the government revoked its broadcasting license
after government officials and ruling party leaders accused the station of inciting
violence. The license was provisionally restored in October 2010, and a
Ministry of Communications and Transport investigation into the station’s
allegedly unauthorized use of broadcasting frequencies was closed. However,
in February 2011 a local prosecutor accused the station’s owner of “aggravated
theft of the radio spectrum” in relation to the same events. The accusation was
dismissed on appeal, but reinstated in June 2011 by an Utcubamba appeals
court. The station’s owner could face four years in prison if convicted.
Human Rights Defenders
In September 2011, in a speech in Congress, the minister of defense accused
two of Peru’s best known human rights organizations, the National Coordinator
for Human Rights and the Institute for Legal Defense, of seeking “to destroy the
armed forces.” Both organizations have advocated for years for accountability
for human rights violations during the armed conflict. They were the target of
similar comments by the vice-president and defense minister during García’s
presidency.
Key International Actors
In July 2011 the United States extradited former army major Telmo Hurtado to
stand trial in Peru for the 1985 massacre of 69 civilians at Accomarca, Ayacucho
department. In March 2008 a US federal court in Miami ordered Hurtado to pay
US$37 million in damages to two relatives of victims of the massacre in a suit
filed under the Alien Tort Statute. Hurtado was among 29 former military facing
trial by the National Criminal Court in Lima at this writing.
V<E<QL<C8
The weakening of Venezuela’s democratic system of checks and balances
under President Hugo Chávez has contributed to a precarious human rights situation.
Without judicial checks on its actions, the government has systematically
undermined the right to free expression, workers’ freedom of association,
and the ability of human rights groups to protect rights.
Weeks before the new National Assembly—with a substantial opposition composition—
took office in January 2011, Chávez’s supporters in the legislature
adopted several laws that increased the government’s ability to undercut
rights.
Police abuses and impunity remain a grave problem. Prison conditions are
deplorable, and fatality rates high due to inmate violence.
Judicial Independence
In 2004 Chávez and his legislative allies conducted a political takeover of the
Supreme Court, filling it with government supporters and creating new measures
that make it possible to purge justices from the court. In December 2010
the outgoing legislators from Chávez’s political party modified the timeline so
they could make appointments before leaving office: they appointed 9 permanent
justices and 32 stand-ins, including several allies. Since 2004, the court
has largely abdicated its role as a check on executive power, failing to protect
fundamental rights enshrined in the constitution.
In 2011 Supreme Court President Luisa Estella Morales declared that laws in
Venezuela “respond to an ideological purpose,” while Justice Fernando Torre
Alba stated that courts “must severely … sanction behaviors or cases that
undermine the construction of [Bolivarian] socialism.”
Individual judges may face reprisals if they rule against government interests.
In December 2009 Judge María Lourdes Afiuni was detained on the day she
authorized the conditional release of Eligio Cedeño, a banker accused of corruption.
Afiuni was following a recommendation by the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detentions, given that Cedeño had been in pre-trial detention
for almost three years, although Venezuelan law prescribes a two-year
limit. The day after her arrest, Chávez publicly branded Afiuni a “bandit” who
should receive the maximum 30 years in prison. Accused of corruption, abuse
of authority, and “favoring evasion of justice,” her case is pending before a
judge who has stated publicly: “I would never betray my Commander because I
take the Revolution in my blood…”
Judge Afiuni was held in pre-trial detention in deplorable conditions in a violent
prison for over a year, and remains under house arrest. Three UN human rights
special rapporteurs and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights have
denounced her arrest and called for her release.
Legislating by Decree
In December 2010 the outgoing National Assembly passed an enabling law that
granted Chávez broad powers to legislate by decree on a wide range of issues
for 18 months. The law’s vague provisions could directly impact the exercise of
rights by, for example, allowing the president to determine which penalties can
be imposed when someone commits a crime. As of November 2011 Chávez had
adopted over 20 legislative decrees, including one reinstating crimes previously
derogated by the legislature. The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality
of this decree, which criminalized several banking practices, arguing that economic
crimes are “crimes against humanity” and could not be decriminalized.
Freedom of Media
Venezuela enjoys a vibrant public debate in which anti-government and progovernment
media criticize and defend the president. However, the government
has discriminated against media that air political opponents’ views, strengthened
the state’s ability to limit free speech and created powerful incentives for
government critics to self-censor.
Laws contributing to a climate of self-censorship include the 2005 amendments
to the criminal code extending the scope of desacato laws that criminalize disrespect
of high government officials, and a broadcasting statute allowing arbitrary suspension of channels for the vaguely defined offense of “incitement.” In
December 2010 the National Assembly extended the scope of this statute to
include the internet. It also amended the telecommunications law, granting the
government power to suspend or revoke concessions to private outlets if it is
“convenient for the interests of the nation” or demanded by public order and
security.
The government has abused its control of broadcasting frequencies to punish
radio and television stations with overtly critical programming. In 2009 the government
broadcasting authority CONATEL closed 32 radio stations and reported
that over 200 others were under review, without providing a list of the stations
being investigated. Several stations have since limited their critical programming.
In November 2011 CONATEL suspended several radio stations while it
investigated them, but no additional stations had been closed at this writing.
RCTV, Venezuela’s most popular critical television station, was pulled from public
airwaves in 2007. RCTV International, the cable channel that replaced it, was
removed from cable broadcasting in 2010 after CONATEL ordered that cable
providers suspend transmitting channels that it had not certified as “international”
channels. RCTV’s lawyers say CONATEL has rejected RCTV’s requests to
obtain this certification, and the channel remains unable to transmit in
Venezuela.
CONATEL has opened seven administrative investigations against Globovisión—
the only TV channel available without cable critical of the government—that
could lead to the station’s suspension or revocation of its license. In October
2011 CONATEL fined Globovisión US$2.1 million for allegedly violating the
broadcasting statute when it aired images of a June prison riot. The other six
cases have yet to be resolved; some have been pending for over a year.
In 2010 the government adopted vague norms that expand its power to limit
access to almost any information it holds, including creating a Center for
Situational Studies of the Nation with broad powers to limit public dissemination
of “information, facts or circumstance[s]” it deems confidential.
Prosecuting Government Critics
Several prominent critics of Chávez’s government have been targeted for criminal
prosecution in recent years. The courts’ lack of independence reduced the
chances of them receiving a fair trial.
In July 2011 Oswaldo Álvarez Paz, a former governor of Zulia state and member
of an opposition political party, was sentenced to two years in prison for criticizing
the Chávez administration on TV. Álvarez Paz was convicted of disseminating
false information for saying that Chávez was not a democrat and that
“Venezuela has turned into a center of operations that facilitates the business
of drug-trafficking.” Álvarez Paz is serving his sentence on conditional liberty
but cannot leave the country without judicial authorization.
Guillermo Zuloaga, president of Globovisión, remains under criminal investigation
for allegedly disseminating false information and for offending the president.
At a public meeting in March 2010, Zuloaga accused Chávez of ordering
the shooting of demonstrators during the 2002 coup. In a June televised
speech, Chávez expressed outrage that Zuloaga was still free. A week later
police arrived at Zuloaga’s house to arrest him and his son for alleged irregularities
in their car sales business, an investigation their lawyers said had been
stalled for months. The two men, who were not at home, subsequently fled the
country.
In March 2011 Rubén González, secretary general of the Ferrominera Orinoco
Union, was sentenced to over seven years in prison for organizing and participating
in a strike with 2,000 workers in Guyana to protest a government-owned
company’s failure to comply with a collective bargaining agreement. González
was convicted for incitement to commit crimes, restricting freedom to work, and
violating the prohibition to enter security zones. Not only was the prosecution
of González criticized by the International Labour Organization and Venezuelan
unions, but it was also denounced by pro-government labor leaders in
Venezuela. Upon appeal, the Supreme Court ordered another judge to re-try
González. The case against González, who was released on conditional liberty,
remained pending at this writing.
Human Rights Defenders
Chávez’s government has aggressively sought to discredit human rights
defenders. In June Justice Minister Tarek El Aissami accused Humberto Prado of
the Venezuelan Observatory of Prisons of “destabilizing the prison system” and
having been “an accomplice in the massacre of inmates” in the past. After several
official media outlets discredited Prado, he received multiple death threats
and left Venezuela for two months.
In July 2010 the Supreme Court ruled that “obtaining financial resources, either
directly or indirectly, from foreign states with the intent of using them against
the Republic, [and] the interest of the people [could constitute] treason.” That
same month members of Chávez’s political party filed a criminal complaint with
the Attorney General’s Office, alleging that several local human rights NGOs
had committed treason by receiving funding from foreign donors. Over 30 NGOs
are currently under investigation, according to local media.
In December 2010 the National Assembly adopted two laws that, if applied to
human rights organizations, could severely undermine their ability to work
independently. The “Law for the Defense of Political Sovereignty and National
Self Determination” blocks NGOS that “defend political rights” or “monitor the
performance of public bodies” from receiving international funding. It also
imposes stiff fines on organizations that invite foreigners who express opinions
that offend institutions or undermine national sovereignty. The “Organic Law on
Social Control”—which regulates the work of organizations and individuals that
have an impact on “general or collective interests”—states that individuals
must follow the law’s socialist principles and values: those who violate the law
may face civil, administrative, or criminal sanctions.
Police Abuses
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela, where extrajudicial killings by security
agents remain a problem. The minister of the interior and justice has estimated
that police commit one of every five crimes. According to the most recent official
statistics, law enforcement agents allegedly killed 7,998 people between
January 2000 and the first third of 2009.
Impunity for human rights violations remains the norm. In 2010, prosecutors
charged individuals allegedly responsible for abuses in less than 3 percent of
cases investigated.
In April 2008 Chávez’s administration issued a decree that established a new
national police force and enacted measures to promote non-abusive policing
proposed by a commission comprised of government and NGO representatives.
At this writing there had been no independent evaluation of the new police
force’s performance.
Prison Conditions
Venezuelan prisons are among the most violent in Latin America. Weak security,
deteriorating infrastructure, overcrowding, insufficient and poorly trained
guards, and corruption allow armed gangs to effectively control prisons.
Hundreds of violent prison deaths occur every year. In June 2011, at least 25
people were killed and over 60 seriously injured, including prisoners and
National Guard members, after clashes between inmates in the El Rodeo prisons.
Labor Rights
The National Electoral Council (CNE), a public authority, has the power to organize
and certify all union elections, violating international standards that guarantee
workers the right to elect their representatives in full freedom, according to
conditions they determine. Established unions whose elections have not been
CNE-certified may not participate in collective bargaining.
For several years the government has promised to reform the relevant labor and
electoral laws to restrict state interference in union elections. Reforms that
explicitly state that union elections held without CNE participation are legally
valid were still pending before the National Assembly at this writing.
Key International Actors
Venezuela’s government has increasingly rejected international monitoring of
its human rights record. In September 2011 the Supreme Court president held
that Venezuela will “respect all international agreements only if … international
bodies respect [Venezuelan] sovereignty and … jurisdiction.”
In September 2011 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that
Venezuela must allow Leopoldo López, a prominent opposition leader, to run
for public office. López, a former Caracas district mayor, has been barred from
seeking elected office by the country’s comptroller general since 2008 due to
corruption allegations for which he has never been formally charged, prosecuted,
or convicted. The court has also found that Venezuela is failing to adopt
measures it ordered to protect individuals facing imminent risks to their lives or
physical integrity.
In October 2011 many governments expressed concern regarding the human
rights situation in Venezuela during the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal
Periodic Review of the country. Venezuela’s government accepted most recommendations
that states made, but rejected several key recommendations aimed
at protecting free speech, strengthening judicial independence, complying with
the Inter-American Court’s binding rulings, and supporting the independent
work of NGOs.
A=>?8E@JK8E
Armed conflict with the Taliban and other insurgents escalated in 2011, but
Afghanistan’s military allies made it clear they were intent on withdrawing
troops as soon as possible, with a deadline for Afghan national security forces
to take over from international forces by the end of 2014.
Rising civilian casualties, increased use of “night raids” by the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), and abuses by insurgents and governmentbacked
militias widened the impact of the war on ordinary Afghans. Stability
was further undermined by a political crisis following parliamentary elections
and panic caused by the near-collapse of the country’s largest private bank.
The Afghan government continues to give free rein to well-known warlords and
human rights abusers as well as corrupt politicians and businesspeople, further
eroding public support. And it has done far too little to address longstanding
torture and abuse in prisons and widespread violations of women’s rights.
In 2011 support grew within the government and with its international partners
for a negotiated peace agreement with the Taliban, given waning international
willingness to continue combat operations. However, moves toward a peace
agreement proved difficult with several false starts, the killing by the Taliban of
a key government negotiator, pressure from Pakistan for a key role in the
process, and lack of trust and differing priorities among the government and its
international partners.
The possibility of an agreement raised fears (and, reportedly, re-arming) among
non-Pashtun communities, who are concerned about an alliance between the
government and the Taliban. It also renewed grave concerns that human rights,
especially women’s rights, would be bargained away in the negotiation
process.
Flawed parliamentary elections in September 2010 led to fallout that, in 2011,
threatened to seriously destabilize the country. Following the certification of
election results by the Independent Election Commission (IEC), President
Hamid Karzai took the unprecedented step of creating a special court to review
the results. After street protests in Kabul and eight months during which parliament was immobilized by uncertainty, the special court disqualified 62 members
of parliament out of 249 seats. A compromise in September 2011 resulted
in nine members of parliament being removed.
The Armed Conflict
The armed conflict escalated in 2011. The Afghan NGO Security Office (ANSO)
reported that opposition attacks increased to 40 a day in the first six months of
the year, up 119 percent since 2009 and 42 percent since 2010. ANSO also
reported a 73 percent increase since 2010 in attacks against aid workers, which
included a fatal mob attack—sparked by the burning of the Koran by an
American pastor in Florida—against a United Nations office in the city of Mazare-
Sharif. Insurgent attacks reached previously secure areas including Parwan
and Bamiyan as the war spread to many new parts of the country.
Civilian casualties rose again, with the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) recording 1,462 conflict-related civilian deaths in the first six months
of the year, a 15 percent increase since 2010. Some 80 percent were attributed
to anti-government forces, most commonly caused by improvised explosive
devices (IEDs). Most IEDs that the ISAF encounters are victim-activated devices
detonated by pressure plates, effectively antipersonnel landmines, which the
1997 Mine Ban Treaty—to which Afghanistan is a party—prohibits.
The death of 368 civilians in May was the highest monthly toll since UNAMA
began tracking figures in 2007. The use of “night raids” by international
forces—nighttime snatch operations against suspected insurgents widely
despised by Afghans because of their infringement on family life—increased to
a reported 300 per month. While pro-government forces succeeded in reducing
the number of civilian deaths directly caused by their operations, more could
still be done to protect civilian lives.
The NATO mission aimed to train a 134,000-strong police force and 171,600 soldiers
by October 2011 to replace foreign forces. But the effort faces serious
challenges, including attrition, insurgent infiltration, and illiteracy and substance
abuse among recruits. In multiple incidents, trainees attacked and killed
their international mentors. One in seven Afghan soldiers, a total of 24,000, deserted in the first six months of the year, twice as many as in 2010.There are
concerns that the buildup of the armed forces is moving too fast for necessary
training and vetting, and that the size of the force will be financially unsustainable.
In an effort to combat insurgency the Afghan government continues to arm and
provide money, with little oversight, to militias in the north that have been
implicated in killings, rape, and forcible collection of illegal taxes. As part of its
exit strategy, the United States is backing “Afghan Local Police” (ALP), villagebased
defense forces trained and mentored primarily by US Special Forces,
which have been created since 2010 in parts of the country with limited police
and military presence. In its first year ALP units were implicated—with few consequences
for perpetrators—in killings, abductions, illegal raids, and beatings,
raising serious questions about government and international efforts to vet,
train, and hold these forces accountable.
A campaign of assassinations of public figures by the Taliban in the north and
the south seeks to destabilize the government. Prominent figures killed included
the mayor of Kandahar, Ghulam Haidar Hameedi; a northern police commander,
Gen. Daud Daud; and President Karzai’s half-brother, Ahmad Wali
Karzai, a key southern powerbroker. Shifting power structures have led to the
appointment of individuals implicated in serious human rights abuses, including
Matiullah Khan as Uruzgan police chief and Abdur Rezaq Razziq as
Kandahar police chief. The Taliban and other insurgent groups continue to target
schools, especially those for girls. The Taliban also use children, some as
young as eight, as suicide bombers.
Detainee Transfers
Torture and abuse of detainees in Afghan jails in 2011 led the ISAF to temporarily
suspend the transfer of prisoners in eight provinces. Abuses in these jails
documented by the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan include beatings,
application of electric shock, threats of sexual assault, stress positions,
removal of toenails, twisting and wrenching of genitals, and hanging detainees
by their wrists. Inadequate due process protections for detainees held within the parallel US-administered system and for those prosecuted under Afghan
law following US detention also continue to be a serious concern.
Violence and Discrimination against Women and Girls
Attacks and threats against women continue, frequently focusing on women in
public life, school girls, and the staff of girls’ schools. The incarceration of
women and girls for “moral crimes” such as running away from home—even
when doing so is not prohibited by statutory law—also continues to be a major
concern, with an estimated half of the approximately 700 women and girls in
jail and prison facing such charges.
A government-proposed regulation in 2011 would have prevented NGOs from
independently operating shelters for women and jeopardized the existence of
Afghanistan’s few existing shelters. Afghanistan at present has 14 shelters,
each able to house an average of around 20 to 25 women and their children.
This does not meet even a small fraction of the need in a country where an estimated
70 to 80 percent of marriages are forced and 87 percent of women face
at least one form of physical, sexual, or psychological violence or forced marriage
in their lifetimes. Although the regulation was significantly improved following
strong domestic and international criticism, it exemplifies the hostility
felt by many parts of Afghan society, including within the government, to
women’s autonomy and ability to protect themselves from abuse and forced
marriage.
Weak Rule of Law and Endemic Corruption
Afghanistan’s justice system remains weak and compromised, and a large proportion
of the population relies instead on traditional justice mechanisms, and
sometimes Taliban courts, for dispute resolution. Human rights abuses are
endemic within the traditional justice system, with many practices persisting
despite being outlawed. For example Baad, where a family gives a girl to another
family as compensation for a wrong, continues even though it is banned by
the 2009 Law on Elimination of Violence against Women.
Prison overcrowding is extreme and increasing at an alarming rate, with the
number of prisoners increasing from 600 in 2001 to 19,000 in 2011. Following
the escape of 476 prisoners from Sarposa Prison in Kandahar, the government
ordered the transfer of responsibility for prisons from the Ministry of Justice to
the Ministry of Interior, despite international concerns that doing so would
increase the likelihood of abusive interrogation and lead to gaps in training,
management, and oversight.
Key International Actors
For many international actors, particularly the US, a desire to bow out of what
increasingly appears to be an unwinnable war has entirely overshadowed concerns
about human rights. Activists’ demands that negotiations with the
Taliban not imperil human rights, especially women’s rights, have been met by
bland international assurances that any agreement would require the Taliban to
commit to respecting the constitution. Such promises are of little use when
many in Afghanistan, both government and insurgent supporters, interpret the
constitution as elevating religious principles over international human rights
obligations. The Taliban has in practice shown no willingness to respect international
human rights laws and norms.
Internationally supported efforts to promote human rights, civil society, education,
rule of law, governance, and access to health care are imperiled by declining
international aid. Aid budgets are expected to decline precipitously in 2012.
The looming date of 2014 for withdrawal of most international troops—which is
advancing against a backdrop of rising civilian casualties particularly from
insurgent attacks, increased use of “night raids,” abuses by armed groups, and
persistent human rights violations—begs the question of exactly what kind of
Afghanistan the troops will be leaving behind.
B8E>C8;<J?
The Awami League government failed to use its significant parliamentary mandate
in 2011 to push through policies to ensure strong protections of human
rights. Instead of prosecuting members of the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB),
who engage in extrajudicial killings, the home minister chose to deny that such
violations occur, even in cases where internal ministry investigations found evidence
of wrongdoing. The practice of disguising extrajudicial killings as “crossfire”
killings seeped from the RAB into other law enforcement institutions, particularly
the police. New allegations of torture, arbitrary arrest, and enforced
disappearances by police continue to emerge.
The government in 2011 tightened controls over civil society organizations by
prosecuting labor union leaders and delaying foreign grants to NGOs. At this
writing a bill proposing restrictions on media, which would prohibit the broadcast
of certain religious and political speech, was under consideration.
Violence against women including rape, dowry-related assaults, acid attacks,
and sexual harassment continue.
Torture, Extrajudicial Killings, and Other Abuses
Despite strong evidence that security forces were continuing to arbitrarily arrest
people, often torturing and then killing them in custody, the home minister
refused to acknowledge the need for accountability. Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina said her government had zero tolerance for extrajudicial killings, but
failed to properly investigate allegations and prosecute the perpetrators.
On May 21, 2011, William Gomes, a representative of the Asian Human Rights
Commission, was allegedly picked up by plainclothes RAB personnel and taken
to a place his abductors described as “headquarters,” where he was stripped
naked, had his hands and legs cuffed, was forced into stress position, and was
verbally abused and threatened with physical torture. He was interrogated
about his work documenting human rights violations.
In at least two cases, the Home Ministry ignored its own findings that RAB was
responsible for wrongful killings. According to Odhikar, a Dhaka-based human
rights organization, at least 1,600 people have been victims of extrajudicial
killings since 2004. Before the Awami League came to power, its leaders had
accused RAB of widespread extrajudicial killings; they now claim that all deaths
occur during armed exchanges with criminals.
The military and police continue to employ torture and cruel, inhuman, or
degrading punishment against suspects, violating both domestic and international
law. Many deaths in custody are never investigated. According to
Odhikar, at least 12 people died in custody due to police torture in 2011.
Trials for Bangladesh Rifles Abuses
Military tribunal hearings against members of the Bangladesh Rifles (BDR)
accused of participating in a February 2009 mutiny continued through 2011.
Military courts convicted nearly 1,000 soldiers in mass trials that did not meet
fair trial standards, among other things because the prosecution failed to produce
individualized evidence against each detainee. In a single trial that concluded
on June 27, 657 of 666 defendants were found guilty and sentenced to
prison terms ranging from four months to seven years.
Several thousand other soldiers remain in custody awaiting trial in military
courts, while another 847 have been charged under the Bangladesh Criminal
Code. Some of those charged under the criminal code face the death penalty
and many do not have lawyers.
The government did not investigate allegations of torture and possibly as many
as 70 custodial deaths during investigations after the mutiny. Many suspects
were denied access to legal counsel, particularly in the few months directly
after the mutiny.
Civil Society
The government increased surveillance of Odhikar and in particular, Adilur
Rahman Khan, Odhikar’s secretary advocate; threatening and harassing staff;
and delaying approvals of projects.
After Nobel Peace Laureate Mohmmad Yunus, founder of the Grameen Bank,
was removed from his position at the bank because he had exceeded the
mandatory retirement age, there were mysterious attacks on his supporters. In
May Sagirur Rashid Chowdhury, an accounts officer at the bank, was picked up
outside the office by plainclothes men. When he was released his body bore
signs of severe beatings. He said his abductors had asked him to issue a public
statement withdrawing support for Yunus. In September six women directors
and one former director of the board of directors of the Grameen Bank, all beneficiaries
of the microcredit system, suffered intimidation by police who came
and searched their rooms.
The government continued legal action aimed at intimidating the Bangladesh
Center for Worker Solidarity (BCWS), a trade union group. After revoking BCWS’s
registration one agency demanded that two union leaders, Kalpona Akhter and
Babul Akhter, both facing criminal charges, resign as a precondition to renewed
registration of the organization. BCWS has denied all allegations against it.
International Crimes Tribunal
To address fair trial concerns, the government in June 2011 amended the
International Crimes (Tribunals) Act of 1973 to include some basic due process
concerns, such as the right to the presumption of innocence and a fair and public
hearing. But the law, established to prosecute those responsible for atrocities
in the war of 1971, still fell short of international standards. The definitions
of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide did not conform to international
standards and the government failed to amend the law to ensure due
process. Defense lawyers, witnesses, and investigators said they had been
threatened.
The tribunal in 2011 began proceedings in its first case, that of Jamaat-e-Islami
leader Delawar Hossein Sayedee, accused of involvement in war crimes in the
1971 war.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Violence against women and girls and their discriminatory treatment under personal
status laws persists. New cases were reported in 2011 of beatings, isolation,
and other public humiliation of girls, all imposed following religious leaders’
issuance of fatwas on issues such as talking to a man, pre-marital relations,
having a child outside wedlock, and adultery. Women’s groups are particularly
concerned that such abuses continue even though the High Court division
of the Bangladesh Supreme Court ordered government authorities to take
preventive measures and prosecute perpetrators.
The Bangladesh parliament in 2011 enacted a law against domestic violence
and rules are currently being framed for its implementation. The government
also introduced a national policy to advance women’s rights.
Recruiters in the Middle East are increasingly turning to Bangladesh to hire
women domestic workers as other labor-sending countries tighten their regulations
or impose bans in response to widespread exploitation. The Bangladeshi
government has failed to introduce minimum protection measures for these
workers during training or recruitment or to ensure that embassies abroad are
adequately equipped with labor attaches and shelters to respond to cases of
abuse.
Protection of Indigenous People
Bangladeshi authorities did little to prevent intensifying violence and discrimination
against indigenous groups residing in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. There
were repeated clashes between ethnic and religious minority groups and “settlers”
who belong to the majority Bengali community. These clashes were in
part a result of government failure to implement its agreement with the indigenous
communities to protect their rights.
Key International Actors
The United States and United Kingdom expressed concern in 2011 about continuing
impunity for human rights violations by the RAB. Both countries have provided
assistance and training for RAB, though the UK ended such programs in
2011. The US recommended creation of an independent unit to investigate allegations
of torture, disappearances, and extrajudicial killings by the RAB.
Bangladesh and India signed trade and security agreements in 2011. Despite
Indian government commitments to order its border forces to act with restraint
against Bangladeshi nationals who cross into Indian territory, it failed to properly
investigate and prosecute those responsible for abuses, including killings.
BLID8
Burma’s human rights situation remained dire in 2011 despite some significant
moves by the government which formed in late March following November 2010
elections. Freedoms of expression, association, and assembly remain severely
curtailed. Although some media restrictions were relaxed, including increased
access to the internet and broader scope for journalists to cover formerly prohibited
subjects, official censorship constrains reporting on many important
national issues. In May and October the government released an estimated 316
political prisoners in amnesties, though many more remain behind bars.
Ethnic conflict escalated in 2011 as longstanding ceasefires with ethnic armed
groups broke down in northern Burma. The Burmese military continues to be
responsible for abuses against civilians in conflict areas, including forced
labor, extrajudicial killings, sexual violence, the use of “human shields,” and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. Despite support from 16 countries for a proposed
United Nations commission of inquiry into serious violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties to Burma’s internal armed conflicts, no
country took leadership at the UN to make it a reality. Foreign government officials
expressed their optimism about government reforms despite abundant
evidence of continuing systematic repression.
Signs of Change, But Unclear If They Will Result in
Lasting Change?
Burma’s national parliament and 14 regional and state assemblies convened in
late January 2011. The formal transfer of power from military rule to the new government
took place on March 30. Former generals hold most senior ministerial
portfolios, and serving generals are constitutionally guaranteed the posts of
ministers of defense, home affairs, and border affairs security. Thein Sein, a former
general and prime minister, was elected president. The speaker of the
lower house is also a former general, and many former military officers hold
important positions in the ruling military-backed Union Solidarity and
Development Party.
President Thein Sein’s inaugural speech in March was notably moderate and
constructive in tone and he promised more reforms than had any leader during
the preceding 23 years of military rule. The government’s stated priorities
include economic reform, improved education, ending corruption, and environment
protection. In August senior government officials called on exiled political
dissidents to return home without reprisal.
In the national parliament, members of parliament are permitted to raise issues
with two weeks prior notice and upon official approval. Some previously sensitive
issues have been discussed in the new parliament such as calls for a political
prisoner amnesty, citizenship for the long repressed Rohingya Muslim
minority, and education reform including the currently banned teaching of ethnic
languages. In addition, the government worked on a bill that, if not watered
down before being enacted, would liberalize citizens’ ability to form unions and
associations.
Reform bills have been tabled in the new parliament on forming trade unions,
permitting peaceful assembly, and amending of the political party registration
rules in ways that could open the way for participation by the long repressed
opposition party, the National League for Democracy. These changes are
encouraging on paper, but it remains to be seen how they will be implemented
and the level of social participation.
Media freedoms have been relaxed in some cases, with propaganda slogans
removed from magazines and newspapers; mention of Aung San Suu Kyi and
display of her photo is now permitted after a long ban. Neverthless, the censorship
board continues to ban stories deemed politically sensitive, an estimated
20 media workers are in prison, including a 21-year-old videographer who
received a 16-year sentence in September 2011 for taking video footage after a
bomb blast in central Rangoon.
On September 5 the government formed a new National Human Rights
Commission, composed of 15 former ambassadors, academics, and civil servants.
Since March Aung San Suu Kyi has been permitted much greater freedom to
travel and meet her supporters in the National League for Democracy, even though the party is technically illegal under the electoral laws. Suu Kyi travelled
to Naypyidaw in August to meet President Thein Sein; it was the first time she
has visited the capital city, which formally opened in 2005.
In November the NLD announced the party would formally re-register as a political
party, and expressed their intention to contest scheduled bi-elections in
2012, with Suu Kyi stating she would consider running as a candidate.
Ethnic Conflict and Displacement
Fighting between government forces and ethnic armed groups spread in Burma
during 2011, as many longstanding ceasefire agreements unraveled. In Karen
State, eastern Burma, a breakaway faction of the Democratic Karen Buddhist
Army (DKBA) took up arms following the November 2010 elections. Intensified
fighting along the border forced an estimated 20,000 refugees into Thailand.
Most DKBA soldiers refused to complete their transformation into Burmesearmy-
controlled Border Guard Force units and ended their 16-year ceasefire.
In March the Burmese army attacked the Shan State Army-North, breaking a
ceasefire reached in 1989, as the Shan army resisted pressure to demobilize
and form a government-controlled people’s militia. Fighting in northern Shan
State displaced an estimated 30,000 civilians.
In June fighting broke out between Burma’s second largest opposition armed
group, the Kachin Independence Army (KIA), and the Burmese army in northern
Burma near the Chinese border, ending a ceasefire signed in 1994. Local
women’s rights groups reported high levels of sexual violence with more than
35 women and girls raped in the first two months of the fighting alone. Over
30,000 civilians were internally displaced, fleeing Burmese army abuses such
as forced labor, extrajudicial killings, and indiscriminate fire, with several thousand
seeking refuge in China.
The Burmese military continues to violate international humanitarian law
through the use of anti-personnel landmines, extrajudicial killings, forced
labor, torture, beatings, and pillaging of property. Sexual violence against
women and girls remains a serious problem and perpetrators are rarely brought
to justice. The army continues to actively recruit and use child soldiers, even as the government cooperates with the International Labour Organization on
demobilizing child soldiers.
In January Burmese army units in Karen State forced convicts to work as porters
in ongoing operations in combat zones. This longstanding practice saw hundreds
of prisoners drawn from prisons and labor camps transported to frontline
units, and forced to carry military supplies and material to the frontline, often
being used as “human shields” to deter attacks or clear anti-personnel landmines.
Porters are often tortured, beaten, and subjected to ill-treatment during
their forced service.
Ethnic armed groups have also been implicated in serious abuses, such as
recruiting child soldiers, extrajudicial executions, and using antipersonnel landmines
around civilian areas.
Approximately 500,000 people are internally displaced due to conflict in eastern
Burma, with an additional 140,000 refugees in camps in Thailand. Thai
authorities in 2011 increased calls for repatriation of the refugees, a proposal
that Burmese officials welcomed, and European Union authorities gave greater
priority in refugee aid allocations to preparations for repatriation despite serious
security concerns about returning populations to active conflict zones.
Bangladeshi authorities increased threats to close Rohingya refugee camps and
drive the Rohingya minority back into Burma. Some 28,000 Rohingya refugees
live in official camps in Bangladesh and another 200,000 live in makeshift settlements
or mixed in with the local population in border areas.
Millions of Burmese migrant workers, refugees, and asylum seekers live in
Thailand, India, Bangladesh, Malaysia, and Singapore.
Key International Actors
In 2011, 16 countries publicly supported calls for a UN-led commission of
inquiry into violations of international human rights and humanitarian law in
Burma, but none was prepared to lead efforts to make this a reality. Most countries
adopted a “wait and see” approach to Burma, noting government pledges
of reform and citing Aung San Suu Kyi’s expression of cautious optimism that
there might be an “opportunity for change.”
In May Vijay Nambiar, the UN secretary-general’s special envoy on Burma, visited
Burma and expressed optimism over stated reform goals, but also noted
that political prisoner releases fell short of international expectations. In his
August report on the human rights situation, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
encouraged the government to turn its reform agenda into reality, but cautioned
that failure to release political prisoners, seek peace with ethnic groups, and
lift all restrictions on Aung San Suu Kyi would erode international confidence in
the process.
Tomas Ojea Quintana, the UN special rapporteur on Burma, visited Burma in
August and later stated that despite positive signs of change there remain
“serious and ongoing human rights concerns,” including “continuing allegations
of torture and ill-treatment during interrogation.” In his September report
to the General Assembly, Quintana said “many serious human rights issues
encompassing the broad range of civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights remain and they need to be addressed.”
The United States, EU, Australia, Canada, and Switzerland continue to impose
restrictive trade and financial sanctions on Burma, arguing that recent government
actions are insufficient to consider lifting the sanctions. In September and
November Derek Mitchell, the newly appointed US special representative and
policy coordinator on Burma, made official visits to the country. Mitchell
expressed cautious optimism that reforms could evolve into far-reaching
change, but urged the government to “take concrete actions in a timely fashion
to demonstrate its sincerity and genuine commitment to reform and national
reconciliation.” US Senator John McCain visited refugee communities along the
Thailand-Burma border and met government and opposition leaders inside
Burma in May and June.
In December US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited Burma, the first visit by
such a senior US official in 50 years—the result, President Barack Obama said,
of encouraging “flickers of change” in Burma.
During the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Summit in
November, it was announced that Burma would become chair of the regional
grouping in 2014 and host all of ASEAN’s meetings that year.
Burma’s neighbors—China, India, and Thailand—continue to invest in and trade
extensively with Burma, especially in the extractive and hydro-electric energy
industries. Burma continued to earn billions of US dollars in natural gas revenues,
little of which is directed into social services such as health care and
education.
China began construction on two energy pipelines from western Burma to
Yunnan, including a planned rail link. The building of a series of massive hydroelectric
dams on the Irrawaddy River in upper Burma sparked heated domestic
debate over its effects on the environment and the ethnic minority population,
some of whom have already been forcibly displaced by the project. In late
September President Thein Sein suspended work on the Myitsone dam, the
largest in a series of several planned dams. The move was received positively
inside Burma, but criticized by the Chinese government.
There are negative impacts of certain other Chinese investments, including agribusiness
ventures in northern Burma, which have involved land seizures by
Burmese authorities. India’s construction of a major infrastructure project for
the Kaladan River in western Burma continued in 2011, as did Indian investments
in mining projects. Sales of natural gas to Thailand still account for the
largest share of the Burmese government’s foreign exchange earnings, which
will increase markedly when the Chinese gas pipeline project is completed in
2013.
Russia, China, and North Korea continue to sell arms to Burma, despite frequently
voiced US concerns that North Korean sales could breach UN Security
Council resolutions on non-proliferation.
C8D9F;@8
Twenty years after the signing of the Paris Agreements in 1991, Cambodia’s
human rights record remains poor. The government of the ruling Cambodian
People’s Party (CPP) continues to use the judiciary, penal code, and threats of
arrest or legal action to restrict free speech, jail government critics, disperse
peaceful protests by workers and farmers, and silence opposition party members.
In 2011 it threatened one of the key accomplishments of the Paris
Agreements—the spectacular growth of NGOs, community-based civic groups,
informal associations, and grassroots networks—by proposing a law that would
give it wide discretion to shut down associations and NGOs.
In 2011 the government failed to take meaningful steps to ensure that the judiciary
was impartial and independent. The courts continued to operate as an
arm of the CPP, symbolized by the chief justice of the Supreme Court, Dith
Munthy, remaining a member of the party’s highest decision-making body.
Allegations that Prime Minister Hun Sen was pressuring Khmer Rouge tribunal
officials to drop cases dealt a further blow to the judiciary.
Opposition party leader Sam Rainsy remains in exile rather than face long
prison sentences as a result of politically motivated and manifestly unfair trials.
Noting that criticism of policy decisions is “one of the basic functions of leaders
of opposition parties,” Surya Subedi, the United Nations special rapporteur
on human rights in Cambodia, wrote that opposition leaders “should not be
subjected to criminal proceedings for discharging their responsibilities in a
peaceful manner.”
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Association
The Cambodian government in 2011 pressed forward with a vaguely worded
draft law on associations and NGOs that would require NGOs to register and
would enable the government to order the closure of organizations on arbitrary
grounds. Civil society groups fear that the law will be used to intimidate groups
and associations into silence. National and international NGOs mounted a campaign
opposing the draft law and the UN and key donors such as the United
States and European Union made their concerns known publicly and privately.
NGO fears were deepened on August 2 when the Ministry of Interior (MOI) sent
a letter to local NGO Sahmakum Teang Tnaut (STT) suspending its activities for
five months without specifying the legal grounds for the action. On August 13
the MOI publicly accused STT of “incitement” of persons to oppose development
projects. Authorities issued formal warning letters to two other groups,
Bridges Across Borders Cambodia (BABC) and NGO Forum on Cambodia, and
threatened a fourth group, the Housing Rights Task Force.
The government increasingly is using criminal defamation and incitement laws
to intimidate critics. NGOs identified at least 12 persons imprisoned under such
laws for peaceful expression of views since December 2010. They include Seng
Kunnakar, UN World Food Program employee; Sam Chankea, provincial field
coordinator of Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association
(ADHOC); Leang Sokchouen, staff member from Licadho; and Hang Chakra, editor
of the Khmer Machas Srok newspaper.
The government continues to use a 2009 law on demonstrations to deny
protest requests or compel smaller protests to use remotely placed, so-called
freedom parks for rallies. Many people have staged protests regardless, particularly
over land. In March the government denied permission for a public rally
organized by the Cambodian Women’s Movement Organization and women
workers in central Phnom Penh to celebrate the 100th anniversary of international
women’s day, even though the minister of women’s affairs was scheduled to
speak.
The government also continues to push for a trade union law that would significantly
weaken union rights by amending registration, collective bargaining, and
strike provisions. The draft provisions violate international labor rights standards.
Authorities have prevented at least three public showings in Phnom
Penh of a documentary about the 2004 assassination of labor leader Chea
Vichea. There has been no progress in his case or that of two other union leaders
killed in 2004.
Torture and Arbitrary Detention
Police and the military police routinely use torture to extract confessions that
are used to obtain convictions. Cambodia’s prisons continue to be overcrowded
and lack sufficient food, water, sanitation, and healthcare. A survey by Licadho
found that prisons are “bursting at the seams,” with reported occupancy at 179
percent in April 2011. Campaigners have demanded reforms to limit widespread
use of pre-trial detention and step up implementation of parole procedures and
non-custodial sentences.
Reportedly, Cambodian authorities are arbitrarily detaining more than 2,000
people—including the homeless; street children, some as young as 13; and
people with mental disabilities—in 11 government drug detention centers created
to “treat” and “rehabilitate” drug users. Detainees in such centers are subjected
to torture; violence, including electric shocks and whippings; forced
labor; and military-style drills. Vietnam continued to strongly influence
Cambodian drug treatment policies.
Women and girls—including transgender women—involved in sex work face
beatings, rape, sexual harassment, extortion, arbitrary arrest, and detention by
police and government-hired security guards. A 2008 law on trafficking and
sexual exploitation that criminalizes trafficking also makes “solicitation” illegal,
which has exposed sex workers to arbitrary detention and abuse. Homeless
children, families, beggars, people with mental disabilities, and other indigent
people gathered in police sweeps have been detained and mistreated in government
social affairs centers.
Land Confiscation and Forced Evictions
Illegal land confiscation and forced evictions by government officials and security
forces on behalf of powerful companies and individuals remains a pressing
issue. Land rights activists face violence and arrest, with more than 60 people
imprisoned or awaiting trial at this writing, for protesting forced evictions and
land grabbing.
In August more than 100 protesters from the Prey Lang forest reserve were
arrested in Phnom Penh, the capital, while distributing pamphlets advocating preservation of the forest. Ten people were injured in June in Kompong Speu
when a prosecutor led over 100 soldiers and police to forcibly take control of
disputed land awarded by courts to a Taiwanese company.
Since 2007 Phnom Penh municipal authorities, supported by military and
police, have sought to evict the approximately 4,200 families living in the
Boeung Kak Lake area.The land was transferred by the government in a 99-year
lease to a joint venture between a Chinese company and Shukaku, a
Cambodian company owned by Lao Meng Kim, a senator and senior CPP member.
Intimidation and violence by security forces have forced many families to
accept paltry compensation packages and resettle in remote sites on the city
outskirts.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
Prime Minister Hun Sen has continued to undermine the independence of the
Extraordinary Chambers of the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC), demanding that the
court not pursue cases 003 and 004 against five suspects submitted for indictment
by the international co-prosecutor. In April You Bunleng and Siegfried
Blunk, the co-investigating judges, closed their investigation into case 003
without having appeared to give the cases the rigorous scrutiny warranted. The
international co-prosecutor Andrew Cayley challenged this decision in early
May; a month later the co-prosecuting judges refused his request and threatened
him with contempt of court on specious grounds of violating judicial confidentiality.
The co-investigating judges also significantly narrowed their definition
of “victim,” thereby largely shutting down civil party applications to present
evidence in those cases. In October Human Rights Watch called for the coinvestigating
judges to resign for failing to perform their judicial duties. One
week later Blunk resigned, citing government interference in the court.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Asylum seekers, especially from Vietnam and China, remain at risk of forced
repatriation in violation of the Refugee Convention. On February 15 the government
ordered closed the refugee center in Phnom Penh sheltering Montagnard
refugees from Vietnam. Despite international urging, the government did not amend its sub-decree on determining refugee status, which fails to incorporate
the Refugee Convention’s definition of refugee and otherwise to fulfill
Cambodia’s obligations as a party to that convention.
Cambodian authorities still do not grant asylum to Khmer Krom—ethnic Khmer
from southern Vietnam—who fled Vietnam. Despite promises to treat them as
Cambodian citizens, authorities have failed to grant many of them citizenship
or residence rights.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Since 2008, 40,000 to 50,000 Cambodian women and girls have been recruited
as migrant domestic workers in Malaysia. Recruitment agents often forge fraudulent
identity documents for children, offer cash and food incentives as “loans”
that leave migrants deeply indebted, confine recruits in training centers in
Cambodia for months, and intimidate those who try to escape. Many recruitment
centers have inadequate food, water, and access to medical care. In 2011
three women recruits died while confined in the centers; authorities failed to
undertake thorough investigations into their deaths or hold anyone accountable.
A revised labor regulation in August fell far short of guaranteeing minimum
rights protections for Cambodian migrants going abroad. Drafted with little consultation
with migrants or civil society organizations, the regulation fails to
tackle forced confinement, debt bondage, and child recruitment. Cambodian
embassy officials in Kuala Lumpur and recruitment agencies frequently fail to
protect workers fleeing abuses and in some cases have returned workers to
abusive employers. In October Cambodia announced a ban on sending domestic
workers to Malaysia.
Key International Actors
Cambodia’s donors pledged US$2.8 billion in development aid for the 2009 to
2012 period. From 1998-2008, donors annually contributed approximately $600
million a year. Foreign assistance accounts for over 50 percent of Cambodia’s budget, yet donors have said little about Cambodia’s worsening human rights
environment.
A notable exception was a strong donor response to the draft NGO law, which at
this writing had still not been enacted.
The World Bank suspended provision of new loans after the Cambodian government
failed to address critical problems in a World Bank-supported land titling
program. The bank had for many years raised concerns about high-level corruption
but had rarely taken action.
Japan, Cambodia’s largest donor, said little about human rights, the draft NGO
law, or the Khmer Rouge tribunal debacle. China, another major investor and
donor, continued to increase aid to Cambodia without conditions, undermining
efforts by others to address human rights concerns.
C?@E8
Against a backdrop of rapid socio-economic change and modernization, China
continues to be an authoritarian one-party state that imposes sharp curbs on
freedom of expression, association, and religion; openly rejects judicial independence
and press freedom; and arbitrarily restricts and suppresses human
rights defenders and organizations, often through extra-judicial measures.
The government also censors the internet; maintains highly repressive policies
in ethnic minority areas such as Tibet, Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia; systematically
condones—with rare exceptions—abuses of power in the name of “social
stability”; and rejects domestic and international scrutiny of its human rights
record as attempts to destabilize and impose “Western values” on the country.
The security apparatus—hostile to liberalization and legal reform—seems to
have steadily increased its power since the 2008 Beijing Olympics. China’s
“social stability maintenance” expenses are now larger than its defense budget.
At the same time Chinese citizens are increasingly rights-conscious and challenging
the authorities over livelihood issues, land seizures, forced evictions,
abuses of power by corrupt cadres, discrimination, and economic inequalities.
Official and scholarly statistics estimate that 250-500 protests occur per day;
participants number from ten to tens of thousands. Internet users and reformoriented
media are aggressively pushing the boundaries of censorship, despite
the risks of doing so, by advocating for the rule of law and transparency, exposing
official wrong-doing, and calling for reforms.
Despite their precarious legal status and surveillance by the authorities, civil
society groups continue to try to expand their work, and increasingly engage
with international NGOs. A small but dedicated network of activists continues
to exposes abuses as part of the weiquan (“rights defense”)movement, despite
systematic repression ranging from police monitoring to detention, arrest,
enforced disappearance, and torture.
C?@E8
Against a backdrop of rapid socio-economic change and modernization, China
continues to be an authoritarian one-party state that imposes sharp curbs on
freedom of expression, association, and religion; openly rejects judicial independence
and press freedom; and arbitrarily restricts and suppresses human
rights defenders and organizations, often through extra-judicial measures.
The government also censors the internet; maintains highly repressive policies
in ethnic minority areas such as Tibet, Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia; systematically
condones—with rare exceptions—abuses of power in the name of “social
stability”; and rejects domestic and international scrutiny of its human rights
record as attempts to destabilize and impose “Western values” on the country.
The security apparatus—hostile to liberalization and legal reform—seems to
have steadily increased its power since the 2008 Beijing Olympics. China’s
“social stability maintenance” expenses are now larger than its defense budget.
At the same time Chinese citizens are increasingly rights-conscious and challenging
the authorities over livelihood issues, land seizures, forced evictions,
abuses of power by corrupt cadres, discrimination, and economic inequalities.
Official and scholarly statistics estimate that 250-500 protests occur per day;
participants number from ten to tens of thousands. Internet users and reformoriented
media are aggressively pushing the boundaries of censorship, despite
the risks of doing so, by advocating for the rule of law and transparency, exposing
official wrong-doing, and calling for reforms.
Despite their precarious legal status and surveillance by the authorities, civil
society groups continue to try to expand their work, and increasingly engage
with international NGOs. A small but dedicated network of activists continues
to exposes abuses as part of the weiquan (“rights defense”)movement, despite
systematic repression ranging from police monitoring to detention, arrest,
enforced disappearance, and torture.
Human Rights Defenders
In February 2011, unnerved by the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements and a
scheduled Chinese leadership transition in October 2012, the government
launched the largest crackdown on human rights lawyers, activists, and critics
in a decade. The authorities also strengthened internet and press censorship,
put the activities of many dissidents and critics under surveillance, restricted
their activities, and took the unprecedented step of rounding up over 30 of the
most outspoken critics and “disappearing” them for weeks.
The April 3 arrest of contemporary artist and outspoken government critic Ai
Weiwei, who was detained in an undisclosed location without access to a
lawyer, prompted an international outcry and contributed to his release on bail
on June 22. Tax authorities notified him on November 1 that he had to pay
US$2.4 million in tax arrears and fines for the company registered in his wife’s
name. Most of the other activists were also ultimately released, but forced to
adopt a much less vocal stance for fear of further reprisals. Several lawyers
detained in 2011, including Liu Shihui, described being interrogated, tortured,
threatened, and released only upon signing “confessions” and pledges not to
use Twitter, or talk to media, human rights groups, or foreign diplomats about
their detention.
The government continues to impose indefinite house arrest on its critics. Liu
Xia, the wife of imprisoned Nobel Peace Laureate Liu Xiaobo, has been missing
since December 2010 and is believed to be under house arrest to prevent her
from campaigning on her husband’s behalf. In February 2011 she said in a brief
online exchange that she and her family were like “hostages” and that she felt
“miserable.” She is allowed to visit Liu Xiaobo once a month, subject to agreement
from the prison authorities.
Chen Guangcheng, a blind legal activist who was released from prison in
September 2010, remained under house arrest in 2011. Security personnel
assaulted Chen and his wife in February after he released footage documenting
his family’s house arrest. Noted activist Hu Jia, who was released after completing
a three-and-a-half-year prison sentence in June, is also under house arrest
in Beijing, the capital, with his activist wife Zeng Jinyan and their daughter.
Grave concerns exist about the fate of lawyer Gao Zhisheng, who was “disappeared”
by the authorities in September 2009 and briefly surfaced in March
2010 detailing severe and continuous torture against him, before going missing
again that April.
On June 12, 2011, despite the steady deterioration in China’s human rights environment,
the Chinese government declared it had fulfilled “all tasks and targets”
of its National Human Rights Action Plans (2009-2010).
Legal Reforms
While legal awareness among citizens continues to grow, the government’s
overt hostility towards genuine judicial independence undercuts legal reform
and defeats efforts to limit the Chinese Communist Party’s authority over all
judicial institutions and mechanisms.
The police dominate the criminal justice system, which relies disproportionately
on defendants’ confessions. Weak courts and tight limits on the rights of the
defense mean that forced confessions under torture remain prevalent and miscarriages
of justice frequent. In August 2011, in an effort to reduce such cases
and improve the administration of justice, the government published new rules
to eliminate unlawfully obtained evidence and strengthened the procedural
rights of the defense in its draft revisions to the Criminal Procedure Law. It is
likely it will be adopted in March 2012.
However, the draft revisions also introduced an alarming provision that would
effectively legalize enforced disappearances by allowing police to secretly
detain suspects for up to six months at a location of their choice in “state security,
terrorism and major corruption cases.” The measure would put suspects at
great risk of torture while giving the government justification for the “disappearance”
of dissidents and activists in the future. Adoption of this measure—which
is hotly criticized in Chinese media by human rights lawyers, activists, and part
of the legal community—would significantly deviate from China’s previous
stance of gradual convergence with international norms on administering justice,
such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which
China signed in 1997 but has yet to ratify.
China continued in 2011 to lead the world in executions. The exact number
remains a state secret but is estimated to range from 5,000 to 8,000 a year.
Freedom of Expression
The government continued in 2011 to violate domestic and international legal
guarantees of freedom of press and expression by restricting bloggers, journalists,
and an estimated more than 500 million internet users. The government
requires internet search firms and state media to censor issues deemed officially
“sensitive,” and blocks access to foreign websites including Facebook,
Twitter, and YouTube. However, the rise of Chinese online social networks—in
particularly Sina’s Weibo, which has 200 million users—has created a new platform
for citizens to express opinions and to challenge official limitations on
freedom of speech despite intense scrutiny by China’s censors.
On January 30 official concern about Egyptian anti-government protests prompted
a ban on internet searches for “Egypt.” On February 20 internet rumors
about a Chinese “Jasmine Revolution” resulted in a ban on web searches for
“jasmine.” In August a cascade of internet criticism of the government’s
response to the July 23 Wenzhou train crash prompted the government to warn
of new penalties, including suspension of microblog access, against bloggers
who transmit “false or misleading information.”
Ambiguous “inciting subversion” and “revealing state secrets” laws contributed
to the imprisonment of at least 34 Chinese journalists. Those jailed
include Qi Chonghuai, originally sentenced to a four-year prison term in August
2008 for “extortion and blackmail” after exposing government corruption in his
home province of Shandong. His prison sentence was extended in June for
eight years when the same court found him guilty of fresh charges of extortion
and “embezzlement.”
Censorship restrictions continue to pose a threat to journalists whose reporting
oversteps official guidelines. In May Southern Metropolis Daily editor Song
Zhibiao was demoted as a reprisal for criticism of the government’s 2008
Sichuan earthquake recovery efforts. In June the government threatened to
blacklist journalists guilty of “distorted” reporting of food safety scandals. In July the China Economic Times disbanded its investigative unit, an apparent
response to official pressure against its outspoken reporting on official malfeasance.
Physical violence against journalists who report on “sensitive” topics remained
a problem in 2011. On June 1, plainclothes Beijing police assaulted and injured
two Beijing Times reporters who refused to delete photos they had taken at the
scene of a stabbing. The two officers were subsequently suspended. On
September 19 Li Xiang, a reporter with Henan province’s Luoyang Television,
was stabbed to death in what has been widely speculated was retaliation for
his exposé of a local food safety scandal. Police have arrested two suspects
and insist that Li’s murder was due to a robbery.
Police deliberately targeted foreign correspondents with physical violence at
the site of a rumored anti-government protest in Beijing on February 27. A video
journalist at the scene required medical treatment for severe bruising and possible
internal injuries after men who appeared to be plain clothes security officers
repeatedly punched and kicked him in the face. Uniformed police manhandled,
detained, and delayed more than a dozen other foreign media at the
scene.
Government and security bureaus prevented the biennial Beijing Queer Film
Festival from screening in Beijing’s Xicheng District. Parts of the festival were
held surreptitiously in community venues.
Freedom of Religion
The Chinese government limits religious practices to officially-approved temples,
monasteries, churches, and mosques despite a constitutional guarantee
of freedom of religion. Religious institutions must submit data—including financial
records, activities, and employee details—for periodic official audits. The
government also reviews seminary applications and religious publications, and
approves all religious personnel appointments. Protestant “house churches”
and other unregistered spiritual organizations are considered illegal and their
members subject to prosecution and fines. The Falun Gong and some other groups are deemed “evil cults” and members risk intimidation, harassment,
and arrest.
In April the government pressured the landlord of the Beijing Shouwang
Church, a “house church” with 1,000 congregants, to evict the church from its
location in a Beijing restaurant. Over the course of at least five Sundays in April
and May, the Shouwang congregation held its services in outdoor locations,
attracting police attention and resulting in the temporary detention of more
than 100 of its members.
The government continues to heavily restrict religious activities in the name of
security in ethnic minority areas. See sections below on Tibet and Xinjiang.
Health
On August 2 the government announced the closure of 583 battery-recycling
factories linked to widespread lead poisoning. However, it has failed to substantively
recognize and address abuses including denial of treatment for child
lead poisoning victims and harassment of parents seeking legal redress that
Human Rights Watch uncovered in a June 2011 report of lead poisoning in
Henan, Yunnan, Shaanxi, and Hunan.
People with HIV/AIDS continued to face discrimination. In September an HIVpositive
female burn victim was denied treatment at three hospitals in
Guangdong province due to stigma about her status. On September 8 an HIVpositive
school teacher launched a wrongful dismissal suit against the Guizhou
provincial government after it refused to hire him on April 3 due to his HIV status.
Disability Rights
The Chinese government is inadequately protecting the rights of people with
disabilities, despite its ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities (CRPD), and its forthcoming review by the treaty’s monitoring
body.
In September a group of part-time teachers with disabilities requested that
China’s Ministry of Education lift restrictions imposed by 20 cities and
provinces on full-time employment of teachers with physical disabilities. On
September 7, Henan officials freed 30 people with mental disabilities who had
been abducted and trafficked into slave labor conditions in illegal brick kiln
factories in the province. The discovery cast doubt on official efforts to end
such abuses in the wake of a similar scandal in Shaanxi in 2007.
On August 10 the Chinese government invited public comment on its longawaited
draft mental health law. Domestic legal experts warn the draft contains
potentially serious risks to the rights of persons with mental disabilities,
including involuntary institutionalization, forced treatment and deprivation
of legal capacity.
Migrant and Labor Rights
Lack of meaningful union representation remained an obstacle to systemic
improvement in workers’ wages and conditions in 2011.The government prohibits
independent labor unions, so the official All-China Federation of Trade
Unions (ACFTU) is the sole legal representative of China’s workers. A persistent
labor shortage linked to changing demographics—official statistics indicate
that nationwide job vacancies outpaced available workers by five percent in the
first three months of 2011—has led to occasional reports of rising wages and
improved benefits for some workers.
In January a government survey of migrant workers indicated that the hukou
(household registration) system continued to impose systemic discrimination
on migrants. Survey respondents blamed the hukou system, which the government
has repeatedly promised to abolish, for unfairly limiting their access to
housing, medical services, and education. In August 2011 the Beijing city government
ordered the closure of 24 illegal private schools that catered to
migrant children. Most found alternate schools, although an estimated 10 to 20
percent had to be separated from their parents and sent to their hukou-linked
rural hometowns due to their parents’ inability to secure suitable and affordable
schooling in Beijing.
Women’s Rights
Women’s reproductive rights remain severely curtailed in 2011 under China’s
family planning regulations. Administrative sanctions, fines, and forced abortions
continue to be imposed, if somewhat erratically, on rural women, including
when they become migrant laborers in urban or manufacturing areas, and
are increasingly extended to ethnic minority areas such as Tibet and Xinjiang.
These policies contribute to an increasing gender-imbalance (118.08 males for
every 100 females according to the 2010 census), which in turn fuels trafficking
and prostitution.
Sex workers, numbering four to ten million, remain a particularly vulnerable
segment of the population due to the government’s harsh policies and regular
mobilization campaigns to crack down on prostitution.
Although the government acknowledges that domestic violence, employment
discrimination, and discriminatory social attitudes remain acute and widespread
problems, it continues to stunt the development of independent
women’s rights groups and discourages public interest litigation. A new interpretation
of the country’s Marriage Law by the Supreme People’s Court in
August 2011 might further exacerbate the gender wealth gap by stating that
after divorce, marital property belongs solely to the person who took out a
mortgage and registered as the homeowner, which in most cases is the husband.
Illegal Adoptions and Child Trafficking
On August 16 the Chinese government announced it would tighten rules to prevent
illegal adoptions and child trafficking. Revised Registration Measures for
the Adoption of Children by Chinese Citizens were expected to be introduced by
the end of 2011 and would restrict the source of adoptions to orphanages,
rather than hospitals or other institutions. The planned rule change follows revelations
in May 2011 that members of a government family planning unit in
Hunan had kidnapped and trafficked at least 15 babies to couples in the United
States and Holland for US$3,000 each between 2002 and 2005. A subsequent
police investigation determined there had been no illegal trafficking, despite testimony from parents who insist their children were abducted and subsequently
trafficked overseas.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In 1997 the government decriminalized homosexual conduct and in 2001
ceased to classify homosexuality as a mental illness. However, police continue
to occasionally raid popular gay venues in what activists describe as deliberate
harassment. Same-sex relationships are not legally recognized, adoption rights
are denied to people in same-sex relationships, and there are no anti-discrimination
laws based on sexual orientation. On April 4, 2011, Shanghai police raided
Q Bar, a popular gay venue, alleging it was staging “pornographic shows.”
Police detained more than 60 people, including customers and bar staff, and
released them later that day. High-profile public support for overcoming social
and official prejudice against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
people is increasingly common. On July 5 a China Central Television talk show
host criticized homophobic online comments posted by a famous Chinese
actress and urged respect for the LGBT community.
Tibet
The situation in the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) and the neighboring
Tibetan autonomous areas of Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, and Yunnan province,
remained tense in 2011 following the massive crackdown on popular protests
that swept the plateau in 2008. Chinese security forces maintain a heavy presence
and the authorities continue to tightly restrict access and travel to Tibetan
areas, particularly for journalists and foreign visitors. Tibetans suspected of
being critical of political, religious, cultural, or economic state policies are targeted
on charges of “separatism.”
The government continues to build a “new socialist countryside” by relocating
and rehousing up to 80 percent of the TAR population, including all pastoralists
and nomads.
The Chinese government has given no indication it would accommodate the
aspirations of Tibetan people for greater autonomy, even within the narrow confines of the country’s autonomy law on ethnic minorities’ areas. It has rejected
holding negotiations with the new elected leader of the Tibetan community in
exile, Lobsang Sangay, and warned that it would designate the next Dalai Lama
itself.
In August Sichuan authorities imposed heavy prison sentences on three ethnic
Tibetan monks from the Kirti monastery for assisting another monk who selfimmolated
in protest in March. Ten more Tibetan monks and one nun had selfimmolated
through mid-November, all expressing their desperation over the
lack of religious freedom.
Xinjiang
The Urumqi riots of July 2009—the most deadly episode of ethnic unrest in
recent Chinese history—continued to cast a shadow over developments in the
Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region. The government has not accounted for
hundreds of persons detained after the riots, nor investigated the serious allegations
of torture and ill-treatment of detainees that have surfaced in testimonies
of refugees and relatives living outside China. The few publicized trials
of suspected rioters were marred by restrictions on legal representation, overt
politicization of the judiciary, and failure to publish notification of the trials and
to hold genuinely open trials as mandated by law.
Several violent incidents occurred in the region in 2011, though culpability
remains unclear. On July 12 the government said it had killed 14 Uighur attackers
who had overrun a police station in Hetian and were holding several
hostages. On July 30 and 31 a series of knife and bomb attacks took place in
Kashgar. In both cases the government blamed Islamist extremists. In mid-
August it launched a two-month “strike hard” campaign aimed at “destroying a
number of violent terrorist groups and ensuring the region’s stability.”
Under the guise of counterterrorism and anti-separatism efforts, the government
also maintains a pervasive system of ethnic discrimination against
Uighurs and other ethnic minorities, along with sharp curbs on religious and
cultural expression and politically motivated arrests.
The first national Work Conference on Xinjiang, held in 2010, endorsed economic
measures that may generate revenue but are likely to further marginalize ethnic
minorities. By the end of 2011, 80 percent of traditional neighborhoods in
the ancient Uighur city of Kashgar will have been razed. Many Uighur inhabitants
have been forcibly evicted and relocated to make way for a new city likely
to be dominated by the Han population.
Hong Kong
Hong Kong immigration authorities’ refusal in 2011 to grant entry to several visitors
critical of the Chinese government’s human rights record raised concerns
that the territory’s autonomy was being eroded. Concerns about police powers
also continue to grow following heavy restrictions imposed on students and
media during the visit of a Chinese state leader in September 2011.
The status of migrant domestic workers in Hong Kong was strengthened in
September when a court judged that rules excluding those workers from seeking
the right of abode were unconstitutional. However, the Hong Kong government
suggested it would appeal to Beijing for a review, further eroding the territory’s
judicial autonomy.
Key International Actors
Despite voting in favor of a Security Council resolution referring Libya to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in February, the Chinese government continued
to ignore or undermine international human rights norms and institutions.
In June, amidst outcry against the visit, China hosted Sudanese President Omar
al-Bashir, who is wanted by the ICC on charges of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, and genocide. In 2011 it significantly increased pressure on governments
in Central and Southeast Asia to forcibly return Uighur refugees, leading
to the refoulement of at least 20 people, and in October prevailed upon the
South African government to deny a visa to the Dalai Lama, who wished to
attend the birthday celebrations of Archbishop Desmond Tutu. That same
month it exercised a rare veto together with Russia at the Security Council to
help defeat a resolution condemning gross human rights abuses in Syria.
Although several dozen governments attended the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize ceremonies
honoring activist Liu Xiaobo, relatively few engaged in effective advocacy
on behalf of human rights in China during 2011. While the US emphasized
human rights issues during Hu Jintao’s January state visit to Washington, that
emphasis—and the attention of other governments—declined precipitously
once the Arab Spring began, making it easier for the Chinese government to
silence dissent. Few audibly continued their calls for the release of Liu and others.
Perhaps demonstrating the influence of growing popular objections to abusive
Chinese investment projects, the Burmese government made a surprise
announcement in September that it would suspend the primarily Chinesebacked
and highly controversial Myitsone Dam. In Zambia, Chinese-run mining
firms announced a sudden wage increase following the election of the opposition
Patriotic Front, which had campaigned in part on securing minimum wage
guarantees.
IE;@8
India, the world’s most populous democracy, continues to have a vibrant
media, an active civil society, a respected judiciary, and significant human
rights problems.
Custodial killings, police abuses including torture, and failure to implement
policies to protect vulnerable communities marred India’s record in 2011 as in
the past. Impunity for abuses committed by security forces also continued, particularly
in Jammu and Kashmir, the northeast, and areas facing Maoist insurgency.
New state controls over foreign funding of NGOs led to restrictions on
legitimate efforts to protect human rights. However, killings by the Border
Security Force at the Indo-Bangladesh border decreased dramatically.
Social unrest and protests deepened in resource-rich areas of central and eastern
India, where rapid economic growth has been accompanied by rapidly
growing inequality. Mining and infrastructure projects threaten widespread displacement
of forest-dwelling tribal communities. The government has yet to
enact comprehensive laws to protect, compensate, and resettle displaced people,
although a new land acquisition law has been drafted.
Although at this writing deaths from terror attacks had decreased significantly
from earlier years, there were serial bomb explosions in Mumbai on July 13,
2011. On September 7, 2011, a bomb explosion outside the Delhi High Court
killed 15 people. The perpetrators remain unidentified. Progress was made in
restraining the police from religious profiling of Muslims after bombings.
Despite repeated claims of progress by the government, there was no significant
improvement in access to health care and education.
An anti-corruption movement erupted into public view in August and brought
the government to a standstill, with widespread street protests and sit-ins
demanding legal reform and prosecutions. Activists working with two prominent
efforts to address poverty and accountability—India’s rural employment guarantee
scheme and right to information laws—came under increasing attack, facing
threats, beatings, and even death.
Accountability
India has yet to repeal laws or change policies that allow de jure and de facto
impunity for human rights violations, and has failed to prosecute even known
perpetrators of serious abuses.
The Indian defense establishment resisted attempts to repeal or revise the
Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA), a law that provides soldiers in “disturbed”
areas widespread police powers. In September Home Minister P.
Chidambaram said that there was an ongoing effort “to build a consensus within
the government” to address the problems with AFSPA, but no action has
been taken. Various government-appointed commissions have long called for
repeal.
Jammu and Kashmir
Thousands of Kashmiris have allegedly been forcibly disappeared during two
decades of conflict in the region, their whereabouts unknown. A police investigation
in 2011 by the Jammu and Kashmir State Human Rights Commission
(SHRC) found 2,730 bodies dumped into unmarked graves at 38 sites in north
Kashmir. At least 574 were identified as the bodies of local Kashmiris. The government
had previously said that the graves held unidentified militants, most
of them Pakistanis whose bodies had been handed over to village authorities
for burial. Many Kashmiris believe that some graves contain the bodies of victims
of enforced disappearances.
The government of Jammu and Kashmir has promised an investigation, but the
identification and prosecution of perpetrators will require the cooperation of
army and federal paramilitary forces. These forces in the past, have resisted fair
investigations and prosecutions, claiming immunity under the Armed Forces
Special Powers Act (AFSPA) and section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Maoist Insurgency
Maoist insurgents, also known as Naxalites, operate in 10 states and claim to
fight for the rights of the marginalized tribal, Dalit, and landless communities.
Governance has often been weak in regions where the Maoists have found popular
support, with economic-development-related corruption and illegal mining
severely limiting the revenue available for public services and infrastructure in
many of the areas. With government oversight and regulation of the mining sector
often wholly ineffective, irresponsible mine operators also pollute vital
water supplies, destroy farmland, wreck roads and other public infrastructure,
and create other serious health and environmental hazards.
Maoist forces continue to engage in killings and extortion, and target government
schools and hospitals for attacks and bombings. At this writing the
Naxalites had killed nearly 250 civilians as well as over 100 members of the
security forces in 2011. Government officials assert that security forces killed
more than 180 Naxalites between January and November 2011, though local
activists allege that some of these were civilians.
Despite court rulings, the government has yet to properly implement a directive
preventing security forces from using schools during counterinsurgency operations.
Human rights activists seeking accountability for abuses such as arbitrary
arrests, torture and other ill-treatment, and killings have come under
threat from both Naxalite forces and security agencies.
In a welcome decision, the Indian Supreme Court ruled unconstitutional the use
of Special Police Officers—inadequately trained militias—by the Chhattisgarh
government in operations against the Maoists. SPOs have been implicated in
many abuses.
Killings by Border Security Forces at Bangladesh Border
After a human rights report found that Border Security Force (BSF) personnel
operating at the Bangladesh border had indiscriminately shot and killed over
900 Indians and Bangladeshis in the last 10 years, the government in March
2011 ordered restraint and issued BSF personnel rubber bullets. Killings
dropped dramatically after the change in policy, but still continue. In their effort
to contain illegal activities including the smuggling of cattle and narcotics,
some BSF soldiers have continued to harass and beat border residents. No BSF
soldier has been prosecuted for any of the killings or other abuses.
Right to Information Law
Citizens and activists have increasingly been using the Right to Information Act
(RTI), passed in 2005, to expose official corruption and promote transparency
and accountability. In a sad testament to the rampant corruption that exists in
India, at least 12 RTI activists have been killed and several others assaulted
over the past two years, according to the Asian Centre for Human Rights.
Bombings and Other Attacks
Three bomb explosions in Mumbai on July 13, 2011, killed 29 people and
injured 130. On September 7, 2011, a bomb explosion outside the Delhi High
Court claimed 15 lives and injured 50. Security and intelligence agencies did
not conduct mass arrests of suspects based on little evidence, which in the
past resulted in the torture of suspects for information and confessions.
However, the failure of the authorities to identify alleged perpetrators led to
widespread criticism of the agencies and calls for police reform and training.
Death Penalty
Capital punishment remains on the statute books. Although India has not carried
out an execution since 2004, many death sentence appeals have been
allowed to languish, some for decades. In 2011 the president rejected clemency
petitions in five cases, including on behalf of three persons convicted for
assassinating Rajiv Gandhi, the former prime minister.
Women’s Rights
2011 census data revealed a further decline in India’s female/male sex ratio,
pointing to the failure of laws aimed at reducing sex-selective abortions. A
series of “honor” killings and rapes rocked the country in 2011 but there has
been no effective action to prevent and effectively prosecute such violence. The
government has yet to improve health services for survivors of sexual assault
but has taken steps to provide compensation for rape survivors. At this writing
the government was revising its medico-legal protocols for evidence collection
from rape survivors, excluding the degrading and inhuman “finger” test that classifies many rape survivors as “habituated to sexual intercourse,” causing
humiliation to victims and at times affecting the outcome of criminal trials.
Despite considerable progress on maternal health, vast disparities remain and
a spate of maternal deaths continues to be reported from Madhya Pradesh and
Rajasthan states.
Palliative Care
Hundreds of thousands of persons with incurable diseases suffer unnecessarily
from severe pain because the Indian government has failed to ensure access to
safe, effective, and inexpensive pain drugs. In an important step forward, the
Medical Council of India recognized palliative care as a medical specialty. But
more than half of government-supported regional cancer centers still do not
offer palliative care or pain management, even though more than 70 percent of
their patients need it, resulting in severe but unnecessary suffering for tens of
thousands.
International Role
As a member of the United Nations Security Council and the Human Rights
Council (HRC), India in 2011 had an opportunity to align its foreign policy with
the ideals it claims to stand for, but officials remained reluctant to voice concerns
over even egregious human rights violations in countries such as Sri
Lanka, Burma, Syria, and Sudan.
Despite concerns over the safety of its nationals in Libya, India did support UN
Security Council resolution 1970 on Libya calling for protection of the Libyan
people. India later abstained on resolution 1973, which authorized military
force to protect civilians. During its rotating presidency at the Security Council,
India was able to secure a consensus among sharply divided member states on
Syria, leading to the first Council statement condemning the violence. India did
not support the HRC resolution creating an international commission of inquiry
on Syria in August, or the Syria text that called for a draft resolution that
demanded an end to the violence and cooperation with the UN inquiry proposed
by France and the United Kingdom at the Security Council in October.
While India claims it has privately pressed the Sri Lankan and Burmese governments
on accountability for conflict-related abuses, it has not supported an
independent international investigation into abuses in either country.
Key International Actors
Indian domestic human rights issues, terming such efforts interference in its
internal affairs. The United States and European Union privately urge India to
improve its human rights record, but say little in public. In July 2011, however,
the European Parliament adopted a resolution concerning India’s retention of
the death penalty.
India’s policy in the subcontinent continues to be heavily influenced by strategic
and economic concerns about China’s growing influence in countries like
Burma, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
IE;FE<J@8
Over the past 13 years Indonesia has made great strides in becoming a stable,
democratic country with a strong civil society and independent media.
However, serious human rights concerns remain. While senior officials pay lip
service to protecting human rights, they seem unwilling to take the steps necessary
to ensure compliance by the security forces with international human
rights and punishment for those responsible for abuses.
In 2011 religious violence surged, particularly against Christians and
Ahmadiyah, a group that considers itself Muslim but that some Muslims consider
heretical. Violence continued to rack Papua and West Papua provinces,
with few effective police investigations to hold perpetrators accountable.
Freedom of Expression
While Indonesia today has a vibrant media, authorities continue to invoke
harsh laws criminalizing those who raise controversial issues, chilling peaceful
expression. Indonesia has imprisoned more than 100 activists from the
Moluccas and Papua for peacefully voicing political views, holding demonstrations,
and raising separatist flags.
The new Law on State Intelligence passed in October, contains vague and overbroad
language that could facilitate abuse. For instance, anyone who even negligently
leaks confidential information about intelligence activities is subject to
imprisonment, raising fears the law could be used to prosecute journalists,
political opposition members, or human rights activists who publish information
in the public interest about government abuses.
Indonesia’s criminal libel, slander, and “insult” laws prohibit deliberately
“insulting” public officials and intentionally publicizing statements that harm
another person’s reputation. In July the Supreme Court overturned an acquittal
of Prita Mulyasari, who complained of poor medical treatment over emails to
friends, and convicted her on internet defamation charges. Despite acquitting
Mulyasari in a related civil case, the Supreme Court sentenced her to a sixmonth
suspended sentence.
Military Reform and Impunity
Impunity for members of Indonesia’s security forces remains a serious concern,
with no civilian jurisdiction over soldiers who commit serious human rights
abuses. Military tribunals are held rarely, lack transparency, and the charges
frequently fail to reflect the seriousness of the abuses committed.
In January a military tribunal in Jayapura, Papua, convicted three soldiers from
Battalion 753 and sentenced them to between eight to twelve months imprisonment.
Despite video evidence of six soldiers involved in brutally torturing two
Papuans, the tribunal tried only three of the six soldiers, and on lesser military
discipline charges rather than for torture. The soldiers have not been discharged.
In August the Jayapura military tribunal convicted three soldiers from the same
battalion regarding an incident in which soldiers shot and killed Reverend
Kinderman Gire on the suspicion he was a separatist. Again, the tribunal only
convicted them of “disobeying orders,” and sentenced them to six, seven, and
fifteen months in prison respectively.
In June President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono appointed his brother-in-law Lt.-
Gen. Pramono Edhie Wibowo as the new army chief. Pramono commanded a
Kopassus team that was deployed to East Timor in 1999. During that time, in
the run up to a referendum on independence, pro-Indonesia militias or security
forces killed more than 1,000 civilians.
The armed forces retain extensive business holdings despite a law requiring the
government to shut down these businesses or take them over by October 2009.
Freedom of Religion
In 2011 incidents of religious violence got more deadly and more frequent, as
Islamist militants mobilized mobs to attack religious minorities with impunity;
short prison terms for a handful of offenders did nothing to dissuade mob violence.
The government failed to overturn several decrees that discriminate
between religions and foster intolerance. According to the Setara Institute, which monitors religious freedom, there were 216 cases of religious attacks in
2010 and 184 cases in the first nine months of 2011.
In February more than 1,500 Islamist militants attacked a house in Cikeusik,
western Java, killing three and seriously wounding five Ahmadiyah men. The
incident was caught on film. Public outrage generated around the case prompted
the authorities to act quickly in investigating the attack. In July the Serang
district court sentenced 12 men to between three and six months imprisonment
for disturbing public order, incitement, and assault, but not for manslaughter.
Police and prosecutors failed to present a fully compelling case against the 12
defendants. Police did not conduct thorough investigations, and prosecutors
did not call key eyewitnesses to the attack. The prosecutors also sought
reduced sentences, contending that the Ahmadiyah provoked the attack.
In August the Serang court convicted one of the Ahmadiyah members seriously
injured in the attack, Deden Sudjana, for assault and disobeying police orders,
sentencing him to six months imprisonment.
In 2011 Islamist mobs attacked Ahmadiyah communities and mosques in various
places, including West Java, Banten, and South Sulawesi. In August in
Makassar, South Sulawesi, a lawyer who represented the Ahmadiyah was
assaulted.
In April an Islamist suicide bomber attacked a police mosque in Cirebon, West
Java, killing himself and injuring at least 28 people. The bomber had previously
been involved in violent protests over a blasphemy trial and an anti-Ahmadiyah
attack in Cirebon in 2010. In September another Islamist suicide bomber
attacked a church in Solo, Central Java, killing himself and wounding 14 churchgoers.
In February Islamists also attacked three churches in Temanggung, Central Java,
after the district court convicted controversial preacher Antonius Bawareng of
blasphemy. The court sentenced him to five years in jail, the maximum penalty
for blasphemy, but Islamists called for him to be executed. The Semarang district
court later convicted eight of the Islamists involved in the attack, sentencing
them to between five months and one year imprisonment.
Minority congregations reported that local government officials arbitrarily
refused to issue them permits required, under a 2006 decree, for building
houses of worship. Those who attempted to worship without a permit faced
harassment and violence.
In January the Supreme Court ordered the reopening of a Presbyterian church
known locally as GKI Yasmin, overturning the Bogor administration’s ruling
which had revoked the church’s building permit. However, Bogor Mayor Diani
Budiarto refused to comply. Government ministers offered the church “relocation.”
In October an Islamist organization began to harass churchgoers who
were holding Sunday services on a sidewalk outside the sealed church.
Senior government officials—including Minister of Religious Affairs
Suryadharma Ali, Home Affairs Minister Gamawan Fauzi, and Minister of Human
Rights and Law Patrialis Akbar—continued to justify restrictions on religious
freedom in the name of public order.
Papua/West Papua
In August internal military documents—mainly from Kopassus, Indonesia’s special
forces—were made public, exposing how the Indonesian military monitors
peaceful activists, politicians, and religious clergy in Papua. The documents
show the deep military paranoia in Papua that conflates peaceful political
expression with criminal activity. Several of those named in the documents as
targets have faced arrest, imprisonment, harassment, or other forms of violence.
Access to Papua in 2011 remained tightly controlled. Few foreign journalists and
human rights researchers can visit independently without close monitoring of
their activities. Since October the vice president’s office has set up the Unit to
Accelerate Development in Papua and West Papua, which is focused on economic
development. Its board members include some veterans of peace talk
over Aceh.
In July over 500 representatives of Papuan civil society met at a peace conference
in Jayapura, organized by a government-funded peace-initiative network.
Violence in Papua worsened in July and August with several unrelated attacks
in which more than two dozen people were killed or seriously injured.
Seventeen people were killed in Puncak Jaya in July when two rival political
camps clashed in an election dispute.
In Puncak Jaya there has been a long insurgency between the Free Papua
Organization (OPM) and the Indonesian military. The OPM commander in
Puncak Jaya claimed responsibility for several attacks against the Indonesian
military in July, including one in which an Indonesian military chopper was shot
down, injuring seven soldiers and killing one.
In October security forces used excessive violence when arresting more than
300 Papuans involved in a three-day Papuan Congress. At least three men were
killed and more than 90 were injured. Six Papuan leaders were charged with
treason.
Aceh
Aceh’s provincial government continued to implement a repressive Shariainspired
dress code with disregard for women’s agency and a law on “seclusion,”
banning association between unmarried men and women in “isolated”
places. The provisions are enforced primarily through a Sharia police force that
harasses, intimidates, and arbitrarily arrests and detains children, women, and
men. Local community groups also forcibly enter homes and assault and publicly
humiliate couples they suspect are committing “seclusion.” Police make
little effort to deter and prosecute such assaults. In April two couples were publicly
caned under the “seclusion” law.
At this writing it was unclear what effect a decision by Partai Aceh, the main
party of the former rebels, to boycott December 2011 local elections would
have. The party claimed that Jakarta-sponsored election regulations were not in
line with the 2005 Helsinki peace agreement that ended the decades-long conflict
in Aceh.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Migrant domestic workers continue to face abuses both during the recruitment
process in Indonesia and while employed abroad. The government has failed to
stop local recruiters from charging prospective migrants exorbitant fees that
leave them highly indebted, which contributes to situations of forced labor
abroad.
In May Indonesia and Malaysia signed a new Memorandum of Understanding
on Indonesian domestic workers traveling to Malaysia. The revised agreement
includes some improved benefits for migrant domestic workers, allowing them
to keep their passports instead of having to surrender them to their employers,
and guarantees them a weekly day off. But the agreement does not set a minimum
wage, as Indonesia had wanted, and perpetuates recruitment fee structures
that leave workers indebted.
In June the Saudi government executed Ruyati binti Sapubi, a 54-year-old
domestic worker from western Java. She was convicted of murdering her Saudi
employer, who she claimed was abusing her.
Child Domestic Workers
Hundreds of thousands of girls in Indonesia are employed as domestic workers.
Many work long hours, with no day off, and are forbidden from leaving the
house where they work. In the worst cases, girls are physically, psychologically,
and sexually abused by their employers. Despite supporting the landmark
International Labour Organization convention in June that extended key labor
protections to domestic workers, Indonesia’s domestic laws exclude all domestic
workers from the basic labor rights afforded to formal workers. A domestic
workers law that was introduced in 2010 has since stalled in parliament.
Key International Actors
Indonesia assumed the chairmanship of the Association of Southeast Asia
Nations (ASEAN) in 2011, holding an ASEAN summit in Jakarta in May and Bali
in November. In May Indonesia committed to “uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights” when it was elected by the
General Assembly to become a member of the United Nations Human Rights
Council, but left unaddressed which concrete steps would be taken to fulfill
pledges on key issues like freedom of religion and expression, and accountability
of abuses by military forces.
The United States continued to provide extensive military assistance to
Indonesia. In July US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Indonesia Foreign
Minister Marty Natalegawa co-chaired the second annual Joint Commission of
the US-Indonesia Comprehensive Partnership. In November President Barack
Obama visited Indonesia as part of the ASEAN Summit in Bali.
The US also continued to reengage with Kopassus, and provide significant support
to Detachment 88, Indonesia’s counterterrorism police. Similarly, the
Australian government continued cooperation with both units.
In July the European Parliament issued a resolution on human rights in
Indonesia, condemning recent attacks on Christians and Ahmadiyah properties.
M8C8PJ@8
Despite government promises of reform and relaxation of controls in some
areas, human rights in Malaysia remain tightly constrained.
On September 15, 2011, Prime Minister Seri Najib Tun Razak announced the
government’s intention to repeal the Internal Security Act (ISA), revoke three
emergency proclamations that underpin many of Malaysia’s most repressive
laws, and review the Restricted Residence Act. In the same speech, however, he
committed to introducing two new laws under article 149 (“Special Laws
against Subversion”) of the Federal Constitution, which allows parliament to
enact sweeping security provisions that deny basic freedoms.
On July 9, police in Kuala Lumpur, the capital, broke up a peaceful rally organized
by Bersih 2.0, the Coalition for Clean and Fair Elections, arresting nearly
1,700 demonstrators demanding electoral reforms. Police fired teargas at close
range at protesters in an underground tunnel, injuring several, and into the
Tung Shin and Chinese Maternity hospital courtyard.
Detention without Charge or Trial
The ISA permits indefinite detention without charge or trial of any person that
officials deem a threat to national security or public order. While use of the ISA
has declined over the years, government figures released in connection with
Najib’s speech said 37 people were in ISA detention. The government continues
to detain thousands under the Emergency (Public Order and Crime Prevention)
Ordinance (EO) and the Dangerous Drugs (Special Preventive Measures) Act.
However, in October parliament repealed the Restricted Residence Act and 125
people previously confined under the act were released.
The United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention singled out the EO for
criticism in its February 2011 report, noting the law permits indefinite detention
“without the need to sustain evidence or probe penal responsibility.”
Malaysian authorities arbitrarily applied the ISA in October 2010 against immigration
officers allegedly involved in human trafficking despite the availability of Malaysia’s Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act, but abruptly released all but one
of the accused in August 2011. The last detainee was released on November 10.
On July 2, police used the EO to detain six leaders of the Parti Sosialis Malaysia
(PSM) on the bogus charge that they were responsible for planning the Bersih
rally and, until their July 29 release, subjected them to lengthy interrogations,
isolation, and blindfolding.
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Association
Rights of expression, peaceful public assembly, and association —guaranteed
in Malaysia’s Constitution—continued to be violated in 2011. On May 21 Bersih
announced a July 9 “Walk for Democracy” to call for reform of the electoral system.
In mid-June the police announced that no police permit, required by section
27 of the Police Act, would be issued for the march. Inspector-General of
Police Tan Sri Ismail Omar threatened that “stern action” would be taken
against anyone involved in an “illegal rally.”
Throughout June police mounted repeated shows of force, arresting activists
distributing leaflets, wearing yellow Bersih shirts, or coordinating gatherings to
promote the rally. On June 29 a plainclothes police unit without a warrant raided
Bersih’s secretariat, confiscating Bersih materials and detaining some of
those present for questioning; on July 1 the Home Ministry declared Bersih an
illegal organization under the Societies Act. On the day before the march police
obtained a court order prohibiting 91 rally leaders from entering downtown
Kuala Lumpur. Although the thousands who eluded police blockades were
peaceful and well-disciplined, but police broke up the rally using baton
charges, chemically infused water cannons, and teargas barrages. Nearly 1,700
people were arrested. Journalists and ordinary citizens released photographs
and video documenting much of the abuse.
On June 25, police stopped a bus carrying PSM activists to a planned rally,
detaining 30 on suspicion of “preparing to wage war against the king.” They
were released from pre-trial detention on July 2, but police immediately redetained
six of their leaders under the EO. All 30 were charged under the
Societies Act and a section of the ISA outlawing possession of subversive documents.
On September 19 the attorney general released them and on October 10, a court affirmed the release as a “discharge not amounting to an acquittal,”
which makes them subject to future prosecution. On October 28, six PSM leaders
were granted the same discharge
Media Censorship
With nearly all mainstream newspapers and television and radio stations controlled
by media companies close to political parties in the government coalition,
social media usage has expanded rapidly, joining popular online news
portals as alternative sources for news and information. The internet remains
uncensored but the Home Ministry in 2011 again refused the Malaysiakini website’s
application to publish a daily print version, saying that a publishing permit
is “a privilege,” not a right. Malaysiakini has challenged the Home
Ministry’s decision; at this writing the High Court was set to review the challenge
on December 8, 2011. Online news portals critical of the government also
came under repeated cyber-attacks by unknown assailants at key news junctures,
such as the Sarawak elections in April and the Bersih rally in July.
In his September speech, Prime Minister Najib promised to amend the Printing
Presses and Publications Act but only to end the mandatory annual licensing
requirement. The minister of home affairs would retain broad authority, without
judicial review, to refuse permission to publish anything he determines “likely
to be prejudicial to public order, morality, security … or national interest.”
On July 14 the High Court in Kuala Lumpur upheld the ban on seven books by
Malaysiakini cartoonist Zunar and threatened revocation of printers’ licenses if
they produced his books.
In September the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission
ordered broadcasters not to show a non-partisan voter education public service
announcement created by well-known film producer and musician Peter Teo.
Trial of Anwar Ibrahim
The trial of Anwar Ibrahim, parliamentary leader of Malaysia’s political opposition,
has raised serious human rights concerns. Anwar is charged with “sodomy” for allegedly engaging in consensual homosexual conduct on June
26, 2008.
Court rulings have denied Anwar’s legal team access to the prosecution’s witness
list, critical forensic samples needed for independent examination, and
medical examiners’ notes from hospital examinations of the accuser, in violation
of international fair trial standards.
In a September 23, 2011, affidavit to the court, Prime Minister Najib affirmed he
had met Saiful, the accuser, two days before the alleged incident of sodomy.
Migrant Workers, Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and
Trafficking Victims
The Malaysian Immigration Act 1959/1963 fails to differentiate between
refugees, asylum seekers, trafficking victims, and undocumented migrants. The
government is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and lacks domestic
refugee law and asylum procedures.
On July 25 Australia and Malaysia signed a “refugee swap” deal that would
have permitted Australia to send 800 asylum seekers to Malaysia for refugee
screening in exchange for receiving 4,000 refugees registered by the Office of
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. On August 31 the Australia High Court
struck down the agreement after determining that it did not legally bind
Malaysia to protect the rights of transferred asylum seekers.
Malaysia has made little progress in ensuring respect for human rights in its
anti-human trafficking efforts. The Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act conflates the
crimes of trafficking and smuggling, thereby reducing protections for both
groups of victims, and making it less likely that trafficking victims will cooperate
in identifying and prosecuting perpetrators.
A 2011 program to register all migrant workers lacked transparency regarding
which migrant workers will be permitted to remain in Malaysia.
Some 300,000 migrant domestic workers are excluded from key protections
under Malaysia’s Employment Act, including limits on working hours, a mandatory day off per week, annual and sick leave, maternity protections, and fair termination
of contracts. NGOs and embassies of labor-sending countries handle
hundreds of complaints involving unpaid wages, physical and sexual abuse,
and forced confinement. Indonesia and Malaysia signed a Memorandum of
Understanding that guarantees a weekly day off and allows domestic workers
to keep their passports rather than surrendering them to employers. However,
the agreement perpetuates recruitment fee structures that leave workers deeply
indebted. Malaysia is one of only nine states that did not vote for International
Labour Organization Convention No. 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers.
Drug Policy
The National Anti-Drugs Agency maintains over 20 Puspens (drug retention centers)
where detainees are held a minimum of two years. Although rates of
relapse to drug use have been estimated in Malaysia at 70 to 90 percent, people
who are re-arrested as users face long prison terms and caning.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The government refuses to consider repeal of article 377B of the penal code,
which criminalizes consensual “carnal intercourse against the order of nature,”
or to replace article 377C on non-consensual sexual acts with a modern, gender-
neutral law on rape.
In July the high court refused to permit Aleesha Farhnan Abdul Aziz, a transgender
individual, to change her registered name and gender from male to female.
In April Malaysian authorities sent 66 allegedly effeminate schoolboys to camp
“to guide them back to the right path.”
On November 3 police banned Seksualiti Merdeka, a festival held annually
since 2008 to celebrate the rights of people of diverse sexual orientations and
gender identities, as a threat to public order.
Freedom of Religion
Malaysia’s constitution affirms the country is a secular state that protects religious
freedom for all, but treatment of religious minorities continues to raise
concerns. On August 3, 2011, Selangor state religious authorities raided a
Methodist church where an annual charity dinner was being held. The authorities
alleged that there had been unlawful proselytization of the Muslims present
at the event but presented no evidence to support their allegations.
Nazri Aziz, de facto law minister, said that since Islam allows underage marriage,
the government “can’t legislate against it.”
Key International Actors
The United States continues to exercise significant influence in Malaysia
through expanding links in trade and investment, military-to-military ties, and
cooperation in regional security. When Deputy Prime Minister Tan Sri Muhyiddin
Yassim visited Washington in January 2011, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
emphasized the “positive track” of the growing bilateral relationship and suggested
the possibility of a US presidential visit. She also urged a fair trial for
Anwar Ibrahim.
Malaysia continued to have close ties with China and agreed to a request by
Beijing in August to summarily return to China a group of ethnic Uighurs in
Malaysia despite the likelihood that they would face torture and ill-treatment.
Eleven were sent back while five remain in Malaysia.
Malaysia continued to lead efforts to stymie the efforts of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Committee on Migrant Workers to negotiate a legally
binding instrument for the protection and promotion of the rights of migrant
workers.
N<G8C
Nepal’s political and peace processes remained stalled in 2011, resulting in
instability; weak governance; and no progress on accountability for the killings,
enforced disappearances of civilians, and other abuses that accompanied
Nepal’s civil war between 1996 and 2006.
Prime Minister Jhala Nath Khanal resigned on August 14, citing his failure to
resolve the constitutional stalemate and his desire to make way for a consensus
government. On August 28, days before the expiration of the mandate of
the Constituent Assembly, Baburam Bhattarai, a senior member of the United
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M), was elected prime minister. He
became the second member of his party to head the government since the
2008 elections.
In a last minute deal political parties extended the term of the Constituent
Assembly by three months until the end of November. Next steps were not clear
at this writing: the Supreme Court ruled in November 2010 that the Constituent
Assembly mandate could not be extended by more than six months absent
exceptional circumstances and the declaration of a state of emergency,
although the court has subsequently backed away from this position.
On November 1 the parties announced an all-party agreement laying out the
terms for integration of Maoist combatants into the Nepal Army and for the
rehabilitation of others, an issue that has long been at the core of the stalled
peace process.
The government has made little progress in realizing economic, social, and cultural
rights, and reports of lawlessness persist in many parts of the country,
especially in the Terai and eastern hills. Armed groups and ethnic organizations
have been involved in killings and extortion with impunity.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The government and political parties have consistently failed to muster the will
to establish accountability for even egregious wartime human rights violations.
Not one person has been held criminally responsible for such crimes. In many
cases, those accused of violations actively receive protection from security
forces or political parties.
In August Prime Minister Bhattarai announced that the government was willing
to offer amnesties for rebels and government soldiers alike. A formal agreement
between the UCPN-M and its coalition partner, the United Democratic Madhesi
Front (UDMF), called for the withdrawal of criminal cases against individuals
affiliated with the Maoist party and with the Madhesi, Janajati, Tharuhat, Dalit,
and Pichadabarga movements. It also declared a general amnesty that could
include serious crimes and human rights abuses. The Maoist party’s
“Commitments and Proposal Concerning Government, the Peace Process, and
the Constitution,” made public on August 25, contained a near identical provision.
Although the prime minister subsequently backed away slightly, saying he
only intended to withdraw “politically motivated” cases, he failed to state what
exactly that means or who would make the determination. The November 1 allparty
agreement is vague on what will happen to wartime cases.
Previous governments have expressed a similar desire to withdraw such cases.
Then-Home Minister Krishna Bahadur Mahara indicated in May 2011 that he
was inclined to withdraw the case against UCPN-M Central Committee member
Agni Sapkota. Sapkota, a Constituent Assembly member, was a cabinet minister
from May to August 2011 even while he was under investigation for the April
2005 abduction and killing of Arjun Lama.
On October 2, in what is feared will be the first in a string of amnesties, the cabinet
pardoned Balkrishna Dhungel, a Constituent Assembly member whose conviction
for the 1998 murder of Ujjwal Kumar Shrestha was confirmed by the
Supreme Court in January 2011. The UCPN-M protested the conviction, claiming
that the case was counter to the spirit of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the interim constitution.
Draft bills to establish a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a
Disappearances Commission have been tabled in parliament but await debate
by the Statute Committee. While the bills are a step towards ensuring justice for
war victims, several of their provisions are inconsistent with international law.
Integration of Maoist Combatants
For more than four years, 19,602 former Maoist combatants have been held in
United Nations-monitored cantonment sites. In January 2010 the process began
to discharge a further 2,973 individuals recruited as children and 1,035 recruited
near the end of the civil war.
A UN monitoring mechanism was formed in 2011 to scrutinize UCPN-M compliance
with the terms of a 2009 action plan it agreed to with government and UN
representatives, including a ban on recruitment of children.
A special committee established in mid-2009 to address the integration of
Maoist combatants into the security forces was unable to function for several
months due to the continuous absence of UCPN-M representatives from meetings.
The November 1, 2011, agreement calls for the establishment of a new
special committee to oversee the integration of 6,500 Maoist combatants into
the Nepal Army in non-combat roles. The remaining combatants, who have chosen
not to join the Nepal Army, will receive compensation and rehabilitation.
Dalits
Dalits (“untouchables”) suffer from endemic discrimination, especially in the
economic, social, and cultural spheres. In September 2009 Nepal announced
its support for UN-endorsed guidelines on the elimination of caste discrimination.
However, Nepal has yet to implement recommendations made in 2004 by
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, including the adoption
of legislation enabling the National Dalit Commission—a state agency—to
fulfill its mandate.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The Nepal government has made significant strides towards ensuring equality
for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex people (LGBTI) in recent
years. Yet progress remains tenuous. The draft fundamental rights chapter of
the constitution includes LGBTI rights but draft civil and criminal codes are
extremely regressive and threaten to negate constitutional guarantees.
According to local NGOs, Nepal has 280 discriminatory legal provisions affecting
the LGBTI community.
The government’s promise that the 2011 national census would allow citizens to
identify themselves as male, female, or transgender was a largely superficial
gesture. Social prejudice and stigma, including on the part of census takers,
resulted in gross undercounting of third gender individuals. And although individuals
could identify as third gender on the census household survey, they
could not do so on other census forms and almost no data was gathered on
such individuals.
Another challenge is the ability of third gender individuals to have identity documents
that accurately reflect their self-identified gender. Despite a 2007
Supreme Court ruling requiring that they be supplied with such documents—
allowing them full access to state protections and benefits—only a handful of
people have received updated cards. In September the prime minister and
home minister promised to start issuing third gender citizenship identity cards,
but no progress had been made at this writing.
Women’s Rights
While women have constitutional guarantees of equality and strong representation
in the Constituent Assembly, women and girls continue to face widespread
discrimination. Trafficking, domestic violence, dowry-related violence, rape,
and sexual assault remain serious problems. Sexual violence cases are often
settled in private and, even when complaints are filed, police rarely carry out
effective investigations. Women in the Constituent Assembly have formed a
caucus to push for greater focus on women’s concerns.
The millions of Nepalis who have migrated to the Middle East in recent years
risk abuse at every step of the migration process, including imposed debts and
deception during recruitment, labor exploitation and abuse abroad, and limited
access to redress. The number of women migrating as domestic workers has
significantly increased since a ban on such migration was lifted in 2010, and
they face especially high risks given their exclusion from labor laws abroad. The
government failed to comply with a requirement under the Foreign Employment Act of 2008 to place labor attaches in destination countries with a significant
number of Nepali workers.
Tibetan Refugees
Tibetan refugees have faced increasing harassment as Nepali authorities grow
increasingly responsive to pressures from China. Arrests, criminalization of
entry, arbitrary detention, and forced return of refugees to China were reported
in 2011. In March the government banned Tibetans from celebrating during the
Tibetan New Year. In August police arrested and briefly detained Thiley Lama,
the Dalai Lama’s envoy to Nepal, and his assistant after they publicly asked for
the inclusion of refugee rights in Nepal’s new constitution and the issuance of
identity cards for Tibetans in Nepal.
In September Nepali authorities arrested more than 20 Tibetan refugees,
including several children, for illegal entry. Pursuant to a “gentleman’s agreement”
between the government and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), authorities are to immediately hand over such refugees to UNHCR
which is then to facilitate their onward progress to India. But these refugees
were transferred to UNHCR only after a court intervened more than a week later.
Disability Rights
Children with disabilities in Nepal face diverse and imposing barriers to obtaining
a basic education. Schools are physically inaccessible, teachers are inadequately
trained, and some children are denied admission to neighborhood
schools. Some also experience abuse and neglect at home and in their communities.
These barriers result in low attendance and high dropout rates for children
with disabilities compared with their non-disabled peers.􀀀
Key International Actors
After years of heavy dependency on India, Nepal increasingly has attempted to
strengthen ties with China, its other powerful neighbor. In March China provided
military aid of about US$19.8 million, and helped build military medical
facilities.
India played a positive role in bringing about the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement that ended Nepal’s 10-year civil war but was subsequently accused
of meddling in Nepal’s selection of a prime minister, adding to political instability.
The Indian government maintained an overt distance from Nepal’s political
turmoil in 2011.
Nepal is dependent on aid and relies heavily on its traditional donors, such as
Japan, the United States, the United Kingdom, India, and the European Union.
The US and UK provide significant military assistance to Nepal, though US aid
continues to be restricted on human rights grounds. Resumption of full US military
aid is contingent on Nepali military cooperation with civilian investigation
and prosecution of security force abuses. The UCPN-M remains on the US list of
banned terrorist organizations.
Nepal continues to be a major troop contributor to UN peacekeeping missions.
The UN announced in July that the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) field office in Kathmandu, the capital, would close as of
December 2011. The status of the office has been in dispute since 2009, with
the government whittling down its terms of reference and extending the UN incountry
presence on only a six monthly basis. At this writing it remained
unclear whether OHCHR will pull out or seek a timed phase-out contingent on
the government meeting required benchmarks.
NFIK? KFI<8
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea) systematically violates
the basic rights of its population. Although it has signed four key international
human rights treaties and includes rights protections in its constitution, it
allows no organized political opposition, free media, functioning civil society,
or religious freedom. Arbitrary arrest, detention, lack of due process, and torture
and ill-treatment of detainees remain serious and endemic problems.
North Korea also practices collective punishment for various anti-state offenses,
for which it enslaves hundreds of thousands of citizens in prison camps,
including children. The government periodically publicly executes citizens for
stealing state property, hoarding food, and other “anti-socialist” crimes.
During 2011 observers increasingly concluded that Kim Jong-Il, North Korean
leader and chairman of the National Defense Commission (NDC), has selected
his youngest son, Kim Jong-un, to continue the Kim family’s dynastic rule of the
country. In February 2011 Jong-un was appointed vice-chairman of NDC, reinforcing
his earlier appointments in September 2010 to the Central Committee of
the Ruling Workers Party and the Central Military Commission.
The new International Coalition to Stop Crimes against Humanity in North Korea
(ICNK), comprised of 41 international NGOs, was launched in September to
advocate for the establishment of a United Nations commission of inquiry on
North Korea.
Food Shortages and Famine
In March 2011 a joint UN survey estimated that over six million vulnerable persons
in North Korea urgently required international food assistance to avoid
famine. As estimated food shortages reached more than one million metric
tons, the World Food Programme called it the worst famine in a decade, and
South Korea-based NGOs and media with informants inside North Korea reported
hunger-related deaths. Causes include dismal harvests resulting from floods
and an extremely harsh winter; economic mismanagement of a monetary devaluation
scheme in November 2009 that wiped out many peoples’ savings and
heavily damaged informal food markets; and the government’s blatantly discriminatory food policies that favor the military, government officials, and other
loyal groups. North Korea’s two largest food donors, the United States and
South Korea, refused to provide food aid until North Korea apologizes for the
sinking of the South Korean warship Cheonan and shelling of Yeonpyeong
Island in 2010.
Torture and Inhumane Treatment
Testimony from escaped North Koreans indicates that individuals arrested on
criminal charges often face torture by officials aiming to enforce obedience and
extract bribes and information. Common forms of torture include sleep deprivation,
beatings with iron rods or sticks, kicking and slapping, and enforced sitting
or standing for hours. Detainees are subject to so-called pigeon torture, in
which they are forced to cross their arms behind their back, are handcuffed,
hung in the air tied to a pole, and beaten with a club. Guards also rape female
detainees. One study done in 2010 found that 60 percent of refugee respondents
who had been incarcerated witnessed a death due to beating or torture.
Executions
North Korea’s Criminal Code stipulates that the death penalty can be applied
only for a small set of crimes, but these include vaguely defined offenses such
as “crimes against the state” and “crimes against the people” that can be and
are applied broadly. In addition, scholars and NGOs monitoring conditions in
North Korea say that a December 2007 amendment to the penal code extended
the death penalty to many more crimes, including non-violent offenses such as
fraud and smuggling.
Forced Labor Camps
Testimony from escapees has established that persons accused of political
offenses are usually sent to forced labor camps, known as gwalliso, operated
by the National Security Agency.
The government practices collective punishment, sending to forced labor
camps not only the offender but also his or her parents, spouse, children, and even grandchildren. These camps are notorious for abysmal living conditions
and abuse, including severe food shortages, little or no medical care, lack of
proper housing and clothes, mistreatment and torture by guards, and executions.
Forced labor at the gwalliso often involves difficult physical labor such as
mining, logging, and agricultural work, all done with rudimentary tools in dangerous
and harsh conditions. Death rates in these camps are reportedly
extremely high.
North Korea has never acknowledged that these camps exist, but US and South
Korean officials estimate some 200,000 people may be imprisoned in them,
including in camp No. 14 in Kaechun, No. 15 in Yodok, No. 16 in Hwasung, No.
22 in Hoeryung, and No. 25 in Chungjin.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
North Korea criminalizes leaving the country without state permission. Those
who leave—most often by crossing the country’s northern border into China—
face harsh punishment upon repatriation, including interrogation, torture, and
punishments depend on North Korean authorities’ assessments of what the
returnee did while in China. Those suspected of simple commerce or other
money-making schemes are usually sent to work in forced labor brigades.
Others suspected of religious or political activities, including contact with
South Koreans, are given lengthier terms in horrendous detention facilities or
forced labor camps with chronic food and medicine shortages, harsh working
conditions, and mistreatment by guards.
Hundreds of thousands of North Koreans have fled since the 1990s, and some
have settled in China’s Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture. Beijing categorically
labels North Koreans in China “illegal” economic migrants and routinely
repatriates them, despite its obligation to offer protection to refugees under
both customary international law and the Refugee Convention of 1951 and its
1967 protocol, to which China is a state party.
Many North Korean women in China live with local men in de facto marriages.
Even if they have lived there for years, they are not entitled to legal residence
and face the risk of arrest and repatriation. Some North Korean women and girls are trafficked into marriage or prostitution in China. Many children of such
unrecognized marriages are forced to live without a legal identity or access to
elementary education because their parents fear that if they register the children
the mother will be identified by Chinese authorities and forcibly repatriated
to North Korea.
Government-Controlled Judiciary
North Korea’s judiciary is neither transparent nor independent. All personnel
involved in the judiciary—including judges, prosecutors, lawyers, court clerks,
and jury members—are appointed and tightly controlled by the ruling Workers’
Party of Korea. In cases designated as political crimes, suspects are not even
sent through a nominal judicial process; after interrogation they are either executed
or sent to a forced labor camp, often with their entire families.
Labor Rights
North Korea is one of the few nations in the world that is not a member of the
International Labour Organization (ILO). The ruling Korean Workers’ Party firmly
controls the only authorized trade union organization, the General Federation of
Trade Unions of Korea. South Korean companies employ some 44,000 North
Korean workers in the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC), where the law governing
working conditions falls far short of international standards on freedom of
association, the right to collective bargaining, and protection from gender discrimination
and sexual harassment.
Freedom of Association, Information, and Movement
The government uses fear—generated mainly by threats of forced labor and
public executions—to prevent dissent, and imposes harsh restrictions on freedom
of information, association, assembly, and travel.
North Korea operates a vast network of informants to monitor and punish persons
for subversive behavior. All media and publications are state-controlled,
and unauthorized access to non-state radio or TV broadcasts is severely punished.
The government periodically investigates the “political background” of its citizens to assess their loyalty to the ruling party, and forces Pyongyang residents
who fail such assessments to leave the capital.
Key International Actors
The North Korean government continues to refuse to recognize the mandate of
the UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the DPRK or
extend any modicum of cooperation to him. However, the government did permit
a visit in May 2011 by Robert King, US special envoy for North Korean
human rights issues, and during the visit released US citizen Eddie Jun after
holding him for more than a year.
In March the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution against North Korea for
the sixth straight year, citing member states’ serious concerns about continuing
reports of “systemic, widespread, and grave violations of civil, political, economic,
social, and cultural rights” and concerns about “all-pervasive and
severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought, conscience, religion, opinion
and expression, peaceful assembly and association.” In the same month, the
UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted a resolution against North Korea for
the fourth year in a row for abysmal, systematic human rights violations. Both
resolutions condemned North Korea’s failure to state whether it accepted any of
the 167 recommendations that it took under advisement from a HRC Universal
Periodic Review session of its record in December 2009.
In July 2010 the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling for the
European Union to sponsor a resolution to establish a UN commission of
inquiry to assess past and present human rights violations in North Korea.
The six-party talks on denuclearizing the Korean peninsula—involving North
and South Korea, China, Japan, Russia, and the US—remain stalled. The US and
South Korea demanded that North Korea halt its uranium-enrichment program,
freeze nuclear and missile tests, and allow international nuclear inspectors
back into the country before talks could start, while North Korea insisted there
be no pre-conditions to resumption of talks.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Il visited Chinese leaders in Beijing in May 2011
to discuss economic cooperation and security issues and met with Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev in August.
North Korea’s relations with Japan remain frosty, largely due to a dispute over
abductees. North Korea admitted in 2002 that its agents had abducted 13
Japanese citizens in the 1970s and 1980s for use in training North Korean spies.
It returned five to Japan, but claimed the other eight had died. Japan insists the
number of abductees is higher. No legal means of immigration between the two
countries exists; of the nearly 100,000 migrants from Japan to North Korea
between 1959 and 1984, only 200 have been able to return to Japan by escaping
clandestinely.
P8B@JK8E
Pakistan had a disastrous year in 2011, with increasing attacks on civilians by
militant groups, skyrocketing food and fuel prices, and the assumption of neartotal
control of foreign and security policy by a military that operated with complete
impunity. Religious minorities faced unprecedented insecurity and persecution.
Freedom of belief and expression came under severe threat as Islamist
militant groups murdered Punjab Governor Salmaan Taseer and Federal
Minorities’ Minister Shahbaz Bhatti over their public support for amending the
country’s often abused blasphemy laws. Pakistan’s elected government notably
failed to provide protection to those threatened by extremists, or to hold the
extremists accountable.
In August and September the southern province of Sindh experienced massive
flooding for the second year running, displacing some 700,000 people.
Pakistan’s largest city, Karachi, suffered from hundreds of targeted killings perpetrated
by armed groups who are patronized by political parties.
Security continued to deteriorate in 2011, with militant and sectarian groups
carrying out suicide bombings and targeted killings across the country. The
Taliban and affiliated groups targeted civilians and public spaces, including
marketplaces and religious processions. Ongoing rights concerns include the
breakdown of law enforcement in the face of terror attacks, a dramatic increase
in killings across the southwestern province of Balochistan, continuing torture
and ill-treatment of criminal suspects, and unresolved enforced disappearances
of terrorism suspects and opponents of the military. Abuses by Pakistani
police, including extrajudicial killings, also continued to be reported throughout
the country in 2011.
Relations between Pakistan and the United States—Pakistan’s most significant
ally and its largest donor of civilian and military aid—deteriorated markedly in
2011, fueled by a diplomatic crisis over a CIA contractor killing two men at a
Lahore traffic junction and the US’s killing of al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden.
Balochistan
Conditions markedly deteriorated in the mineral-rich province of Balochistan.
Human Rights Watch documented continued “disappearances” and an upsurge
in killings of suspected Baloch militants and opposition activists by the military,
intelligence agencies, and the paramilitary Frontier Corps. Baloch nationalists
and other militant groups also stepped up attacks on non-Baloch civilians,
teachers, and education facilities, as well as against security forces in the
province. Pakistan’s military continued to publicly resist government reconciliation
efforts and attempts to locate ethnic Baloch who had been subject to “disappearances.”
The government appeared powerless to rein in the military’s
abuses.
Human Rights Watch recorded the killing of at least 200 Baloch nationalist
activists during the year, as well as dozens of new cases of disappearances.
The dead included Abdul Ghaffar Lango, a prominent Baloch nationalist
activist, and Hanif Baloch, an activist with the Baloch Students Organisation
(Azad).
Since the beginning of 2011, human rights activists and academics critical of
the military have also been killed in the province. They include Siddique Eido, a
coordinator for the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission of Pakistan
(HRCP); Saba Dashtiyari, a professor at the University of Balochistan and an
acclaimed Baloch writer and poet; and Baloch politician Abdul Salam. Three
employees of the BGP Oil and Gas company were killed and four injured in an
attack in eastern Balochistan in September; the Baloch Liberation Army, a militant
group, claimed responsibility for the attack.
Religious Minorities
Across Pakistan attacks took place against Shia and other vulnerable groups.
Sunni militant groups, such as the supposedly banned Lashkar-e Jhangvi, operated
with impunity even in areas where state authority is well established, such
as the Punjab province and Karachi. On September 19, 26 members of the
Hazara community travelling by bus to Iran to visit Shia holy sites were forced
to disembark by gunmen near the town of Mastung and shot dead. Three others
were killed as they took the injured to a hospital. Lashkar-e-Jhangvi claimed responsibility. On October 4, gunmen riding on motorbikes stopped a bus carrying
mostly Hazara Shia Muslims who were headed to work at a vegetable market
on the outskirts of Quetta, Balochistan’s capital. The attackers forced the
passengers off the bus, made them stand in a row, and opened fire, killing 13
and wounding 6.
In 2001 Aasia Bibi, a Christian from Punjab province, became the first woman in
the country’s history to be sentenced to death for blasphemy. She continued to
languish in prison after the Lahore High Court, in a controversial move, prevented
President Asif Ali Zardari from granting her a pardon in November 2010.
High-ranking officials of the ruling Pakistan People’s Party (PPP) called for her
release and the amendment of section 295(C) of Pakistan’s penal code, otherwise
known as the blasphemy law. However, the government succumbed to
pressure from extremist groups and dropped the proposed amendment.
Ruling party legislator Sherry Rehman, who tabled the amendment, received
multiple public death threats in the face of government inaction. On January 4
Punjab Governor Salmaan Taseer was assassinated by a member of his security
detail for supporting the amendment. On March 2 Federal Minister for
Minorities Shahbaz Bhatti was shot dead for the same reason. While Taseer’s
alleged assassin was arrested on the spot, the government reacted to the murders
by seeking to appease extremists rather than hold them accountable.
Emboldened extremists exploited the government’s passivity by intimidating
minorities further, and the year saw an upsurge of blasphemy cases and allegations.
Minorities, Muslims, children, and persons with mental disabilities have
all been charged under the law.
Members of the Ahmadi religious community also continue to be a major target
for blasphemy prosecutions and are subjected to specific anti-Ahmadi laws
across Pakistan. They also face increasing social discrimination, as illustrated
by the October expulsion of 10 students from a school in Hafizabad, Punjab
province, for being Ahmadi. In November, four Hindus, three of them doctors,
were killed in an attack by religious extremists in the town of Shikarpur in
Sindh province, sending shockwaves through the minority community.
Women’s Rights
Mistreatment of women and girls—including rape, domestic violence, and
forced marriage—remains a serious problem. Public intimidation of, and threats
to, women and girls by religious extremists increased in major cities in 2011.
In a disappointing development, the government failed to honor its commitment
to reintroduce the Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) Bill,
unanimously passed by the National Assembly in August 2009, but lapsed after
the Senate failed to pass it within three months as required under Pakistan’s
constitution. In April the Supreme Court upheld a 2005 ruling by the provincial
Lahore High Court acquitting five of the six men accused of the gang-rape of
Mukhtar Mai, a villager from Muzaffargarh district in Punjab province, who was
raped on the orders of a village council in 2002.
Militant Attacks and Counterterrorism
Suicide bombings, armed attacks, and killings by the Taliban, al Qaeda, and
their affiliates targeted nearly every sector of Pakistani society, including journalists
and religious minorities, resulting in hundreds of deaths. The US and
others alleged that the military and Inter Services Intelligence (ISI) were complicit
with these networks, claims the military and government adamantly
denied.
Security forces routinely violate basic rights in the course of counterterrorism
operations. Suspects are frequently detained without charge or are convicted
without a fair trial. Thousands of suspected members of al Qaeda, the Taliban,
and other armed groups—who were rounded up in a country-wide crackdown
that began in 2009 in Swat and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas—
remain in illegal military detention; few have been prosecuted or produced
before the courts. The army continues to deny lawyers, relatives, independent
monitors, and humanitarian agency staff access to persons detained in the
course of military operations.
Aerial drone strikes by the US on suspected members of al Qaeda and the
Taliban in northern Pakistan continued in 2011, with some 70 strikes taking
place through early November. As in previous years these strikes were often accompanied by claims of large numbers of civilian casualties, but lack of
access to the conflict areas has prevented independent verification.
Karachi
Karachi experienced an exceptionally high level of violence during the year,
with some 800 persons killed. The killings were perpetrated by armed groups
patronized by all political parties with a presence in the city. The Muttaheda
Qaumi Movement (MQM), Karachi’s largest political party, with heavily armed
cadres and a well-documented history of human rights abuse and political violence,
was widely viewed as the major perpetrator of targeted killings. The
Awami National Party (ANP) and PPP-backed Aman (Peace) Committee killed
MQM activists. Despite an October 6 Pakistan Supreme Court ruling calling for
an end to the violence, authorities took no meaningful measures to hold perpetrators
accountable.
Freedom of Media
At least six journalists were killed in Pakistan during the year. Saleeem
Shahzad, a reporter for the Hong Kong-based Asia Times Online and the Italian
news agency Adnkronos International, disappeared from central Islamabad, the
capital, on the evening of May 29, 2011. Shahzad had received repeated and
direct threats from the military’s dreaded ISI agency. Shahzad’s body, bearing
visible signs of torture, was discovered two days later on May 31, near Mandi
Bahauddin, 80 miles southeast of Islamabad. Following an international and
domestic furor caused by the murder, a judicial commission was formed within
days to probe allegations of ISI complicity. On August 9 Human Rights Watch
testified before the commission. At this writing the commission had not
announced its findings.
Earlier, on January 13, Geo TV reporter Wali Khan Babar was shot and killed in
Karachi shortly after covering gang violence in the city. On May 10 Tribal Union
of Journalists President Nasrullah Khan Afridi was killed when his car blew up in
Peshawar; the provincial information minister described the act as a “targeted
killing by the Taliban.” On August 14 thugs killed online news agency reporter
Munir Ahmed Shakir after he covered a demonstration by Baloch nationalists in the Khuzdar district, Balochistan. On November 5 the body of Javed Naseer
Rind, a sub-editor with the Urdu-language Daily Tawar, was found with torture
marks and gunshot wounds in the town of Khuzdar in Balochistan province. He
had been missing since September 9.
A climate of fear impedes media coverage of military and militant groups.
Journalists rarely report on human rights abuses by the military in counterterrorism
operations, and the Taliban and other armed groups regularly threaten
media outlets over their coverage.
Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and the provincial high courts effectively muzzled
media criticism of the judiciary in 2011 through threats of contempt of
court proceedings, as has been the case since Pakistan’s independent judiciary
was restored to office in 2009. In a positive development, journalists vocally
critical of the government experienced less interference from elected officials
than in previous years.
Key International Actors
The US remained Pakistan’s most significant ally and was the largest donor of
civilian and military aid to Pakistan, but relations deteriorated markedly in
2011. A major diplomatic crisis erupted on January 27 when Raymond Davis, a
CIA contractor, shot two men dead at a Lahore traffic junction. While the US
maintained that Davis had diplomatic immunity, Pakistan’s Foreign Ministry
disputed the claim. Davis was released on March 16 after US$2.4 million was
paid in “blood money” compensation to the victims’ families under the country’s
controversial Islamic law.
Further strains developed after a successful US operation in the city of
Abbotabad killed al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden. In July the US announced it
was withholding some $800 million in military aid to Pakistan. Relations deteriorated
still further over Pakistan’s allegedly persistent support for “Haqqani
network” militants, a group US officials accused of targeting the US Embassy
and US troops in Afghanistan.
In October 2010 the US sanctioned six units of the Pakistani military operating
in the Swat valley under the Leahy Law. That law requires the US State Department to certify that no military unit receiving US aid is involved in gross
human rights abuses and, when such abuses are found, they are to be thoroughly
and properly investigated. Despite pledges, Pakistan did not take any
action in 2011 to hold perpetrators of abuse accountable as required under the
law. In several instances in Swat, Balochistan, and the tribal areas, US aid to
Pakistan appeared to continue to contravene the Leahy Law.
As tensions increased between the US and Pakistan, neighboring China repeatedly
expressed support for Pakistan. Relations between Pakistan and nuclear
rival India remained tense, although in a significant move Pakistan granted its
larger neighbor “Most Favored Nation” trade status in November.
P8GL8 N<N GL@E<8
Papua New Guinea has abundant natural resources, but poor governance and
corruption have prevented ordinary citizens from benefitting from this wealth.
The government has failed to safeguard environmental concerns in mining
operations, and the continued dumping of mine waste into rivers poses potentially
severe health risks.
The government has not taken concrete steps to address pervasive abuses by
the police force that are committed with impunity, as documented in a February
report by the United Nations special rapporteur on torture. Violence against
women is widespread, buttressed by limited social services and a weak justice
system.
Dysfunctional government institutions continue to paralyze the country. In
August Peter O’Neill, the former treasurer, was elected prime minister after
opposition leaders persuaded parliament to declare the prime minister’s office
vacant while sitting Prime Minister Michael Somare received medical treatment
overseas. In September the National Court referred Somare’s bid to hold his
seat in parliament to the Supreme Court. Somare has been the country’s dominant
political figure for more than 40 years. Some have expressed cautious
optimism that new leadership could herald a more transparent and accountable
government.
Extractive Industries
Extractive industries are the main engine of the economy, but the government
has long failed to adequately regulate them, with devastating consequences to
the environment. Papua New Guinea’s sprawling Porgera gold mine, 95 percent
owned by Canadian company Barrick Gold, has produced more than 16 million
ounces of gold since opening in 1990, worth more than US$20 billion today.
The mine dumps 16,000 tons of liquid waste into the Porgera River every day, a
controversial practice that is out of line with current industry standards. Critics
worry it could pose serious health risks to communities downstream.
A protracted legal battle over the Ramu Nickel mine, set to begin operations in
late 2011, involves Ramu Nico Management (MCC), the Chinese company that
owns the majority of the mine, and landowners raising compensation discrepancies
and environmental concerns. In July the National Court dismissed an
application that landowners had brought for a permanent injunction preventing
the mine from dumping waste into the sea. The Supreme Court was hearing an
appeal at this writing.
Exploration drilling as part of a projected $15 billion Liquid Natural Gas (LNG)
project is set to expand at the end of the year. Disputes between local landowners
and LNG contractors have been common since the project was sanctioned
in 2009, and unresolved disputes over compensation for landowners, outstanding
business development grants, and inadequate benefits for employees continue
to generate protests and occasional violence. In August local villagers
attacked two employees at the LNG site in Komo, a proposed airfield, forcing
Exxon Mobile to temporarily halt operations.
Torture and Other Police Abuse
Human Rights Watch has previously documented widespread abuse by Papua
New Guinea’s police, including use of excessive force against demonstrators,
torture, and sexual violence, including against children.
In February the UN special rapporteur on torture released a report on Papua
New Guinea documenting routine beatings of criminal suspects that often rise
to the level of torture, extortion of sex from female detainees, corruption, and
other abuses. Conditions in correctional institutions were “poor,” and
“appalling” in police lockups, where children are regularly detained with
adults. The report outlined measures to address corruption and impunity in the
police force, including ratifying the Convention against Torture and amending
domestic legislation. At this writing the government had taken no substantive
measures to address widespread abuses documented in the report.
Violence against Women
Violence, including sexual violence, against women and girls is rampant in
Papua New Guinea. Support services such as shelters and emergency health
care are grossly inadequate. Victims face formidable barriers to obtaining
redress through the justice system, including lack of information, limited legal
aid, and geographic distance. Many village courts rely on customary laws that
do not protect women’s rights. The system often leaves perpetrators unpunished,
a problem exacerbated by the propensity of some police to engage in
sexual violence.
Private security personnel employed at the Porgera gold mine have been implicated
in alleged gang rapes and other violent crimes. Following publication in
February of Gold’s Costly Dividend, Human Rights Watch’s report on this issue,
Barrick Gold and police uncovered additional cases of alleged abuse. Barrick
fired six employees for involvement in, or failure to report, alleged sexual violence.
Police arrested three current and former Porgera Joint Venture employees
in January. Two were charged with rape and the third with inflicting grievous
bodily harm. Barrick has committed to improve oversight and accountability
mechanisms in order to prevent future abuse. At this writing it was working to
establish a compensation mechanism for victims.
Corruption
The government has regularly been embroiled in corruption scandals. In
Transparency International’s 2010 Corruption Percentage Index, which evaluates
and ranks public sector corruption in countries all over the world, Papua
New Guinea ranked 154 out of 178 countries surveyed.
After taking office Prime Minister O’Neill called for establishing an independent
commission against corruption and initiated a corruption investigation task
force. In August the prime minister announced an investigation of the National
Planning and Monitoring Department after revelations that $850 million in
development funds had allegedly been inappropriately distributed to companies
and individuals. Despite public commitments to tackle the corruption crisis, the new government’s rhetoric must be matched by action to address the
government’s systemic culture of graft.
Health and Education
Papua New Guinea performs poorly on most indicators of economic and social
well-being. Rates of maternal and child mortality are among the region’s highest.
The closure of rural aid posts and health centers, and the shortage of
drugs, medical equipment, and trained health professionals all limit access to
quality health care.
The country has the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS among the Pacific islands.
According to the most recent health data, around 34,100 people live with the
disease (0.92 percent of adults in 2010), with young women most likely to be
diagnosed. Gender inequality; sexual violence; inadequate HIV-prevention
information, including opposition to condom promotion; and poor access to
health care fuels the virus’s spread. People living with HIV/AIDS often face violence
and discrimination.
Primary education remains neither free nor compulsory. According to AusAID,
the net enrollment in primary education was 63 percent of school-age children
in 2009. Barriers include long distances to schools, a shortage of upper secondary
placements, high school fees, and school closures due to insecurity.
The new government has committed to fully subsidize education up to grade 10
beginning in January 2012, though similar pledges have been made in the past
with few results.
Key International Actors
Australia, Papua New Guinea’s former colonial ruler, is the country’s most
important international partner, providing some $498 million in annual assistance.
In August Australia and Papua New Guinea agreed to reopen a processing center
on Manus Island for asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat.
However, the issue has been deferred indefinitely after the Australian High Court’s September ruling that overseas detention and processing of asylum
seekers was unlawful. Despite Australia’s apparent agreement to process asylum
claims on Manus Island, Papua New Guinea remains responsible as a party
to the 1951 Refugee Convention for ensuring a fair refugee status determination
process and respect for the principle of nonrefoulement (“non-return” to persecution),
as well as being responsible for humane treatment of migrants and
durable solutions for refugees. The center has yet to officially open.
In 2011 the UN Human Rights Council examined Papua New Guinea’s rights
record through the Universal Periodic Review process. Addressing the recommendations
of states, Papua New Guinea acknowledged a wide range of human
rights concerns, but failed to offer clear steps to combat such issues. For
instance, in addressing questions about the special rapporteur’s report on
police abuse and torture, Papua New Guinea offered what is now a familiar
response: the recommendations, it said, were “under review.”
T?< P?@C@GG@E<J
The Philippines is a multiparty democracy with an elected president and legislature,
a thriving civil society sector, and a vibrant media. Several key institutions,
including the judiciary and law enforcement agencies, remain weak and
the military and police still commit human rights violations with impunity.
Armed opposition forces, including the communist New People’s Army (NPA)
and various Islamist Moro groups, also commit abuses against civilians.
President Benigno Aquino III maintains that the government is “working overtime”
to prevent new cases of human rights violations and to resolve previous
cases, and has pleaded for patience. Yet despite promises of reform, his
administration has made little progress in addressing impunity. Extrajudicial
killings of leftist activists and petty criminals continue, with the government
failing to acknowledge and address involvement by the security forces and
local officials.
Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced Disappearances
Hundreds of leftist politicians and political activists, journalists, and outspoken
clergy have been killed or abducted since 2001. The government has largely
failed to prosecute military personnel implicated in such killings, even though
strong evidence exists in many cases. Only seven cases of extrajudicial killings
from the past decade have been successfully prosecuted, none of which were
in 2011 or involved active duty military personnel.
Politically motivated killings have continued despite President Aquino’s
pledges to address the problem. Human Rights Watch has documented at least
seven extrajudicial killings and three enforced disappearances for which there
is strong evidence of military involvement since Aquino took office in June
2010.
On February 27, unidentified assailants shot and killed Rudy Dejos, a tribal
chieftan and local human rights officer, and his son Rudyric. The elder Dejos’s
body showed signs of torture. Prior to the killing, according to Dejos’s wife,
Philippine army soldiers had threatened him on several occasions. The police blamed the NPA for the killing before gathering any evidence, and have now
filed charges against an alleged NPA member. The family does not believe the
NPA is behind the killing.
A landmark Supreme Court decision in May and a National Commission on
Human Rights report in March said military officers were behind the “disappearance”
of four leftist activists in 2006 and 2007; Sherlyn Cadapan, Karen
Empeño, Manuel Merino, and Jonas Burgos. The government still has not
brought charges against the implicated officers; faced with this inaction, the
families themselves have filed cases against the officers.
Private Armies
Aquino campaigned on promises to dismantle the “private armies” of politicians
and wealthy landowners, which have long been responsible for serious
abuses. While Interior Secretary Jesse Robredo has claimed the Aquino administration
has dismantled almost half of the private armies in the southern
island of Mindanao, he has not presented any evidence. Promises to revoke
Executive Order 546, which local officials cite to justify the provision of arms to
their personal forces, also have not come to fruition. Aquino still defends the
use of poorly trained and abusive paramilitary forces to fight NPA insurgents
and Islamist armed groups. In October Aquino announced the deployment of
additional paramilitary personnel to provide security to mining companies.
The trial of senior members of the Ampatuan family for the November 23, 2009
massacre of 58 political opponents and others, including more than 30 media
workers, in Maguindanao in Mindanao, is ongoing.
Torture
The police and the military were implicated in numerous incidents of torture in
2011. While several investigations are ongoing, the rigor of investigations varies
and at this writing no one had been convicted under the 2009 Anti-Torture Act.
In September the Department of Justice filed charges of torture against a Manila
precinct chief, Senior Inspector Joselito Binayug, and six others, including one of his superiors, after a cell phone video was circulated in March 2010 showing
Binayug pulling on a rope tied around a criminal suspect’s genitals and beating
him during the interrogation. The whereabouts of the victim, Darius Evangelista,
remain unknown.
On July 23 in Sumisip, Basilan army scout rangers arrested 39-year-old baker
Abdul-Khan Balinting Ajid as an alleged member of the Abu Sayyaf armed
group. Soldiers allegedly stripped him naked, sexually assaulted him, and set
him on fire. While the military said several soldiers involved had been relocated
to Manila, the capital, and restricted to barracks, at this writing no criminal
charges had been filed against them.
Targeted Killings of Petty Criminals and Street Youths
So-called death squads operating in Davao City, Tagum City, and other cities
continue to target alleged petty criminals, drug dealers, gang members, and
street children. Aquino’s administration has not acted to dismantle such
groups, end local anti-crime campaigns that promote or encourage unlawful
use of force, or prosecute government officials complicit in such activities. At
this writing the National Commission on Human Rights had still not reported on
the outcome of multi-agency task force investigations into summary killings in
Davao City in 2009.
Conflict in Mindanao
A ceasefire remains in place between the Philippine government and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front, and peace talks are ongoing. The army continues to
fight Abu Sayyaf, an armed group implicated in numerous attacks on and
abductions of civilians, particularly in Sulu and Basilan.
Conflict with the New People’s Army
Military clashes continue between government forces and the NPA, especially in
the Eastern Visayas, Negros, and parts of Mindanao.
The NPA has unlawfully killed and detained civilians and extorted “taxes” from
individuals and businesses. NPA leaders have often sought to justify targeted
killings by noting that “people’s courts” earlier condemned those killed for
“crimes against the people.” For instance, the NPA killed Raymundo Agaze in
Kabankalan City, Negros Occidental on August 19, and Ramelito Gonzaga in
Mindanao on September 2 following “people’s court” rulings. Philip Alston, former
United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, concluded
that the NPA’s court system “is either deeply flawed or simply a sham.”
The Philippine army fabricated stories that several children taken into military
custody were NPA rebels. In several cases investigated by Human Rights Watch,
the army paraded the children in front of the media, publicly branding them
rebels despite conclusive contrary evidence. In two of the cases, the army
detained the children for several days.
The UN Children’s Fund has documented the use of children in armed conflict
by the NPA and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, as well as by government
forces. The UN has reported a rising trend of government security forces using
schools as barracks and bases in contravention of national legislation prohibiting
such practice.
Reproductive Rights
Contraceptives, including condoms, are restricted in parts of the Philippines,
which prohibits and criminally punishes abortion without exception. The law
leaves open the possibility that a serious threat to a pregnant woman’s life
could be classified as a justifying circumstance barring criminal prosecution.
However, the Philippine Supreme Court has yet to adjudicate this possibility,
which does little to mitigate the serious consequences of criminalizing abortion
for women’s health and lives.
Despite vehement opposition from the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of the
Philippines, Aquino has remained publicly committed to a reproductive health
bill that aims to provide universal access to contraception and maternal health
care. The bill goes some way toward enhancing protection of sexual and reproductive
rights and the right to the highest obtainable standard of health, but still makes abortion a criminal offense. At this writing it remained before
Congress.
Philippine Workers Abroad
Approximately two million Filipinos work abroad, and in the first nine months of
2011 sent home an estimated US$13 billion. Hundreds of thousands of women
work in Southeast Asia and the Middle East as domestic workers, where they
are typically excluded from labor laws and are often subject to abuses including
unpaid wages, food deprivation, forced confinement in the workplace, and
physical and sexual abuse. In 2011 the Philippine government either proposed
or implemented bans on sending workers to countries with high incidences of
abuse. These bans have largely been ineffective, with host countries turning to
other labor sources instead. The Philippines has yet to extend labor protections
to household workers domestically, but played a key role globally by chairing
negotiations for the International Labour Organization Convention on Decent
Work for Domestic Workers, adopted on June 16, 2011.
Key International Actors
The United States is the Philippines’s most influential ally and, together with
Australia and Japan, among the country’s largest bilateral donors. The US military
has access to Philippine territory and seas under a Visiting Forces
Agreement, and the two militaries hold annual joint exercises. In fiscal year
2011-2012 the US government appropriated $12 million to the Philippines under
Foreign Military Financing for procurement of US military equipment, services,
and training. Of this sum, $3 million is contingent upon the Philippine government
showing progress in addressing human rights violations, including ending
extrajudicial killings. US Ambassador Harry Thomas, Jr. has publicly called on
the Philippine government to do more to end impunity for extrajudicial killings.
The European Union’s 2009 to 2011 €3.9 million ($5.3 million) program to
address extrajudicial killings and strengthen the criminal justice system concluded
in April.
In May UN member states elected the Philippines to the UN Human Rights
Council.
S@E>8GFI<
Singapore’s People’s Action Party (PAP), in power since 1959, garnered its lowest-
ever winning margin in May 2011 elections, losing six parliamentary seats to
the opposition Workers’ Party. The government’s relaxation of prohibitions on
campaign rallies and online electioneering were improvements, but the government
continued to effectively control television and print media.
During the May 2011 review of its human rights record at the United Nations
Human Rights Council (HRC), Singapore rejected many of the member states’
suggestions for human rights improvements, including ratification of core UN
conventions.
Freedoms of Expression, Assembly, and Association
Singapore’s constitution guarantees rights to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly, and association. However, it also permits broadly interpreted restrictions
not only for security, public order, and morality, but also for parliamentary
privilege and racial and religious harmony. These restrictions facilitate censorship
of broadcast and electronic media, films, video, music, sound recordings,
and computer games. The Newspaper and Printing Presses Act requires yearly
renewal of registration and allows government officials to limit circulation of
foreign newspapers they deem “engage in the domestic politics of Singapore.”
Two corporations dominate the media in Singapore. MediaCorp is wholly owned
by a government investment company; Singapore Press Holdings Limited (SPH)
is a private company, but the government must approve and can remove shareholders,
who have the authority to hire and fire all directors and staff.
Although Singapore loosened some limitations on free speech, association,
and assembly in mid-March 2011, it maintained or tightened other restrictions.
Blogs, podcasts, and social networking sites were permitted to be used for
internet election advertising as long as they did not contain recorded messages
that were “dramatized” or “out of context.” Candidates were also required to
announce within 12 hours of the start of campaigning all new media content
they planned to use.
Government officials continue to maintain that religious and ethnic differences
have “the potential to cause friction and divide Singaporeans” and therefore
necessitate restrictions on free speech. Outdoor gatherings of five or more persons
require police permits.
On December 10, 2010, police refused to grant Singaporeans for Democracy
(SFD) a permit to hold an International Human Rights Day parade. In February
2011 Chee Soon Juan, secretary general of the Singapore Democratic Party, paid
a heavy fine for “speaking without a permit” during the 2006 general election
campaign to avoid a prison term of 20 weeks.
In January 2011 the government ordered The Online Citizen (TOC), a popular
blog site, to register as a political association. According to the Prime Minister’s
Office, “TOC has the potential to influence the opinions of their readership and
shape political outcomes in Singapore. It has been gazetted to ensure that it is
not funded by foreign elements or sources.”
A police investigation is underway to determine if a SFD invitation-only event in
September 2011 should be considered a public event held without a permit. The
Public Order Act 2009 mandates that permits for indoor assemblies are needed
if, as was the case here, all speakers are not citizens of Singapore. Police
raised concerns that invitations issued through a Facebook events page and by
email compromised the forum’s private status.
Police were also investigating a public forum of former Internal Security Act
detainees organized by the opposition Singapore Democracy Party (SDP) in
September. According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the SDP “arranged for a
fugitive from justice, Francis Seow [speaking online from Boston], and a foreign
national, Ms. Tang Fong Harr [speaking from Hong Kong] to participate in a discussion
on Singapore’s domestic politics.”
All associations of 10 or more members must seek approval, which can be
denied by the Registrar of Societies if deemed “prejudicial to public peace, welfare
or good order.”
Singapore also resorts to charges of contempt of court, criminal and civil
defamation, and sedition to rein in its critics. On June 1, 2011, British author Alan Shadrake began serving a six-week prison term for contempt of court for
“scandalizing the judiciary” by alleging in his book, Once a Jolly Hangman:
Singapore Justice in the Dock, that Singapore’s justice system permits interference
by the People’s Action Party with court decisions relating to capital punishment.
At his trial, the prosecution cited 11 specific statements, including the
book title, to argue that Shadrake’s allegations and insinuations “muzzle confidence
in the courts’ impartiality, integrity and independence.” Shadrake was
immediately deported upon release.
Criminal Justice System
Singapore’s Internal Security Act (ISA) and Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
Act permit arrest and virtually unlimited detention of suspects without charge
or judicial review. As the Ministry of Home Affairs explained in September 2011,
threats such as subversion, espionage, and terrorism keep ISA “relevant.” At
least three suspected terrorists were detained in 2011.
The Misuse of Drugs Act permits confinement of suspected drug users in “rehabilitation”
centers for up to three years without trial. Second-time offenders
face prison terms and may be caned.
Singapore continued to implement mandatory death sentences for some 20
drug-related offenses in the face of repeated criticism by UN human rights bodies
and experts.
Judicial caning, an inherently cruel punishment, is a mandatory additional punishment
for medically fit males between 16 and 50-years-old who have been
sentenced to prison for a range of crimes including drug trafficking, rape, and
immigration offenses. A sentencing official may also, at his discretion, order
caning in cases involving some 30 other violent and non-violent crimes. The
maximum number of strokes at any one time is 24. The United States State
Department reported that in 2010, “3,170 convicted persons were sentenced to
judicial caning, and 98.7 percent of caning sentences were carried out.” During
its HRC Universal Periodic Review (UPR), Singapore rejected all recommendations
designed to eliminate caning.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Penal Code section 377A criminalizes sexual acts between consenting adult
men. Sexual acts between women are not criminalized.
The Board of Film Censors gave its strictest classification, R21, to “The Kids are
All Right,” a film depicting a lesbian-headed household. The classification prevents
advertising and home video release of the film, and restricts viewers to
persons over 21-years-old. Only one print of the film was authorized to be
released, significantly limiting public showings.
Migrant Domestic Workers and Trafficking
Singapore continues to improve rights protections and working conditions for
some 196,000 foreign domestic workers through vigorous prosecution of
employers and recruiters who physically abuse workers, fail to pay wages, or
subject workers to dangerous conditions. Effective April 1 it amended the
Employment Agencies Act to cap recruitment fees at two months salary for
workers on two-year contracts but exempted substantial training and travel
costs from the cap.
The government also refuses to include domestic workers under the
Employment Act, and uses a sponsorship system that ties a domestic worker to
a specific employer who, in turn, retains the right to cancel the migrant worker’s
contract, making her subject to immediate deportation. Unscrupulous employers
often use the threat of contract cancellation to intimidate workers into
accepting unlawful work conditions, restricting their movements, and preventing
them from filing complaints.
A government-mandated standard contract for migrant workers does not
address issues such as long work hours, poor living conditions, and enforced
confinement. Instead of guaranteeing one day off per month and a set number
of rest hours per day, it makes such breaks a matter of negotiation between
employer and employee. It also fails to provide protections against denial of
annual or medical leave, requires immediate deportation of pregnant workers,
and stipulates that no foreign domestic workers may marry a Singaporean.
Singapore is one of only nine states that did not vote for passage of
International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 189 on Decent Work for
Domestic Workers.
At this writing Singapore had not ratified the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders in Singapore risk being fined, jailed, bankrupted, and
forbidden from traveling outside the country without government approval. At
its UPR review, Singapore rejected the suggestion that it accept a visit by the
UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders.
Key International Actors
Maritime security, counterterrorism, trade, and investment dominated relations
between Singapore and the US, one of its most important allies, with both parties
eager to expand already robust military ties in the region, preserve open
shipping lanes in the South China Sea, and impede terrorist financing.
Singapore and the US are in talks about establishing a permanent Singapore
base for an advanced US littoral combat ship.
The US continued to be restrained in its criticism of Singapore’s human rights
record. It was silent, for example, during the May 2011 review of Singapore’s
record as part of the UPR process.
Singapore continued to play a leading role in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) yet did little to ensure that the human rights principles
contained in the ASEAN Charter were applied to member countries like Burma,
Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, where human rights abuses are systemic.
SI@ L8EB8
The aftermath of Sri Lanka’s quarter century-long civil war, which ended in May
2009 with the defeat of the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE),
continued to dominate events in 2011. In April United Nations Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon released a report by a panel of experts that concluded that both
government forces and the LTTE conducted military operations “with flagrant
disregard for the protection, rights, welfare and lives of civilians and failed to
respect the norms of international law.” The panel recommended the establishment
of an international investigative mechanism. Sri Lankan officials responded
by vilifying the report and the panel members.
The government has failed to conduct credible investigations into alleged war
crimes by security forces, dismissing the overwhelming body of evidence as
LTTE propaganda. The government’s Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission (LLRC), characterized as a national accountability mechanism, is
deeply flawed, does not meet international standards for such commissions,
and has failed to systematically inquire into alleged abuses.
In August the government allowed emergency regulations in place for nearly
three decades to lapse, but overbroad detention powers remained in place
under other laws and new regulations. Several thousand detainees continue to
be held without trial, in violation of international law.
Accountability
Sri Lanka has made no progress toward justice for the extensive laws of war
violations committed by both sides during the long civil war, including the government’s
indiscriminate shelling of civilians and the LTTE’s use of thousands
of civilians as “human shields” in the final months of the conflict. Since the war
ended the government has not launched a single credible investigation into
alleged abuses. The lack of investigation was especially conspicuous with
regard to several incidents featured in a June 2011 program on the British television
station Channel 4, showing gruesome images of what appear to be summary
executions of captured and bound combatants. Incredibly, the government repeatedly has dismissed the footage as fabricated despite several independent
expert reports finding it authentic.
In May the Sri Lankan Defense Ministry held an international conference in
Colombo, the capital, on defeating terrorism that gave scant attention to government
abuses. In August the Defense Ministry issued its own report, conceding
for the first time that government forces caused civilian deaths in the final
months of the conflict, but taking no responsibility for laws of war violations
and concluding peremptorily without further investigation that the deaths were
the unfortunate collateral damage of war.
Impunity for serious violations also continues for older cases. Despite strong
evidence of involvement by government forces in the execution-style slayings of
17 aid workers and five students in separate incidents in 2006, government
inquiries continue to languish and no one has been arrested for the crimes.
The government has repeatedly extended the deadline for the LLRC. The LLRC’s
mandate focuses on the breakdown of the 2002 ceasefire between the government
and the LTTE, and does not explicitly require it to investigate alleged war
crimes during the conflict. The LLRC heard testimony but undertook no investigations
into such allegations. The LLRC was due to submit its report to
President Mahinda Rajapaksa on November 15. The government has stated that
the report will be made public but has not indicated when it will do so. The government
has not acted on the LLRC’s preliminary recommendations.
Torture, Enforced Disappearances, and Arbitrary Detention
While the government allowed longstanding emergency regulations to lapse in
August, it failed to rescind other legislation granting police and other security
forces overbroad detention powers and it adopted new regulations that in effect
continue several of the emergency provisions. The president continues to issue
monthly decrees granting the armed forces search and detention powers.
Despite the end of the formal state of emergency, the government also continues
to hold several thousand people initially detained under the emergency
regulations. Many have been held for years without trial, in violation of international law. The government has so far refused to even publish lists of those
detained.
The government has gradually released many, but not all, of the more than
11,000 suspected LTTE members detained at the end of the war and sent to socalled
rehabilitation centers. The government denied detainees important due
process guarantees, such as access to legal counsel, and thousands spent two
years or more in detention. There are reports that some people released from
the rehabilitation centers were harassed by security forces after they returned
home.
In 2011, new reports of “disappearances” and abductions in the north and the
east emerged, some linked to political parties and others to criminal gangs. The
government has lifted its restriction on travel to parts of the north, although it
maintains a very high security presence. Violence, including sexual assault, by
so-called grease devils, some of whom could allegedly be traced to military
camps, highlighted insecurity in the north and east.
The Prevention of Terrorism Act gives police broad powers over suspects in custody.
Sri Lanka has a long history of torture by the police forces, at times resulting
in death.
Civil Society and Opposition Members
Free expression remained under assault in 2011. Gnanasundaram Kuhanathan,
editor of a Jaffna-based newspaper, was beaten with iron bars by a group of
unidentified youths in late July. He was severely injured and required hospitalization.
In July a team of Radio Netherlands journalists were harassed by police
and later robbed and attacked at gunpoint by a gang in a white van, a notorious
symbol of terror in Sri Lanka. Lal Wickrematunge, chairman of the Sunday
Leader and brother of Lasantha Wickrematunge (who was gunned down in
2009), received a phone call from President Rajapaksa in response to an article
on high-level corruption in which the president said to Wickrematunge, “You
are writing lies, outrageous lies! You can attack me politically, but if you attack
me personally, I will know how to attack you personally too.”
There have been no further developments regarding the killing of Lasantha
Wickrematunge or the disappearance of Prageeth Ekneligoda, a contributor to
Lanka e-news, who has been missing since January 24, 2010.
Members and supporters of the Tamil National Alliance (TNA), campaigning
ahead of local elections in Jaffna in June, were attacked by army personnel
wielding rods, batons, and sticks. Among the injured were TNA members and
police officers assigned to provide security to the parliamentarians. The results
of an investigation into the incident ordered by the secretary of defense are not
known.
In November the government blocked at least six news websites claiming that
they had maligned the character of the president and other top government
officials.
Reconciliation Efforts
Reconciliation efforts, meant to address longstanding grievances of the ethnic
Tamil population, have been slow at best. Local elections in March, July, and
October further consolidated the hold of Rajapaksa’s ruling alliance, although
the TNA garnered significant victories in the north. The TNA and the government
have been in negotiations to deal with, among other matters, devolution of
powers to the provinces, a key issue underpinning the civil war. The talks have
been rife with tension, with the TNA accusing the government of deceitful and
facetious behavior, and the government accusing the TNA of issuing LTTE-type
ultimatums as a result of its electoral victory in the north. The TNA left talks
with the government in August but has since returned.
In September the TNA reacted angrily to government statements at the UN
Human Rights Council (HRC) in Geneva, saying government claims that reconciliation
efforts have been predicated on “building trust and amity” between the
communities is not supported by the experience of the Tamil people.
Internally Displaced Persons
The vast majority of the nearly 300,000 civilians illegally confined in militarycontrolled
detention centers after the war have moved out of the centers back
into communities, although not necessarily into their original homes. About
110,000 persons still live with host families or in camps and several thousand
are not able to return because their home areas have not been demined. The
government has still not granted international demining agencies access to
several areas.
Key International Actors
Pressure on accountability from key international actors mounted following the
April release of a damning panel report commissioned by the UN secretary-general.
Several countries—including Britain, Canada, Australia, and the United
States—called on Sri Lanka to investigate the allegations contained in the
report. The European Parliament adopted a resolution in May urging Sri Lanka
to immediately investigate the allegations and the European Union to “support
further efforts to strengthen the accountability process in Sri Lanka and to support
the UN report.” Even India, which had largely stayed silent on alleged
abuses in Sri Lanka, added to the pressure in May when it called for investigations.
Also in May the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary
executions called on the government to investigate “textbook examples of
extrajudicial executions” in Sri Lanka following a review of evidence related to
government execution of prisoners.
In September UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon submitted the panel report on
the war to the president of the HRC and, acting on one of the report’s recommendations,
announced that the UN would undertake a separate inquiry into
the its own actions in Sri Lanka during the final months of the war.
While several countries called for accountability for laws of war violations during
the September HRC session, the Council failed to act following Ban’s transmission
of the panel report and has not yet taken steps towards establishing an
international accountability mechanism, the main recommendation in the
report.
Several governments indicated that they will support an international accountability
mechanism if the LLRC report fails to properly address accountability
issues. US Assistant Secretary of State Robert Blake said during a trip to Sri
Lanka in September that unless there is a full, credible, and independent
accounting, “there will be pressure for some sort of alternative mechanism.”
The UK has likewise said that it will “support the international community in
revisiting all options” unless the Sri Lankan government demonstrates progress
by the end of 2011.
US legislation restricts military aid to Sri Lanka, subject to strict conditions
regarding progress on accountability and human rights.
At a Commonwealth summit in October, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen
Harper called for a boycott of a planned Commonwealth heads of government
summit in Sri Lanka in 2013, should Sri Lanka fail to improve its human rights
record by that time.
T?8@C8E;
Yingluck Shinawatra, younger sister of exiled former Prime Minister Thaksin
Shinawatra, won a landslide victory in July 2011 elections, offering what was
hoped would be political stability in Thailand after several years of political
upheaval. The new government has not yet fulfilled early promises to give priority
to Thailand’s many human rights problems. In October and November
Bangkok—the capital—and 23 other provinces were severely affected by the
worst flooding in decades, which displaced hundreds of thousands people and
massively devastated livelihood and economy.
Accountability for Political Violence
At least 90 people died and more than 2,000 were injured during violent political
confrontations from March to May 2010. The loss of life resulted from the
unnecessary use of lethal force by Thai security forces, attacks by armed elements
operating in tandem with the United Front for Democracy against
Dictatorship (UDD), known as the “Red Shirts,” and incitement to violence by
some UDD leaders.
In January 2011 the Justice Ministry’s Department of Special Investigation (DSI)
announced the results of preliminary investigations into the violence. The DSI
implicated soldiers in 13 deaths, and armed UUD elements in another 12
deaths. But lack of police cooperation stalled efforts to initiate post-mortem
inquests and prosecutions. Prime Minister Yingluck vowed to end these delays
after appointing Gen. Priewpan Damapong,Thaksin’s brother-in-law, as national
police chief in September.
The status of investigations into alleged crimes by UDD “Black Shirt” militants
remained unclear, with the Yingluck government denying the group’s existence.
A number of those accused of deadly attacks against soldiers, police officers,
and anti-UDD groups were released on bail. The election of 12 senior UDD leaders
as ruling Pheu Thai Party members of parliament raised serious concerns
that they would be able to use their political influence and parliamentary immunity
to evade accountability for their role in the 2010 violence.
Yingluck promised full support for the work of the Truth for Reconciliation
Commission of Thailand (TRCT), established by the government of Abhisit
Vejjajiva to look into the political violence, but has yet to grant the TRCT subpoena
power, rendering it unable to obtain complete information about security
force deployment plans and operations, autopsy reports, witness testimony,
photos, and military and police video footage.
In its initial work, the TRCT found that the Abhisit government had pressured
law enforcement officials to charge hundreds of ordinary UDD protesters with
serious criminal offenses and hold them in pre-trial detention for months without
the possibility of bail. The government announced in September that it
would review the charges against those protesters and ensure they are treated
in accordance with due process and human rights guarantees. The TRCT also
recommended that a special mechanism be established to provide fair compensation
and other remedies to all victims of abuse and political violence.
Progress in investigating criminal offenses committed by members of the
People’s Alliance for Democracy (PAD), known as the “Yellow Shirts,” during
protests in 2008 has also been slow. Additionally, the police officers and politicians
believed responsible for the excessive use of force against PAD protesters
rallying in front of the parliament on October 7, 2008, continue to enjoy impunity.
Freedom of Expression and Freedom of Media
From 2008 to 2011 the Abhisit government oversaw the closure of more than
1,000 websites, a satellite television station, online television channels, printed
publications, and more than 40 community radio stations for allegedly
threatening national security or broadcasting material deemed offensive to the
monarchy.
Thai authorities continue to use the Computer Crimes Act and article 112 of the
penal code, lese majeste (insulting the monarchy), to enforce censorship and
persecute dissidents. The National Human Rights Commission estimates that
more than 400 lese majeste cases were sent to trial in 2010 and 2011. Persons
charged with lese majeste offenses are frequently denied bail and remain in prison for months awaiting trial. In most cases, the trials are closed to the public.
In March a court sentenced Tanthawut Taweewarodomkul to 13 years in
prison for posting material on the anti-monarchy website Nor Por Chor USA.
Lese majeste prosecutions in 2011 also targeted webmasters and editors, such
as Chiranuch Premchaiporn, webmaster and director of Prachatai.com, and
Somyos Pruksakasemsuk, editor of Red Power magazine.
New Deputy Prime Minister Chalerm Yubumrung told parliament on August 26
that lese majeste offenses would not be tolerated. The government established
a “war room” at national police headquarters to monitor the internet and lead
the crackdown on websites deemed critical of the monarchy. On September 1,
police arrested Surapak Phuchaisaeng in Bangkok for allegedly posting pictures,
audio clips, and messages deemed insulting to the royal family on
Facebook. It was the first lese majeste arrest under Yingluck’s government.
Critics of Yingluck and the Pheu Thai Party, such as Jermsak Pinthong and TNews
group, lost contracts with the government-controlled National
Broadcasting Services of Thailand (NBT) to produce television and radio news
analysis programs broadcast nationally.
Violence and Human Rights Abuses in Southern Border Provinces
Separatist insurgents in the loose National Revolution Front-Coordinate (BRNCoordinate)
network continue to attack civilians in the southern border
provinces. Car bombs and motorcycle bombs killed six and wounded 118 in the
September 16 attacks in the Su Ngai Kolok district, Narathiwat province.
Insurgents have planted landmines in rubber plantations to spread terror
among the ethnic Thai Buddhist population and force them to relinquish ownership
of the plantations.
Insurgent groups continue to target teachers in government-run schools, whom
they see as symbols of state efforts to undermine ethnic Malay Muslim identity.
On September 6, insurgents fatally shot teacher Kanit Lamnui in Yala province’s
Raman district, poured gasoline over his body, and set it ablaze. Since 2004,
insurgents have killed at least 148 teachers and educational officials.
Government security forces frequently use schools for barracks and bases,
endangering students and teachers, and impairing education.
Although Fourth Region Army commander Lt. Gen. Udomchai Thammasarorat
vowed that the ethnic Malay Muslim population would see justice done for
abuses against them, Thai security forces still face little or no consequences for
extrajudicial killings, torture, enforced disappearances, and other abuses. After
a sharp decline since 2007, new cases of “disappearances” increased in 2011.
Anti-Narcotics Policy
Deputy Prime Minister Chalerm announced in September that the government
would respect human rights and due process when implementing anti-narcotics
policy, but flatly denied any official involvement in the more than 2,800 extrajudicial
killings that accompanied then Prime Minister Thaksin’s 2003 “war on
drugs.”
Starting in September the Yingluck government set a target to “rehabilitate”
400,000 drug users within one year. There was little change in the government
practice of arbitrarily arresting drug users and detaining them in compulsory
drug “rehabilitation” centers, mostly run by the military and the Interior
Ministry, where the ostensible treatment is based on military-style physical
exercise. Routinely detained in prison prior to compulsory rehabilitation,
detainees get little or no medical assistance for drug withdrawal symptoms.
Human Rights Defenders
Gunmen shot dead environmentalist Thongnak Sawekchinda in Samut Sakhon
province on July 28, allegedly in retaliation for his campaign against local coal
industry pollution. Since 2001 more than 20 environmentalists and human
rights defenders have been killed in Thailand. Investigations into the killings
have frequently suffered from inconsistent and shoddy detective work, the failure
of the Justice Ministry to provide adequate protection for witnesses, and
political interference in law enforcement efforts.
WORLD REPORT 2012
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Migrant Workers
Thai authorities continue to return refugees and asylum seekers to countries
where they are likely to face persecution. Nur Muhammed, an ethnic Uighur,
was arrested on August 6 and taken to the Bangkok Immigration Detention
Center (IDC), where he was charged under the Immigration Act with illegal entry.
Instead of being brought to a court, as stipulated by Thai law, he was handed
directly into the custody of Chinese government officials and has since disappeared.
China’s record of arbitrary detention and torture of ethnic Uighurs
places Muhammed at grave risk of abuse.
Thai authorities at least twice “pushed back” boats carrying ethnic Rohingyas
from Burma and Bangladesh in 2011 despite allegations that such practices led
to hundreds of deaths in 2008 and 2009. After providing basic supplies of food
and water, Thai authorities towed the boats far out into international waters
before cutting the boats adrift. One boat of 91 Rohingya was stopped in Trang
province on January 22 and pushed back out to sea, ultimately landing in
India’s Andaman and Nicobar Islands. A second boat, with 129 Rohingya on
board, was pushed back on the high seas and drifted to Aceh, Indonesia.
Thailand is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and has no law that recognizes
refugee status. Asylum seekers and refugees who are arrested often
face long periods of detention until they are accepted for resettlement or agree
to be sent back to their own country. In some cases, Sri Lankan, Nepalese, and
Rohingya refugees have been held for more than two years. On June 6, 94
refugees and two asylum seekers from Pakistan’s persecuted Ahmadiyah community
were released on bail; some had been detained for nearly six months.
Thai labor laws provide little protection to migrant workers from Burma,
Cambodia, and Laos who have been abused by police, civil servants, employers,
and criminal elements. A migrant worker registry and “nationality verification”
scheme provides legal documentation for workers, but does little to
counter the impunity with which employers violate such workers’ rights.
Migrant workers remain extremely vulnerable to exploitation, with female
migrants enduring sexual violence and labor trafficking, and male migrants facing
extreme labor exploitation, including being trafficked onto fishing boats. In
October NGOs and the media documented that migrant workers fleeing Thailand’s flooding, which affected millions of people, were being targeted by
police for arrest, extortion, and abuse.
Key International Actors
The United Nations, United States, Australia, European Union, Switzerland, and
Norway expressed strong support for political reconciliation and greater human
rights protections in Thailand in 2011, urging the government and all other conflicting
political factions to engage in dialogue and refrain from using violence.
Switzerland provided training and technical assistance to the TRCT.
Thailand made many human rights pledges in its successful 201o campaign to
join the UN Human Rights Council, but few have been implemented. In
September Foreign Minister Surapong Tovichakchaikul said Thailand would
seek to renew its seat at the council for another term and also bid for a non-permanent
seat at the UN Security Council.
The Cluster Munitions Coalition strongly criticized Thailand for using cluster
munitions in a border conflict with Cambodia in February 2011. In June the Thai
ambassador to the UN in Geneva informed the first intersessional meeting of
the Convention on Cluster Munitions that Thailand hoped to ratify the convention
in “the near future.”
V@<KE8D
The Vietnamese government systematically suppresses freedom of expression,
association, and peaceful assembly. Independent writers, bloggers, and rights
activists who question government policies, expose official corruption, or call
for democratic alternatives to one-party rule are routinely subject to police
harassment and intrusive surveillance, detained incommunicado for long periods
of time without access to legal counsel, and sentenced to increasingly long
terms in prison for violating vague national security laws.
Police frequently torture suspects to elicit confessions and, in several cases,
have responded to public protests over evictions, confiscation of land, and
police brutality with excessive use of force. Anti-China protests in Hanoi and Ho
Chi Minh City in 2011 were dispersed and protesters were intimidated,
harassed, and in some cases detained for several days.
The 11th Vietnam Communist Party Congress in January 2011 and the stage-managed
National Assembly election in May determined the leadership of the party
and government for the next five years. During both, there was no sign of any
serious commitment to improve Vietnam’s abysmal human rights record. Prime
Minister Nguyen Tan Dung began his second term in July, enjoying strong support
from the Ministry of Public Security and other hard-liners.
Repression of Dissent
2011 saw a steady stream of political trials and arrests, likely spurred in part by
Vietnamese government concerns that pro-democracy Arab Spring movement
might reach Asia.
During the first 10 months of 2011, the authorities sent at least 24 rights
activists to prison. All but one were convicted of “conducting propaganda
against the state” (penal code article 88), “undermining national unity” (article
87), or “subversion of the administration” (article 79). These three vaguely
defined articles have been employed to imprison hundreds of peaceful activists
in the last decade. In addition, the police arrested at least 27 political and religious
advocates in 2011. Blogger Nguyen Van Hai, known by his pen name DieuCay, has been held incommunicado since October 2010. Two other pro-democracy
internet writers, Nguyen Ba Dang and Phan Thanh Hai, have been detained
since 2010 without trial.
In a major trial in April 2011, prominent legal activist Dr. Cu Huy Ha Vu was convicted
of conducting propaganda against the state and sentenced to seven
years in prison. The sentence was upheld on appeal.
In May the People’s Court of Ben Tre convicted seven peaceful land rights
activists, including Mennonite pastor Duong Kim Khai and Hoa Hao Buddhist
member Tran Thi Thuy, for subversion and sentenced them to long prison terms.
Authorities continue to harass, interrogate, and in some cases detain and
imprison online critics. In January 2011 police arrested human rights blogger Ho
Thi Bich Khuong. In May democracy advocate Nguyen Kim Nhan was arrested
for allegedly conducting propaganda against the state, five months after he was
released from prison on the same charge. In August blogger Lu Van Bay was
sentenced to four years for his pro-democracy articles published on the
Internet. Also in August blogger Pham Minh Hoang was sentenced to three
years for subversion.
Ethnic minority activists also face arrest and imprisonment. In January the Lang
Son provincial court sentenced blogger Vi Duc Hoi, an ethnic Tay, on charges of
conducting propaganda against the state to eight years in prison, reduced to
five years on appeal in April. In March land rights activist Chau Heng, a member
of the Khmer Krom minority group, was sentenced to two years in prison in An
Giang on charges of “destruction of property” and “causing public disorder.”
The People’s Court of Gia Lai imprisoned eight Montagnard Protestants in April
to sentences between eight to twelve years for violating article 87 of the penal
code, which outlaws “undermining unity policy.”
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Information
The government does not allow independent or privately-owned domestic
media to operate and exerts strict control over the press and internet. Criminal
penalties apply to authors, publications, websites, and internet users who disseminate
materials deemed to oppose the government, threaten national security, reveal state secrets, or promote “reactionary” ideas. The government
blocks access to politically sensitive websites, requires internet cafe owners to
monitor and store information about users’ online activities, and subjects independent
bloggers and online critics to harassment and pressure.
In August anti-China protests in Hanoi were dispersed with force. Protesters
were intimidated, harassed, and detained for peacefully marching near the
Embassy of China and around Hoan Kiem lake. Government media, including
newspapers and television stations, continually cast negative images of protesters
and labeled them “reactionary.”
Freedom of Religion
The government restricts religious practices through legislation, registration
requirements, and harassment and surveillance. Religious groups are required
to register with the government and operate under government-controlled management
boards. Despite allowing many government-affiliated churches and
pagodas to hold worship services, the government bans any religious activity
that it arbitrarily deems to oppose “national interests,” harm national unity,
cause public disorder, or “sow divisions.”
Local police continue to prohibit unsanctioned Buddhist Hoa Hao groups from
commemorating the anniversary of the death of Hoa Hao founder Huynh Phu
So. During Buddhist festivals in May and August, Da Nang police blocked
access to Giac Minh and An Cu pagodas and intimidated Buddhist followers.
Both pagodas are affiliated with the un-sanctioned Unified Buddhist Church of
Vietnam.
Protestant pastor Nguyen Trung Ton was arrested in January on unknown
charges. Three Catholic Ha Mon Montagnard activists—Blei, Phoi, and Dinh
Pset—were arrested in March. Two Cao Dai activists, Nguyen Van Lia and Tran
Hoai An, were arrested in April and July. Also in April Protestant pastor Nguyen
Cong Chinh was arrested and charged with “undermining national unity.” At
least 15 Catholics affiliated with Redemptorist churches in Hanoi and Ho Chi
Minh City, including bloggers Le Van Son and Ta Phong Tan, were arrested in
July, August, and September.
In July prominent religious and democracy campaigner Father Nguyen Van Ly
was sent back to prison after approximately 16 months of medical
parole/house arrest. Father Ly suffers from partial paralysis resulting from
strokes previously suffered in prison and there continue to be serious concerns
for his health.
Criminal Justice System
Police brutality, including torture and fatal beatings, continues to be reported in
all regions of the country. At least 13 people died in police custody within the
first 10 months of 2011.
Political and religious detainees and others whose cases are considered sensitive
are frequently tortured during interrogation, held incommunicado prior to
trial, and denied family visits and access to lawyers. Vietnamese courts remain
under the firm control of the government and the Vietnam Communist party,
and lack independence and impartiality. Political and religious dissidents are
often tried without the assistance of legal counsel in proceedings that fail to
meet international fair trial standards. Defense lawyers who take on politically
sensitive cases are intimidated, harassed, debarred, and imprisoned.
Vietnamese law continues to authorize arbitrary “administrative detention”
without trial. Under Ordinance 44 (2002) and Decree 76 (2003), peaceful dissidents
and others deemed threats to national security or public order can be
involuntarily committed to mental institutions, placed under house arrest, or
detained in state-run “rehabilitation” or “re-education” centers.
People dependent on illegal drugs can be held in government detention centers
where they are subjected to “labor therapy,” the mainstay of Vietnam’s
approach to drug treatment. In early 2011 there were 123 centers across the
country holding some 40,000 people, including children as young as 12. Their
detention is not subject to any form of due process or judicial oversight and
routinely lasts for as long as four years. Infringement of center rules—including
the work requirement—is punished by beatings with truncheons, shocks with
electrical batons, and being locked in disciplinary rooms where detainees are
deprived of food and water. Former detainees report being forced to work in cashew processing and other forms of agricultural production, including potato
or coffee farming; construction work; and garment manufacturing and other
forms of manufacturing, such as making bamboo and rattan products. Under
Vietnamese law, companies who source products from these centres are eligible
for tax exemptions. Some products produced as a result of this forced labor
made their way into the supply chain of companies who sell goods abroad,
including to the United States and Europe.
Key International Actors
Vietnam’s complicated relationship with China plays a key role in both domestic
and foreign affairs. Domestically, the government has been increasingly criticized
on nationalist grounds by many activists and some retired military officials
for weak responses to what is widely seen in Vietnam as China’s aggressive
behavior in the disputed Spratly and Paracel Islands. The government in
2011 worked to silence this increasingly public and audible anti-China chorus.
Internationally, the government has attempted to increase cooperation with the
US, India, Japan, and neighboring Association of Southeast Asian Nations countries
as a regional counter-balance China’s influence.
Despite Japan’s considerable leverage as Vietnam’s largest bilateral donor, it
has repeatedly failed to publicly comment on Vietnam’s deteriorating rights
record.
The relationship between Vietnam and the US continues to grow closer. In
September Vietnam opened a new consulate in New York, and the US
Consulate in Ho Chi Minh City expanded with the opening of an American
Center. The US and Vietnam are also among those currently negotiating to join
the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a multilateral free trade agreement.
In January and May United Nations independent experts who had visited
Vietnam in 2010 published their findings. The UN special rapporteur on human
rights and extreme poverty issued a broadly positive report but urged the government
to ratify and implement major human rights treaties, including the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment.
The UN special rapporteur on minority issues issued a more critical report, acknowledging some progress but raising concerns about the potential denial
of religious freedom and “other serious violations of civil rights.” The rapporteur
also pointedly noted that obstacles during her visit “impeded her ability to
obtain perspectives other than those in consonance with official Government
positions.”
AID<E@8
More than three years after deadly street clashes between police and opposition
protesters left 10 individuals dead, there has been no meaningful accountability
for the excessive use of force by law enforcement. The government
decriminalized libel, but drastically increased financial penalties in civil libel
suits. Authorities continue to restrict freedom of assembly. Torture and ill-treatment
in police custody persist and the government has failed to effectively
investigate a troubling number of deaths in custody and non-combat deaths in
the military.
Armenia’s international partners have not fully leveraged their influence to
improve the human rights situation.
Lack of Accountability for Excessive Use of Force
In April 2011 President Serge Sargsyan ordered efforts to intensify investigations
into the role of security forces in the March 1, 2008 clashes with opposition
protestors in Yerevan, the capital, which resulted in the deaths of 10 people,
including two police. Four officers were convicted in December 2009 but
immediately amnestied. Under a May 2011 general amnesty all civilians remaining
in custody on charges related to the clashes, including two prominent opposition
politicians, Sasun Mikaelian and Nikol Pashinian, were released.
Freedom of Assembly
In April 2011, Yerevan officials allowed the opposition Armenian National
Congress (ANC) to demonstrate in Freedom Square for the first time since the
March 2008 clashes. However, opposition activists allege that the authorities
prevented demonstrators from traveling from other cities to participate in subsequent
large opposition rallies.
In October police arrested Vartgen Gaspari outside the prime minister’s office
as he participated in a peaceful demonstration of a few dozen parents of military
personnel and activists protesting the large number of military non-combatant deaths. Gaspari was charged with hooliganism and resisting police and
released on bail two days later.
In December 2010 a court imposed a two-year suspended sentences on opposition
activists Sargis Gevorgian and Davit Kiramijyan for hooliganism and
assaulting police when police tried to prevent demonstrators from entering
Freedom Square in March 2010.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Local and international human rights organizations reported ill-treatment of
detained persons in police custody. In August the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) made public the report on its
2010 visit, which documented a “significant number of credible and consistent
allegations of physical ill-treatment of detained persons,” as well as torture of
detainees, allegedly in order to secure confessions and other information.
In August police beat and detained seven ANC activists after they intervened in
what they believed was an illegal police stop and search of another man in a
Yerevan park. Medics diagnosed the activists with concussions. Police charged
all seven with hooliganism and assaulting an official. A court remanded one
activist, Tigran Arakelian, to four months of pre-trial detention. At this writing
there had been no investigation into the police’s actions.
In June two plainclothes Yerevan police officers shot and killed robbery suspect
Arman Yengibaryan. Police justified the use of force by saying Yengibaryan fired
a gas pistol at police while fleeing. Local human rights groups contend police
actions were excessive. Yengibaryan’s gun had no live ammunition and gunshot
wounds to his head and abdomen suggest police did not try to minimize
recourse to lethal force. An initial criminal investigation concluded the police
actions were lawful, but Yengibaryan’s family is challenging that outcome on
the basis that the investigation was not effective, as required by international
law, and in particular because they, as the family of the deceased, had no
access to the investigation.
Despite a May amnesty releasing 590 prisoners, prison overcrowding persists,
leading to violations in detention conditions and standards of treatment, such as unhygienic conditions, inadequate medical care, and lack of exercise.
Overcrowding is mainly due to courts improper overuse of pre-trial detentions.
Deaths in Custody
Unexplained deaths in custody also mar Armenia’s human rights record. In
October 2010 Slavik Voskanyan died in pre-trial detention in Vanadzor two
weeks after his detention on murder charges involving a police officer’s mother.
According to his family, Voskanyan died from gangrene, which developed after
a wound sustained in custody became infected and was not properly treated. A
criminal investigation was closed after it concluded that the prison doctor’s
negligence was not responsible for Voskanyan’s death. The investigation never
examined how Voskanyan sustained the wounds that lead to his death.
In November 2010 a court convicted Ashot Harutyunyan, former head of the
Charentsavan Police Investigative Department, to eight years for abuse of
authority and incitement to suicide with respect to Vahan Khalafyan, who died
from knife wounds in police custody in April 2010. Local human rights groups
and Khalafyan’s family believe he was stabbed to death.
In May 2011 a court overturned prosecutors’ March 2011 decision to terminate
the investigation into the 2007 death of Levon Gulyan. Officials claim Gulyan
jumped from the second story of a police station while trying to escape.
Gulyan’s relatives insist he was tortured.
Army Abuses
Local human rights groups report ill-treatment, hazing, and an alarming number
of non-combat deaths in the army. The Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly’s Vanadzor
Office reported at least 17 non-combat deaths through October 2011. For example,
Torgom Sarukhanyan, 21, died in February, allegedly of a self-inflicted gunshot.
Ministry of Defense investigators arrested three servicemen on charges of
incitement to suicide. Sarukhanyan’s family claims that he was murdered and
that his body bore signs of beatings.
In December 2010 a court sentenced Maj. Sasun Galstyan to three years imprisonment
for abuse of authority. A video of Galstyan beating and humiliating two
conscripts appeared on YouTube in September 2010.
Freedom of Media
In May 2010 Armenia decriminalized libel. However, amendments to the civil
code introduced high monetary fines for libel and defamation and led to an
increase in lawsuits against newspapers, particularly by public officials. In
some cases courts’ disproportionately large damage awards threaten the survival
of newspapers. Journalists and editors report the chilling effect of large
fines.
In February 2011 a court ordered the pro-opposition daily Haykakan Zhamanak
to pay three government-connected businesspeople approximately US$16,500
in damages and retract allegations that they were implicated in criminal activities
(the average monthly salary in Armenia is $90). The newspaper has sought
donations from its readers to pay the fine and keep publishing.
In June a court ordered the opposition newspaper Zhamanak to pay former
President Robert Kocharyan approximately $8,250 for having published allegations
implicating him in corrupt business deals during and after his presidency,
placing Zhamanak in serious financial straits. In another defamation suit
brought by Kocharyan, a court in June froze the daily newspaper Hraparak’s
bank accounts pending a verdict.
In a separate case, in September a Yerevan court froze approximately $8,000 of
Hraparak’s assets and prohibited the newspaper from writing about a libel lawsuit
filed against the paper by the head of the state body responsible for judicial
supervision.
In February a court ordered the daily Yerkir to pay approximately $800 to progovernment
parliamentarian Tigran Arzakantsyan in a spurious suit after the
newspaper called Arzakantsyan a “dandy” in an article.
Lack of media pluralism remains a problem. In December 2010 the National
Commission on Television and Radio, responsible for broadcasting licenses, denied independent television station A1+ a license for the 13th time, despite a
2008 European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) judgment that Armenia had violated
freedom of expression by repeatedly and arbitrarily denying the station a
license.
The authorities also refused to grant digital broadcast licenses to ALM television,
whose owner has expressed political ambitions, and to the Gyumri-based
GALA TV, although GALA can broadcast on analogue frequencies until 2015 with
its existing license. Since 2007 GALA has been subject to apparently politically
motivated court cases and harassment by state agencies, seemingly in retaliation
for the station’s coverage of opposition party activities.
Human Rights Defenders
In August a court heard a defamation suit Lernapat Mayor Vano Yeghiazaryan
filed against Artur Sakunts, head of Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly’s Vanadzor
Office, after Sakunts accused Yeghiazaryan in a newspaper interview of embezzlement
and abuse of power, and criticized the authorities’ unwillingness to
investigate the allegations. The trial is ongoing.
Key International Actors
Several of Armenia’s international partners limited their criticism of the government’s
human rights record.
In its May European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the European Union
highlighted Armenia’s lack of judicial independence, limited media pluralism,
poor prison conditions, and inadequate investigations into ill-treatment, but
stopped short of articulating concrete human rights improvements required as
part of its engagement with Armenia’s government.
In an October 2011 resolution on Armenia’s fulfillment of its obligations as a
Council of Europe member, the organization’s Parliamentary Assembly gave the
government undue credit by stating, “the chapter on the March 2008 events
can finally be considered closed.” The resolution nevertheless reiterated concerns
about the lack of accountability for the 10 deaths during the clashes.
In a May report on Armenia, Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner
for human rights, focused on freedom of expression, assembly, and
association, and abuses in the army. He urged the authorities hold accountable
those responsible for excessive use of force in the March 2008 clashes.
In its April concluding observations, the United Nations Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination urged the authorities to, among other
things, do more to combat manifestations of discrimination against individuals
and groups.
AQ<I98@A8E
Azerbaijan’s human rights record deteriorated in 2011. The government cracked
down on all forms of protest and imprisoned dozens of youth activists after
sham trials. Although the number of government-initiated criminal and civil
libel cases against journalists decreased, the atmosphere for journalists and
other critics remained hostile. The government’s so-called beautification campaign
in central Baku, the capital, resulted in forced evictions and illegal demolitions.
Restrictions on freedom of religion and torture and ill-treatment in custody
also persisted.
Azerbaijan continued to deny access to the country for the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly rapporteur on political prisoners in Azerbaijan.
Freedom of Media
The Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety, a local media monitoring
organization, reported that more than 50 domestic and foreign journalists were
harassed or attacked in 2011. In March six masked men abducted and beat
Seymur Haziyev, a journalist for the pro-opposition daily Azadlig, warning him
to stop writing articles criticizing the authorities. In April, three unidentified
assailants kidnapped Azadlig reporter Ramin Deko, held him for eight hours,
and warned him against using social media to criticize the government. Police
failed to effectively investigate the attacks.
In October a court remanded Khural newspaper editor-in-chief Avaz Zeinalli to
three months pre-trial custody on dubious extortion charges. Earlier in October
a court ordered the seizure of Khural’s office equipment to pay fines imposed in
three defamation cases brought by the head of the presidential administration
and other officials against the newspaper in 2009.
In April police prevented a Swedish television crew from covering a protest by
taking their cameras and deleting all footage. In July officials deported
Bloomberg Markets photographer Diana Markosian from the Baku airport. In
June four men assaulted American freelance writer Amanda Erickson and British human rights activist Celia Davies, breaking Davies’s arm. Two alleged
assailants now face criminal charges.
Despite repeated calls from Azerbaijan’s international partners for the government
to decriminalize libel and refrain from using criminal and civil libel
charges against critical voices, officials initiated seven libel cases against journalists
and others in the first half of 2011; at least two resulted in imprisonment.
In May the authorities released Eynulla Fatullayev, a prominent editor and government
critic, who was imprisoned in 2007 on politically motivated charges,
and whose release the European Court of Human Rights had ordered in April
2010.
Freedom of Assembly
The government severely restricted freedom of assembly. Officials did not
authorize any demonstrations in central Baku and police quickly and often violently
dispersed unauthorized protests.
The government cracked down on a series of protests inspired by the prodemocracy
Arab Spring movements. Police detained more than 50 activists in
March after a two-day protest. The courts tried dozens in closed late night trials,
sentencing activists for up to 10 days.
In an unauthorized rally on April 2, police physically obstructed protesters from
gathering and detained over 200 people—including public figures, journalists,
and opposition activists—fourteen of whom were sentenced in unfair trials to
up to three years imprisonment. On April 17, police again forced demonstrators
away from a protest site, detained more than 100 people and prosecuted
dozens on misdemeanor charges.
Political Prisoners
Imprisonment on politically motivated charges is a continuing problem. In the
first six months of 2011, local human rights activists counted between 23 and 45 political prisoners, including several activists involved in the March and
April protests.
In March police detained youth activist Bakhtyar Hajiyev, 29, in advance of a
protest planned for March 11, which he had promoted through social media. In
a politically motivated trial, Hajiyev was sentenced to two years in prison for
military draft evasion, although he had asked to perform alternative service, as
permitted by law.
Also in March social media activist and opposition Popular Front party member
Jabbar Savalanli, 20, was sentenced to two-and-a-half years in prison on bogus
drug possession charges. In the days leading up to his arrest he had posted
comments online criticizing the government.
The authorities still refuse to grant a visa to the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly’s rapporteur on political prisoners in Azerbaijan, who has never been
allowed to visit Azerbaijan since being appointed in March 2009.
Ill-Treatment and Deaths in Custody
Torture and ill-treatment continue with impunity and two men died in police
custody in 2011. In the first half of 2011 the Azerbaijan Committee against
Torture, an independent prison monitoring group, received 89 complaints alleging
ill-treatment in custody.
In January Elvin Askerov, 31, died following a police chase and his subsequent
detention. Police allege he was bruised during the chase. Askerov’s family
believes he was beaten in Baku’s Nizami District police station. Despite the
family’s request, no investigation followed.
Turac Zeynalov, 31, was detained on August 24 on espionage charges and later
died in the custody of the Ministry of National Security of the Nakhichevan
Autonomous Republic. Relatives who visited Zeynalov the day after his detention
stated that he appeared to have been beaten and could not move. He died
three days later. Officials claim that he died of skin cancer. The authorities
opened an investigation. In September security ministry officials detained and
deported a Radio Free Europe Azerbaijani Service correspondent investigating Zeynalov’s death.
Forced Evictions and Illegal Demolitions
Since 2009, citing city “beautification,” the Baku mayor’s office has evicted
hundreds of residents—sometimes using force—and demolished their homes.
Homeowners often receive compensation well below market value and have few
options for legal recourse.
Evictions were also used to harass human rights defenders. On August 11, violating
a court injunction, the authorities demolished without warning a building
owned by human rights defender Leyla Yunus that served as an office for
Yunus’s Institute for Peace and Democracy, the Azerbaijani Campaign to Ban
Landmines, and the only women’s crisis center in Baku. Yunus had repeatedly
criticized the government’s demolition campaign.
Freedom of Religion
The government tightened restrictions on all religious groups, dramatically
increasing fines for unauthorized religious activity and requiring all religious
groups to seek prior authorization from the government to gather after the June
2010 amendments.
In June police dissolved a private meeting of 40 Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ganja,
detaining and questioning attendees for up to 10 hours. A court fined three for
violating regulations on religious meetings. The same day police raided the
Baptist congregation in Sumgait, warning the leader not to meet for worship
without state permission. The Ganja community of Jehovah’s Witnesses has
unsuccessfully attempted to register at least twice since June 2010.
In December 2010 the government banned women from wearing head scarves
in schools and universities, leading thousands to drop out. In October a court
convicted five people of organizing unsanctioned protests and resisting police
during a May demonstration against the head scarves ban, imprisoning them to
up to two-and-a-half years.
In January 2011, officials arrested Movsum Samadov, leader of an outlawed
Islamic party, after a speech was posted on YouTube in which he denounced
President Ilham Aliyev. In October he was convicted to 12 years imprisonment
for an attempted coup.
Human Rights Defenders
In August a court sentenced Vidadi Isganderov, head of the human rights
organization Support for Protection of Democracy, to three years in prison on
dubious charges of interference with the November 2010 parliamentary elections.
The authorities charged Isganderov a few months after he filed a complaint
alleging vote rigging in the district in which he ran for parliament.
Isganderov also served short sentences in April after two arrests for participating
in unsanctioned rallies.
Several human rights lawyers faced politically motivated disciplinary and criminal
actions and the government interfered with the work of human rights
groups. In August, following a complaint by a police chief, Azerbaijan’s Bar
Association suspended Khalid Bagirov, who represented the family of Elvin
Askerov who died in police custody in January. Another lawyer, Elchin Namazov,
was permanently disbarred and faces criminal sanctions.
In March the Justice Ministry suspended the Azerbaijan Human Rights House, a
member of the International Human Rights House Network and a registered
organization that served as a training and resource center and conference
venue for local groups. Also in March the ministry ordered the National
Democratic Institute (NDI) to suspend activities in Azerbaijan pending registration.
Since 2006, authorities have denied NDI’s repeated registration attempts.
The Ministry of Justice again refused registration to the Media Monitoring
Institute, which has unsuccessfully attempted to register six times since 2009.
In March in Ganja, Azerbaijan’s second largest city, local officials and police,
without explanation, evicted from their offices three NGOs: the Regional Center
for Development of Democratic Education, Demos, and the Election Monitoring
and Democracy Studies Center.
Key International Actors
While the European Union, United States, and other international and regional
institutions and partners criticized Azerbaijan’s human rights record, they failed
to condition their engagement on concrete human rights improvements.
The EU, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and
the US Embassy in Baku all expressed concern over the arrests of youth
activists.
In May the European Parliament adopted a resolution expressing “deep concern
at the increasing number of incidents of harassment, attacks and violence
against civil society and social network activists and journalists in Azerbaijan.”
The same month Catherine Ashton, EU High representative for foreign affairs
and security policy/ vice-president of the European Commission, issued a statement
expressing concern about the convictions of Jabbar Savalanli and
Bakhtyar Hajiyev.
On August 16 the UN high commissioner for human rights criticized the destruction
of Leyla Yunus’s property and called on the government to ensure safe
working conditions for human rights defenders. The EU and the US Mission to
the OSCE also objected to the demolition.
In a September observation on human rights in Azerbaijan, Thomas
Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner for human rights, criticized the
authorities for failure to adequately protect freedom of expression, association,
and assembly.
B<C8ILJ
The December 2010 presidential election resulted in victory for Alyaksandr
Lukashenka, who has ruled the country for the last 16 years. The Organization
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) found the election to be flawed,
crushing hopes for democratic progress in Belarus. On election night riot police
beat and arrested hundreds of largely peaceful protesters. Over 40 were imprisoned,
although in apparent response to international pressure the government
released many throughout the year.
In the following months the authorities unleashed a harassment campaign, targeting
human rights defenders, political activists, journalists, and lawyers.
Severe restrictions on freedoms of association, assembly, and media remain
and the level of repression is unprecedented.
In August 2011 prominent Belarusian human rights defender Ales Bialiatski was
arrested on politically motivated charges of tax evasion.
December 2010 Post-Election Unrest and Political Prisoners
On the night of December 19, tens of thousands of demonstrators took to the
streets of Minsk, the capital, protesting what they felt was another stolen election.
Riot police violently dispersed the largely peaceful demonstration, beating
everyone within reach. They arrested more than 700 protesters, including
dozens of journalists and seven presidential candidates. Hundreds served up
to 15 days in detention for misdemeanor charges of “hooliganism.” A coalition
of independent human rights NGOs in Minsk who documented the crackdown
found that hundreds of detainees alleged abuse while in police custody, including
beatings, no access to food and water, and being forced to sign police
reports containing false information about the circumstances of their arrest.
Trials were held behind closed doors and marred by multiple due process violations.
Most defendants had no access to defense counsel and were not allowed
to call witnesses. There were no acquittals.
Belarusian authorities sought to portray the December unrest as an attempt,
planned by the opposition and foreign states, to overthrow the government.
More than 40 persons—including journalists, civil society leaders, and five former
presidential candidates—were sentenced to up to six years of imprisonment
on trumped-up rioting charges. The NGO coalition found that detainees
were held in poor detention conditions, in virtual isolation from the outside
world, and had severely restricted access to legal counsel at all stages of
detention and trial. Human rights monitors reported that those accused of rioting
or public disorder were convicted despite lack of evidence of engaging in or
inciting violence.
There continue to be allegations of serious psychological and physical abuse
and due process rights violations of political prisoners who remain in custody.
Many are routinely denied meetings with their lawyers. They often do not
receive correspondences and are prohibited from family visits. Some are
repeatedly placed in solitary confinement or punishment cells without justification
and some are denied medical care.
Human Rights Defenders, Civil Society Groups, and Lawyers
In the weeks following the December protests, state security forces repeatedly
raided offices of human rights groups, confiscating equipment, interrogating
staff, and arresting those suspected of participating in pro-democracy protests.
Human rights NGOs report several cases of politically motivated expulsions
from universities and dismissals from public sector jobs.
Involvement in an unregistered organization constitutes a criminal offense
under Belarusian law. The authorities continue to routinely deny registration to
most civil society groups for arbitrary reasons, making activists constantly vulnerable
to prosecution.
In January and June 2011 the Belarusian Helsinki Committee, Belarus’s only
nationally registered human rights group, received two politically motivated
warnings from the Ministry of Justice. Under Belarusian law, two official warnings
may lead to suspension of an organization’s activities.
In August Ales Bialiatski, vice-president of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH)and head of the Human Rights Centre Viasna (Viasna), an
independent human rights group, was arrested on criminal charges of largescale
tax evasion, after Lithuanian and Polish authorities released details of his
personal bank accounts to Belarusian authorities. Viasna used the funds,
received from international donors, for legal and financial assistance for political
prisoners and their families in Belarus.
Authorities withdrew Viasna’s registration in 2003 and have since routinely
denied it registration. As a result, Viasna cannot open a bank account in
Belarus.
In 2011, authorities expelled or banned from entering Belarus an unprecedented
13 foreign human rights defenders, seriously impeding independent monitoring
of the human rights situation in the country.
The authorities consistently targeted lawyers representing clients charged in
connection with the December events. The Ministry of Justice arbitrarily disbarred
or revoked the licenses of seven lawyers, a clear warning to lawyers
against taking on “political” cases. Lawyers who represent political prisoners
continue to face difficulties accessing their clients, resulting in some individuals
being left without legal counsel.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Belarusian authorities continue to severely curtail the right to assemble peacefully.
In 2011 the political opposition held “silent” demonstrations to protest
Lukashenka’s government or express support for political prisoners. Police disperse,
sometimes harshly, protesters who do nothing more than stroll silently
or clap their hands. Many were sentenced to up to 15 days of administrative
detention for “hooliganism.” In October the Belarusian parliament adopted
restrictive amendments to a number of laws that seemed aimed at banning
silent demonstrations. The amendments included restrictions on where demonstrations
can be held, and introduced a more complicated procedure for obtaining
permits for public gatherings. Also according to the new legislation, actions
directed at spreading or sharing information about a planned gathering may constitute an offense unless the gathering had already been approved by the
authorities.
Freedom of Media
The government continued to severely restrict freedom of media. The authorities
routinely threatened the independent print media, and on several occasions
blocked social media and other websites. Police arrested dozens of journalists
covering pro-democracy protests in December and the later “silent”
protests. For example, in May 2011 a court handed independent journalist Iryna
Khalip a two-year suspended sentence on trumped-up riot charges in connection
with the December protests. In May the authorities initiated closure proceedings
for the independent newspapers Nasha Niva and Narodnaya Vola.
Although legal proceedings were discontinued in August, both newspapers
received fines for trumped-up violations of media law. In July a court convicted
Andrzej Poczobut, a correspondent for the Polish newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza,
for defaming Lukashenka. In his articles Poczobut called President Lukashenka
a dictator. He was handed a three-year suspended sentence. In September a
higher court upheld the conviction.
Death Penalty
In July 2011 Belarusian authorities executed two individuals, despite the United
Nations Human Rights Committee’s request to not carry out the executions
pending the committee’s review of their cases. Both men, convicted of murder,
admitted their guilt but alleged they were tortured during interrogations. The
committee deplored their executions, stating that Belarus violated its international
obligations by imposing death sentences on individuals whose right to
fair trial may have been violated.
Key International Actors
Many foreign governments and international organizations condemned the
post-election crackdown and expressed concern over the deepening human
rights crisis in Belarus.
In December 2010 Hillary Clinton, United States secretary of state, and
Catherine Ashton, European Union representative for foreign affairs and security
policy/ vice-president of the European Commission, issued a joint statement
calling the election “an unfortunate step backwards” in the democratic development
of Belarus. In January 2011 the foreign ministers of Germany, Sweden,
Poland, and the Czech Republic issued a joint statement condemning the postelection
crackdown.
In January the EU and the US imposed new financial and travel sanctions
against the Belarusian government. The US significantly extended the list of
Belarusian top-ranking officials subject to visa bans and travel restrictions, but
did not specify how many officials were affected by the limitations. In August
the US imposed new economic sanctions against four major state-owned
Belarusian companies.
In 2011 the European Parliament adopted four resolutions on the human rights
situation in Belarus. In its resolution on Belarus adopted in January, the
European Parliament expressed its dismay at the “unprecedented wave of violence,
intimidation, mass arrests, and prosecution of political opponents.”
In February 2011 UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon expressed concern about
“reports of harassment and continued detention of journalists, civil society
activists and opposition candidates” and called for their release.
In June 2011 the UN Human Rights Council adopted a resolution condemning
violations in Belarus, and called on the high commissioner for human rights to
monitor the human rights situation and report to the Council during the following
sessions. The resolution also encouraged relevant UN thematic special procedures
mandate holders to pay particular attention to the human rights situation
in Belarus.
During her speech at the Eastern Partnership summit in September, German
Chancellor Angela Merkel called the government’s actions against opposition
“unacceptable.”
In contrast, Russia has condemned international sanctions against Belarus,
calling them “counterproductive.” In August 2011 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced that in 2012 Russia will supply gas to Belarus at a
discount price as a sign of support.
In response to international pressure, Lukashenka’s government gradually
released some political prisoners. In January 2011 Belarusian authorities
released several of the detainees facing riot charges and transferred several
others to house arrest. In March they re-classified riot charges against six
detainees to less serious offences. Between June and August the authorities
pardoned 13 individuals who were convicted in relation to December events;
most, however, had to admit guilt as a condition of their release.
In an unexpected public statement in August, Lukashenka called on opposition
leaders to join him in a strategic discussion on leading Belarus out of political
and economic crises. In September, 11 more political prisoners were released
after being granted a presidential pardon.
Meanwhile the Belarusian government ignored international requests to restore
the OSCE mandate in Belarus, which it discontinued in January, following the
organization’s critical assessment of the December election. Lukashenka’s government
also refused to cooperate with the Moscow Mechanism, the OSCE’s
only existing monitoring mechanism that does not require consensus. The OSCE
imposed the procedure in April.
BFJE@8 8E; H<IQ<>FM@E8
The continuing political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina impeded necessary
human rights reforms, including the constitutional changes needed to end discriminatory
restrictions on Jews and Roma holding political office. Roma in particular
remain extremely vulnerable and subject to widespread discrimination.
More than 15 years after being indicted for the 1995 Srebrenica genocide,
Bosnian Serb wartime commander Ratko Mladic faced trial in the Hague.
Returns of refugees and displaced persons continued to dwindle with little or
no progress on durable solutions, including for Roma refugees from Kosovo.
Ethnic and Religious Discrimination
Bosnia again failed to implement a 2009 European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) ruling (the Sejdic and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina case) ordering
the country to amend its constitution to eliminate ethnic discrimination in the
national tri-partite presidency and House of Peoples. Currently only members of
the three main ethnic groups (Bosniaks, Serbs, and Croats) may stand for election.
Political gridlock, including failure to form a national government one year
after general elections, meant the parliamentary body charged with proposing
constitutional amendments had to yet to be formed and a similar ministeriallevel
body had yet to meet at this writing.
Although more Roma children were enrolled in primary and secondary education
in 2011, they still attend school at lower rates than their peers. In addition,
the 99 percent unemployment rate for Roma in Bosnia in 2011 meant even
those who completed school had virtually no chance of finding work. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
up to 10 percent of Roma are not on the public registry in Bosnia, impeding
their access to public services. Many Roma remained unable to access needed
health care services due to registration restrictions, and most Roma remained
in informal settlements with poor housing.
More than 100 Roma in Mostar, many elderly or children, faced imminent forced
eviction in November from their homes in a settlement to make room for a
housing project sponsored by the city and the Ministry of Human Rights for 18 other Roma families. At this writing the authorities had failed to identify alternative
housing for those facing eviction, some of whom were moved in late
2010 from another location in Mostar.
War Crimes Accountability
On May 31, 2011, Bosnian Serb army commander Ratko Mladic was extradited
to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) (see
Serbia chapter). Mladic made his first appearance in court in June, pleading not
guilty to 11 counts of genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes,
including the massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian men and boys from Srebrenica
in July 1995 and the siege of Sarajevo from 1992 to 1995. In October the trial
member rejected a request from the prosecutor to split the charges into two trials
and proceed with the Srebrenica charges first to ensure efficiency and justice
for victims. The trial member concluded the request would “prejudice the
accused and render the trials less manageable.”
The trial of Bosnian Serb wartime president Radovan Karadzic, charged with
many of the same crimes as Mladic, continued at the ICTY in 2011, with some
delays due to disputes between his legal team and the prosecutor’s office
about delayed disclosure of evidence to the defense.
In September Momcilo Perisic, former Yugoslav army chief of staff, was convicted
at the ICTY of war crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia,
including involvement in the Srebrenica massacre. He was sentenced to 27
years in prison.
Between September 2010 and 2011, the domestic War Crimes Chamber in
Bosnia reached final verdicts in 24 cases, raising the total number of completed
cases to 75.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
The adoption of a revised strategy in 2010 to support the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) did little to arrest the declining number of
such returns. According to UNHCR only 146 refugees and 177 IDPs returned to their areas of origin in the first six months of 2011. As of mid-2011, there were
113,188 registered IDPs (including about 7,000 in collective centers), according
to UNHCR, with 48,583 in the Federation, 64,359 in Republika Srpska, and 246
in Brcko District. Impediments to return remained similar to previous years: lack
of economic opportunity in Bosnia, inadequate housing, and reluctance to
return to areas where residents would be an ethnic minority.
Bosnia continued to host Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians from Kosovo under temporary
protected status, many of whom had lived in the country for over a
decade. As of June 2011, UNHCR reported that there were 152 Kosovo Roma in
Bosnia, up from previous years.
National Security and Human Rights
In June Ahmed el-Farahat, an Egyptian national arrested and detained at
Lukavica immigration detention center in October 2010 under national security
legislation, was deported to Egypt without criminal charges being filed against
him or the opportunity to examine evidence and appeal his deportation. El-
Farahat, who had gone on hunger strike earlier in the year to protest his indefinite
detention, had lived in Bosnia with legal permanent resident status since
the early 1990s.Five other national security suspects were detained without
charge at Lukavica, including three with cases pending before the ECtHR.
In March Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner of human
rights, condemned Bosnia’s failure to implement recommendations, made after
his 2007 visit to the country, on improved safeguards for national security suspects,
including a judicial remedy for long-term detainees at Lukavica detention
center and suspending deportations for those at risk of torture or ill-treatment
in the countries of return.
In February the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina began the trial of six defendants
charged with the 2010 bombing of a police station in the town of
Bugojno, which killed one police officer. Three of the six defendants pleaded
not guilty, while two defendants refused to enter pleas and one did not attend
the hearing. At this writing only two defendants had attended the two hearings
of the trial.
Freedom of Media
In August journalist Omer Hasanovic and cameraman Emir Hrncic of the
Federation Radio-Television were attacked in Zivinice by 10 men who confiscated
their equipment. They were reporting on Mehmed Butkovic’s activities during
his suspension as the head imam of the Islamic community in Zivinice.
Witnesses claimed that the assailants were Butkovic and his followers. There
were no arrests in the case at this writing.
There were no significant developments in investigating threats made in 2010
against TV editor Bakir Hadziomerovic and an assault on TV journalist Osman
Drina the same year. Hadziomerovic continued to receive death threats—the latest
in February 2011—but no arrests had been made at this writing.
Hadziomerovic has been living under police protection since 2009.
Key International Actors
The European Union played an increasingly significant role in Bosnia in 2011,
opening a new office in Sarajevo to house both the EU Special Representative
in Bosnia and an increasing number of staff working towards EU integration.
Peter Sorensen, the new head of the EU Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina
(BiH) and EU special representative (EUSR), was appointed in 2011 and took
office in September.
Catherine Ashton, the EU high representative for foreign affairs and security
policy/ vice-president of the European Commission, assumed the main role in
defusing tensions with Republika Srpska leader Milorad Dodik after he called
for an RS referendum on national government institutions, including the war
crimes tribunals, which was seen as a precursor for eventual referendum on
Republika Srpska’s secession from Bosnia.
The European Commission’s annual progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina
in October identified the continued failure to form a state-level government as a
key obstacle to reform, including implementation of the Sejdic and Finci ruling.
The report also highlighted ongoing discrimination against Roma (despite some
moves to implement the Roma strategy), political pressure on the media and intimidation of journalists, segregated education, and little progress on rule of
law.
In his March report released following his visit to Bosnia, Hammarberg underlined
the need to enhance protection of Roma, including the Kosovo Roma,
under temporary protected status, end ethnic segregation in public schools,
and to find a durable solution for refugees and IDPs.
In February the Council of Europe’s European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance (ECRI) criticized lack of progress on implementing the Sejdic and
Finci ruling, while highlighting the continued marginalization of minority
groups, particularly Roma.
In a joint opinion issued in June, United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
and United Kingdom Foreign Affairs Minister William Hague expressed disappointment
at the protracted institutional gridlock in Bosnia that was preventing
needed reforms, including ending ethnic discrimination in politics. During a
visit to Bosnia the same month, US Assistant Secretary of State Philip H.
Gordon stated the country had made little political progress since 2006-2007
and called on Bosnian politicians to form a government and stop stoking ethnic
tensions.
CIF8K@8
As Croatia closed membership negotiations and received a tentative date (July
2013) to join the European Union, its progress on human rights lagged behind
its commitments. The government’s reaction to the international war crimes
conviction of a Croatian general and its domestic handling of war crimes
revealed continuing difficulties in coming to terms with the past. Croatia
released a long-promised plan for deinstitutionalizing persons with intellectual
or mental disabilities, but took little action to implement it. Despite the
announcement of a plan to compensate Croatian Serbs stripped of property
rights during the war from 1991 to 1995, Serbs faced continued obstacles reintegrating
back into Croatia.
War Crimes Accountability
In April the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
found former generals Ante Gotovina and Ivan Cermak guilty of war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed against Serbs in 1995. A third defendant,
Mladen Markac, was acquitted. The convictions of the generals led to days of
protests by veterans’ groups and others opposed to the ruling, and condemnation
from political leaders in Croatia, including Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor
and President Ivo Josipovic.
On July 20, 2011, the remaining fugitive wanted by the ICTY, Goran Hadzic, was
arrested in Serbia and extradited to The Hague two days later (see Serbia chapter).
Hadzic, president of rebel Serb-controlled territory in Croatia in 1992 and
1993, is charged with ordering the killing of hundreds and the deportation of
thousands of Croats and other non-Serbs between 1991 and 1993. In August he
pled not guilty to 14 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In the first eight months of 2011, 20 individuals were indicted for war crimes in
domestic courts: 11 Serbs and 9 members of the Croatian army and police. The
most prominent of the nine, Tomislav Mercep, is accused of having command
responsibility for—and in some cases ordering—the illegal detention, torture,
and killing of 53 Yugoslav Army soldiers in 1991.
The number of war crimes trials conducted in absentia increased in 2011, particularly
in cases in which the defendant was a Serb. An ongoing plan by the
Chief State Attorney’s Office to revise past convictions rendered in absentia
fails to address the continuing problem of conducting trials in absentia. In the
first eight months of 2011, 20 of the 33 active war crimes trials took place at
least partially in absentia, and of the 20 newly-indicted individuals in 2011, 10
were indicted in absentia, primarily Serbs. Suspects continued to face trial in
regular district courts rather than the four courts specially designated for war
crimes trials.
Disability Rights
In March—five years after pledging with the EU to move people with disabilities
out of institutions and into the community—Croatia published a five-year plan
for deinstitutionalization. The plan pledges to move 30 percent of people with
intellectual disabilities out of institutions by 2016 and 20 percent of people
with mental disabilities by 2017, while developing community-based support
for these populations, such as organized housing.
However, the plan continued to consider smaller institutions as adequate community
living options and did little to define criteria for community-based support.
At this writing the government had yet to provide increased funding to
community support programs for people with intellectual or mental disabilities,
according to disability groups in Croatia.
More than 17,000 people in Croatia remain deprived of their legal capacity,
stripping them of the opportunity to exercise basic legal rights and putting
them at risk of arbitrary detention in institutions. Despite commitments by
Croatia at the Universal Periodic Review before the United Nations Human
Rights Council in November 2010, including to abolish guardianship laws, there
has been no progress in reforming the system.
Return and Reintegration of Serbs
Four hundred seventy-nine refugees—all Serbs—returned to Croatia in the last
six months of 2010 and the first six months of 2011, according to the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), down slightly from the same
period twelve months earlier. Only two Serb internally displaced persons (IDPs)
returned to their homes in Croatia in the first six months of 2011. As of the end
of June there were 2,084 IDPs in Croatia, 1,636 of them Serbs.
Croatian authorities began to implement a September 2010 decision to permit
Serbs stripped of the tenancy rights during the 1991-1995 war to buy apartments
at discounts of up to 70 percent, a key impediment to Serb returns in
urban areas. Out of the 1,140 households eligible for this program and contacted
by Croatian authorities, 610 had submitted applications to purchase homes
as of September 2011. However, according to official data, as of mid-year none
of the apartments had been sold because of delays in legal registration of the
state entity in charge of selling the apartments.
There were ongoing delays in government-sponsored housing programs for
returnees. Only 286 applications were approved from June 2010 to June 2011,
bringing overall approvals to 7,742, of which 60 percent were from Serb families.
There was some progress in processing Serb’s pension eligibility claims for
recognition of wartime work in formerly rebel-held areas. According to UNHCR,
as of the end of June, 23,568 of 24,901 requests had been processed, although
only 57 percent were resolved positively, with ongoing problems about admissible
evidence. There were only minor increases in positive decisions in regions
where recognition had been as low as 30 percent in previous years, continuing
to compromise the financial security of returnees to those regions.
Asylum and Migration
Asylum applications rose to 392 in the first seven months of the year compared
to 290 in all of 2010. Problems with processing asylum applications remained,
including lack of access to a state-funded lawyer at first instance and for those
seeking to challenge their detention. The recognition rate for asylum applications
in 2011 decreased to about 3 percent, with 7 individuals recognized as
refugees in the first 7 months of 2011 and 2 granted subsidiary protection.
Croatia addressed overcrowding at its asylum reception center in Kutina by
securing a temporary facility with similar conditions that can accommodate 150
more individuals.
Despite increasing arrivals of unaccompanied migrant children (213 in 2010),
Croatia continued to lack an adequate infrastructure to protect them. Although
guardians are appointed to all unaccompanied migrant children upon arrival in
Croatia, they lack capacity and guidance on how to secure the best interests of
their wards, with no provision for interpreters, legal assistance (other than for
asylum appeals), or a tracking system, despite UNHCR reports that about 90
percent leave Croatia before their asylum procedure is completed.
Freedom of Media
Concerns over freedom of media, particularly for journalists reporting on corruption
and organized crime, prompted a visit in January of the civil society organization
Southeast European Media Organization (SEEMO). Croatian parliamentarian
Josip Djakic filed defamation suits against Aleksandra Stankovic from the
public television station HTV in July and Goran Gazdek, journalist and editor of
Virovitica.net, in September, following their critical reporting on alleged corruption
in the Association for Croatian War Veterans.
In October a judge ruled that Gazdek had not committed defamation, stating
that Gazdek’s reporting on the association was truthful, and that he was not
required to reveal his sources. First hearings in the case against Stankovic were
held in Zagreb in October.
In December 2010, 12 individuals were arrested in the June 2008 attack of
Dusan Miljus, an investigative journalist for Jutarnji List newspaper covering
corruption. However, the state attorney dropped charges against suspects in
June, citing insufficient evidence. No other suspects have been arrested in the
case.
Human Rights Defenders
In October the Croatian parliament passed a law merging all five of its national
human rights institutions into one central body, citing the need for cost-saving
and efficiency. The merger affects the Human Rights Center as well as the four
ombudsperson offices (the General People’s Ombudsperson and the
Ombudspeople for Disabilities, Children, and Gender Equality). The ombudsperson
offices had opposed the change, arguing it would overstretch the capacity
of one office to deal with all these human rights issues. The law will go into
effect in July 2012.
Key International Actors
At the end of June Croatia closed negotiations for entry into the EU. Despite
ongoing concerns about corruption, war crimes accountability, and freedom of
expression, amongst other human rights issues, Croatia received a tentative
entry date of July 2013 but will continue to be monitored by the EU until that
time to ensure compliance with membership requirements.
In November the EU progress report on Croatia cited progress on tackling war
crimes impunity and corruption but expressed concern at the limited progress
in investigating prior cases of intimidation of journalists, slow progress on deinstitutionalizing
people with disabilities, and ongoing discrimination against
Roma.
ELIFG<8E UE@FE
Even as the EU and member states proclaimed the importance of human rights
in the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements, they remained unwilling to prioritize
human rights at home. Policy responses to migration from North Africa—
including calls to limit free movement inside EU internal borders, disputes over
rescuing boat migrants in peril, and reluctance to resettle refugees from Libya—
exemplified this negative approach.
The European Commission failed to pursue vigorously its duty to enforce fundamental
rights, dropping proceedings against Hungary over its media law and
France over Roma expulsions, and suspending proceedings against Greece on
its dysfunctional asylum and migration system despite continuing problems.
The commission’s first annual report on rights inside the EU shied away from
criticizing members states, with Fundamental Rights Commissioner Viviane
Reding emphasizing that the Charter for Fundamental Rights was a “compass”
rather than a “stick.”
Populist extremist parties remained strong across the EU, corroding mainstream
politics especially on issues related to Roma, Muslims, and migrants.
Governments frequently responded by echoing these parties’ criticism of
minorities and pursuing policies that infringed human rights.
Common EU Asylum and Migration Policy
Upheaval in North Africa brought thousands of migrants and asylum seekers to
European shores. The United Nations estimated that at least 1,400 people died
crossing the Mediterranean in the first seven months of 2011, most as they tried
to flee Libya. While rescue efforts—particularly by Italy and Malta—saved countless
lives, poor coordination and disputes over where to disembark rescued
migrants endangered others.
The Council of Europe (CoE) Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) initiated an inquiry
in June into the deaths of boat migrants in the Mediterranean since January, following
allegations that European and NATO warships ignored the plight of a
boat in distress in late March or early April, leading to 63 deaths.
One hundred migrants rescued by a Spanish NATO warship spent five days at
sea in July as Spain, Italy, and Malta refused to take them (Tunisia agreed). The
dispute prompted concerns that NATO ships would be more reluctant to rescue
migrants in the future. In August Italy accused NATO of forcing Italian coast
guards to assist a boat in distress despite a NATO ship’s greater proximity.
With Tunisia and Egypt hosting hundreds of thousands displaced by the Libyan
conflict, EU countries remained reluctant to help. As of September eight EU
states had agreed to resettle fewer than 700 UN-recognized refugees from North
Africa.
In June the European Commission presented proposals to revise the Reception
Directive, which covers assistance to asylum seekers, and the Procedures
Directive, which deals with asylum procedures. The proposals—which include
broad grounds for detention, low standards on access to social assistance and
healthcare, and expanded use of fast-track asylum procedures—remained subject
to negotiation with the EU’s council and parliament at this writing.
Amendments to the Qualification Directive, approved by the European
Parliament in October, improved protection for victims of gender-related persecution
and children. At this writing the council had yet to adopt the modified
directive.
Legal proceedings in 2011 highlighted structural defects with the Dublin II
Regulation, which generally requires that asylum claims be heard in the first EU
state entered. Opposition from a majority of EU states blocked efforts to reform
the regulation, which places a disproportionate burden on countries at the EU’s
external borders.
In January the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) Grand Chamber ruled in
MSS v. Belgium and Greece that Belgium’s transfer of an Afghan asylum seeker
to Greece under the regulation exposed him to abusive detention conditions in
Greece and denied him the chance to seek asylum. An advocate general of the
Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) said in September, in another
case involving a transfer to Greece, that an EU country must examine an asylum
claim if return to the first country of entry would expose the individual to rights
violations. The CJEU had not ruled on the case at this writing.
Also at this writing at least eight EU states were processing claims from asylum
seekers who passed through Greece and a larger number had suspended
Ireland’s returns to Greece.
The debate about whether to reinstitute internal border controls in the
Schengen area—a free movement zone comprising 25 EU and other countries—
sparked in part by a dispute between France and Italy over Tunisian migrants,
raised concerns that EU member states might restore checks in a discriminatory
way. France intensified document checks at and around the border with Italy in
an apparent effort to identify Tunisian migrants coming from Italy. A police
union revealed that an official notice in the Cannes central police station in
February calling on officers to target Tunisians for such checks had been
removed following protests.
Changes to the regulations governing Frontex, the EU’s external border agency,
adopted in September and October made more explicit its duty to respect
human rights in its operations, and established a rights officer post and a
forum to consult civil society, but failed to create a mechanism to hold Frontex
accountable for rights violations. Frontex border guards on the Greece-Turkey
border were complicit in exposing migrants to abusive conditions in Greek
detention centers.
The CJEU ruled in March that undocumented parents of children who themselves
are EU citizens are entitled to reside and work in the EU. The court ruled
in April that member states cannot impose prison terms on undocumented
migrants for failing to leave the country when ordered.
Discrimination and Intolerance
The horrific terrorist attacks in Norway (not an EU state) in July underscored
growing intolerance in Europe. One man killed 77 people—almost half of them
children—and injured over 150 in two separate attacks on the same day. His
writings betrayed extremist, xenophobic, and anti-Muslim views, echoing what
has increasingly become mainstream debate in Europe.
In February United Kingdom Prime Minister David Cameron and French
President Nicolas Sarkozy separately declared multiculturalism a failed policy.
The CoE’s European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) warned
in June against rising racism with hateful discourse, discrimination against
Muslims, and violence targeting migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers, calling
anti-Roma sentiment one of the most acute problems in many European
societies.
Laws banning women and girls from wearing full-face veils entered into force in
France (April) and Belgium (July) amid criticism from Thomas Hammarberg, the
CoE Commissioner for Human Rights, and human rights groups that these bans
violate women’s rights, non-discrimination, personal autonomy, and freedom of
religion and expression. The first two women to receive fines, in September, for
violating the ban in France announced they would appeal. Italy moved closer to
adopting similar nationwide legislation when a parliamentary committee
endorsed a bill in August, while the Netherlands’s government proposed to
adopt a ban on face-covering veils by 2013.
A June report by Hammarberg’s office found that homophobic and transphobic
biases persist in public opinion, policies, and laws. The UK announced it would
lift its lifetime ban on gay men donating blood. Only three other EU member
states allow gay men to donate (Italy, Portugal, and Sweden). Germany’s
Constitutional Court ruled in January that requiring transgender people to
undergo sex reassignment surgery and irreversible sterilization to legally
change their gender was unconstitutional. At least sixteen EU countries, including
the Netherlands, have such requirements. The Dutch government submitted
draft legislation in September to eliminate the requirement.
Eleven EU countries were among the first to sign a CoE convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and domestic violence adopted in
May. The convention requires measures to prevent violence, protect victims
regardless of legal status in the country, and prosecute perpetrators.
In June the CoE Venice Commission rejected proposals to amend its official
position on the political participation of persons with intellectual or mental disabilities
by removing undue restrictions on their right to vote. This position violates
the binding UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
which has been ratified by 17 EU member states and the EU itself.
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
Accountability remained elusive for complicity by EU countries in CIA rendition
and secret prison programs. In January Lithuania’s prosecutor general closed
the investigation into secret CIA prisons in that country, one year after it began.
In September Hammarberg criticized continuing failure to determine responsibilities
in Romania, Poland, and Lithuania. In a resolution adopted in October
PACE expressed concern about the use of state secrecy doctrine to undermine
or impede appropriate parliamentary oversight of intelligence services and
investigations into unlawful acts.
Human Rights Concerns in Select EU Member States
France
Expulsions of Eastern European Roma continued, with a June immigration law
increasing certain procedural safeguards while also allowing expulsions for
“abusing” the right to short-term stay as EU citizens. Despite evidence of continued
discriminatory targeting of Roma, the European Commission said in
August it was satisfied with France’s response to its concerns.
In April France’s Council of State (highest administrative court) ruled that an
August 2010 Ministry of Interior circular (later withdrawn) telling police to prioritize
the dismantling of unlawful Roma settlements was discriminatory.
The June immigration law weakened the rights of migrants and asylum seekers,
expanding the use of so-called transit zones—where they have fewer rights and
can be easily deported—to detain individuals. The maximum detention period
pending deportation was increased to 45 days, with judicial review delayed for
five days after placement in detention.
The same law allowed the government to detain foreign terrorism suspects for
up to six months, including in cases where deportation is blocked because of
the risk of torture or ill-treatment upon return. The Constitutional Council struck
down the government’s attempt to increase such detention to up to 18 months.
The ECtHR ruled in September that France could not deport an Algerian to his
home country because of the risk he faced of torture or ill-treatment.
Following civil society pressure and several binding court rulings, legal changes
enacted in April increased safeguards in police custody, including notification
of the right to remain silent and to have a lawyer present during questioning.
However private client-lawyer conferences are still limited to 30 minutes, and
authorities can still delay the presence of a lawyer in certain circumstances.
The changes left in place exceptional rules for terrorism and organized crime
suspects, who can be held for up to 72 hours without access to a lawyer.
Germany
In August Rheinland-Pfalz became the sixth state to grant freedom of movement
to asylum seekers. In the 10 other states asylum seekers must stay within a circumscribed
geographic area, with violation punishable by fines or prison. The
UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) expressed concern
in July over inadequate social benefits, housing, access to employment,
and healthcare for asylum seekers.
In September the parliament adopted a law exempting school personnel from
the obligation to report undocumented migrants. Efforts by opposition parties
to extend the exemption to health care and labor court personnel failed. In July
the CESCR urged Germany to strengthen efforts to address obstacles facing
people with a migration background in education and employment.
In October parliament renewed counterterrorism legislation for another four
years and established an independent monitoring commission. The legislation
permits extensive surveillance and data mining. In December 2010 a Cologne
court dismissed Khaled el-Masri’s case against the German government for failing
to pursue the extradition of 13 United States citizens allegedly involved in
his rendition to Afghanistan in 2004.
In October the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention expressed concern
over the preventive detention of individuals deemed dangerous, a regime the
German Constitutional Court ruled unconstitutional in May. Germany faced
questions in November from the UN Committee against Torture (CAT) on the use of diplomatic assurances and the deportation of unaccompanied migrant children.
Greece
Critical problems with the asylum system persisted, despite an official increase
in the refugee recognition rate to 12.35 percent (including appeals) in the first
seven months of the year. Access to asylum and review of claims at first
instance remained problematic, with the new asylum service—created in a
January law—expected to become fully operational only in 2012. Organizational
and technical problems hampered the work of appeals committees established
to tackle the backlog, which the government calculated in September at
38,000.
Migrants and asylum seekers, including women and families with children, continued
to be detained in inhumane conditions. There was a chorus of criticism
of migrant detention conditions in Greece, including in March by the EU
Fundamental Rights Agency, the CoE Committee for the Prevention of Torture
(CPT), and CoE Secretary General Thorbørn Jagland.
Numerous countries expressed concern about the situation of migrants,
refugees, and asylum seekers in Greece during its Universal Periodic Review at
the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) in May and urged Greece to take effective
measures, including prosecution against discrimination, racism, and xenophobia.
Racist violence in Athens was a serious problem. The Pakistani Community of
Greece documented attacks on 60 Pakistani men in the first three months of
2011. Far-right extremists rampaged through immigrant neighborhoods in May,
leaving at least 25 people hospitalized with stab wounds or severe beatings.
Two men and one woman were due to stand trial in December for the
September assault and serious injury of a 24-year-old asylum seeker.
There were frequent demonstrations and strikes against austerity measures
during the year, with fears that cuts to wages, pensions, and social spending
are disproportionately affecting the poor, persons with disabilities, the elderly,
migrants, and ethnic minorities.
The Athens prosecutor’s office opened an investigation in July into allegations
of excessive and indiscriminate police use of force, including tear gas, during a
June protest. The investigation was ongoing at this writing. A police officer was
arrested in October for assaulting a news photographer at an anti-austerity rally
the same month.
In March the Ombuds Institute published a damning report on abuses against
children with disabilities at the Children’s Care Center of Lechaina, including
the use of cage beds, tying children to their beds, and routine sedation. As of
September the number of staff at the center had increased, but concerns persisted
about conditions and treatment.
Roma continued to face systemic discrimination in housing and education. In
March the ECtHR agreed to examine a school segregation case brought by 140
Roma children and parents. Greek authorities failed to implement a 2008 ECtHR
ruling on school segregation involving the same families.
Hungary
A widely criticized media law, which undermines freedom of expression entered
into force on January 1, the day Hungary assumed the EU presidency.
Amendments adopted in March left in place the most significant problems,
including overly broad and vague restrictions on media reporting with violations
punishable by large fines, and regulatory powers in the hands of government-
appointed bodies.
A new constitution was adopted in April. Drafted by the ruling Fidesz party, it
contains provisions that discriminate against women; lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender (LGBT) people; and people with disabilities. In June the CoE’s
Venice Commission criticized the lack of consultation with civil society and recommended
amendments. The constitution goes into effect in January 2012.
Migrants from third countries entering Hungary through Ukraine continued to be
returned across the border despite evidence of ill-treatment in Ukraine, in some
cases after their pleas to seek asylum in Hungary were allegedly ignored.
Legislation adopted in December 2010 increased maximum immigration detention
to twelve months, and permitted extended detention for asylum seekers.
Roma faced harassment and threats from vigilante groups in rural areas. In
April the Hungarian Red Cross evacuated 277 Roma from a settlement after an
anti-Roma vigilante group threatened to conduct “military” training nearby. Four
men stood trial in March for killing six Roma and injuring ten others during
attacks between July 2008 and August 2009. The verdict was pending at this
writing.
During Hungary’s Universal Periodic Review at the HRC in May, numerous countries
recommended action against discrimination based on gender and sexual
orientation, and to improve minority rights, in particular of Roma, including by
combating hate crimes.
Italy
Over 55,000 boat migrants, including at least 3,700 unaccompanied children,
reached Lampedusa, a small Italian island in the Mediterranean, from North
Africa in the first seven months of the year. Reception centers on Lampedusa
were periodically overwhelmed, with enduring concerns about the procession
of asylum claims and conditions there and elsewhere in Italy, including for
women and unaccompanied children. A fire allegedly set by Tunisians
destroyed most of a detention center on the island in September, leading the
government to declare Lampedusa an unsafe port. International and national
organizations, including the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and PACE, expressed concern that this could delay rescue operations.
As many as 12,000 Tunisians who arrived before April 5, when Italy signed a
bilateral agreement with the new Tunisian government, received temporary
visas. Those who arrived later were detained, pending deportation, in poor conditions
following procedures that lacked sufficient safeguards.
Hundreds spent up to five days in detention on boats after the fire at the
Lampedusa center before being transferred to other detention facilities or
deported. In August an Italian navy ship intercepted around 100 migrants in
international waters and transferred them to a Tunisian vessel, in what
appeared to be an unlawful pushback.
All those arriving from Libya, primarily sub-Saharan Africans, applied for asylum,
with many placed in specially created reception centers. In August the
Italian interior minister estimated that 35 to 40 percent would be granted asylum,
with the rest ordered to leave Italy or forcibly removed.
Italy signed an immigration cooperation agreement with the Libyan National
Transitional Council in June, including the repatriation of undocumented
migrants. At this writing there had been no returns to Libya in 2011. In June the
Grand Chamber of the ECtHR heard a case involving the pushback by Italy of 24
Africans to Libya in May 2009, but had yet to rule at this writing.
In September an appeals court acquitted two Tunisian boat captains of charges
stemming from their 2007 rescue and transfer to Lampedusa of 44 boat
migrants in defiance of Italian authorities.
The ECtHR ruled in April that Italy’s 2009 expulsion of Ali Ben Sassi Toumi to
Tunisia, in breach of its order to suspend removal, had violated the ban on
returns to risk of torture, rejecting Italy’s argument that diplomatic assurances
from Tunisia mitigated the risk.
In July the lower house of parliament rejected draft legislation that would have
extended hate crime provisions to protect LGBT persons.
The UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women communicated
in July its deep concern about a range of issues affecting women in
Italy, including multiple forms of discrimination and vulnerability to violence
facing migrant and Roma women in particular. In September Hammarberg
expressed concern about racist and xenophobic political discourse, particularly
targeting Roma and Sinti, and called on Italian authorities to improve their
response to racist violence. He criticized ongoing emergency powers leading to
serial evictions of Roma camps.
In October the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child expressed concern
about discrimination against Roma children in enjoyment of the rights to
health, education, and an adequate standard of living, as well as reports of
overrepresentation of Roma and foreign children in the juvenile justice system.
The Netherlands
In February the government narrowed the right of some asylum seekers to a
suspensive appeal. In July it announced that rejected asylum seekers and irregular
migrants should be forced to bear all costs for their forced return and narrowed
the right to a suspensive appeal in certain cases.
In August an appeals court reaffirmed that Turkish nationals should be exempt
from the in-country integration test required for long-term residency. In
September the government said that Turkish migrants are no longer required to
pass integration tests before immigrating to the Netherlands.
In September the Dutch government announced plans to introduce stricter
requirements for family reunification, impose fines or prison for unauthorized
stay, and make it easier to deport non-EU foreigners who commit a crime. In a
move that could discourage domestic violence victims from reporting abuse,
the plans also increase from three to five years the period women migrants
must remain with their husbands before they can seek residency independently.
Under the proposals family members of recognized refugees would be
exempt from having to claim asylum. At this writing the measures had yet to be
presented to parliament.
While NGOs applauded a March central government decision to end detention
of unaccompanied migrant children, local authorities criticized a separate central
government decision, effective in July, to sever all financial and housing
support once they turn 18-years-old.
Geert Wilders, leader of the Freedom Party, was acquitted in June of charges of
inciting hostility or discrimination against Muslims, non-Western immigrants,
and Moroccans. The prosecutor had recommended the charges be dismissed
on free expression grounds. But the finding of the Dutch court that, as a politician,
Wilders had greater latitude than members of the public to express
inflammatory ideas appeared at odds with ECtHR jurisprudence on free speech.
Poland
In May the prosecutor general replaced the lead prosecutor investigating allegations
of Polish government complicity in CIA secret detention on Polish soil. A
leading newspaper alleged that the replacement had political motivations. An
investigation was ongoing at this writing.
New anti-discrimination legislation went into effect in January, despite criticism
from civil society that it offers inadequate protection for sexual orientation,
gender identity, and disability. A cut in the budget of the office of the
ombudsperson for civil rights, whose mandate is expanded by the new law,
prompted it to call for the law to be suspended on the grounds that it cannot
perform its new functions with reduced resources.
Poland continued to have one of the most restrictive abortion laws in Europe. In
May the ECtHR ruled in the case RR v. Poland that the denial of access to genetic
pre-natal testing and a legal abortion amounted to a violation of the prohibition
on cruel and inhuman treatment, as well as a violation of the right to privacy
and family life. Draft legislation to impose a total ban on abortions was narrowly
defeated in parliament in August.
Spain
Widespread protests against austerity measures began in May, with occupations
of squares in several cities. There were credible reports of excessive use
of force by police in dispersal operations in Madrid and elsewhere between
May and August. Accusations of excessive force also marred a protest against
the Pope’s visit to Madrid in mid-August.
New immigration regulations in June ensured that undocumented migrant
women who report domestic violence do not risk immediate expulsion. The
rules make it easier for parents of children with Spanish citizenship to obtain
residency permits, facilitate residency for unaccompanied migrant children at
18-years-old, and create a presumption in age-dispute cases that the individual
is a child. The Ombuds Institute nonetheless criticized age-determination practices
in September and recommended procedural reforms.
In February ECRI expressed continuing concerns about insufficient application
of criminal provisions to combat racially motivated crimes, inadequate data collection
on racism and discrimination, and ethnic profiling of migrants by police.
The UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) echoed
these concerns in April. A comprehensive government-proposed non-discrimination
bill was before parliament at this writing.
In March the CPT repeated its call for reform of incommunicado detention for
suspects of serious crimes such as terrorism, including access to a lawyer from
the outset of detention and the right to examination by a doctor of choice. In
July the Ombuds Institute also recommended improving safeguards in incommunicado
detention.
Spain extradited Belgian-Moroccan citizen Ali Aarrass to Morocco in December
2010 to face terrorism charges, despite a binding order from the CAT in
November to suspend extradition while it examined the case.
In October 2011 the violent Basque separatist group ETA announced it would
give up its 43-year armed struggle.
United Kingdom
Rioting in early August in London, Manchester, Liverpool, and elsewhere across
the UK, triggered by death of a man in north London shot by the police, led to
five deaths and over 3,000 arrests, including hundreds of children. An investigation
into the shooting was ongoing at this writing.
Penal reform groups and a former chief prosecutor expressed concern about the
severity of sentencing in some riot-related cases, including of children. In
October an appeals court upheld seven riot sentences, including the widely criticized
four-year terms for inciting riot on Facebook, and reduced three others.
CERD urged the government in October to thoroughly investigate the underlying
causes of the rioting, and ensure that policy responses do not disproportionately
affect minorities.
A commission appointed in May to review the domestic Human Rights Act had
yet to report at this writing. The act faced renewed criticism from the prime minister
and home secretary.
Correspondence between the government of former Libyan leader Muammar
Gaddafi and British intelligence discovered in Libya in September indicated
British involvement in rendition to Libya, underscoring the need for an effective
inquiry into UK complicity in rendition and overseas torture.
In August NGOs and victims’ lawyers withdrew their cooperation with the government-
established inquiry set up for that purpose on the grounds that government-
imposed conditions announced in July, including limits on questioning
witnesses and government control over disclosure, made an effective process
impossible. At this writing the inquiry had yet to begin.
In July the ECtHR affirmed the extra-territorial application of the European
Convention on Human Rights, ruling that the UK had both arbitrarily detained
an Iraqi civilian for over three years in a British-run detention center in Iraq, and
had failed to conduct independent and effective investigations into the deaths
of five Iraqis apparently killed by British soldiers in Iraq.
In September a three-year public inquiry found a British military regiment
responsible for the 2003 death in custody of Iraqi civilian Baha Mousa after
being subject to inhuman and degrading treatment and sustaining multiple
injuries. The inquiry recommended comprehensive steps against hooding and
stress techniques in detention, as well as independent inspection of battlefield
detention centers. Another inquiry into allegations that up to 20 men were tortured
and murdered in British custody in southern Iraq in 2004 had yet to begin
at this writing.
Four counterterrorism bills that the government tabled in February, May, and
September were under parliamentary scrutiny at this writing. Terrorism precharge
detention limits would be reduced from 28 to 14 days, but with the
option of a new 28-day emergency power, drawing criticism from the parliamentary
human rights committee.
Control orders would also be limited in severity and duration, but again with
the option of restoration in exceptional circumstances. Inadequate judicial
safeguards and the use of secret evidence remained. Terrorism stop and search
without suspicion will also be permanently limited, although the risk of misuse
remains.
Children continued to be detained with family members pending deportation
despite a 2010 government pledge to end the practice.
G<FI>@8
Georgia’s human rights record remained uneven in 2011. The government used
excessive force to disperse anti-government protests in Tbilisi, the capital, in
May, and prosecuted dozens in misdemeanor trials without full respect for due
process rights. The authorities failed to effectively investigate these events and
past instances of excessive use of force. Other concerns include restrictions on
freedom of association and media, as well as forced evictions of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) living in state-owned temporary housing.
The United States and the European Union deepened their political and economic
ties with Georgia but failed to use their leverage to secure human rights
improvements.
Freedom of Assembly and Police Violence
As in past years, the authorities interfered with freedom of assembly. On May
26, 2011, police used water cannons, tear gas, and rubber bullets to disperse
anti-government protests in Tbilisi, 15 minutes after the rally permit expired.
Police pursued fleeing demonstrators, detaining some 160, and beating many,
including those who offered no resistance. Police also interfered with the work
of Georgian and foreign journalists, verbally and physically assaulting at least
ten and detaining two. Police also took some journalists’ press cards and damaged
or confiscated several reporters’ equipment.
In summary trials the Tbilisi city court convicted over 90 of the protestors
detained on May 26 of disobeying police orders, sentencing them to up to 30
days administrative detention. In most cases, the court relied exclusively on
police testimonies to convict demonstrators and did not take any action in
response to defendants’ visible injuries.
In July a closed Ministry of Interior internal investigation into the May 26 events
led to administrative punishments for 16 police officers including dismissal of
four for excessive use of force. The authorities did not investigate allegations of
ill-treatment by police.
Authorities’ failure to fully address excessive use of force by police was further
tainted by the continued lack of effective investigations into past instances of
abuse, including the events of November 7, 2007, when police used excessive
force against largely peaceful protestors in Tbilisi, injuring at least 500, and the
June 15, 2009 police attack against 50 opposition supporters outside police
headquarters, in which at least 17 demonstrators were injured.
Administrative (Misdemeanor) Detentions
In 2010 the government increased the maximum misdemeanor sentence from
30 to 90 days. Although the sentence is equivalent to a criminal penalty,
detainees do not have access to full due process rights. Although defense
counsel is permitted, some detainees had difficulties accessing a lawyer in part
because they are not allowed to inform their families of their detention. Lawyers
who act for those facing administrative charges have inadequate time (sometimes
as little as 10 to 15 minutes) to prepare a defense. Defendants also often
cannot present evidence or call witnesses in court. In 2010 the authorities
decreased the appeal period for administrative sentences from ten to two days,
although court records become available only three days after a trial.
Administrative detainees stay in Ministry of Interior holding cells, which are
unsuitable for detention over 72 hours, with inadequate access to exercise and
hygienic and medical care.
Forced Evictions of Internally Displaced People
Beginning in June 2010 the authorities evicted thousands of IDPs from stateowned
temporary collective centers in Tbilisi, supposedly to provide them with
durable housing solutions. The authorities failed to respect international standards
regarding evictions: they did not engage in genuine consultation with
IDPs and failed to agree on adequate alternative housing or compensation prior
to eviction. Georgia has some 246,000 IDPs as a legacy of conflicts in the
1990s and in 2008.
In late 2010, in consultation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the government adopted guidelines on eviction procedures, which resulted in some improvements, but the process still failed
to meet international standards.
The authorities evicted hundreds of families in February and August 2011. Many
families refused resettlement to remote areas, fearing limited employment
opportunities, but were still forced out of collective centers.
Labor Rights Violations
In August 2011, 147 workers of the Kutaisi Hercules Steel plant, a Georgian-
Indian joint venture in western Georgia, formed a trade union and elected union
representatives. On September 13 the union launched a strike to demand better
working conditions and higher salaries. Although the strike was in accordance
with Georgian law, two days later police detained over a dozen strikers demonstrating
near the front of the plant. Police released the strikers several hours
later, but some reported being forced to sign a statement that they would not
participate in further protests.
On September 18, police stopped three union members in various parts of the
city and insisted that they each take a drug or alcohol test. The men refused,
were arrested for disobeying police orders, and sentenced to 10 days administrative
detention. The workers believe the charges were an attempt to intimidate
them and other workers.
The government abolished the labor inspectorate in 2006, apparently to limit
government interference with business, and no other supervisory agency has
been created to ensure compliance with labor laws.
Lack of Accountability for Laws of War Violations
Over three years after the Georgian-Russian conflict over South Ossetia,
Georgian authorities have yet to ensure a comprehensive investigation into,
and accountability for, international human rights and humanitarian law violations
by their forces. During the war the Georgian military used indiscriminate
force including firing multiple rocket launchers, an indiscriminate weapon that
should not be used in civilian areas.
The Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court—to which
Georgia is a party—continued with its preliminary examination of the situation.
Freedom of Media
The media environment remains mixed, print media is diverse, but nationwide
television broadcasting is limited to the state-owned Public Broadcaster and
pro-government Rustavi 2 and Imedi stations. In a positive step, parliament
passed a bill in April mandating that broadcasting companies make ownership
information public.
In July police arrested four photo journalists—Zurab Kurtsikidze, a European
Press Agency photographer; Giorgi Abdaladze, a contract photographer with the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Irakli Gedenidze, President Mikhail Saakashvili’s
personal photographer; and Gedenidze’s wife Natia—on espionage charges
related to passing sensitive information to Russia. The case was classified as
“secret” and the evidence never declassified. Local and international groups
considered the charges politically motivated, allegedly in retribution for coverage
of the May 26 events. Two weeks later a court released the journalists on
conditional sentences of up to three years, in plea bargain deals with prosecutors.
In June the Ministry of Finance started simultaneous unannounced tax audits of
several firms owned by Georgia’s largest media group, Media Palitra, which
also owns numerous newspapers, including the popular weekly Kviris Palitra, a
radio station, eleven magazines, the news agency Interpressnews and the
online Palitra TV. Media and civil society groups believed the audits were
designed to harass Media Palitra in retaliation for its media outlets’ extensive
coverage of the May 26 crackdown. In August the audit was suspended indefinitely.
Criminal Justice System
Overcrowding in prisons remains a problem, leading to poor prison conditions.
The Ombudsman’s Office documented numerous cases of ill-treatment in prisons.
In prison No. 2 in Kutaisi, inmates are forced to spend up to 24 hours in an empty two to three square meter cell wearing only their underwear as punishment
for prison rules violations. The ombudsman called on the prosecutor’s
office to investigate.
In a June report, Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner for
human rights, welcomed the government’s efforts to reform the justice system,
but urged the authorities to adopt a more human rights oriented criminal justice
policy.
Key International Actors
The US and the EU deepened their engagement and economic ties with Georgia.
While both actors raised human rights concerns, neither used the process
toward upgraded relations to secure concrete human rights improvements.
The US, the EU, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE),
and other governments and institutions called on the Georgian authorities to
investigate police conduct during the May 26 protests.
Dunja Mijatovic, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe representative
on freedom of the media, expressed concern about abuse, detention,
and questioning of journalists during the May protests.
The Democracy Working Group of the US-Georgia Charter on Strategic
Partnership met in Tbilisi in April to discuss progress and cooperation on democratic
reforms in Georgia. The US committed over US$90 million to support
democracy and good governance in Georgia.
In an April resolution on Georgia’s fulfillment of its obligations as a Council of
Europe member, PACE welcomed the “significant progress” Georgia had made
to meet its obligations, but expressed concern about the administration of justice
and fair trial norms.
In its May European Neighborhood Policy progress report, the EU commended
Georgia for judicial reforms, but expressed concerns about failures to guarantee
political and media pluralism and protection of labor rights and freedom of
association.
In July the European Commission adopted the Annual Action Programme for
Georgia, committing over € 50 million ($ 70 million) to support the country’s
criminal justice system, conflict resolution efforts, and IDPs.
K8Q8B?JK8E
Kazakhstan failed to carry out long-promised human rights reforms in the year
following its chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE). Instead, its rights record suffered further setbacks. Control of
the penitentiary systems moved from the Ministry of Justice to the Ministry of
Internal Affairs, putting prisons back in police control, and a new restrictive religion
law was adopted. Websites were blocked and legal amendments limiting
media freedoms remained. A union lawyer was imprisoned for six years for
speaking out on workers’ rights. The government continued to punish activists
for breaking restrictive rules on freedom of assembly and Kazakhstan’s leading
human rights defender, Evgeniy Zhovtis, remains in prison.
National Referendum and Presidential Elections
In January 2011 parliament voted in favor of holding a national referendum to
extend President Nursultan Nazarbaev’s term in office. The European Union and
United States sharply criticized the proposal, with the US calling it a “setback
for democracy in Kazakhstan.”
President Nazarbaev vetoed the referendum, but called for early presidential
elections, which took place on April 3. According to the Central Election
Committee, the incumbent received 95.55 percent of the vote with an 89.99
percent turnout. The OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights (ODIHR) concluded that “serious irregularities” marred the poll, and the
US Mission to the OSCE warned that “such irregularities are not in keeping with
Kazakhstan’s OSCE commitments … to hold elections that meet OSCE standards.”
Opposition groups criticized the early election and urged citizens to
boycott the poll.
Freedom of Expression
The environment for freedom of expression remains restrictive and marked by
government loyalists dominating broadcast media outlets, harassment of independent
journalists, prohibitive penalties for civil defamation, and criminal penalties for libel. Local human rights groups voiced concern over a draft
broadcast bill that would limit independent media broadcasting if adopted.
Media watch dog Adil Soz reported that seven journalists were physically
attacked in the first half of 2011. They included Daniyar Moldashev, director of
the Almaty publishing house that prints the Respublika and Golos Respubliki
opposition newspapers, who was beaten and robbed by unknown individuals
on March 25. In late October, two Stan.TV journalists were attacked with a
baseball bat and shot with rubber bullets by four unknown assailants while
covering the oil strikes in Aktau, western Kazakhstan. Adil Soz reported that
another 12 journalists were accused of criminal libel in the same period,
although in August an Aktobe court dismissed a libel suit against Alima
Abdirova, a human rights activist and journalist.
On August 19 the authorities blocked the popular Russian-language blogging
platform Livejournal after an Astana city prosecutor claimed the site distributed
information of a religious extremist and terrorist nature. In June authorities temporarily
blocked Wordpress.com alleging its publications contain illegal information.
Other popular independent websites, including that of the independent
weekly Respublika, remain blocked.
On August 16 the authorities denied parole for the fourth time to imprisoned
journalist Ramazan Yesergepov, editor of the Alma-Ata Info newspaper, but permitted
him to spend a week with his ill mother in September. In a 2009 closed
trial marred by due process violations, Yesergepov was sentenced to three
years in prison for disclosing state secrets.
Freedom of Assembly
Kazakh authorities maintain restrictive rules on freedom of assembly and
detained and fined activists and other individuals for organizing and/or participating
in unsanctioned protests and pickets. Work on a draft law on peaceful
assembly remained suspended.
In two separate incidents in January small groups of activists in Almaty and
Urals were detained and fined for protesting against the proposed referendum
to extend President Nazarbaev’s rule. In August three activists of the Socialist Movement of Kazakhstan were sentenced to short term administrative sentences
after staging a protest in support of the striking oil workers outside the
Nur-Otan party office in Almaty.
In mid-May workers in the oil sector in western Kazakhstan staged strikes and
labor protests demanding higher wages, revised collective agreements, and
non-interference in union work. On June 5, police dispersed several hundred
workers who tried to protest outside the regional mayor’s office in Aktau, and
temporarily detained and fined several dozen. On July 8 riot police dispersed oil
workers on strike in Zhanaozen, and the following night used force to round-up
workers who remained on a hunger strike. In mid-August Akzhanat Aminov, an
oil worker, was given a two-year suspended sentence for allegedly organizing
an illegal strike.
There was an increased number of protests over housing issues, after the financial
crisis left many unable to pay back home loans. On March 16 an Astana
Court sentenced Esenbek Ukteshbayev, chairman of the unregistered union
Zhanartu and leader of the Almaty-based movement Leave Peoples’ Homes
Alone, to 15 days administrative detention, a day after he participated in a
peaceful rally of estate investors and mortgage holders.
Detention of Activists
On August 8 union lawyer Natalia Sokolova was sentenced to six years in prison
and banned from civil work for three years on charges of “inciting social discord”
for addressing workers about wage disparity and “actively participating in
illegal gatherings” at an oil company in western Kazakhstan. On September 26
her sentence was upheld on appeal, endorsing the government’s violations of
her right to free expression and association.
On August 19 a prison appeals commission rejected political activist Aidos
Sadykov’s latest request to be transferred from prison to a settlement colony, a
penal establishment that allows for more freedoms than an ordinary prison. He
was imprisoned for two years in July 2010 for “hooliganism accompanied by
resistance to the police” in what appears to be a politically motivated set up.
On August 2 Evgeniy Zhovtis, Kazakhstan’s most prominent human rights
defender and head of the Kazakh International Bureau for Human Rights and
the Rule of Law, was denied early release for the second time. On September 3,
2009, Zhovtis was found guilty of vehicular manslaughter, following an unfair
trial marred by serious procedural flaws that effectively denied him the right to
present a defense. Zhovtis was sentenced to four years in a settlement colony.
Risk of Refoulement
On June 9, in blatant violation of international human rights law and the nonrefoulement
principle, Kazakh authorities extradited to Uzbekistan at least 28
men whom Uzbek authorities wanted on various anti-state and religion-related
charges, despite interim measures from the United Nations Committee Against
Torture (CAT) directing the suspension of extraditions, and significant and credible
evidence the men risked being tortured if returned. The men had been
detained a year earlier and were subsequently denied refugee status by Kazakh
authorities. Serious due process violations marred judicial review of their
refugee claims and extradition orders.
On May 30, Kazakh authorities extradited Ershidin Israil to China, despite the
clear risk of torture he faced if returned. Israil, an Uighur refugee who had fled
to Kazakhstan after the July 2009 Urumqi riots, was denied refugee status by
Kazakh authorities.
Labor Abuses and Child Labor in Agriculture
Philip Morris Kazakhstan (PMK), a subsidiary of Philip Morris International,
increased protections for migrant workers on tobacco farms by requiring written
contracts to ensure migrant workers receive regular payments and other protections.
PMK expanded trainings regarding labor rights and child labor and
increased monitoring to prevent abuses frequent in past years such as hazardous
child labor, forced labor, and passport confiscation. The government
continues to prevent migrant workers’ children from accessing education by
blocking them from registering in schools.
Freedom of Religion
In a clear setback for religious freedom, on October 13 President Nazarbaev
signed a restrictive new law, “On Religious Activities and Religious
Associations.” According to Forum 18, an independent international religious
freedom group, the new law “severely restrict[s] freedom of religion and belief”
and “imposes a complex four-tier registration system, bans unregistered religious
activity, imposes compulsory religious censorship and require both central
and local government approval to build or open new places of worship.”
Key International Actors
Kazakhstan’s controversial OSCE chairmanship culminated in a summit in
December 2010 in Astana. NGOs held a parallel OSCE civil society conference
and adopted recommendations to strengthen OSCE states’ implementation of
human dimension commitments and improve cooperation with civil society. On
the eve of the summit, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton held a town hall
meeting with civil society organizations, stressing that fundamental freedoms
such as expression, association, and religion are “are absolutely critical to the
building of sustainable societies.” Clinton honored several Kazakh human
rights groups, including the Almaty Helsinki Committee and the Kazakhstan
Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law.
A July 2011 review by the UN Human Rights Committee criticized the use of child
labor in tobacco and cotton fields and undue restrictions on freedom of association
and assembly. The committee noted “concern at reports that threats,
assaults, harassment and intimidation of journalists and human rights defenders
have severely reduced the exercise of freedom of expression,” and called
on Kazakhstan to “fully comply with the principle of non-refoulement.”
In July Catherine Ashton, EU high representative for foreign affairs and security
policy/vice president of the European Commission, welcomed the launch of
negotiations for a new “enhanced partnership” between the EU and
Kazakhstan, which began in October, stressing that “the successful conclusion
of the negotiations will be influenced by the advancement of democratic
reforms.”
In September the US ambassador to the OSCE and the EU issued critical statements
reacting to developments in Kazakhstan, including Sokolova’s imprisonment
and the transfer of penitentiary control to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
However, such public criticism by the EU and US of human rights violations by
the Kazakhstan government is muted.
KPI>PQJK8E
In 2011 Kyrgyzstan continued to grapple with the consequences of the June
2010 violence that erupted between ethnic Kyrgyz and Uzbeks in the country’s
south, killing more than 400 people. Four commissions of inquiry were completed
and thousands of criminal investigations continued in 2011, with the justice
process skewed to scapegoat ethnic Uzbeks for the violence.
Torture and arbitrary detentions in the context of investigations into the June
2010 violence are rampant and go largely unpunished. Ethnic Uzbeks in the
south are particularly vulnerable to police torture. Violations of international
fair trial standards plagued the administration of justice in the south.
While the climate for freedom of media generally improved in 2011, the authorities
made several attempts to limit freedom of expression.
Kyrgyzstan’s presidential elections took place on October 30, 2011.
Skewed Justice
In May 2011 the Kyrgyzstan Inquiry Commission (KIC)—commissioned by
President Roza Otunbayeva in 2010 and headed by Kimmo Kiljunen, a member
of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe (OSCE)—published its findings that the government failed to prevent
and stop the June 2010 violence. The KIC also found that some military
personnel participated in attacks on Uzbek neighborhoods, and that some
crimes committed during the June 2010 violence might amount to crimes
against humanity if proven in court.
However, official commissions published three reports in 2011 that did not
acknowledge the role that military and security personnel played, and generally
failed to recognize the systematic nature of attacks on Uzbek neighborhoods.
The authorities opened more than 5,000 criminal cases into the June 2010 violence.
Although most of those killed were ethnic Uzbek, 83 percent of those
facing prosecution for homicide were also ethnic Uzbek.
In 2011 trials in connection with the June 2010 violence continued to be held
with violations of international fair trial standards. Defendants, mostly ethnic
Uzbeks, are found guilty and sentenced to prison terms ranging from several
years to life primarily based on confessions that many allege were coerced
under torture.
The Kyrgyz Supreme Court routinely upholds these court verdicts, leaving the
accused with no other national recourse to justice. In one of the few exceptions,
in April 2011 the Supreme Court returned a ruling against an ethnic Uzbek
sentenced to 15 years imprisonment for re-examination after finding inconsistencies
in the evidence against him. A judge at the Osh city court paid little
attention to the recommendations from Bishkek and after yet another biased
trial added a year to the initial verdict, sentencing the Uzbek man to 16 years in
prison.
The hostile and violent environment in which trials occurred undermined defendants’
fair trial rights. Lawyers in southern Kyrgyzstan who defend ethnic Uzbek
clients continue to be harassed and physically attacked. Although court staff
and police officers often witness such attacks, no one has been held accountable
for violence against lawyers.
Torture and Arbitrary Detentions
While local human rights NGOs report that incidents of arbitrary detentions and
torture in police custody decreased in 2011 in the south, these abuses remain
rampant and unpunished, particularly in the context of investigations into the
June 2010 violence. Most judges in such cases dismiss, ignore, or fail to order
investigations into torture allegations. In at least nine cases police also arbitrarily
detained and tortured ethnic Uzbek men and threatened to charge them
in relation to the June 2010 violence if they did not pay large sums.
Human Rights Watch research found at least two ethnic Uzbeks died in 2011
due to injuries sustained when detained in police extortion schemes. Given the
routine use of torture by the country’s law enforcement officials, efforts by the
prosecutor’s office to investigate allegations of torture were inadequate. The
prosecutor general’s office stated it had launched 34 criminal investigations into torture allegations between January and July 2011. However, only three law
enforcement officials have been convicted in just two cases. At this writing six
more cases had been sent to a court.
Freedom of Expression
While the climate for media freedoms has generally improved since President
Kurmanbek Bakiev’s fall in April 2010, there were several attacks on journalists
in 2011, and parliament adopted two resolutions curbing freedom of expression
regarding the 2010 events.
In 2011 several reporters were physically or verbally attacked while performing
journalism work. In May supporters of the Asaba nationalist political party verbally
threatened non-ethnic Kyrgyz staff of the Bishkek-based online news
agency www.24.kg. The agency plans to appeal in court the prosecutor’s decision
not to investigate these threats.
On June 20 in Osh a group of Ata-Jurt political party supporters attacked and
beat a cameraman for NTS, a Bishkek-based television channel. Local media
reported that law enforcement officials did not intervene. Instead of investigating
the attack, they later accused the journalist of unprofessional behavior and
provoking the fight.
In a May 2011 resolution the Kyrgyz parliament barred KIC Chair Kiljunen from
entering the country, alleging he had provided partial information about the
June 2010 violence. In a June 16 resolution, parliament instructed government
agencies to “take measures to block the site Ferghana.ru,” an independent
Central Asian news website. Although the site is still accessible in Kyrgyzstan,
the move clearly reflected parliament’s intent to silence those who do not
adhere to the official version of the June events.
In July 2011 the Kyrgyz government decriminalized libel. However, “insult” and
“insult of a public official” remain criminal offenses.
Human Rights Defenders
Azimjon Askarov, a human rights defender who has worked on documenting
police treatment of detainees, remains in a prison facility in Bishkek, the capital,
awaiting the Supreme Court hearing of his appeal. After a trial marred with
violations and allegations of torture, he was sentenced to life for “organizing
mass disorders,” “inciting ethnic hatred,” and taking part in killing a police officer
on June 13, 2010.
Human rights activists who have exposed violations following the June 2010
violence face hostility, particularly among nationalist groups.
In June 2011 the Bishkek-based Kyrgyz-language newspaper Alibi published an
article that accused two prominent human rights defenders, Toleikan Ismailova
and Aziza Abdirasulova, of being “traitors” and betraying Kyrgyzstan’s interests
in exchange for grants from foreign donors. On September 20 in Bishkek,
Abdirasulova’s son was arbitrarily detained and beaten by plainclothes operatives
and prevented from consulting his lawyer for several hours, actions that
Abdirasulova believes were due to her human rights work.
Elections
In July 2011 the CEC accredited mass media for involvement in, and coverage of,
the presidential election campaign. However, it denied accreditation to online
news agencies, significantly limiting their campaign coverage.
On October 30 the country elected its new president. Prime Minister Almazbek
Atambaev received 62.52 percent of the votes in the first round of the elections.
The OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutes and Human Rights monitoring mission
noted that the elections were “peaceful, but shortcomings underscore
need to improve integrity of process” referring to reports of flawed lists of voters
and tabulation processes. The post-election period was calm despite warnings
from two nationalist presidential candidates that they would contest the
election results if they lost.
Key International Actors
At the June 2011 session of the United Nations Human Rights Council the UN
high commissioner for human rights presented a report on Kyrgyzstan that
acknowledged cooperation between the Kyrgyz government and her office and
exposed the authorities’ failure to protect victims of the June 2010 violence.
Also in June 2011 the Council passed a resolution calling Kyrgyzstan to improve
its record in the areas of administration of justice, torture, arbitrary detention,
and press freedom, and renewing its mandate in Kyrgyzstan.
On September 21, 2011, Kyrgyzstan signed the UN Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities that the UN General Assembly adopted in December
2006.
During a May 2011 visit to Kyrgyzstan the OSCE representative on freedom of
the media met in Kyrgyzstan with government officials and the media community.
She praised the government’s efforts to implement media reforms and noted
the situation regarding freedom of the media in the country had improved since
2010. She emphasized the authorities’ responsibility to ensure journalists’
safety so they can work without fear of retaliation.
In January 2011 a small group of OSCE police consultants was deployed to
southern Kyrgyzstan after lengthy negotiations between the OSCE and the government,
which in July 2010 had requested an OSCE police presence but subsequently
opposed a mandate authorizing the police group to do anything more
than consult with local law enforcement. The restrictive mandate significantly
curbed the OSCE police advisory group’s ability to help protect rights in the
region.
On June 9 and 10, 2011, the United States-Kyrgyzstan Annual Bilateral
Consultations took place in Washington, with an agenda that included discussion
of US support for Kyrgyzstan’s parliamentary democracy, judicial and legal
reform, human rights, regional stability, and security.
The European Union issued several public statements throughout the year
responding to human rights developments in the country. An August statement
by the EU Delegation in Bishkek, for example, welcomed the decriminalization of libel, expressing hope that the reform would contribute to “greater respect”
for freedom of media in the country. In May Catherine Ashton, EU high representative
for foreign affairs and security policy/vice-president of the European
Commission, called on the Kyrgyz authorities to implement the recommendations
forwarded by the KIC, noting that some of them “meet priorities of the EU
assistance programmes, especially on reform of the judiciary.”
In August 2011 the World Bank approved a US$30 million loan for Kyrgyzstan to
finance social programs for the poor and improve “accountability and transparency
in government processes” in Osh and Jalal-Abad provinces.
RLJJ@8
The announcement in September that Prime Minister Vladimir Putin would run
for president in 2012 led most analysts to believe that his election is a foregone
conclusion, and cast a shadow over the prospect of much-needed political
reform. Harassment of human rights defenders continues and the working climate
for civil society organizations and activists remains hostile. Impunity for
past abuses and murders of activists in the North Caucasus is rampant.
Russia’s cooperation with international institutions on human rights appears
perfunctory. Several positive developments pertaining to freedom of expression
were offset by detrimental legislative initiatives in other areas.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are vulnerable to harassment and violent attack, and
those working in the North Caucasus are especially at risk.
In Chechnya the 2009 murders of three activists—Natalya Estemirova, Zarema
Saidulaeva, and Alik Dzhabrailov—remain unpunished. Impunity for these murders
has had a chilling effect on Chechen activists. In at least two cases in
2011, activists were subjected to severe harassment by officials, but made no
official complaints for fear of retribution.
One activist who spoke out about threats was Supyan Baskhanov, a Chechen
lawyer who runs the Grozny office of the Committee against Torture, a Russian
NGO. In June 2011 Baskhanov helped organize a small, peaceful, anti-torture
rally in Grozny, the Chechen capital. Police dispersed the demonstration,
detained Baskhanov and his colleague, and threatened them with reprisals if
they persevered in efforts to hold police accountable.
Human Rights Watch documented five incidents in 2010 of law enforcement
physically attacking and harassing Dagestani lawyers. In 2011 the authorities
failed to conduct effective investigations into these attacks, despite pledges to
the contrary. Indeed, instead of holding accountable police who beat human
rights lawyer Sapiyat Magomedova in 2010, the authorities charged
Magomedova with using violence against state officials and insulting police officers on duty. Magomedova’s indictment appears to be in retaliation for her
work.
Activists from other Russian regions also faced serious problems. The day
before a civil society forum held in conjunction with the June 2011 European
Union-Russia summit in Nizhny Novgorod, the conference venue suddenly, and
without proper explanation, refused to host the event. It took place elsewhere.
Before the summit, law enforcement officials warned at least 10 local activists
against holding public rallies.
In June 2011 two unidentified men severely beat Bakhrom Hamroev—Central
Asia expert with Memorial Human Rights Center (Memorial), a leading Russian
human rights group—in his Moscow apartment building. It was the second such
beating he had endured in less than six months. Both attacks remain unpunished.
One positive development was the June 2011 acquittal of Oleg Orlov, head of
Memorial, on criminal slander charges. The case stemmed from Orlov’s 2009
statement suggesting that Chechnya’s leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, was responsible
for the murder of Natalya Estemirova. The court’s decision was appealed a
week later and appeal hearings started in October.
A month before the ruling, President Dmitry Medvedev introduced amendments
to Russia’s criminal code that would decriminalize libel and make it an administrative
offense. The amendments are pending in the Duma and will advance
free speech protections in Russia if passed into law.
Killings of Whistleblowers
There was some progress in the investigation of the 2006 murder of journalist
Anna Politkovskaya. In August 2011 a police official was arrested on suspicion
of organizing the murder. However, there is no official information indicating
who ordered Politkovskaya’s murder. Other investigations into attacks on independent
journalists have been largely ineffective.
In 2011 an ad-hoc working group under Medvedev’s Council on Civil Society
conducted the first independent public inquiry into the death of Sergei Magnitsky. Magnitsky, an anti-corruption lawyer who had alleged wide-scale tax
fraud, was prosecuted on trumped-up charges and died in pre-trial custody in
2009. His death generated massive international attention. The working
group’s report appeared to prod the authorities to reactivate the investigation
into the case, which had previously been closed.
Hate Crimes
In May 2011 two ultra-nationalists, Nikita Tikhonov and Evgenia Khassis, were
convicted and sentenced to life in prison and 18 years respectively for the 2009
murders of human rights lawyer Stanislav Markelov and journalist Anastasiya
Baburova.
This unique example of an effective and prompt investigation into the killing of
civil activists appears to be part of a police campaign against neo-Nazism. In
2010, 329 ultra-nationalists were convicted for hate crimes, twice as many as in
2009. This trend continued in 2011, resulting in a gradual fall in violent hate
crimes, especially murders. However, aggressive racism and xenophobia continue
to rise, as evidenced nationalist riots that took place in the December
2010.
Freedom of Assembly
The right to freedom of assembly remains problematic in Russia, where police
frequently disperse public rallies held by civil society activists and the political
opposition. Police use excessive force and arbitrarily detain peaceful protesters.
Courts fine protesters or sentence them to administrative detention.
While Moscow authorities generally permitted the now-traditional freedom of
assembly rallies on the 31st day of each month that has 31 days, similar demonstrations
were rarely allowed in other cities. For example, the authorities in
Nizhny Novgorod dispersed a peaceful rally on March 31 and detained over 20
activists.
May saw a series of violent attacks by private security agents, at times aided by
unidentified men, against individuals protesting the construction of a highway between Moscow and St. Petersburg through the Khimki forest. Police refused
to investigate the attacks. The protesters informed Human Rights Watch of several
cases of excessive use of force against them by police, including the violent
dispersal of a peaceful rally and a beating in police custody.
In October 2010 the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), in the Alexeev v.
Russia ruling, found Russia in violation of freedom of assembly for denying
activists the right to hold gay pride marches. Despite this legally binding ruling,
the May 2011 gay pride gathering in central Moscow was once again dispersed.
Police used excessive force and failed to protect peaceful protesters from
homophobic violence. One assailant delivered a heavy blow to the head of
Novaya Gazeta journalist Elena Kostyuchenko. She had to be hospitalized.
Elections
With Russian parliamentary elections scheduled for December 4, 2011, the government’s
refusal to register new political parties became a particular concern.
No independent party founded in 2010—Parnas, Other Russia, RotFront,
Motherland-Common Sense—was granted registration. In April 2011 the ECtHR
ruled that the 2006 de-registration of the Republican Party of Russia violated
the European Convention on Human Rights. The court found party registration
requirements were unmanageable for small parties.
In June 2011, in what appeared to be a sudden move towards liberalization,
Medvedev introduced legislation lowering the threshold of votes that parties
must garner to secure a Duma seat from 7 to 5 percent, starting with the 2016
election. However in 2011, as in previous election periods, pro-government parties
benefitted from disproportionate access to media and abuse of administrative
resources, resulting again in an uncompetitive electoral environment.
The Russian government allowed the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe to carry out only limited-scale monitoring of the vote (200 monitors).
In May 2011 Russia’s Central Election Committee adopted a resolution strictly
limiting the activities of election observers, including forbidding Russian citizens to be members of international monitoring missions. Legislative restrictions
make it nearly impossible for Russian NGOs to observe elections.
North Caucasus
According to official statements, the number of insurgent attacks in the North
Caucasus doubled in 2010 compared to 2009. In 2011 the Islamist insurgency
remained on the rise, especially in the Republic of Dagestan. In January a suicide
bomber from the North Caucasus killed 37 people and wounded over 120
at a Moscow airport. The February killing of three tourists in Kabardino-Balkaria,
allegedly by insurgents, prompted the authorities to close ski resorts there.
The authorities’ use of torture, abduction-style detentions, enforced disappearances,
and extrajudicial killings in the course of their counterinsurgency campaign,
coupled with impunity for these abuses, antagonized the population of
the North Caucasus.
Dagestan’s president appeared to seek social consensus and stability, but the
republic had the highest number of documented abductions, according to
Memorial. Between January and September 2011, 28 people were abducted and
nine subsequently “disappeared.” Salafi Muslims remained especially vulnerable
to persecution.
In Ingushetia, 12 local residents were abducted, seven of whom “disappeared”
between January and September, according to Memorial.
Chechen law enforcement and security agencies under Ramzan Kadyrov’s de
facto control continued to resort to collective punishment against relatives and
suspected supporters of alleged insurgents. Memorial documented 11 abductions
of local residents by security forces between January and September 2011.
Five of the abducted subsequently “disappeared.”
Increasingly, victims refuse to speak about violations due to fear of official retribution.
In a letter to a Russian NGO in March 2011 federal authorities stated that police
in the Chechen Republic sabotaged investigations into abductions of local residents and sometimes covered up for perpetrators. The letter marked the first
public acknowledgement of the impotence of federal investigative authorities in
investigating abuses in Chechnya.
Police in Austria gathered evidence of a link between the 2009 murder of a
Chechen refugee, Umar Israilov, and the Chechen leadership, but in 2011 the
Russian authorities ignored judicial requests to question key witnesses in
Russia, including Kadyrov. Israilov had filed a complaint with the ECtHR in 2006
alleging Kadyrov had tortured him. In June 2011 a court in Vienna handed down
sentences ranging from 16 years to life to three men accused of organizing the
murder.
There were no further reports of attacks on women and girls in Chechnya who
refuse to wear headscarves, although those who do not cannot work in the public
sector or attend schools and universities.
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
In June the Duma received draft legislation to allow Russia’s Constitutional
Court to override certain ECtHR judgements. If adopted, this initiative would
impede implementation of ECtHR rulings, place Russia in violation of its international
legal obligations, and obstruct access to justice for Russians.
At this writing the ECtHR had issued more than 210 judgments holding Russia
responsible for grave human rights violations in Chechnya. Russia continues to
pay the required monetary compensation to victims. But it fails to meaningfully
implement the core of the judgments, chiefly because it does not conduct effective
investigations and hold perpetrators accountable.
Health Issues and Palliative Care
Access to quality healthcare remains a serious problem in Russia. Ill-advised
government policies around drug treatment and HIV prevention continued to
undermine Russia’s battle against the HIV epidemic, leading to significant numbers
of preventable new infections and deaths. Although over 300,000
Russians die of cancer each year, with many facing severe pain, available palliative care services remained limited. As a result, hundreds of thousands of
patients die in avoidable agony each year. In much of the country, the government
does not make oral morphine available through the public healthcare system,
or adequately train healthcare workers on modern pain treatment methods.
Existing drug regulations are excessively restrictive and limit appropriate
morphine use for pain relief.
Migrant Worker Rights
Russia hosts between 4 and 9 million migrant workers who come overwhelmingly
from states of the former Soviet Union. Thousands are employed in building
sports venues and other infrastructure necessary for Russia to host the 2014
Winter Olympic Games in Sochi. Some workers reported employers’ failure to
provide contracts, adequate housing, or payments in full or on time. In October
2010, numerous migrant workers in Sochi protested non-payment of wages;
some employers retaliated against workers with irregular work status by
denouncing them to the authorities. Several of these workers were deported.
Property Expropriation and Evictions before the 2014 Olympics
To make way for venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics, hundreds of families living
in the Adler region of Sochi have lost their property through state expropriations.
The regional government provided most homeowners with compensation,
but in many cases these amounts and expropriation procedures were neither
fair nor transparent.
Key International Actors
The EU’s human rights consultations with Russia continued to be an ineffective
tool for advancing human rights. At the June EU-Russia summit, Herman Van
Rompuy, European Council president, noted “strong concerns” about human
rights and stressed the importance of “respect for the international obligations
and political pluralism” in the context of upcoming elections. Additionally, the
European Parliament adopted three critical resolutions on Russia that have
addressed the human rights situation.
Widespread public outcry, including by German politicians, forced the German
nonprofit group Quadriga to reverse a decision to award a prestigious prize to
Vladimir Putin. The Quadriga Prize invokes the “moral courage of the civil movement”
that brought the fall of the Berlin Wall.
The Civil Society Working Group under the United States-Russia Bilateral
Presidential Commission continued its work and discussed issues such as child
protection, migration, prison reform, and corruption.
In July the US State Department imposed a visa ban on around 60 Russian officials
implicated in the death of Sergei Magnitsky. In July 2011 the Dutch parliament
unanimously endorsed a Magnitsky-like bill, and the European parliament
in December 2010 adopted a resolution recommending similar sanctions to
countries in Europe. In response Medvedev ordered the government to develop
similar measures against US citizens.
S<I9@8
Serbia made little discernible progress on human rights issues in 2011, despite
the European Parliament in January ratifying the European Union’s Stabilization
and Association Agreement with Serbia, and the arrests of Ratko Mladic and
Goran Hadzic, the two remaining fugitives wanted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The situation of ethnic minorities
remains concerning, independent journalists face threats and violence, and the
weak asylum system needs reform. Rising tensions with Kosovo have exacerbated
Serbia’s dialogue with the EU.
In late July the Kosovo government sent armored units to Kosovo’s northern border,
populated by Kosovo Serbs, in an unsuccessful attempt to seize control of
two crossing points. Local Serbs erected roadblocks to stop them and a
shootout erupted, killing one Kosovo policeman. In late August German
Chancellor Angela Merkel visited Belgrade and warned Serbian authorities they
must normalize relations with Kosovo for Serbia to move closer to EU membership.
War Crimes Accountability
In May and July, respectively, the two remaining ICTY war crimes suspects Ratko
Mladic, wartime Bosnian Serb military commander, and Goran Hadzic, wartime
leader of the Croatian Serb separatist forces, were arrested on Serbian soil,
ending the long period of impunity for war crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia. In his visit to Serbia in September, ICTY Chief
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz commended the Serbian government for arresting
Mladic and Hadzic, but also stressed the importance of Serbia’s technical cooperation
with the tribunal regarding ongoing trials. Additionally, he underlined
the importance of regional cooperation in prosecuting war criminals.
Domestic war crimes prosecutions have proceeded steadily, although the
Serbian War Crimes Chamber has faced increasing criticism for limited progress
in domestic war-related criminal proceedings, and for indictments of individuals
for war crimes that were eventually dropped due to lack of evidence.
In March Jovan Divjak, a Bosnian army wartime general, was arrested by
Austrian police under a Serbian arrest warrant in Austria over charges that he
committed war crimes in 1991 against Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) troops on
Dobrovoljacka Street in Sarajevo. Many NGOs and NGO spokespeople, including
the president of the Helsinki Committee of Serbia, condemned the indictment
as shameful and provocative, especially because Divjak is an active member
of the NGO community. The Korneuburg District Court in Austria declined
Serbia’s request for extradition, and Divjak was released in July. There have
been several other high-profile indictments and arrests for war crimes against
the JNA—including against Ejup Ganic, former de facto Bosnian vice-president
during the war, and Ilija Jurisic, former wartime high ranking official in the
Ministry of Interior—all of which were eventually dropped due to lack of evidence
and pressure from NGOs and government officials.
Freedom of Media
Hostile acts against independent media outlets and journalists remained a serious
problem. Milan Savatovic was sentenced to 10 months of house arrest in
May, three years after the 2008 brutal attack on Bosko Brankovic, a cameraman
with the B92 media company, during a protest against Radovan Karadzic’s
arrest. Savatovic’s two accomplices received suspended sentences. Journalistic
associations criticized the light sentences, arguing that Serbian law does not
adequately protect journalists.
In January and February the Insider television show reported in a series entitled
“Fraud of the Century” on alleged financial abuses in the mining basin of
Kolubara, near the town of Lazarevac. In an apparent act of intimidation after
the report, unknown perpetrators in Lazarevac put up posters “announcing” the
death of Insider journalists.
Danilo Zuza and Milos Mladenovic, who are believed to be associated with
extremist nationalist groups, were arrested for the July 2010 beating of Teofil
Pancic, a political commentator. In September 2010 they were sentenced to
three months in prison, although the legally proscribed penalty for the crime is
six months to five years. However, due to their lack of previous criminal records
and their ages (both 20-years-old) they were sentenced below the legal minimum. Pancic appealed the low sentences. In November the Court of Appeals in
Belgrade sentenced Mladenovic and Zuza to seven additional months.
Serbia’s government is currently examining a long-awaited draft law on media
strategy forwarded by the Ministry of Culture. Journalist NGOs and associations
in Serbia have criticized the draft for allowing continued state ownership of
media and for what they say are inadequate safeguards against political interference
regarding media content.
Treatment of Minorities
Roma continue to suffer discrimination and attacks. In March a Roma boy was
repeatedly verbally insulted and beaten outside his high school; the young men
responsible were arrested but have not yet been charged. In a similar incident
in May three individuals beat a young Roma adult in a Belgrade bus. They have
been arrested but not yet charged.
Roma families living in informal settlements in Belgrade face forced evictions
with little access to alternative housing. Twelve Roma families were evicted
from their homes under Pancevo Bridge in June without notice. Police escorted
them to the outskirts of Belgrade to live in metal containers without sanitation
or electricity. Five families were evicted from their homes in Skadarska Street,
Belgrade, and spent the next night sleeping in city parks, despite a coalition of
22 NGOs urging the authorities to provide alternative housing.
Human Rights Defenders
A gay rights pride parade set for October 2 was cancelled over fears of mass
violence. Police security assessments showed there could have been riots and
clashes between extremist right-wing groups and marchers. Many local and
international NGOs accused the authorities of giving into threats and for not
adequately tackling hate speech. In her statement, Antje Rothemund, head of
the Council of Europe Office in Belgrade, said she was deeply concerned about
the degree of hatred and violence in Serbian society that led to the event’s cancellation.
In April 2011 a Serbian court sentenced far right leader Mladen Obradovic to
two years in prison for inciting violence during the 2010 gay pride march.
Belgrade’s Higher Court ruled that Obradovic, leader of extremist group Honor,
used violence to disrupt the gathering in order to incite hatred and discrimination.
The court sentenced 13 others to prison terms of 8 to 18 months. Gay
activists and liberals said the sentences were important as the first ever in
Serbia for discrimination against gays, but complained they were too lenient.
Asylum Seekers and Internally Displaced Persons
Serbia’s law on asylum went into effect in April 2008, transferring the power for
making asylum decisions from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to the Serbian asylum office. According to
Ministry of Interior figures, 2,134 asylum seekers were registered in Serbia
between the start of January and end of August, a striking jump from 522 in
2010. The rise appears to be due to an influx of migrants through Greece,
Turkey, and Macedonia. There are currently two centers for asylum seekers in
Banja Koviljaca and Bogovadja in Serbia; the one in Bogovadja opened in June
and is already at capacity. There have been no reports of poor treatment or
abuse so far, but UNHCR reports that overcrowding is likely.
In March the Serbian Commissariat for Refugees and Internally Displaced
People (IDP), in cooperation with UNHCR, published an IDP vulnerability assessment.
It showed there were 73,358 refugees in Serbia, most of them of Croatian
origin, and 97,286 persons from Kosovo with displacement-related needs in
Serbia.
UNHCR reported in March that Serbia (including Kosovo) sent 28,900 asylum
seekers to Europe and North America in 2010. The largest group of asylum seekers
in the world in 2010 were from Serbia (including Kosovo), according to
UNHCR. According to Serbia’s minister of interior, 95 percent of Serbian asylum
applicants in Western European countries belong to ethnic minorities, many of
them Roma of Serbian and Kosovo origin.
Key International Actors
The European Parliament’s ratification of the EU’s Stabilisation and Association
Agreement with Serbia marked a key step toward the latter’s membership in the
union. The resolution particularly underlined the importance of eliminating
parallel structures in the north of Kosovo and the need to improve treatment of
minorities.
In October the European Commission recommended that Serbia become a candidate
to join the EU “on the understanding that Serbia reengages on the dialogue
with Kosovo .” The accompanying progress report commended Serbia’s
judicial reform efforts and improved legal and policy frameworks for human
rights protection, but called for greater efforts to counter threats and violence
against journalists and the media and to improve the status of Roma.
Following a review in March the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination urged Serbian authorities to halt forced evictions for Roma and
improve their access to education and registration. In a September report on
Serbia Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner for human rights,
stressed the need to counter hate speech by extreme right groups, ensure protection
of journalists, and improve human rights for Roma.
Kosovo
Kosovo’s human rights situation improved little in 2011, amid faltering negotiations
with Serbia and tensions between Serbs and Albanians at the northern
border that sometimes led to violence. The justice system remained weak,
despite efforts to prosecute individuals for corruption and war crimes. Kosovo’s
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian (an Albanian speaking group with supposed origins
in Egypt) remained marginalized and vulnerable to discrimination. General
elections in December 2010 occurred without violence, but were marred by
irregularities that international observers said called the results into question.
Key International Actors
The European Parliament’s ratification of the EU’s Stabilisation and Association
Agreement with Serbia marked a key step toward the latter’s membership in the
union. The resolution particularly underlined the importance of eliminating
parallel structures in the north of Kosovo and the need to improve treatment of
minorities.
In October the European Commission recommended that Serbia become a candidate
to join the EU “on the understanding that Serbia reengages on the dialogue
with Kosovo .” The accompanying progress report commended Serbia’s
judicial reform efforts and improved legal and policy frameworks for human
rights protection, but called for greater efforts to counter threats and violence
against journalists and the media and to improve the status of Roma.
Following a review in March the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination urged Serbian authorities to halt forced evictions for Roma and
improve their access to education and registration. In a September report on
Serbia Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner for human rights,
stressed the need to counter hate speech by extreme right groups, ensure protection
of journalists, and improve human rights for Roma.
Kosovo
Kosovo’s human rights situation improved little in 2011, amid faltering negotiations
with Serbia and tensions between Serbs and Albanians at the northern
border that sometimes led to violence. The justice system remained weak,
despite efforts to prosecute individuals for corruption and war crimes. Kosovo’s
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian (an Albanian speaking group with supposed origins
in Egypt) remained marginalized and vulnerable to discrimination. General
elections in December 2010 occurred without violence, but were marred by
irregularities that international observers said called the results into question.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
In March UNHCR reported that Serbia and Kosovo produced the highest number
of asylum applicants in “industrialized” countries in 2010. The trend was attributed
to the EU visa liberalization with Serbia and the economic problems and
discrimination that minorities face in Kosovo. Most claims were lodged in
Europe. According to UNHCR, many claimants were Roma, Ashkali, and
Egyptians from Kosovo. Almost all were rejected.
UNHCR Kosovo registered a total of 695 voluntary minority returns in the first
seven months of the year, a decline from the peak in 2010: 237 Serb, 76 Roma,
187 Ashkali and Egyptian, 36 Bosniak, 68 Gorani, 12 Albanian (to Serbian
majority areas, mainly Mitrovica), and 7 Montenegrins.
Deportations of Kosovars from Western Europe continued, with little assistance
for returnees once in Kosovo. According to UNHCR, 1,334 Kosovars were deported
from Western Europe during the first seven months of 2011, including 336
people to areas where they were in a minority: 168 Roma, 76 Ashkali, 5
Egyptians, 22 Bosniaks, 8 Gorani, 3 Turks, 16 Albanians, and 38 Serbs.
Deportations continued to disproportionately impact Roma, Ashkali, and
Egyptian communities, with most returnees living in informal settlements and
lacking basic utilities such as running water and electricity. The UN Children’s
Fund reported in August that most Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian children
returned to Kosovo were now on the national registry, giving them a legal right
to access education and other social services. Three-quarters still do not attend
school due to poverty, curriculum differences, and language barriers.
The state of North Rhine-Westphalia, which hosts the largest number of Kosovo
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians in Germany, suspended forced returns of Roma,
Ashkali, and Egyptians for the winter months of 2010 and 2011, due to concerns
about their safety in Kosovo. Forced returns from North Rhine-Westphalia
resumed in April 2011, although more nuanced assessments introduced in
September 2010 meant that school-age children were less likely to be deported.
Activists and Roma leaders voiced concerns in March and April 2011 about lack
of treatment for poisoning for most former inhabitants of a lead-contaminated
camp in Mitrovica that closed in October 2010. A similar lead-contaminated
camp at Osterode remained open as approximately 20 families remaining there
feared violence and discrimination if they returned to their former homes in
southern Mitrovica. In July 2011 the authorities in north Mitrovica reached an
agreement with Mercy Corps and the European Commission to provide land for
homes for these families.
Impunity, Accountability, and Access to Justice
The partial retrial at the ICTY of Ramush Haradinaj, former Kosovo prime minister,
and Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj, Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) commanders,
began in August on charges related to wartime prisoner abuse at a KLA
detention facility. A key prosecution witness who had declined to testify in the
first trial again refused to give evidence citing fears over his safety, reawakening
concerns over witness security that the ICTY appeals chamber had cited
when ordering the retrial.
In January the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a
report by Swiss parliamentarian Dick Marty, alleging that some KLA members,
including current senior officials in Kosovo, had participated in the post-war
abductions, enforced disappearances, and killing of Serbs, as well as alleged
organ trafficking and organized crime including weapons and drug smuggling.
In May the EU approved a special task force in its Rule of Law and Police
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to investigate the allegations. In August EULEX
appointed an experienced American prosecutor to head the investigation.
In October the trial of seven Kosovoar Albanians accused of separate allegations
of organ trafficking and human trafficking, known as the Medicus case,
opened in Pristina. The defendants are accused of luring donors from poor
countries to Kosovo with false promises of high payments for their kidneys.
During the period from July 2010 to June 2011, EULEX completed five war crime
cases, with three more ongoing and 67 in pre-trial stages.
The war crimes prosecution of Fatmir Limaj, a Kosovo member of parliament in
the ruling party, was delayed from March until September because of confusion
about whether he had parliamentary immunity from prosecution. In September
the Constitutional Court of Kosovo ruled that lawmakers are not immune from
prosecution and a district court ordered him placed under house arrest. Limaj is
accused of torturing and killing Serbian and Albanian prisoners in the town of
Klecka in 1999.
The impending trial faced a setback in late September when a key witness
under witness protection, Agim Zogaj, was found dead in a park in Germany.
While German police investigations indicated suicide, Zogaj’s family criticized
the protection offered to him by EULEX and said Zogaj had been under intense
pressure. The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights noted that
the case highlighted the wider challenge of effective witness protection in
Kosovo.
Freedom of Media
In an open letter in February Christopher Dell, the United States ambassador to
Kosovo, accused three media outlets—Koha Ditore, Koha Vision TV, and
Express—of illegal conduct after they obtained and reported on text messages
and a tape recorded conversation between Ambassador Dell and Kosovo politicians
during that month’s presidential elections. The Independent Media
Commission in Kosovo cleared the three publications of wrongdoing the same
month. In March Reporters without Borders criticized Dell’s intervention as
“unacceptable harassment.”
In August EULEX issued indictments against Rexhep Hoti and four other staff at
the Kosovo daily Infopress after threats made in the paper in May and June
2009 against a prominent journalist, Jeta Xharra. The threats followed Xharra’s
reporting on threats to media freedom in Kosovo. The indicted individuals could
face up to five years in prison if convicted.
Human Rights Defenders
The EULEX Human Rights Review Panel (HRRP), an advisory body that adjudicates
claims brought by individuals against EULEX, issued its first decision in
April (an employment case) and a second in June (non-implementation of a
court judgment) finding that EULEX had breached property rights in both and
the right to fair hearing in the second.
Key International Actors
In February the head of the UN Mission in Kosovo, Lamberto Zannier, highlighted
before the Security Council the need for a speedy investigation into war
crimes and organ trafficking allegations in the Council of Europe report. He also
noted “widespread irregularities and manipulation of votes” during the
December 2010 elections. Election irregularities were also criticized in January
by Ulrike Lunacek, the European Parliament rapporteur on Kosovo.
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture, a Council of Europe body, released
a report in October after a July visit that found persistent ill-treatment in Kosovo
police custody and lack of legal safeguards for those forcibly placed in psychiatric
facilities.
In October the European Commission’s annual progress report highlighted
“serious shortcomings” in the December 2010 elections and the need for
greater efforts to tackle organized crime, citing “weak” witness protection as a
particular obstacle. The report noted lack of progress on refugees and IDP
returns, and difficult conditions for displaced persons. It called on the authorities
to do more to tackle access to “education, healthcare, housing and social
protection” for Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians.
T8A@B@JK8E
The human rights situation in Tajikistan remains poor. The government persisted
with enforcing a repressive law on religion and introduced new legislation
further restricting religious expression and education. Authorities continued to
restrict media freedoms and journalists—including BBC correspondent Urunboy
Usmonov—were targeted for their work. Domestic violence against women
remains a serious problem in Tajik society. The judiciary is neither independent
nor effective.
In August President Emomali Rahmon signed a wide-ranging amnesty into law
to mark the 20th anniversary of Tajikistan’s independence. Approximately
15,000 prisoners are reported to be covered under its terms, including alleged
members of banned religious and political groups; several thousand prisoners
are expected to be released in 2011.
Institutional Human Rights Reform
In May the Office of the Ombudsman presented its first human rights report
since Zarif Alizoda, the president’s former legal adviser, was appointed
ombudsman in May 2009. The report covers the office’s work from September
2009 to December 2010, and provides an overview of various human rights
concerns in Tajikistan, including torture, freedom of speech, housing, and children’s
rights. Some local human rights groups have criticized the office for lacking
political will to effectively respond to human rights violations.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Torture remains an enduring problem within Tajikistan’s penitentiary system
and is used to extract confessions from defendants, who are often denied
access to family and legal counsel during initial detention. Despite discussions
with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in August, authorities
have not granted ICRC access to places of detention. With rare exceptions,
human rights groups are also denied access.
While torture is practiced with near impunity, authorities took a few small steps
to hold perpetrators accountable. In an unprecedented ruling in September two
law enforcement officers were sentenced to eight years in prison (reduced to six
years under amnesty) on charges of “deliberate infliction of bodily harm carelessly
resulting in the death of a victim” and “abuse of powers,” after Ismoil
Bachajonov, 31, died in police custody in Dushanbe, the capital, in January. A
third officer was sentenced to three years in prison on charges of “negligence,”
but was released under amnesty.
NGOs and local media also reported on the deaths of Safarali Sangov, 37, who
was detained on March 1 on alleged drug-related charges and died in a hospital
several days later, and of Bahromiddin Shodiev, 28, who was detained on
October 14 and died in a hospital on October 30. Police claim that Sangov and
Shodiev each tried to commit suicide at the police station, but their respective
families insist that each died after sustaining injuries during beatings while in
custody. In early November a Ministry of Internal Affairs spokesperson
announced that there would be a “thorough investigation” into Shodiev’s death
and that three officers had been dismissed. Following Sangov’s death two
policemen were charged with “negligence.” Soon after the trial began in
September the judge ordered that the case undergo further investigation.
In July Ilhom Ismanov and 52 other defendants were put on trial in Khujand for
alleged membership in the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. Amnesty
International reported that during a pre-trial detention hearing on November 12,
2010, the judge ignored Ismanov’s testimony that he had been tortured, including
with electric shocks and boiling water, and that other defendants have
since made similar allegations of torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial detention.
Freedom of Media
The clampdown on Tajikistan’s media continued in 2011. Government officials
continued to file debilitating defamation civil suits that seem aimed at muffling
media. Reporters Without Borders said in February that Tajik authorities “are
using a range of methods in an attempt to control the media, including informal
and financial pressure, an increase in the number of defamation suits and arbitrary
arrest.” According to media watchdog Article 19, a new draft mass media law needs further amendments before it complies with international standards
on freedom of expression.
In January then-chief of the Sughd Regional Department of Fighting Organized
Crime (UBOP) filed a lawsuit against the weekly Asia Plus for 1 million somoni
(US$210,000) in moral damages, after a December 2010 article described
alleged torture and ill-treatment by UBOP officers in the Sughd region. In April,
authorities confiscated equipment from Paykon newspaper in connection with a
2010 libel suit. In May, after a Dushanbe court granted the Ministry of Justice’s
petition to liquidate Paykon’s founding organization for alleged violations,
printing houses refused to print the paper, forcing it to close.
In October Mukhamadyusuf Ismoilov, a journalist detained in the Sughd region
on November 23, 2010, was convicted and fined 35,000 somoni ($7,300) on
charges of inciting national, racial, local, or religious hostility; defamation;
insult; and extortion. He was released under amnesty, but banned from journalism
for three years. His colleagues believe his arrest and prosecution are retribution
for his critical articles, including in Nuri Zindagi, an independent weekly
in Dushanbe.
On February 7 Khikmatullo Saifullozoda, the editor of opposition Islamic
Renaissance Party of Tajikistan newspaper Nadjot, was beaten outside his
home in Dushanbe by unidentified assailants and was hospitalized. The United
States and European Union “strongly condemn[ed]” the attack. Authorities
opened a criminal investigation but no one has been held accountable.
On June 13 veteran BBC journalist Usmonov was detained on charges of membership
to the banned religious organization Hizb ut-Tahrir, but released on bail
after an international outcry. Authorities persisted in prosecuting Usmonov on
charges of complicity in the activities of a banned religious extremist organization,
and on October 14 he was sentenced to three years in prison, but released
under amnesty. At his trial, Usmonov testified that he had been tortured in pretrial
detention. He denied the charges against him, explaining that his contact
with the group was part of his work.
Freedom of Religion
Tajik authorities further tightened restrictions on religious freedoms, and pursuant
to newly adopted legislation, the government now extends far reaching
controls over religious education and worship. According to a June statement by
Forum 18, authorities continue “to try to suppress unregistered Muslim education
throughout the country” and “have brought administrative charges against
at least fifteen Muslim teachers in three different regions.” Authorities have
also closed unregistered mosques.
On August 2 President Rahmon signed the highly controversial Parental
Responsibility Law, stipulating that parents must prevent their children from
participating in religious activity, except for state-sanctioned religious education,
until they reach 18-years-old. Human rights groups, religious groups, and
international bodies criticized the adoption of the law. In June the government
passed amendments to the already restrictive 2009 religion law requiring students
who wish to study at religious institutions abroad to first obtain state permission.
Under the pretext of combating extremist threats, Tajikistan continues to ban
several peaceful minority Muslim groups. Christian minority denominations,
such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, are similarly banned. Local media continued to
report on prosecutions of alleged members of Hizb ut-Tahrir and the Jamaat
Tabligh movement.
Women’s Rights
Women and girls in Tajikistan continue to face gender-based discrimination
and domestic violence; violence in the home impacts women and children
alike. On July 28 the United Nations Women Office in Tajikistan hosted National
Public Hearings with various stakeholders on the draft law on domestic violence,
which has been under discussion for many years. At the hearing, participants
raised concerns about the growing number of domestic violence cases in
Tajikistan, and stated their plan to submit recommendations to further
strengthen the law, according to news reports.
Key International Actors
The UN Human Rights Council’s first Universal Periodic Review of Tajikistan
took place in October and resulted in a number of key recommendations.
Tajikistan committed to combat domestic violence, prevent abusive child labor,
bring the definition of torture in line with the Convention Against Torture, and
prevent and investigate alleged cases of torture. However, Tajikistan rejected
key recommendations on religious freedom, such as revising the new Parental
Responsibility Law, and left those related to media freedom pending until
March 2012.
During a European tour in June, President Rahmon met with EU officials to discuss
investment and bilateral cooperation in key areas including energy and
security. Human rights concerns were featured in some of the meetings, including
with Council of Europe Secretary General Thorbjorn Jagland and then-chairwoman
of the European Parliament’s Human Rights Subcommittee Heidi
Hautala.
The EU held human rights dialogues with Tajikistan in February and October,
but per established practice, did not make public any concrete results yielding
from these exchanges, stating only that it had discussed human rights developments
and recommendations on the right to a fair trial, judicial independence,
and women’s rights. A July civil society seminar organized by the EU in
Dushanbe focused on labor migrants’ rights and resulted in recommendations
submitted to the Tajik government.
The US held its second Annual Bilateral Consultations with Tajikistan in April.
According to a US embassy statement, Assistant Secretary of State Robert Blake
raised human rights and freedom of media concerns during a meeting with
President Rahmon, and met with representatives of political parties and civil
society. The US made a number of critical statements on media and religious
freedoms in Tajikistan over the year, including by US Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton during an October visit to Dushanbe. On March 3, US Ambassador to
the OSCE Ian Kelly identified Tajikistan as a government that “cite[s] concerns
about political security as a basis to repress peaceful religious practice.”
TLIB<P
As the Justice and Development Party (AKP) government focused on promoting
Turkey’s regional interests in response to the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements,
human rights suffered setbacks at home. The government has not prioritized
human rights reforms since 2005, and freedom of expression and association
have both been damaged by the ongoing prosecution and incarceration of
journalists, writers, and hundreds of Kurdish political activists.
After winning a third term in office with a historic 50 percent of the vote in the
June 12 general election, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s AKP government again
pledged to embark on a complete revision of the 1982 constitution. Rewriting
the constitution to further human rights has been a recurring political discussion
since the 2007 general election.
The government’s “democratic opening,” announced in summer 2009 to
address the minority rights of Kurds in Turkey, did not progress. Ground-breaking
negotiations between the state and the armed, outlawed Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) to reach a settlement to end the ongoing conflict collapsed. In July
violence escalated with the PKK stepping up attacks on the military and police,
and the Turkish government in August launching the first aerial bombardment
of PKK bases in Iraqi Kurdistan since 2008. Among a rising number of attacks
on civilians were two on September 2: an Ankara bombing by the Kurdistan
Freedom Falcons (TAK)—a PKK-linked group—which killed three, and a PKK
attack on a car that killed four women in Siirt.
The non-resolution of the Kurdish issue remains the single greatest obstacle to
progress on human rights in Turkey.
Turkey provided camps for around 7,500 Syrian refugees who had fled the
Syrian government’s crackdown on demonstrators. Access to camp residents
was restricted, as was the residents’ movement.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
While the last decade has demonstrated momentum in Turkey for increasingly
open debate on even controversial issues, Turkey’s laws, prosecutors, judges,
and politicians still lag behind. Turkey’s overbroad definition of terrorism still
allows for arbitrary imposition of the harshest terrorism charges against individuals
about whom there is little evidence of logistical or material support for terrorism
or of involvement in plotting violent activities. Prosecutors frequently
prosecute individuals for non-violent speeches and writings. Politicians sue
their critics for criminal defamation. Courts convict with insufficient consideration
for the obligation to protect freedom of expression. A comprehensive
review of all existing laws that restrict freedom of expression is overdue.
Particularly concerning was the March arrest and imprisonment on terrorism
charges of two journalists, Ahmet Şık and Nedim Şener, and of academic Büşra
Ersanlı and publisher Ragip Zarakolu in October. Şık and Şener are charged
with aiding and abetting the Ergenekon organization, a criminal gang charged
with coup-plotting against the AKP government. The sole evidence against Şık
and Şener is their non-violent writing, in Şık’s case consisting of an unpublished
manuscript. At this writing the two had spent eight months in pre-trial
detention, awaiting their November trial.
Ersanlı and Zarakolu will face trial in 2012 for alleged links with the Unıon of
Kurdistan Communities (KCK/TM), a body associated with the PKK leadership.
They were arrested during a clamp-down on the pro-Kurdish Peace and
Democracy Party’s (BDP) legal political activity, which began in April 2009 and
intensified in 2011. Hundreds remain in pre-trial detention and thousands are
on trial on terrorism charges after waves of arrests of officials and activist members
of the BDP (which won 36 independent seats in the June 2011 general election)
for alleged KCK links.
There was little progress in the main Diyarbakir KCK trial of 153 defendants,
which included six BDP mayors and a human rights defender held in pre-trial
detention for 22 months. Defendants insisted on conducting their defence in
Kurdish but this was rejected by the court.
In August the government revised a plan to impose obligatory filtering packages
on all internet users and delayed implementation of optional filtering packages,
following forceful public opposition in Turkey and by international bodies,
including the OSCE and the Council of Europe. However, the practice of blocking
an estimated 15,000 websites in Turkey—most of which have pornographic
content but some of which are restricted for pro-Kurdish or other political content
by order of the Telecommunications Ministry and court decisions—raises
concerns about restrictions on the right to freedom of expression and access to
information.
Violence against Women
In May Turkey took the important step to uphold women’s rights in the international
arena by becoming the first signatory to the Council of Europe
Convention against Domestic Violence and Violence against Women. However,
there remains a pressing need to address the domestic rights deficit for women
in Turkey. Violence in the home is endemic, and police and courts regularly fail
to protect women who have applied for protection orders under the Family
Protection Law. Reports of spouses and family members killing women rose in
2011.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Lethal Force by Security Forces
Police violence against demonstrators is still a serious problem in Turkey,
requiring more resolute action from the government. Too often the authorities
mask the problem by investigating demonstrators for resisting police dispersal,
joining unlawful demonstrations, or terrorist propaganda, rather than investigating
allegations of police abuse or investivating senior officers for the conduct
of officers under their authority. In 2011 there were also reports that police
beat detainees during arrest.
During an anti-AKP government demonstration in the Black Sea town of Hopa
on May 31, retired teacher Metin Lokumcu died of a heart attack after excessive
tear gas exposure. Doctors documented injuries on individuals who reported
being beaten and ill-treated by police during the demonstration’s dispersal and
in detention. Some police officers also sustained injuries. Five demonstrators are on trial for participating in an unlawful demonstration, resisting police, and
damaging public property. Seven were acquitted of terrorist propaganda in
September. The investigation into police ill-treatment is ongoing.
Use of firearms by police and the gendarmerie remains a matter of concern, particularly
against unarmed suspects. There was no progress on tightening rules
governing use of force.
Combating Impunity
Increasing public discussion of the past and emerging new information on past
crimes means there are opportunities for criminal investigations into human
rights abuses by state actors in the 1980s and 1990s. The government needs to
support the process, take steps to reform deficits in Turkey’s criminal justice
system, and strengthen fair trial standards. Great obstacles remain to securing
justice for victims of abuses by police, military, and state officials.
The most significant attempt to bring justice to the state perpetrators of extrajudicial
killings and enforced disappearances continued with the ongoing trial in
Diyarbakır involving a now-retired colonel, village guards, and informers for the
murder of 20 individuals in Cizre, Şırnak, between 1993 and 1995.
In March former police officer Ayhan Çarkın spoke publicly for the first time and
later testified before a prosecutor about his involvement in a special operations
unit committing political assassinations of named Kurds and leftists in the
1990s. Çarkın alleged the unit acted under government orders and with its collusion.
In June he was remanded to prison pending trial after claiming involvement
in four killings; the prosecutor’s investigation continued at this writing.
In September Mehmet Ağar—a former police chief, interior minister, and parliamentarian
implicated in Çarkın’s testimony—received a five-year prison sentence
for forming an armed criminal gang involving state actors and mafia.
Proceedings against Ağar began with the evidence of state-mafia activities,
which were revealed after a 1996 traffic accident near Susurluk, western Turkey.
Until 2007 Ağar was protected from prosecution by parliamentary immunity. He
has appealed the conviction and remains at liberty.
Trials continued of alleged anti-AKP coup plotters, made up of senior retired
military, police, mafia, journalists, and academics, and know as the
“Ergenekon” gang. One of the most important advances in 2011 was circumstantial
evidence pointing to Ergenekon gang involvement in the 2007 murder
of three Christians in Malatya. However, the prolonged pre-trial detention of
some Ergenekon defendants, and the prosecution of Şık and Şener risk undermining
this important effort to combat impunity.
There was no progress in uncovering the full plot behind the January 2007 murder
of journalist Hrant Dink, although in September the prosecutor suggested
that the main suspects—who face possible life imprisonment—may have
Ergenekon gang connections. In July the gunman Ogün Samast, who was 17-
years-old at the time of the murder, received a 23-year prison sentence.
Key International Actors
There was little progress in Turkey’s bid for European Union membership in
2011. Accession negotiations remained stalled over Cyprus, the Turkish government’s
undertaking of too few reforms, the lack of opening a new chapter in the
negotiations in 2011, and leading EU member states continued hostility towards
Turkey’s accession. The AKP focused more on building a dynamic regional foreign
policy. The European Commission, in its annual progress report, highlighted
flaws in Turkey’s criminal justice system, fair trial issues, and restrictions on
freedom of expression and media; emphasized that “promoting gender equality
and combatting violence against women remain major challenges”; and
deemed the wide definition of terrorism in Turkish law a “serious concern.”
The United States government remains an important influence on Turkey, sharing
military intelligence on PKK movements in northern Iraq. The US has raised
particular concerns over Turkey’s record regarding freedom of media and
expression.
Following its November 2010 review of Turkey, the United Nations Committee
against Torture voiced concerns about the failure to investigate “numerous,
ongoing and consistent allegations concerning the use of torture” and asked
Turkey to report again in a year regarding steps taken to address the problems identified. In September Turkey ratified the Optional Protocol to the UN
Convention against Torture.
In a July report the Council of Europe commissioner for human rights termed the
situation in Turkey with respect to freedom of expression and media freedom
“particularly worrying.”
TLIBD<E@JK8E
With presidential elections in Turkmenistan scheduled for February 2012,
President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov’s authoritarian rule remains
entrenched, highlighting Turkmenistan’s status as one of the world’s most
repressive countries.
The country remains closed to independent scrutiny, media and religious freedoms
are subject to draconian restrictions, and human rights defenders face
constant threat of government reprisal. The United Nations Human Rights
Committee expressed concern about allegations of widespread torture and illtreatment,
and of enforced disappearances in custody.
Turkmenistan continued to expand relations with foreign governments and
international organizations, but with no meaningful outcomes for human rights.
Cult of Personality and Presidential Elections
Five years after the death of dictator Saparmurad Niyazov, President
Berdymukhamedov, his relatives, and associates enjoy unlimited power and
total control over all aspects of public life in Turkmenistan. In 2010 and 2011
newspapers and other publications began to bestow on Berdymukhamedov the
honorific title arkadag (patron), symbolizing the strengthening of his cult of personality.
The only political party in Turkmenistan is the Democratic Party of
Turkmenistan, led by Berdymukhamedov, and the president did not fulfill his
pledge to ensure adoption of a new law on political parties.
In June 2011 Berdymukhamedov invited exiled political opposition leaders to
return to Turkmenistan to run in the presidential election and promised to guarantee
their safety. It is not clear whether this pledge would be honored, since
key exiled leaders were convicted in absentia in closed trials years ago on
embezzlement and treason charges.
Civil Society
The repressive atmosphere in Turkmenistan makes it extremely difficult for
independent NGOs to operate. Activists and journalists in Turkmenistan, and in
exile, face constant threat of government reprisal. The security services frequently
warn activists not to meet with visiting foreign delegations.
In April, on the eve of the arrival of a delegation from the European Parliament
to examine the country’s human rights situation, the security services arrested
Bisengul Begdesenov, who had previously tried unsuccessfully to register an
ethnic Kazakh cultural center in Ashgabat, the capital. According to
Begdesenov’s family, officials searched his apartment without a warrant and
confiscated computers and other materials. In May a court handed him a suspended
nine-year sentence for swindling and abetting bribery.
Freedom of Media and Information
All print and electronic media are state-controlled. It is very difficult for foreign
media outlets to cover Turkmenistan because they often cannot access the
country.
Internet access remains limited and heavily controlled by the state. The country’s
only internet service provider is state-operated, and political opposition
websites are blocked. Internet cafes require visitors to present their passports.
The government is known to monitor electronic and telephone communications.
In August 2011 Berdymukhamedov ordered that cable television replace satellite
dishes. If enforced, the order would significantly curtail viewers’ access to
information, especially foreign programming, since the government could at
any point interfere with cable television broadcasts. Berdymukhamedov’s
attempt in 2007 to dismantle satellite dishes failed due to an international outcry.
Freedom of Movement
Turkmenistan’s government continues to restrict peoples’ right to travel freely
internationally by means of an informal and arbitrary system of travel bans commonly imposed on, but not limited to, civil society activists and relatives of
exiled dissidents. Such a ban can be arbitrarily imposed on anyone, including
students studying in foreign universities or citizens traveling abroad for business.
According to the Turkmen Initiative for Human Rights (TIHR)—a Vienna-based
exiled human rights group—Turkmen migration services on April 6, 2011,
stopped health officials at passport control, preventing them from traveling to
the United States for an exchange program. The authorities claimed the officials
had unlawfully brought medicines into Turkmenistan, although no charges have
been brought against them.
TIHR further reported that 1,600 Turkmen students were banned without explanation
from departing to study to Tajikistan in September 2011.
Berdymukhamedov also banned, without explanation, government officials
from travelling to Iran for medical treatment.
Freedom of Religion
The right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion is heavily restricted in
Turkmenistan, where no congregations of unregistered religious groups or communities
are allowed. Religious communities have been unable to register for
years.
Ilmurad Nurliev, a Pentecostal pastor sentenced in October 2010 to four years
in prison on what appear to be bogus swindling charges, continues to serve his
sentence. According to Forum 18, an independent international religious freedom
group, in January 2011 two Jehovah’s Witnesses, who are conscientious
objectors, were handed 18-month prison sentences for evading military service.
At this writing there were seven such prisoners.
Forum 18 also reported that local officials harassed and insulted about 40
members of a Baptist church vacationing together on the Caspian Sea, causing
them to leave the area.
Political Prisoners, Enforced Disappearances
Unknown numbers of individuals continue to languish in Turkmen prisons on
what appear to be politically motivated charges. The justice system lacks transparency,
trials are closed in political cases, and the overall level of repression
precludes any independent human rights monitoring. The government has persistently
denied access to the country for independent human rights monitors,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross, NGOs, and 10 UN special
procedures whose requests for visits have not been answered.
The government ignored calls by the UN Committee against Torture and the
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to release well-known political prisoners
Annakurban Amanklychev and Sapardurdy Khajiev, who had worked with
human rights organizations prior to their imprisonment in 2006. Political dissident
Gulgeldy Annaniazov, arrested in 2008, also remains imprisoned.
In October 2011 a court sentenced Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL)
correspondent Dovlet Yazkuliev to five years imprisonment on bogus charges of
urging a relative to commit suicide. The charges appeared to be brought in retribution
for Yazkuliev’s work. In July the security services questioned and warned
Yazkuliev that he could face criminal slander charges for his reporting on the
July 2011 explosions in Abadan (see below). In late Octover Yazkuliev was
released under a presidential prison amnesty.
Another RFE/RL contributor, Amangelen Shapudakov, 80, was detained on
March 7, 2011, and forcibly confined in a psychiatric facility for 43 days. Police
previously detained Shapudakov in February 2011, after he complained to international
organizations about official harassment. According to RFE/RL,
Shapudakov had also been banned from leaving his home district.
In March Jumageldi Mulkiyev was dismissed from his position as editor-in-chief
of the magazine Turkmen World and forcibly confined for eight days in a psychiatric
hospital after his return from holiday in Iran.
In April 2011 the security services imprisoned Bazargeldy and Ayjemal Berdyev,
who have sought redress for more than a decade for their alleged torture in custody
and the arbitrary seizure of their property in the 1990s. The arrests occurred on the eve of the European Parliament’s visit. Human Rights Watch
does not know their current whereabouts.
Approximately 50 prisoners convicted in relation to the November 2002 alleged
assassination attempt on Saparmurat Niyazov—including former Foreign
Minister Boris Shikhmuradov and Turkmenistan’s former ambassador to the
Operation for Security and Co-operation in Europe, Batyr Berdiev—remain the
victims of enforced disappearances. Their fate is unknown, and their whereabouts
not disclosed even to their families. Human Rights Watch is aware of
unconfirmed reports that several defendants in the 2002 plot case have died in
detention.
Illegal House Evictions in Ashgabat
In 2011 local authorities in Ashgabat and the surrounding area continued to
evict, expropriate, and demolish homes of residents without a court ruling or
providing adequate compensation, alternative accommodations, or notice. The
demolitions make way for construction as part of a massive urban renewal project
initiated in the late 1990s. While official statistics are not published, Human
Rights Watch estimates that in the past decade the projects have displaced
thousands of residents.
On June 8, 2011, police in Ashgabat broke up a small and peaceful demonstration
of evictees protesting their difficulties receiving alternative accommodation.
Explosion in Abadan
On July 7, 2011, high temperatures caused a huge explosion of ammunition in
the city of Abadan, resulting in dozens of civilian deaths. The government concealed
information about the explosion, sealed the city, and shut down mobile
and internet lines, hindering people’s efforts to locate loved ones and concealing
the extent of destruction.
Key International Actors
Several international actors continue to seek to leverage Turkmenistan’s energy
wealth, pushing aside concerns about the government’s human rights record.
The European Union in particular continues to press forward with a Partnership
and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with Turkmenistan, frozen since 1998 over
human rights concerns, without requiring any human rights reforms in
exchange. Throughout 2011 the European Parliament continued to hold up
approval of the PCA over human rights concerns. At this writing the PCA was
pending European Parliament approval.
Two national parliaments—in France and the United Kingdom—have yet to ratify
the PCA. Human rights conditions for ratification that the French parliament set
in 2010 remain in place. The UK Foreign Commonwealth Office’s annual report
on human rights failed to convey the severity of Turkmen government abuses
and suggested that UK companies could support the government’s efforts to
build new prisons.
The UN Committee against Torture reviewed Turkmenistan in May 2011 and
found “numerous and consistent allegations about the widespread practice of
torture and ill-treatment.” It voiced concern about enforced disappearances
and incommunicado detention and requested that the Turkmen government
report back within one year on measures taken to address these and other concerns.
UBI8@E<
In 2011 Ukraine adopted reforms to facilitate closer association with the
European Union and adopted new laws on access to information and refugee
protection.
The conviction of former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko and the arrest and
trial of other former government officials undermined confidence in the judiciary’s
independence, media faced increasing pressure, and corruption continued
to plague public and private institutions. Violations of the rights of migrants
and asylum seekers remain serious concerns. Regarding the right to health, in
2011 the government’s record was uneven on HIV/AIDS prevention and poor on
access to pain relief.
Migration and Asylum
On August 4, 2011, a new law on refugees came into force that expands the
grounds for recognizing refugee status, provides for temporary and complementary
forms of protection, automatically grants minors refugee status when parents
receive it, and ensures better access to education for children of refugees
by simplifying school registration procedures.
Unlike EU standards, the law does not provide complementary protection to
those facing indiscriminate violence. At this writing local migration service
offices often refused applications for temporary and complementary protection
while they awaited implementing instructions on the new law from the Cabinet
of Ministers. Asylum seekers remain vulnerable to arbitrary detention, police
harassment, and torture. There is no standard procedure for determining the
age of refugees and asylum-seeking children.
In March 2011 the State Border Guard Service forcibly deported at least 10 asylum
seekers and migrants back to Afghanistan before some could appeal the
rejection of their asylum status. Members of the group did not have access to
adequate legal representation or interpreters during their asylum and deportation
hearings.
The 10 were part of a larger group of 14 asylum seekers who were held in custody
at the Borispyl airport. Border guards allegedly handcuffed some
detainees for more than a day, and at least three border guards allegedly
punched, kicked, and verbally abused group members.
Rule of Law
In 2011 several ministers who served under former President Yushchenko were
tried on criminal charges of “abuse of office” as part of President Viktor
Yanukovych’s anti-corruption campaign. In October a Ukrainian court convicted
and sentenced Tymoshenko to seven years imprisonment for signing a gas contract
with Russia allegedly without approval from the Cabinet of Ministers. The
contract significantly increased the price of natural gas. Other officials facing
prosecution include former acting Minister of Defense Valeriy Ivashchenko, former
Interior Minister Yuri Lutsenko, and former First Deputy Justice Minister
Yevhen Korniychuk, some of whom are also prominent opposition leaders. The
EU, United States, and Russia expressed concern that the allegations against
the former officials did not constitute crimes and that the charges are politically
motivated.
Although international observers declared the 2010 presidential elections generally
in accordance with international standards, OPORA, an independent
NGO, reported procedural violations in the November 2010 local elections.
Hate Crimes and Discrimination
In 2010 the number of reported violent and apparently racially motivated
attacks fell to fewer than 15 from its peak of over 80 attacks per year in 2007
and 2008, but by July 2011 there were already 13. Police and prosecutors
remain reluctant to classify attacks as racially motivated. Racial profiling, nonviolent
harassment by police, and hate crimes against persons of non-Slavic
appearance and ethnic and religious minorities persist. Crimean Tatars and
Roma continue to face discrimination and problems integrating into society,
including lack of education in their native languages.
Civil Society
Despite legislative reforms, the situation for journalists and media outlets deteriorated
in 2011, and civil society activists faced official threats that appeared
to be retaliation for their work. In January 2011 the government passed the Law
on Access to Public Information, which provides for the protection of journalists
and, with the exception of confidential information, mandates the release of
government information about the use of public property and funds.
Attacks on journalists, while not pervasive, often occur with impunity. On July
13, unidentified gunmen shot through the car windshield of Obozrebatel
reporter Anatoly Shariya as he drove home. Although Shariya, who covers gambling,
was not injured, Yanukovych ordered an investigation into the attack. The
same month arsonists barricaded the door to Novosti Donbasu editor Aleksiy
Matsuka’s apartment with cement bags, put a funeral wreath with a threatening
message outside the apartment, and set the door on fire. Matsuka, who was
not home at the time, requested on August 8 that authorities reclassify the current
“hooliganism” charges as an “attempted murder” investigation connected
to his work. In response to Matsuka’s request, on September 9 the Ministry of
Internal Affairs added article 129 “threat of homicide” to the criminal investigation.
The national investigation into the August 2010 disappearance of Vasyl
Klymentyev, Noviy Stil editor-in-chief, remains open. In August former Gen.
Oleksiy Pukach confessed to the 2000 murder of investigative journalist Georgy
Gongadze and implicated former President Leonid Kuchma and current
Parliament Speaker Volodomyr Lytvyn in the crime. The proceedings remain
closed, although the Gongadze family’s lawyer made three separate appeals to
the court to have the murder trial public.
In July ATN TV’s provider unexpectedly and without explanation dropped ATN’s
signal, and local authorities ordered the termination of ATN’s broadcasting due
to a lack of a valid Sanitary and Epidemiological Service permit. ATN, the only
independent Kharkiv news program, wrote an open letter to Yanukovych on
September 13 alleging that the measures were politically motivated. The next
day Fora and A/TVK, two other channels that broadcast ATN news and have valid broadcasting licenses, were unexpectedly removed from the air without a
clear or official explanation. An opaque August 2011 bidding process for digital
television frequencies resulted in several regional stations, including 9 Kanal,
Chornomorska TV, and 3 Studia losing their frequency.
In December 2010 Vinnytsya Human Rights Group (VHRG) coordinator Dmytro
Groisman was charged with disseminating pornography and desecrating state
symbols. At the time VHRG was documenting asylum seekers who claim that
the Vinnytsya police regularly extorted them. Authorities confiscated VHRG’s
documents and equipment in January in connection with Groisman’s case, but
returned all the materials on March 25, 2011. At this writing Groisman could not
legally travel outside the Vinnytsya city limits due to his pending case.
International pressure prevented human rights activist Andrei Bondarenko from
undergoing a groundless, compulsory psychiatric examination in December
2010.
Health
Ukraine took several positive steps to fight the HIV/AIDS epidemic. On January
15, 2011, the government enacted a national law on HIV/AIDS that for the first
time identifies substitution treatment and needle exchange as essential elements
of Ukraine’s national HIV prevention strategy. Ukraine also expanded the
number of people with opioid drug dependence receiving opiate substitution
treatment from none in 2004 to 6,390 in September 2011.
Developments early in 2011 threatened this progress. On January 18 the
Ministry of Interior issued an order to collect personal data of patients enrolled
in opiate substitution programs across Ukraine. Police pursued patients at clinics
and at home to obtain this data and denied them access to services if they
did not provide confidential information, including their HIV status and criminal
record. NGOs working on HIV prevention and treatment were also ordered to
surrender project documents, effectively paralyzing essential HIV prevention
and outreach programs for drug users. In October 2010 the government recriminalized
small amounts of narcotic drugs, resulting in decreased use of needle
exchange programs and a 15 percent rise in drug possession arrests in the first
quarter of 2011.
Tens of thousands of patients with advanced cancer in Ukraine unnecessarily
suffer from severe pain every year because pain treatment is often inaccessible,
best practices for palliative care are ignored, and anti-drug abuse regulations
hamstring healthcare workers’ ability to deliver evidence-based care. Those
healthcare workers who try to provide the most effective pain treatment possible
often have no choice but to act, as one oncologist said, “on the edge of the
law.” The situation is particularly devastating in rural areas—home to about
one-third of Ukraine’s population of 46 million—where strong opioid analgesics
are often hard to access or simply unavailable.
Key International Actors
In August Yanukovych reaffirmed that “Ukraine’s future lies with Europe” and
declined to join a customs union with Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan.
However, Tymoshenko’s conviction jeopardized Ukraine’s prospects of concluding
an EU Association Agreement, which was being finalized at this writing. The
agreement, which includes a free trade agreement, would bring closer economic
and political integration with the EU.
Rising oil prices and Ukraine’s rejection of Russia’s customs union have led to
mounting tensions between the two countries. Despite expressing concern over
the prosecution of opposition leaders, the US continues to provide economic
aid to Ukraine.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe’s standing rapporteur for
media freedom voiced concern over the deteriorating situation for media freedom
in Ukraine.
The United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child reviewed Ukraine in
January, expressing concern over the overall lack of data on children at risk of
torture, domestic violence, and other forms of ill-treatment. In its August review
the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination welcomed
Ukraine’s new refugee law, but expressed concern that several government
bodies working on discrimination ceased work in 2010.
UQ9<B@JK8E
Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains appalling, with no meaningful
improvements in 2011. Torture remains endemic in the criminal justice system.
Authorities continue to target civil society activists, opposition members, and
journalists, and to persecute religious believers who worship outside strict
state controls.
Freedom of expression remains severely limited. Government-sponsored forced
child labor during the cotton harvest continues. Authorities continued to deny
justice for the 2005 Andijan massacre in which government forces shot and
killed hundreds of protestors, most of them unarmed.
Reacting to the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements, the Uzbek government
increased the presence of security forces across the country and widened its
already-tight control over the internet. Despite the government’s persistent
refusal to address concerns about its abysmal record, the United States and
European Union continued to advance closer relations with the Uzbek government
in 2011, seeking cooperation in the war in Afghanistan.
Human Rights Defenders and Independent Journalists
Uzbek authorities regularly threaten, imprison, ill-treat, and torture human
rights defenders and other peaceful civil society activists. In 2011 the Uzbek
government continued to harass activists and interfere with independent civil
society.
The Uzbek government holds at least 13 human rights defenders in prison, and
has brought charges against others, because of their human rights work. They
are: Solijon Abdurakhmanov, Azam Formonov, Nosim Isakov, Gaibullo Jalilov,
Alisher Karamatov, Jamshid Karimov, Norboi Kholjigitov, Abdurasul
Khudainasarov, Ganihon Mamatkhanov, Habibulla Okpulatov, Yuldash Rasulov,
Dilmurod Saidov, and Akzam Turgunov.
Several are in very poor health and at least seven have been ill-treated or tortured
in custody. For example, relatives of imprisoned rights defender Gaibullo Jalilov reported after a January 2011 visit that he had been repeatedly tortured,
including being beaten with a stick that left him nearly deaf in both ears.
Other activists, including independent journalists and opposition figures,
remain imprisoned on politically motivated charges. While authorities released
the poet Yusuf Jumaev and three activists, Farkhad Mukhtarov, Norboi
Kholjigitov, and Maksim Popov, the government did not ease its overall campaign
to crush its critics.
Members of the Human Rights Alliance, an Uzbek human rights group, were regularly
subjected to arbitrary detention and de facto house arrest for their
activism. On April 24 a Russian television program exploring conditions for ethnic
Russians in Central Asia interviewed Alliance members Elena Urlaeva,
Viktoriya Bazhenova, and Tatyana Dovlatova. The next night assailants accosted
the activists in their homes, screaming insults and threatening violence.
Following the airing of the program, Dovlatova was sued for defamation, a case
that appears to have been orchestrated by authorities. Police later raided her
home and she lost badly needed disability benefits.
In June Uzbekistan’s Supreme Court granted a Justice Ministry petition to “liquidate”
Human Rights Watch’s Tashkent office. The ruling followed years of the
Uzbek government obstructing Human Rights Watch’s access to the country,
including denying visas and staff member accreditation, most recently in
December 2010. The obstruction and legal ruling led to the organization’s
expulsion from Uzbekistan after 15 years in the country.
In July, in a development that appears designed to discourage diplomats from
engaging with independent activists, authorities brought administrative
charges against a local British Embassy employee, Press Secretary Leonid
Kudryavtsev, for holding “unauthorized meetings” with human rights defenders.
On August 10 Dovlatova and activist Abdullo Tojiboy-ugli were attacked by
assailants in separate incidents that appear to have been instigated by authorities.
On August 22 journalist Elena Bondar was detained at Tashkent airport after
returning from a journalism course abroad. Security agents confiscated her
flash drives, interrogated her, and sent the confiscated items for “analysis” to
the Center for Monitoring of the Uzbek Information Agency, which has been
involved in trumping up cases against journalists.
Also in August Urlaeva was detained and beaten when she went to investigate a
case of three TV journalists, whom authorities had charged with extortion in
Namangan.
The Andijan Massacre
Six years later, the government continues to refuse an independent investigation
into the 2005 massacre of hundreds of citizens in Andijan, denying justice
to victims and failing to bring to account those responsible. Authorities continue
to persecute anyone suspected of having participated in, or witnessed, the
atrocities.
The Uzbek government also continued to intimidate families of Andijan survivors
who have sought refuge abroad. Police subject them to constant surveillance,
call them for questioning, and threaten them with criminal charges or
home confiscation.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Criminal Justice
Torture remains rampant in Uzbekistan and continues to occur with near-total
impunity. Rights of detainees are violated at each stage of investigations and
trials, despite habeas corpus amendments that went into effect in 2008. The
Uzbek government has persistently failed to meaningfully implement steps to
combat torture that the United Nations special rapporteur in 2003 and other
international bodies have recommended.
Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture
in pre-trial detention. Police use torture to coerce confessions from
detainees. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate allegations of abuse.
In July authorities arrested Said Ashurov, a Tajik national who worked for the
British company Oxus Gold, which the government had forced to close earlier in
the year. A military court sentenced Ashurov to 12 years in prison for “possession
of state secrets” after a closed trial. Witnesses who testified against him
reported to Human Rights Watch that they were beaten in detention to procure
their testimony. Prison authorities have denied Ashurov, who suffers from
chronic hepatitis B, access to adequate medical treatment, resulting in a serious
deterioration of his health.
Human Rights Watch continues to receive regular, credible reports of torture
and ill-treatment in pre-trial and post-conviction detention.
Freedom of Religion
Although Uzbekistan’s Constitution ensures freedom of religion, Uzbek authorities
continued their unrelenting, multi-year campaign of arbitrary detention,
arrest, and torture of Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls.
Over 100 were arrested or convicted in 2011 on charges related to religious
extremism.
Continuing a trend that began in 2008, followers of the late Turkish Muslim theologian
Said Nursi continued to be prosecuted for religious extremism. Dozens
of Nursi followers were arrested or imprisoned in 2011.
Authorities also continue to impose short-term prison sentences and fines on
Christians and members of other minority religions conducting peaceful religious
activities for administrative offenses, such as illegal religious teaching.
On February 4 the Supreme Court again dismissed an appeal by Tohar
Haydarov, a Baptist sentenced to 10 years on allegedly fabricated drug-related
charges. In July a Protestant couple in Fergana, Muradiljon Umurzakov and
Dilorom Mamasadikova, were physically abused and threatened with charges
after police raided their home and found a Bible.
Authorities continue to extend sentences of religious prisoners for alleged violations
of prison regulations. Such extensions occur without due process and
can add years to a prisoner’s sentence.
In November relatives of Muslim religious prisoners serving sentences at Jaslyk
colony, Uzbekistan’s most notorious prison, told Human Rights Watch that following
a hunger strike, prison authorities tortured several inmates, including by
undressing them naked in front of other inmates, beating, and subjecting them
to sexual humiliation.
Forced Child Labor
Forced child labor in the cotton fields remains a serious concern. The government
took no meaningful steps to implement the two International Labour
Organization (ILO) conventions on child labor, which it ratified in March 2008.
Despite repeated requests, it continued to refuse ILO access to monitor the harvest.
The government continues to force 1.5 to 2 million schoolchildren as young as
nine-years-old to help with the cotton harvest for two months a year. They live
in filthy conditions, contract illnesses, miss school, and work daily from early
morning until evening for little to no pay. Hunger, exhaustion, and heat stroke
are common.
Human Rights Watch is aware of several cases of authorities harassing activists
who tried to document forced child labor. In September authorities detained
activists Gulshan Karaeva and Nodir Akhatov while they photographed children
forced to pick cotton in the Kashkadarya region.
Also in September, responding to concerns from Human Rights Watch and other
groups, the organizers of New York Fashion Week cancelled a show by the president’s
daughter, Gulnara Karimova, who serves as Uzbekistan’s permanent
representative to the UN and its ambassador to Spain.
Key International Actors
The Uzbek government continued to refuse to cooperate with international
institutions but faced virtually no consequences for this intransigence. It continues
to deny access to all eight UN special procedures that have requested
invitations, has failed to comply with recommendations made by various expert bodies, and blocks the ILO from sending independent observers to monitor
compliance with the prohibition of forced child labor in the cotton industry.
The EU’s position on human rights remained disappointingly weak, with virtually
no public expressions of concern about Uzbekistan’s deteriorating record. In
January the European Commission president, Jose Manuel Barroso, received
President Islam Karimov in Brussels, a highly controversial visit that marked
Karimov’s first to Europe since the Andijan massacre. The EU’s eagerness to
deepen its relationship with Uzbekistan without requiring improvements contrasted
with its recent re-thinking of its relationships with autocratic governments
in the Middle East. The annual human rights dialogue between the EU
and Uzbekistan, held in May, again yielded no known results and appeared to
have no bearing on the broader relationship.
In 2011 the US deepened its policy of re-engagement with Uzbekistan. Since
2004 Congress had expressly restricted assistance to Uzbekistan based on its
deplorable rights record and further tightened restrictions following the Andijan
massacre. However, in a particularly troubling move, and despite no meaningful
improvements, the Obama administration sought to re-start assistance and provide
military aid to Uzbekistan.
Uzbekistan is seen as a critical stop in the Northern Distribution Network,
through which the US has sent non-lethal supplies to Afghanistan since 2009
as an alternative to what are viewed as unstable supply lines through Pakistan.
US military contracts with Uzbeks as part of this supply chain are potentially
lucrative for persons close to the Uzbek government. Despite the State
Department’s re-designation in September of Uzbekistan as a “Country of
Particular Concern” for systematic violations of religious freedom, the US government
retained a waiver on the sanctions outlined in the designation.
AC><I@8
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika lifted Algeria’s 19-year state of emergency in
February and announced legal and political reforms amidst increasing economic
unrest, pro-reform street protests, and worker strikes. However, at this writing
these measures had not given Algerians the freedom to exercise their rights
of expression, assembly, and association.
Security forces and armed groups continued to enjoy broad impunity for atrocities
committed during the civil war of the 1990s. The state offered compensation
to families of persons forcibly disappeared in the 1990s, but not answers
about their fate. Armed groups continued to carry out deadly attacks, mostly
targeting state security forces.
Freedom of Assembly
January 2011 saw several days of violent protests and rioting in several cities,
triggered by price hikes on basic food items. As the riots subsided, Algerians—
inspired by the stirrings in Tunisia and Egypt—on January 22 began attempting
to hold weekly peaceful pro-reform demonstrations in Algiers, the capital. Large
deployments of police were usually on hand and either prevented the protests
from getting started or confined them to small spaces. Larger-scale labor
protests also took place, including a march by thousands of communal guards
in Algiers on March 7 demanding more pay.
On February 24 President Bouteflika ended the state of emergency. The emergency
decree had given the Interior Ministry sweeping powers to administratively
detain persons deemed to endanger “public order,” close down meeting
places, and ban gatherings. However many restrictions on civil liberties
imposed during the state of emergency continued, as authorities drew on other
repressive laws and regulations. For example, an indefinite ban imposed in
2001 on demonstrations in Algiers remained in effect. Outside the capital, a
1991 decree-law required prior approval for public gatherings. While authorities
tolerated some demonstrations critical of the government outside of Algiers,
these remained more the exception than the rule.
On March 16 in the city of Mostaganem authorities arrested and held overnight
Dalila Touat of the unrecognized National Committee to Defend the Rights of
the Unemployed for handing out leaflets and charged her with violating article
100 of the criminal code, which prohibits “any direct instigation ... by distributing
written matter, of an unarmed gathering.” A court in Mostaganem acquitted
her on April 28. Authorities also subjected leaders of Algeria’s several independent
and legally unrecognized labor unions to various forms of harassment.
Freedom of Expression and Association
The state controls all domestic broadcast media, which provide live telecasts of
parliamentary sessions but air almost no critical coverage of government policies.
Privately-owned newspapers enjoy a freer scope, but repressive press
laws and dependence on revenues from public sector advertising limit their
freedom to criticize the government and the military. Authorities barred Al
Jazeera television from maintaining a bureau in the country.
In July parliament revised two articles of the press code to eliminate prison
terms—but not fines—as punishment for the offense of defaming or showing
contempt for the president, state institutions, or courts. In September the
Council of Ministers approved a draft press code that, if adopted, would eliminate
prison as a punishment for speech offenses; however prison sentences for
speech offenses remain present in the penal code.
The Council of Ministers on September 12 adopted a draft law on associations
that allows authorities to oppose the creation of an association they deem to
be contrary to “the public order” or “good morals.” It also makes it easier for
authorities to dissolve an association without a court order and harder for an
association to receive funding from abroad. Under the proposed law, administering
an “unapproved” association would remain a crime.
Authorities required organizations to obtain authorization from the local governor
before holding indoor public meetings. The government in June banned two
events organized by the Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights: a
conference on the occasion of the Day of the Child scheduled for June 1 in the wilaya (governorate) of el-Taref and one to be held in Algiers on June 10 about
corruption in the Arab world.
Freedom of Religion
Algeria’s constitution defines the state religion as Islam and requires that the
president to be Muslim. A 2006 law criminalizes proselytizing Muslims by non-
Muslims, but not the reverse, and forbids non-Muslims from worshiping except
in state-approved locations. In practice authorities rarely authorized Algerian
Protestant groups to use buildings for worship. In May the governor of the
wilaya of Béjaia ordered the Protestant Church of Algeria (EPA) to shut seven
“unauthorized” places of worship operating in the wilaya. EPA President
Moustapha Krim said in October that the churches continued to operate while
the EPA appealed the order in the courts. On May 25 an Oran court convicted
Abdelkarim Siaghi, a convert to Christianity, of “offending” the Prophet
Muhammad under the penal code and sentenced him to five years in prison
and a fine. He was freed pending an appeal scheduled for November 2011.
Impunity for Past Abuses
Over 100,000 Algerians died during the political strife of the 1990s. Thousands
more were subjected to enforced disappearances by security forces or abducted
by armed groups fighting the government and never found. The 2006 Law on
Peace and National Reconciliation provides a legal framework for the continued
impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of atrocities during this era. The law also
makes it a crime to denigrate state institutions or security forces for the way
they conducted themselves during the political strife, thus potentially penalizing
those who allege that the security forces perpetrated human rights violations.
The law promises compensation to families of “disappeared” persons. But
organizations representing families of the “disappeared” criticized the state for
its failure to provide a detailed account of the fate of their missing relatives,
and for the pressure they said is applied to the families to accept compensation
and abandon demands to learn the truth.
Algerian courts pronounced many death sentences during 2011 but observed a
de facto moratorium on executions since 1993.
Women’s Rights
Algerian women face discrimination under the code of personal status. A man
has the right to divorce his wife without cause, but a woman can file for divorce
only on specific grounds, such as abandonment. Khul’a (a no-fault divorce) is
the only option for women who wish to file for a divorce without invoking the
accepted reasons, but in so doing they forfeit any financial claims.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Attacks by armed groups were down dramatically compared to the mid-1990s,
but al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) continued to launch fatal attacks,
directed mostly—but not exclusively—at military and police targets.
On February 24, the same day the president lifted the state of emergency,
President Bouteflika issued a decree authorizing the Algerian army to conduct
counterterrorism operations, a role it had played during the state of emergency.
A branch of the military, the Department of Intelligence and Security (DRS), was
implicated in some of the worst abuses perpetrated during counterterrorism
operations since the 1990s.
Also on February 24, Bouteflika promulgated article 125 bis of the code of criminal
procedure, allowing judges to place suspects in “protected residence.” The
law allows this form of custody to take place in a secret location and authorizes
prosecution for revealing its whereabouts. “Protected residence” replaced
“assigned residence,” practiced during the state of emergency against a small
number of suspected terrorists. “Assigned residence” involved removing these
individuals from the judicial system and detaining them indefinitely in an
undisclosed location, cut off from contact with families and lawyers.
After the lifting of the state of emergency the detainees who had been in
“assigned residence” were presented in court and transferred to official places
of detention. However authorities continued to prevent some from appearing at trials. For example, lawyers for accused terrorists Omar Ferrah and Yacine
Aïssani withdrew from the courtroom in protest when the court failed to produce
the accused mens’ co-defendant and alleged leader, Amar Saïfi, at several
sessions of their trial between March and June, prompting the adjournment of
the trial until November.
In one case dating to the 1990s, Malik Mejnoun and Abdelkader Chenoui were
brought to trial on July 18 for the 1999 assassination of Kabyle (Berber) singeractivist
Lounes Matoub after they had spent 12 years in pre-trial detention. Both
men claimed they were innocent and said they were tortured while in incommunicado
detention. The court convicted them and sentenced them to 12 years in
prison.
Key International Actors
Algeria and the European Union have an association agreement and signed an
agreement that provides Algeria €172 million (approximately US$234 million) in
aid between 2011 and 2013. In September there was a meeting of the subcommittee
of the bilateral Association Council on “political dialogue, security and
human rights.”
According to the United States government, Algeria “is a major partner in combating
extremism and terrorist networks such as al Qaeda and is our secondlargest
trading partner in the Arab world.” The US provides almost no financial
aid to Algeria, but is the leading customer of its exports, primarily gas and oil.
US President Barack Obama also congratulated the government on February 24
for lifting the state of emergency, noting that “we look forward to additional
steps by the government that enable the Algerian people to fully exercise their
universal rights, including freedom of expression, association and assembly.”
Algeria in 2011 continued to fail to invite five of the special procedures of the
United Nations Human Rights Council that had requested to visit the country,
including the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and
the special rapporteurs on torture and on human rights while countering terrorism.
Algeria hosted a visit by the special rapporteur on the right to adequate
housing.
B8?I8@E
In mid-February Bahraini authorities used lethal force to suppress peaceful
anti-government and pro-democracy protests, killing seven and wounding many
more.
The crackdown resumed in mid-March, after troops from Saudi Arabia entered
Bahrain and Bahraini military and security forces launched a systematic campaign
of retribution, arresting thousands of demonstrators or individuals who
supported the protests. Authorities fired hundreds of public sector employees
suspected of supporting the protests, as did large private firms in which the
state had a substantial stake.
Security forces’ use of birdshot pellets, rubber bullets, and tear gas as well as
live ammunition caused most of the deaths and injuries of protesters and
bystanders. Attacks against protesters continued after authorities formally lifted
the “state of national safety” on June 1. At this writing more than 40 persons
had been killed in connection with suppression of protests, including four who
died in custody in April from torture or medical neglect, and several members of
security forces.
Right to Assembly
During the early morning hours of February 17, security forces attacked peaceful
demonstrators at the Pearl Roundabout in Manama, the capital. Many were
sleeping. The assault left four protesters dead and hundreds injured. On
February 18, security forces and the Bahrain Defense Force (BDF) fired live
ammunition and rubber bullets at peaceful protesters marching towards the
Pearl Roundabout—then occupied by BDF tanks, armored vehicles and police
units—mortally wounding Abd al-Ridha Bu Hameed.
On February 19, authorities ordered security and military forces to withdraw and
protesters reoccupied the Pearl Roundabout. For four weeks protesters gathered
at the roundabout and other areas to voice opposition to the government
and ruling Al Khalifa family. Crown Prince Salma bin Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
appeared on national television and guaranteed that protesters would be free to demonstrate at the Pearl Roundabout without facing arrest or attack by government
forces.
On March 16—a day after King Hamad declared a “state of national safety,”
akin to a state of emergency—security and military forces forcibly cleared the
Pearl Roundabout, the center of anti-government protests. The same day, forces
dispersed protesters in villages outside Manama and surrounded the
Salmaniya Medical Complex, the country’s largest public hospital, preventing
patients and medical staff from entering or leaving the hospital. At least six
people were killed during clashes on March 16, including two police officers.
After lifting the state of emergency on June 1, authorities permitted Al Wefaq,
the largest opposition political society, to hold several rallies, which remained
peaceful, but clashes with security forces regularly broke out when protesters
held demonstrations in Shia villages. At least eleven protesters and
bystanders, including two children under age 18, had been killed as a result of
protest-related injuries between June 1 and this writing.
Arbitrary Arrests and Detentions
Since mid-March security forces have arrested over 1,600 people who participated
in, or were suspected of supporting, the anti-government demonstrations.
Some of those arrested and detained were children. In many cases armed
masked men, some in uniforms and others in civilian clothes, pulled people out
of their homes in pre-dawn raids and transferred them to unknown locations.
Others were arrested at work or pulled out of cars at checkpoints. Authorities
held most detainees in incommunicado detention for weeks, in some cases
months. Detainees had little or no contact with lawyers or family except when
they were presented before a special military court.
Those held incommunicado included doctors, teachers, students, athletes, a
prominent defense lawyer, and leaders of legally recognized opposition political
societies. Ibrahim Sharif, a Sunni who heads the secularist National
Democratic Action Society, was one of the first arrested, in a pre-dawn raid on
March 17. Matar Ibrahim Matar and Jawad Fairouz—who represented Al Wefaq,
the largest opposition bloc in parliament before its members resigned in protest in February—were seized on May 2. Authorities released Matar and
Fairouz in August but they still face charges related to their political activities.
Dozens remained in pre-trial detention as of October, in addition to the more
than 250 who were convicted and sentenced by special military courts. The government
provided little information about the number of people arrested and
typically gave reasons for arrest only when detainees were charged before special
military courts.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Abuse
In April four people died in custody, apparently as a result of torture and medical
neglect. The body of one—Ali Isa Ibrahim Saqer, arrested in connection with
the deaths of two police officers—bore unmistakable signs of torture on his
body. On April 28 Bahrain TV broadcast Saqer’s purported confession in connection
with the trial of his co-defendants, although authorities notified Saqer’s
family of his death on April 9.
Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, a leading human rights and political activist, appeared
before a special military court on May 8 with facial fractures and head injuries,
apparently the result of severe beatings he sustained when authorities
detained him on April 9. Several other co-defendants showed signs of possible
abuse or ill-treatment. Since mid-February dozens of released detainees,
including doctors, nurses, and paramedics arrested in March and April, have
alleged they were abused or tortured during detention, often to coerce confessions.
On February 23, authorities released from prison 23 opposition leaders and
activists arrested between mid-August and early September 2010 for alleged
terrorist offenses. Several in the group described lengthy interrogation sessions
during which they were blindfolded and subjected to both physical and psychological
abuse, some of which amounted to torture. The abuse included threats,
humiliation, solitary confinement, beatings to the head, chest, and other sensitive
areas, beatings on the soles of feet with sticks or hoses, sleep deprivation,
denying access to the bathroom, and electric shocks. Some said they were sexually harassed or assaulted. Most of the defendants have since been rearrested.
Authorities denied requests for visits to detention facilities by independent
human rights and humanitarian organizations as well as United Nations human
rights mechanisms.
Unfair Trials in Special Military Courts
On March 15 King Hamad established by decree special military courts, called
the “Courts of National Safety,” to try protesters and people perceived as supporting
the street protests. BDF Commander-in-Chief Field Marshal Khalifa bin
Ahmed Al Khalifa appointed the military judge who presides over the court,
along with two civilian judges, and the military public prosecutor who prosecuted
the cases.
Since March, authorities have tried several hundred defendants before military
courts and have convicted and sentenced more than 300 persons.
Among those the special military court sentenced to prison terms ranging from
five years to life were Sharif al-Khawaja, and 19 other protest leaders, seven of
them in absentia, on June 22. The charges against them ranged from calling for
a change of government, leading “illegal” demonstrations, “spreading false
news,” and “harming the reputation” of the country. The trial record cited no
evidence linking any of the accused to acts of violence or other recognizable
criminal offenses. An appeals court upheld their convictions and sentences on
September 28.
On April 28 the special military court sentenced four defendants to death and
three others to life in prison for their alleged involvement in the murder of two
police officers. Two of the death sentences were upheld by the Appeals Court of
National Safety, while the other two were changed to life imprisonment. On
September 29 the special military court sentenced another defendant to death
for the alleged murder of a third police officer.
Lawyers defending suspects before the special military court had extremely limited
access to their clients and were unable to adequately prepare their clients’ defenses. In many cases convictions were based solely on secret evidence that
the military prosecution provided, the testimony of interrogators, and confessions
that defendants claimed were coerced.
The special military courts ended their operation on October 7, more than four
months after a June 29 decree by King Hamad that supposedly transferred all
protest-related cases to civilian courts.
Attacks on Doctors and Other Health Care Staff
Since the outbreak of anti-government protests in mid-February, Human Rights
Watch documented restrictions on provision of emergency care at temporary
health posts, sieges at hospitals and clinics by security forces, arrests and
beatings of people with protest-related injuries, and arrests of doctors and
other health care staff who had criticized these actions.
Police attacked a volunteer medical tent in the February 17 raid on Pearl
Roundabout, beating and arresting nurses and doctors as well as protesters. In
response to this attack and to allegations that authorities prevented the dispatch
of ambulances to attend to wounded protesters, demonstrators gathered
outside the emergency facilities of Salmaniya hospital, with the support of
some of the health care staff. For several weeks the grounds outside the complex
became a staging ground for anti-government demonstrations, with
posters, tents, photos of wounded protesters, and speeches by opposition
leaders.
The BDF took over Salmaniya hospital on March 16 and restricted entry to and
exit from the complex. Hospital staff and protesters being treated for injuries
inside the hospital were subjected to harassment, beatings that sometimes
rose to the level of torture, and arrest. Security forces also raided health care
facilities elsewhere, where they interrogated and arrested medical staff.
On September 29 the special military court sentenced 20 doctors and other
health care staff charged with serious crimes, including kidnapping and storing
weapons at Salmaniya hospital, and terms of imprisonment ranging from 5 to
15 years. The court denied the doctors and other health care staff a fair trial by
relying on tainted or questionable evidence including coerced confessions, hearsay, and “secret evidence” submitted by interrogators, who often served as
the prosecutor’s main witness. Judges also prevented the doctors and other
health care staff from testifying in their own defense. At this writing a civilian
court was scheduled to hear the doctors and health care staff’s appeal on
November 28.
Twenty-eight other doctors and health care staff faced misdemeanor charges
before a civil court.
Summary Workplace and University Dismissals
According to the General Federation of Bahraini Trade Unions, ministries, other
official bodies, and private companies in which the state held a substantial
interest dismissed more than 2,500 employees in the first half of the year.
In most cases the stated reason for dismissal was absence from work during
and immediately after street protests, but the dismissals appear to have been
arbitrary and carried out in violation of Bahraini law.
On April 19 the Bahrain News Agency (BNA) reported that the University of
Bahrain had dismissed 200 students, academics, and other employees in connection
with protests and clashes on the campus in March. On May 25, according
to the BNA, Education Minister Majid al-Nuaimi confirmed that some students
in Bahrain and abroad who participated in anti-government protests lost
their government scholarships. The University of Bahrain required all students
to sign a loyalty pledge to the ruling family before they could re-enroll when the
university reopened in early May and again in September.
Women’s Rights
Unlike for Sunnis, there is no codified personal status law dealing with marriage,
divorce, guardianship and child custody, and inheritance for Shias. Such
matters are left to the judge’s discretion in Shia courts. The penal code does
not adequately deal with violence against women as there are no comprehensive
provisions on sexual harassment or domestic abuse. Rape can be punished
with life in prison, but marital rape is not recognized as a crime.
Migrant Workers
More than 460,000 migrant workers, primarily from Asia, work in Bahrain on
temporary contracts in construction, domestic work, and other services. Abuses
such as unpaid wages, passport confiscation, unsafe housing, excessive work
hours, and physical abuse are common. A 2009 reform allowing workers to
change jobs more freely has yet to be publicized widely and does not apply to
domestic workers, who are also excluded from protection under the labor law.
Bahrain voted to adopt the International Labour Organization Convention on
Domestic Work, but has yet to ratify it or to pass draft national legislation on
domestic work.
Key International Actors
Troops primarily from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates entered
Bahrain on March 14 to support Bahrain’s crackdown against largely peaceful
protests.
Bahrain hosts the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet, and the US sells military
equipment to Bahrain, a “major non-NATO ally.” After the February attacks on
demonstrators the United Kingdom and France announced they would cut off
security and military sales and assistance to Bahrain, and the US announced it
would “review” such sales. In September the US Department of Defense formally
notified Congress of a proposed the sale of US$53 million in armored
Humvees and other equipment to the BDF as well as $15 million in Foreign
Military Financing for Bahrain.
US President Barack Obama telephoned King Hamad on February 18 after
Bahraini forces fired on demonstrators and, according to a White House statement,
“reiterated his condemnation of the violence used against peaceful protesters,”
and in a speech on May 19 criticized the government’s “mass arrests
and brute force.” For the most part, however, Bahrain’s major western allies—
the US and the European Union and its member states—were muted in their
public criticism of Bahrain’s serious human rights violations in a manner that
contrasted sharply with their public statements concerning other governments engaged in similar abuses in the region. They also failed to prompt any action
at the UN Human Rights Council.
On June 29 King Hamad issued a decree establishing the Bahrain Independent
Commission of Investigation (BICI) headed by M. Cherif Bassiouni and four
other internationally recognized human rights experts. The commission’s mandate
is to investigate “the events occurring in Bahrain February/March 2011,
and any consequences arising out of the aforementioned events.” The commission
was scheduled to issue its findings on November 23.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the UN secretarygeneral
welcomed the establishment of the BICI. The US government has said it
will wait for the commission’s final report and the government’s response
before deciding on the $53 million arms sales.
After the March crackdown the government sharply restricted access to the
country by independent journalists and international rights organizations,
including Human Rights Watch.
E>PGK
Egyptians took to the streets starting on January 25 to protest peacefully
against President Hosni Mubarak’s 30-year rule, calling for social justice,
democracy, and an end to police brutality. Police violence against protesters,
especially on January 28, only hardened the protesters’ determination. On
February 11 Mubarak was forced to resign and the Supreme Council of the
Armed Forces (SCAF), composed of leading army figures, took over, assuming
full legislative and executive powers two days later. In March voters approved
constitutional amendments in a referendum, and the SCAF issued a
Constitutional Declaration setting out a roadmap for holding parliamentary and
presidential elections.
Overall, there was no improvement in human rights protections in Egypt. On
assuming power the SCAF ordered the release of all detainees held under the
Emergency Law (Law No. 162 of 1958)—numbering several thousand at the end
of 2010 according to estimates by human rights groups—and promised to end
the State of Emergency. However, the SCAF has continued to use special courts
under the Emergency Law and has referred more than 12,000 civilians to military
tribunals since January, more than the total number of civilians tried by military
courts during the 30-year-long Mubarak presidency. Those referred to military
tribunals have included children as young as 15, even though international
law discourages trials of children in military proceedings. Furthermore, on
September 10 the SCAF announced that it was expanding the scope of the
Emergency Law’s application, and that it would remain in force through May
2012.
Throughout the year the military used excessive force to break up demonstrations
and torture detainees. Despite official recognition of the need to rebuild
public confidence in the police, no process of security sector reform was initiated.
There has been no comprehensive investigation into systematic acts of torture
and ill-treatment practiced in recent years by Egyptian police, and in particular
the State Security Investigations (SSI) agency.
On August 3 the trial began of Mubarak and former Minister of Interior Habib
al-Adly, as well as 11 other police officials around the country. They were charged with the killing of protestors and corruption. Their trials were still in
progress at this writing.
Police Violence and Killing of Unarmed Protesters
On January 28, tens of thousands of demonstrators took to the streets of
Alexandria, Suez, and Cairo, the capital. Police responded with tear gas, water
cannons, rubber bullets, and live ammunition in an effort to prevent protesters
from advancing towards the central squares of those cities. The Ministry of
Health said 846 persons died during the protests in January and February. Most
of these were killed on January 28 and 29. On February 2 and 3, armed men in
plainclothes—some mounted on camels and horses—attacked protesters in
Tahrir Square, injuring several hundred; on those two days at least eight people
died of gunshot wounds.
Torture and Excessive Use of Force by Military and Police Officers
The military arbitrarily arrested scores of journalists while they were covering
the protests in January, in addition to hundreds of peaceful protesters. The journalists
were released within a few days of their arrests, but military courts sentenced
many protesters to imprisonment. For example, authorities filed dubious
charges of “thuggery” against peaceful protester Amr Beheiry, arrested during a
protest in Tahrir Square on February 26. Military courts convicted and sentenced
him to five years in prison. Beheiry remained in prison at this writing.
Authorities also detained children, who faced physical abuse and torture.
Street children were particularly vulnerable to arrest and abuse.
Torture by military personnel was first reported on February 2, shortly after the
army took over law enforcement duties from the police. On March 9 the military
broke up a peaceful sit-in in Tahrir Square, arrested at least 174 protesters, and
beat, kicked, whipped, and applied electric shocks to them on the grounds of
the nearby Egyptian Museum. The military brought these protesters before military
courts, which sentenced 134 of them to three to five years in prison on
charges of “thuggery,” but released all of them in May after two months of public
campaigning on their behalf.
The military used excessive force and carried out arbitrary mass arrests in various
cities to disperse demonstrations and sit-ins on numerous occasions—
February 25, March 9, March 23, May 16, July 22, and August 1—beating and
tasering those arrested. On April 9, military officers used rubber bullets and live
ammunition to break up a sit-in opposing SCAF’s rule, wounding at least 71 protesters,
one fatally. On October 9, during the dispersal by military police and
riot police of a protest of Coptic Christians in front of the state TV building in
Cairo, at least two military vehicles ran over and killed 13 protesters and a further
24 were killed by live ammunition. Military prosecutors are overseeing the
investigation into the incident, a conflict of interest likely to reinforce military
impunity.
Central Security Forces, Egypt’s riot police, continued to use excessive force
when policing demonstrations. On June 28 and 29, riot police clashed with protesters
outside the ministry of interior for 16 hours. The police fired tear gas
into the crowd and used rubber bullets and pellet guns, injuring 1,114 persons
according to the Ministry of Health. After the removal of Mubarak, police continued
to use torture in police stations, detention centers, and at points of arrest.
In June bus driver Mohamed Sabah Nasr died in custody in Azbakeya police station
in Cairo after police arrested him along with seven others for “disrupting
traffic.” Those detained with Nasr said that they saw the police beating him.
The Ministry of Interior said that it is investigating his death but they have yet
to make a report public.
Freedom of Expression and Association
News media enjoyed greater freedom in the aftermath of the ouster of Mubarak
on all issues except those concerning the military. As of September the military
prosecutor under the SCAF had summoned at least nine activists and journalists
for questioning on charges of “insulting the military,” but released most
without charge. An exception was blogger Maikel Nabil, whom a military tribunal
in April sentenced to three years imprisonment for “insulting the military”
and “spreading false information” on his blog. At this writing Nabil remained in
prison while awaiting his retrial, scheduled for November 27.
On September 7, Minister of Information Osama Heikal said that due to the current
“media chaos” he would no longer issue broadcasting licenses for new
satellite TV stations. Four days later police raided the offices of Al Jazeera Live
Egypt, the station that had provided the most detailed coverage of anti-SCAF
protests over the preceding weeks, and ordered it to stop broadcasting from
Egypt. The station continued to broadcast from Qatar. On October 30 a military
prosecutor detained blogger Alaa Abdel Fattah, one of the most vocal critics of
the military, for 30 days on charges of inciting the October 9 demonstration at
Maspero and assaulting military officers, charges for which the prosecutor provided
no evidence. Abdel Fattah remained in detention at this writing.
In March the SCAF amended the Political Parties Law to make it easier for new
political parties to form by enabling them to register as long as they meet the
requirements set out in the law. Under Mubarak, applications to register new
parties were usually rejected. However, there was no move to amend the
Associations Law, which allows for excessive government interference in associations.
In July the state security prosecutor announced that he would investigate
possible “treason” charges against NGOs that were not registered under
the Associations Law and that received foreign funding. In November a Cairo
criminal court ordered banks to report on all transactions on the private
accounts of 63 human rights defenders and organizations.
Freedom of Religion and Sectarian Violence
Incidents of sectarian violence continued throughout 2011. In the early hours of
January 1, 2011, a bomb went off in a church in Alexandria, killing 23 people.
The prosecutor opened an investigation but had not charged anyone in connection
with the attack at this writing. On March 8, Christians in the eastern Cairo
suburb of Muqattam protested the burning of a church four days earlier in Atfih,
13 miles south of Cairo, and clashed with Muslims. Twelve people died in the
ensuing violence and shootings, and several Christian homes and businesses
were torched. The prosecutor has yet to investigate the incident.
In May sectarian violence outside a church in Imbaba, a neighborhood of Cairo,
left 12 dead. On July 3, the trial of those arrested in connection with the violence
opened before an Emergency State Security Court. On September 30, a mob burnt down the Mar Girgis church in Marinab, in Aswan, but local authorities
and prosecutors failed to investigate instead insisting on a settlement. The
prime minister ordered an acceleration of the drafting of a new law to facilitate
the renovation and construction of churches, a long-standing demand of
Christians, who face discrimination in this respect.
Refugee and Migrants’ Rights
Egyptian border police continued to shoot at unarmed African migrants who
attempted to cross the Sinai border into Israel, killing at least 22 since January.
Police arrested hundreds of irregular migrants, primarily Eritreans, Ethiopians,
and Sudanese, and detained them in police stations and prisons in Sinai and
Upper Egypt without access to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, thereby denying them the right to make an asylum
claim.
In October immigration officials forcibly deported three Eritreans. Prison officials
in Shallal gave Eritrean embassy officials access to 118 detained Eritrean
men who were asylum seekers and beat them to force them to sign paperwork
agreeing to return to Eritrea. Egyptian authorities announced they would deport
the group to Eritrea.
Migrants reported beatings and rape at the hands of traffickers operating in the
Sinai. In September traffickers detained a group of 120 Eritreans, including 6
women, and threatened to detain and abuse them until they or their families
paid US$3,000 each to allow them to continue their journey to Israel. The
Egyptian authorities failed to conduct any investigations into this organized
trafficking or to arrest anyone in connection with it.
Labor Rights
Strikes, sit-ins, and labor protests increased in number compared to previous
years and spread to new sectors. In April the SCAF passed Law 34 criminalizing
strikes that involve “the disruption of the work of public institutions or public or
private work.” Military police used excessive force on at least 11 occasions to
disperse labor protests and sit-ins. In June military police arrested five workers demonstrating outside the Ministry of Petroleum and a military court sentenced
them to a one-year suspended sentence for participating in the strike. In March
the minister of labor and manpower recognized the right of independent trade
unions to be established through a simple formality of declaration—pending
adoption of a draft law—prepared by the cabinet, that would ease registration
procedures. At least 70 new independent trade unions have declared their
establishment since March.
Women’s Rights
On March 9, military police arrested 20 women as they broke up a sit-in in
Tahrir Square and then beat them on the grounds of the nearby Egyptian
Museum. Military officers took 17 of the group to a military prison and the next
day conducted virginity tests on seven of the women who identified themselves
as unmarried. In response to the public outcry, the SCAF said that it would
“look into the truth of the matter,” but at this writing there had been no
progress in investigating or prosecuting those officers involved.
In May the SCAF amended the Political Rights Law, canceling the women’s
quota of 64 seats in the People’s Assembly that was first used in the November
2010 parliamentary elections, and replacing it with a requirement that each
party must nominate at least one female candidate on its list, a formula likely
to lead to a sharp drop in the number of women deputies.
Egypt’s Sharia-based Personal Status Law—which discriminates against women
in family affairs—applies only to Muslims, while Copts are governed by church
regulations that prohibit them from divorcing, except in cases of adultery. Some
Copts grew more vocal in their demand for a civil law that would give them the
right to divorce.
Key International Actors
When protests broke out in January United States and European Union officials
initially voiced cautious support of the protesters’ right to freedom of assembly
and expression and criticized police violence. As the protests grew, their support for protesters’ demands became stronger and eventually they called upon
President Mubarak to step down.
The US announced in March that it had earmarked $65 million for democracy
and human rights funding in Egypt for 2011, as well as $100 million for economic
development in addition to the roughly $250 million of economic and $1.3
billion in military aid that it had provided in previous years. In May the US also
laid out plans for debt relief. The US Agency for International Development quietly
removed its requirement that local organizations applying for funding be
registered under Egypt’s restrictive Associations Law, provoking criticism from
the Egyptian government. In October US President Barack Obama spoke to Field
Marshall Mohamed Hussein Tantawy, head of the SCAF, and urged him to lift
the Emergency Law and end trials of civilians before military courts.
II8E
In 2011 Iranian authorities refused to allow government critics to engage in
peaceful demonstrations. In February, March, April, and September security
forces broke up large-scale protests in several major cities. In mid-April security
forces reportedly shot and killed dozens of protesters in Iran’s Arab-majority
Khuzestan province. There was a sharp increase in the use of the death penalty.
The government continued targeting civil society activists, especially lawyers,
rights activists, students, and journalists. In July 2011 the government
announced it would not cooperate with, or allow access to, the United Nations
special rapporteur on Iran, appointed in March 2011 in response to the worsening
rights situation.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
In February and March thousands of demonstrators took to the streets of
Tehran, the capital, and several other major cities to support pro-democracy
protests in neighboring Arab countries and protest the detention of Iranian
opposition leaders. The authorities’ violent response led to at least three
deaths and hundreds of arrests.
In response to calls by former presidential candidates and opposition leaders
Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi for mass protests in February, security
forces arbitrarily arrested dozens of political opposition members in Tehran
and several other cities beginning on February 8. Several days later they placed
both Mousavi and Karroubi under house arrest, where they remained at this
writing.
In April Iran’s parliament passed several articles of a draft bill which severely
limits the independence of civil society organizations, and creates a Supreme
Committee Supervising NGO Activities chaired by ministry officials and members
of the security forces. Authorities had already banned or severely restricted
the independence of several professional organizations not covered by the
draft bill, including the Journalists’ Association and the Bar Association. Dozens
of activists affiliated with banned opposition political parties or student groups
are currently serving time in prison.
Death Penalty
In 2010 Iranian authorities recorded 252 executions, but rights groups believe
many more were executed without official acknowledgement. Most of those
executed had been convicted of drug-related offenses following flawed trials in
revolutionary courts. The number of executions increased even further following
the entry into force in late December 2010 of an amended anti-narcotics law,
drafted by the Expediency Council and approved by Supreme Leader Ayatollah
Ali Khamenei. Since then Iran has executed more than 400 prisoners—including
67 drug offenders in January 2011 alone—according to rights groups. Authorities
have refused to acknowledge more than half these executions.
Crimes punishable by death include murder, rape, trafficking and possessing
drugs, armed robbery, espionage, sodomy, adultery, and apostasy. On
September 3 the semi-official Iranian Students News Agency announced the
execution of six men in the southwestern city of Ahvaz. Three of the men were
convicted under Iran’s anti-sodomy laws.
Iran leads the world in the execution of juvenile offenders, individuals who
committed a crime before turning 18-years-old. The Iranian state executed at
least three children in 2011, one of them in public. Iranian law allows capital
punishment for persons who have reached puberty, defined as nine-years-old
for girls and fifteen for boys. There are currently more than a hundred juvenile
offenders on death row.
Authorities have executed at least 30 individuals on the charge of moharebeh
(“enmity against God”) since January 2010, allegedly for their ties to armed or
terrorist groups. During the early morning hours of January 24, 2011, authorities
in Tehran’s Evin prison hanged Jafar Kazemi and Mohammad Ali Haj-Aghai for
their alleged ties to the banned Mojahedin-e Khalq (MEK) opposition group. Ali
Saremi, who admitted to sympathizing with the MEK’s ideological aspirations,
was also hanged in Evin prison on December 28, 2010, for the crime of
moharebeh.
As of October 2011 at least 16 Kurds were on death row, many of them for
alleged national security crimes and moharebeh.
Freedom of Expression
Authorities continue to shut down newspapers and target journalists and bloggers.
On September 5 the Ministry of Islamic Culture and Guidance’s Press
Supervisory Board shut down the weekly Shahrvand (Citizen) and daily Ruzegar
(Time) for insulting the authorities and “propaganda against the state,” among
other crimes. On September 5 and 6, Intelligence Ministry forces raided the
offices of Majzooban-e Noor, a website affiliated with the Nematollahi
Gonabadi Sufi order, and arrested at least 11 members of its editorial staff on
unknown charges.
According to Reporters Without Borders, there were 49 journalists and bloggers
in Iran’s prisons as of October 2011. The judiciary sentenced Vahid Asghari, a
24 year-old blogger, to death for his alleged involvement in “running obscene
websites,” according to rights groups.
The Ministry of Science, backed by the Supreme Council of the Cultural
Revolution, implemented regulations to limit social science course offerings at
various universities as part of an Islamicization program. Authorities also
issued restrictive quotas to limit the courses and majors that women students
could take at certain universities. State universities prevented some politically
active students from registering for graduate programs despite test scores that
should have guaranteed them access.
The government systematically blocked websites that carry political news and
analysis, slowed down internet speeds, and jammed foreign satellite broadcasts.
Human Rights Defenders and Lawyers
Authorities have imprisoned, prosecuted, or harassed dozens of defense
lawyers since June 2009. In August 2011 Nobel Peace Laureate Shirin Ebadi
said at least 42 lawyers had faced government persecution since June 2009. In
January a revolutionary court convicted Nasrin Sotoudeh, a prominent rights
lawyer, of “acting against the national security” and “propaganda against the
regime” and sentenced her to 11 years in prison. Authorities also barred Sotoudeh from practicing law and from leaving the country for 20 years. In
September the judiciary reduced her sentence to six years imprisonment.
In February a revolutionary court sentenced rights lawyer Khalil Bahramian to 18
months in prison and imposed a 10-year ban on his practicing law. In July the
judiciary sentenced Mohammad Ali Dadkhah, a prominent lawyer and cofounder
(with Ebadi) of the Center for Defenders of Human Rights (CDHR), to
nine years in prison and a 10-year ban from teaching and legal practice. On
September 10 security forces arrested Abdolfattah Soltani, another CDHR cofounder.
On September 27 a revolutionary court in Tehran sentenced Narges
Mohammadi, an executive member of the CDHR, to 11 years imprisonment for
acting against the national security and membership in an illegal organization.
Also on September 27, security forces raided the home of Masoud Shafiee, the
lawyer who represented three American hikers detained in Iran since July 31,
2009, and interrogated him for several hours. On October 2 they prevented him
from leaving the country. Authorities had earlier released one of the hikers,
Sarah Shourd, on September 14, 2010, and the two others, Shane Bauer and
Josh Fattal, on September 21.
Few if any independent rights organizations can openly operate in the country
in the current political climate.
Women’s Rights
Iranian women are discriminated against in personal status matters related to
marriage, divorce, inheritance, and child custody. A woman requires her male
guardian’s approval for marriage regardless of her age. An Iranian woman cannot
pass on her nationality to her foreign-born spouse or their children. A
woman may not obtain a passport or travel outside the country without her husband’s
written permission.
Treatment of Minorities
The government denies freedom of religion to adherents of the Baha’i faith,
Iran’s largest non-Muslim religious minority. On May 21, security forces arrested at least 30 Baha’is in a series of coordinated raids in several major cities. At
this writing authorities were still holding the defendants without charge. All
those arrested were affiliated with the Baha’i Institute for Higher Education, a
correspondence university established in 1987 in response to the government’s
policy of depriving Baha’i students of the right to pursue higher education.
According to the Baha’i International Community, there were 100 Baha’is
detained in Iran’s prisons as of October.
Authorities discriminate against Muslim minorities, including Sunnis who
account for about 10 percent of the population, in political participation and
employment. They also prevent Sunni Iranians from constructing mosques in
major cities. In recent years officials have repeatedly prevented Sunnis from
conducting separate Eid prayers in Tehran and other cities. On September 5, in
Fars province, paramilitary Basij militia attacked members of Iran’s largest Sufi
sect, the Nematollahi Gonabadi order, killing one. The authorities then
launched a campaign of arrests against members of the group in several cities.
Authorities also targeted converts to Christianity. In September a revolutionary
court convicted six members of the evangelical Church of Iran to one year
prison terms on charges of “propaganda against the state,” allegedly for proselytizing.
On September 25, authorities summoned Yousef Nadarkhani, the pastor
of a 400-member Church of Iran congregation in northern Iran, to court and
told him he had three opportunities to renounce his faith and embrace Islam.
Nadarkhani refused to recant and faced possible execution as of this writing. In
2010 the judiciary had sentenced Nadarkhani to death for “apostasy from
Islam” despite the fact that no such crime exists under Iran’s penal code.
The government restricted cultural and political activities among the country’s
Azeri, Kurdish, Arab, and Baluch minorities, including organizations that focus
on social issues. In April security forces reportedly killed several dozen protesters,
most of them ethnic Arabs, in Iran’s southwestern province of Khuzestan.
Authorities arrested dozens and executed nine men allegedly connected to
protests on May 9. Security forces also arrested hundreds in Iran’s Azerbaijan
region following large-scale protests in August and September, part of a pattern
of harassment against environmental and Azeri civil society activists.
Key International Actors
In March the UN Human Rights Council appointed a special rapporteur for Iran.
In July 2011 the Iranian government announced it would not cooperate with or
allow the special rapporteur access. On September 23 the special rapporteur
submitted his first report on Iran in which he highlighted a “pattern of systematic
violations of … human rights” and repeated his call on the government to
allow him to visit the country.
Iran continued to refuse access to UN special procedures, despite their longstanding
and repeated requests for invitations to visit. No special rapporteurs
have visited the country since 2005.
On September 15 the UN secretary-general submitted a report to the UN General
Assembly in which he said he was “deeply troubled by reports of increased
numbers of executions, amputations, arbitrary arrest and detention, unfair trials,
torture and ill-treatment” and bemoaned “the crackdown on human rights
activists, lawyers, journalists and opposition activists.” On November 3 the UN
Human Rights Committee issued its concluding observations following its
review of Iran’s implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. The committee concluded “that the status of international
human rights treaties in domestic law is not specified in the legal system,
which hinders the full implementation of the rights contained in the Covenant.”
On April 14 the European Union imposed asset freezes and travel bans on 32
Iranian officials, including members of Iran’s judiciary, who have committed
rights abuses. In June the United States extended individuals sanctions against
additional members of the Revolutionary Guards, the Basij militia, and Iran’s
security forces involved in rights violations. Later that month the US sanctioned
companies with ties to the Revolutionary Guards and military.
Iranian and Turkish cross-border military operations against Kurdish rebels in
Iraqi Kurdistan, which began in mid-June, killed at least 10, injured dozens, and
displaced hundreds of civilians.
II8H
Human rights conditions in Iraq remained extremely poor, especially for journalists,
detainees, and opposition activists. In part inspired by peaceful uprisings
elsewhere in the region, thousands of Iraqis demonstrated in the streets to
demand better services and an end to corruption. Security forces and gangs
responded with violence and threats.
Reports continued of torture of detainees unlawfully held outside the custody of
the Justice Ministry. In late June or early July United States forces handed over
the last of the 192 detainees in Iraq who were still under US control at the end
of 2010, including some former members of Saddam Hussein’s government.
Attacks by armed groups killed hundreds of civilians as well as police. The US
continued to withdraw troops as part of a 2008 agreement that calls for a complete
US withdrawal by the end of 2011.
Freedom of Assembly
After thousands took to the streets in February to protest widespread corruption
and demand greater civil and political rights, federal Iraqi authorities and
Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) authorities both responded with violence.
On February 21, Iraqi police stood by as dozens of assailants, some wielding
knives and clubs, stabbed and beat at least 20 protesters intending to camp in
Tahrir Square in Baghdad, the capital. During nationwide demonstrations on
February 25, security forces killed at least 12 protesters across the country and
injured more than 100. Baghdad security forces beat unarmed journalists and
protesters that day, smashing cameras and confiscating memory cards.
Anti-government protests started in Kurdistan on February 17. At this writing
security forces had killed at least 10 protesters and bystanders and injured
more than 250.On March 6, masked assailants attacked demonstrators in Sara
Square—the center of daily protests in Sulaimaniya—and set the demonstrators’
tents on fire, but failed to evict the demonstrators from the site. On April
18, security forces seized control of Sara Square to prevent further demonstrations. On April 27 the KRG released a 19-page report that determined that both
security forces and protesters were responsible for violence, and that security
forces “were not prepared to control the situation.”
On June 10 in Baghdad government-backed thugs armed with wooden planks,
knives, iron pipes, and other weapons beat and stabbed peaceful protesters
and sexually molested female demonstrators as security forces stood by and
watched, sometimes laughing at the victims.
Authorities also used legal means to curtail protests. On April 13, Iraqi officials
issued new regulations barring street protests and allowing them only at three
soccer (football) stadiums, although they have not enforced the regulations. In
May the Council of Ministers approved a “Law on the Freedom of Expression of
Opinion, Assembly, and Peaceful Demonstration” that authorizes officials to
restrict freedom of assembly to protect “the public interest” and in the interest
of “general order or public morals.” At this writing the law still awaited parliamentary
approval.
Freedom of Expression
In 2011 Iraq remained one of the most dangerous countries in the world to work
as a journalist. Armed groups and unknown assailants killed at least five journalists
and one media worker, according to the New York-based Committee to
Protect Journalists. Journalists also contended with emboldened Iraqi and KRG
security forces.
On February 20, dozens of masked men attacked the private Nalia Radio and
Television (NRT) station in Sulaimaniya. They shot up broadcasting equipment
and wounded one guard. They then doused the premises with gasoline and set
fire to the building, according to the station’s staff. NRT had begun its inaugural
broadcasts of footage of the protests only two days before the attack.
On February 23 security forces in Baghdad raided the office of the Journalistic
Freedoms Observatory, a press freedom group. Their destructive search lasted
more than an hour and they seized computers, external hard drives, cameras,
cell phones, computer disk More than 20 journalists covering protests in Kurdistan said that security forces
and their proxies routinely threatened journalists, subjected them to arbitrary
arrest, beatings, and harassment, and confiscated or destroyed their equipment.
After quashing the daily protests in Sulaimaniya in April, KRG officials
and security forces expanded their suppression of journalists through libel
suits, beatings, detentions, and death threats. The threat of attacks and arrests
sent some journalists into hiding.
On September 8 an unknown assailant shot to death Hadi al-Mahdi, a popular
radio journalist often critical of government corruption and social inequality, at
his Baghdad home. The Ministry of Interior said it would investigate his death,
but at this writing no one had been charged. Immediately prior to his death al-
Mahdi received several phone and text message threats not to return to Tahrir
Square. Earlier, after attending the February 25 “Day of Anger” mass demonstration
in Baghdad, security forces arrested, blindfolded, and severely beat him
along with three other journalists during their subsequent interrogation.
In April Iraq’s parliament approved a Journalists’ Protection Law, intended to
protect media workers and compensate them for injuries sustained while working.
Critics say the law does not do enough to ensure proper protections for
journalists.
In May the Council of Ministers approved a draft of the “Law on Freedom of
Expression of Opinion, Assembly, and Peaceful Demonstration,” which contains
provisions that would criminalize speech, with penalties of up to 10 years in
prison. Under article 13, anyone who “attacks a belief of any religious sect or
shows contempt for its rites”, or publicly insults a “symbol, or person who is
held sacred, exalted, or venerated by a religious sect” would face up to one
year in jail and fines of up to 10 million Iraqi dinars (US$8,600). The law provides
no guidance about what might constitute an unlawful insult.
Secret Prisons and Torture
In February Human Rights Watch uncovered, within the Camp Justice military
base in Baghdad, a secret detention facility controlled by elite security forces
who report to the military office of Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki. Beginning on November 23, 2010, Iraqi authorities transferred more than 280 detainees to
the facility, which was controlled by the Army’s 56th Brigade and the Counter-
Terrorism Service.
The same elite divisions controlled Camp Honor, a separate facility in Baghdad
where detainees were tortured with impunity. More than a dozen former Camp
Honor detainees told Human Rights Watch how detainees were held incommunicado
and in inhumane conditions, many for months at a time. Detainees said
interrogators beat them; hung them upside down for hours at a time; administered
electric shocks to various body parts, including the genitals; and repeatedly
put plastic bags over their heads until they passed out from asphyxiation.
On March 14 the Justice Ministry announced that it would close Camp Honor
after a parliamentary investigative committee found evidence of torture during a
spot inspection of the facility. Human Rights Watch has since received credible
information that elite forces may still hold and interrogate detainees at Camp
Honor.
At this writing the authorities had not prosecuted any officials responsible for
torture at Camp Honor.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights and Gender-Based Violence
Iraq adjudicates family law and personal status matters pursuant to a 1959
Personal Status Code. The law discriminates against women by granting men
privileged status in matters of divorce and inheritance. The law further discriminates
against women by permitting Iraqi men to have as many as four polygamous
marriages.
On October 6 Iraq’s parliament passed legislation to lift Iraq’s reservation to
article 9 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. Article 9 grants women equal rights with men to acquire,
change, or retain their nationality and pass on their nationality to their children.
Violence against women and girls continued to be a serious problem across
Iraq. Women’s rights activists said they remained at risk of attack from extremists,
who also targeted female politicians, civil servants, and journalists.
“Honor” crimes and domestic abuse remained a threat to women and girls, who were also vulnerable to trafficking for sexual exploitation and forced prostitution
due to insecurity, displacement, financial hardship, social disintegration,
and the dissolution of rule of law and state authority.
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is practiced mainly in Kurdish areas of northern
Iraq and several official and non-governmental studies estimate that the prevalence
of FGM among girls and women in Kurdistan is at least 40 percent. On
June 21 Kurdistan’s parliament passed the Family Violence Bill, which includes
several provisions criminalizing the practice, as well as forced and child marriages,
and verbal, physical, and psychological abuse of girls and women.
Attacks on Civilians
Attacks by armed groups killed hundreds of civilians and security forces.
Assailants targeted provincial councils and government officials, checkpoints,
markets, and mosques. In one of the worst attacks, a string of over 40 coordinated
assaults in 17 cities on August 15 killed more than 90 people, including
many unarmed civilians and members of the security forces.
The ongoing attacks, along with injuries from abandoned landmines and cluster
munitions, have created a disproportionately high number of persons with
physical and mental disabilities, many of whom have not received rehabilitation
or support for re-integration into their communities. On August 17 Iraq’s
parliament held a second reading of a resolution to ratify the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Two draft disability laws under consideration
would create a national body to oversee disability issues. But the
proposed laws have several deficiencies including language that is incompatible
with the CRPD.
Key International Actors
The European Court of Human Rights issued two landmark judgments on July 7,
2011, which ruled that the United Kingdom’s human rights obligations apply to
British acts in Iraq, and that the UK had violated the European Convention on
Human Rights by failing to adequately investigate the killings of five Iraqis by its forces there, and that its internment of Iraqis had amounted to arbitrary
detention.
On September 8 a three-year UK inquiry into the death of Baha Mousa, a hotel
receptionist who died in British custody following serious abuse by British soldiers,
condemned inadequate detention procedures, leadership failures, poor
training, a loss of discipline, and a lack of “moral courage” among soldiers to
report abuse. Only one British soldier was convicted of any crime in connection
with this killing, and he was sentenced to only one year in prison.
In September Wikileaks released thousands of classified cables from the US
embassy in Baghdad, one of which called into question the results of a US military
investigation of a 2006 incident in which US soldiers may have handcuffed
and executed at least 10 Iraqi civilians.
In July the United Nations Security Council voted to extend the mandate of the
UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for another year. UNAMI’s 2010 Report
on Human Rights in Iraq, released in August 2011, found that “significant problems
remain with law enforcement and the administration of justice, especially
in relation to the provision and respect for due process and fair trial rights,”
and that “incidents of abuse and torture remain widely reported.”
IJI8<C/O::LG@<; P8C<JK@E@8E T<II@KFI@<J
Serious human rights violations continued in 2011 in the Occupied Palestinian
Territories (OPT). Israeli soldiers used unnecessary lethal force against demonstrators
in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights and across the border in
Lebanon. Israeli military attacks in Gaza and policing operations in the West
Bank resulted in the deaths of at least 37 civilians.
Israel continued to block exports from, and many imports to, the Gaza Strip,
hindering the rebuilding of Gaza’s devastated economy. In the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, Israel demolished a record number of Palestinian
homes under discriminatory practices, imposed severe restrictions on
Palestinian freedom of movement, continued to build unlawful settlements,
and arbitrarily detained peaceful protesters, including children.
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza launched hundreds of rocket attacks at
Israeli population centers in 2011, killing two civilians and seriously injuring at
least nine others; indiscriminate mortar attacks seriously injured at least four
civilians in Israel. Another attack fatally injured an Israeli youth in a school bus.
Egyptian attackers whom Israel claimed operated in coordination with armed
groups in Gaza crossed the Egyptian border and killed six Israeli civilians.
Hamas authorities carried out three judicial executions in 2011 after unfair military
trials, and allegedly tortured scores of detainees, some of whom died in
custody.
The Palestinian Authority’s (PA) security services arbitrarily detained hundreds
of Hamas supporters as well as politically unaffiliated protesters who supported
the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements and reconciliation between
Hamas and Fatah. The PA also arrested journalists who were critical of the
authorities. Credible allegations of torture by the PA’s security services continued.
Gaza Strip
Israel
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) conducted attacks on Gaza, including against smuggling
tunnels and in response to rocket attacks, that killed 32 Palestinian civilians
as of October, the Israeli rights group B’Tselem reported. The cases included
civilians killed during aerial and artillery attacks, as well as IDF shootings of
Palestinian civilians in the “no-go” zone along Gaza’s northern and eastern borders.
In April one Israeli aerial attack apparently targeted a Palestinian ambulance,
while another aerial attack killed a mother and daughter in an area
where no members of armed groups were present. In August an Israeli aerial
attack on a sports club that witnesses said was not used for military purposes
killed two civilians.
There were no further convictions for laws of war violations during “Operation
Cast Lead,” which ended in January 2009, despite individual IDF soldiers having
allegedly intentionally killed civilians and the widespread, wanton destruction
of civilian property. Israel previously convicted only three soldiers for
crimes during the conflict, and only one received a prison sentence, for stealing
a credit card. Hamas has prosecuted no one for indiscriminate attacks on
Israel.
Blockade
Israel’s punitive closure of the Gaza Strip, tightened after Hamas’s takeover of
Gaza in June 2007, continued to have severe humanitarian and economic consequences
for the civilian population.
Gaza’s economy grew rapidly, but the World Bank said the growth depended on
international assistance. The economy had not returned to pre-closure levels;
daily wages, for instance, had declined 23 percent since 2007. Israel’s neartotal
restrictions on exports from Gaza hindered economic recovery. Due to low
per capita income, 51 percent of the population was unable to buy sufficient
food, according to UN aid agencies.
Israel allowed imports to Gaza that amounted to around 40 percent of pre-closure
levels, the UN reported. Israel continued to bar construction materials, like
cement, which it said had “dual use” civilian and military applications. Israel
allowed shipments of construction materials for projects operated by international
organizations, but as of September Gaza still had an estimated shortage
of some 250 schools and 100,000 homes.
A report requested by the UN secretary-general found in September 2011 that
Israeli commandos used excessive force in the killing of nine participants in the
2009 “Gaza Flotilla.” The report found that Israel’s naval blockade of Gaza was
lawful, but did not address the human rights implications of Israel’s broader
closure policy. Israeli officials had justified the closure in part as a means to
pressure Hamas to release soldier Gilad Shalit, who was captured in 2006 and
was released in October 2011 (see below).
Egypt shared responsibility for the closure of Gaza by restricting the movement
of goods and people at the Rafah crossing on Gaza’s southern border. In late
May Egypt announced it would allow up to 400 Gaza residents to enter Egypt
per day. By August more than 920 people per day crossed Rafah in both directions,
compared to 1,320 people per day when the crossing was last fully operational
in 2006. However, Egyptian border authorities continued to require
Palestinians to present official identification cards, which cannot be issued
without Israeli approval, even for Gaza residents. Egypt did not permit regular
imports or exports through Rafah; in 2005 up to 8,600 truckloads of goods per
month entered Gaza from Egypt.
“No-Go” Zone
Israeli forces regularly shot at Gaza residents up to 1.5 kilometers from the
armistice line between Gaza and Israel, creating a “no-go” zone that comprises
35 percent of Gaza’s agricultural land, according to the UN. The Israeli navy
shot at and confiscated Palestinian fishing boats that sailed more than two
nautical miles from the coast, prohibiting access to some 85 percent of Gaza’s
maritime area. In August Israel notified Gaza fishermen that they could retrieve
dozens of confiscated boats at the Kerem Shalom land crossing, but delivered the boats without their equipment and demanded payment for transporting
them; the fishermen refused.
Hamas
Palestinian armed groups launched 316 rockets at Israeli population centers in
2011, as of November 8, up from 236 rockets in all of 2010. In April Hamas’s
armed wing claimed responsibility for an attack, which Israel said involved an
antitank missile, on an Israeli school bus, fatally injuring a 16-year-old boy. In
August armed groups launched scores of rocket attacks that seriously injured at
least five people and killed a man in Beer Sheva. An Ashkelon man was killed
by shrapnel from a rocket in October.
The Hamas Interior Ministry carried out three judicial death sentences. Hamas
executed, by hanging, a father and son convicted of murder and collaboration
with Israel. Abd al-Karim Shrair was executed by firing squad, following an
unfair military court trial for collaboration that did not address evidence that
security forces had tortured him.
The internal security service of the Interior Ministry and Hamas police in Gaza
allegedly tortured 102 people as of September, according to complaints
received by the Independent Commission for Human Rights (ICHR), a
Palestinian rights body. In April Hamas authorities arrested ‘Adel Razeq, 52,
without a warrant, denied his family access to him in detention, and allegedly
tortured him to death. The ICHR received 163 complaints of arbitrary arrest by
Hamas security forces.
On October 18 Hamas released Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit in exchange for 477
Palestinian prisoners, many of whom had been convicted for attacks on Israeli
civilians. Hamas had subjected Shalit to cruel and inhuman treatment that may
amount to torture by having refused to allow him to communicate with his family
or receive visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Hamas police and internal security forces assaulted, arbitrarily detained, and
allegedly tortured civil society activists and peaceful protesters who had sought
to demonstrate in solidarity with Egyptian and Syrian protesters and had called
for an end to the political split between Hamas and its rival, Fatah.
Hamas’s Interior Ministry closed several NGOs in Gaza, including the Sharek
Youth Forum. In August the Education Ministry banned eight secondary-school
students from traveling to the United States, where they had won scholarships.
Hamas banned three newspapers printed in the West Bank from distribution in
Gaza. Police harassed people for so-called morality offenses, including male
hairdressers who cut women’s hair, and confiscated “immoral” novels.
West Bank
Palestinian Authority
Complaints of torture committed by West Bank PA security services decreased
slightly compared to the same period last year, with the ICHR receiving 91 complaints
as of September. PA courts have not found any security officers responsible
for torture, arbitrary detention, or prior cases of unlawful deaths in custody.
The ICHR received 479 complaints of arbitrary arrests by PA security
forces. In a positive development, PA military courts implemented a January
decision to stop exercising jurisdiction over civilians.
The PA’s security services, and men in civilian clothes whom witnesses identified
as security employees, arbitrarily prevented or violently dispersed numerous
nonviolent protests during the year and assaulted and arbitrarily detained
journalists covering the incidents. PA security officials also arbitrarily arrested
and detained, confiscated equipment from, and physically abused journalists
perceived to be critical of the PA or supportive of Hamas. In several cases,
security officials ignored court orders to release detained journalists.
Palestinian civilians injured 29 settlers in the West Bank and killed seven as of
November, the UN reported. In September Israeli police concluded that a father
and son from the settlement of Kiryat Arba died in a car crash because
Palestinians had thrown rocks at their car. In August an Israeli military court
convicted a Palestinian man for killing five members of the Fogel family in the
Itamar settlement in March; a second man plead guilty to murder charges in the
case in October.
Israel
Israeli forces in the West Bank killed at least five Palestinian civilians as of
October. After the end of an arrest operation, soldiers fatally shot two men
while they were standing with a group of demonstrators who were throwing
stones, B’Tselem reported. In another case, a soldier shot and killed an
unarmed resident of Qusra who was protesting against settler incursions on village
lands. Soldiers shot and killed an unarmed 66-year-old man in his bed
after mistakenly entering his home in search of a suspected Hamas member,
according to Palestinian rights groups and international media reports.
The Israeli government generally took no action against Israeli settlers who
destroyed or damaged mosques, homes, olive trees, cars, and other Palestinian
property, or physically assaulted Palestinians. In January a settler shot and
killed a 15-year-old boy near the Palestinian village of Safa; in September a settler
killed an 8-year-old Palestinian boy in a hit-and-run incident near Hebron.
As of October 31 the UN reported 377 attacks by settlers that damaged
Palestinian property, including almost 10,000 olive trees, and injured 167
Palestinians. On average Israeli authorities indict only nine percent of the settlers
whom police investigate for attacking Palestinians or damaging
Palestinian property, according to the Israeli rights group Yesh Din.
Settlement Building, Discriminatory Home Demolitions, and Evacuations
As of November 1, Israeli authorities had demolished 467 Palestinian homes
and other buildings in the West Bank (including East Jerusalem), displacing 869
people, a rate that means Israel will have forcibly displaced more West Bank
Palestinians in 2011 than during any year since the UN started collecting cumulative
figures in 2006.
Israel usually carries out demolitions on the grounds that the structures were
built without permits, but in practice such permits are almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain in Israeli-controlled areas, whereas a separate planning
process available only to settlers grants new construction permits much more
readily.
The Israeli NGO Peace Now reported that from October 2010, when Israel ended
its temporary settlement “building freeze,” to July 2011 construction began on
2,598 new settlement homes, and another 2,149 new homes were completed.
Settlers also continued to take over Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem, based
in part on laws that recognize Jewish ownership claims there from before 1948
but bar Palestinian ownership claims from that period in West Jerusalem.
Freedom of Movement
Israel maintained onerous restrictions on the movement of Palestinians in the
West Bank, especially in “Area C,” which is under exclusive Israeli control. It
maintained more than 520 checkpoints and other closure obstacles as of July.
Israel continued construction of the wall or separation barrier around East
Jerusalem. Some 85 percent of the barrier’s route falls within the West Bank,
placing many settlements on the “Israeli” side of the barrier. The barrier led to
the confiscation of private land and separated many Palestinian farmers and
pastoralists from their lands.
Arbitrary Detention and Detention of Children
Israeli military justice authorities arbitrarily detained Palestinians who advocated
non-violent protest against Israeli settlements and the route of the separation
barrier. In January a military appeals court increased the prison sentence of
Abdallah Abu Rahme, from the village of Bil’in, to 16 months in prison on
charges of inciting violence and organizing illegal demonstrations, largely on
the basis of coerced statements of children.
In a positive development, in September the Israeli military issued an order
raising the age of majority for Palestinians to 18 years; previously 16 and 17-
year-olds had been treated as adults under the security regime. Human rights
groups reported, however, that Israeli authorities continued to sentence
Palestinians according to their age at the time of sentencing even if they were
children at the time of the offense, and documented cases in which Israeli
authorities arrested children in their homes at night, at gunpoint, questioned them without a family member or a lawyer, and coerced them to sign confessions
in Hebrew, which they did not understand.
As of September 31 Israel detained 164 Palestinian children under 18-years-old,
and also held 272 Palestinians in administrative detention without charge;
Israel released at least 9 administrative detainees, but no children, in the prisoner
exchange.
Israel
In May and June Israeli forces used lethal force against demonstrators, reportedly
killing 35, across the northern border in Lebanon and in the Israeli-occupied
Golan Heights. Protesters threw rocks over a high border fence in Lebanon,
and some protesters entered the Israeli-occupied Golan, but witnesses said the
demonstrators posed no threat to the soldiers’ lives.
The Israeli parliament passed legislation penalizing calls for boycotts of Israeli
settlements. Another new law allows “admissions committees” to screen applicants
who wish to move to small communities on the basis of vague “suitability”
criteria; the law circumvents a Supreme Court prohibition on housing discrimination
against Palestinian citizens of Israel. A third new law penalizes cultural,
academic, or other institutions or municipalities that commemorate the
Nakba (catastrophe), the Palestinian term for the dispossession and flight of
Palestinians around Israel’s founding.
Bedouin citizens of Israel suffered discriminatory home demolitions. The Israel
Land Administration repeatedly demolished dwellings in the Bedouin village of
Al-Araqib, and confiscated the personal belongings of residents who attempted
to hide in a cemetery. At the time residents were contesting in court the state’s
claims that they had never owned lands in the area. Some 90,000 Bedouin live
in “unrecognized” villages with no basic services and at risk of demolitions. In
September the Israeli government adopted a plan that reportedly recommended
the transfer of up to 30,000 Bedouin from the “unrecognized” villages to other
townships. Israel has retroactively legalized large, Jewish-owned, private farms
in the area.
There are an estimated 200,000 migrant workers in Israel; employers’ withholding
of wages and underpayment is reportedly common. Most workers are indebted to recruiting agencies, beholden to a single employer for their livelihood,
and are unable to transfer their employment without their employer’s
consent. Government policies restrict migrant workers from forming families,
deporting migrant workers and their children born in Israel.
Israel continued to deny asylum seekers who entered the country irregularly
from Egypt the right to a fair asylum process. According to affidavits by soldiers
and asylum seekers filed to Israel’s Supreme Court in April and August, Israeli
forces continued to forcibly return people to Egypt, which is known to return
refugees to countries where they could face persecution and torture. Israeli
NGOs said the government failed to ensure access to health screening in detention
or upon release for border-crossers, many of whom alleged they were tortured
and raped by traffickers in Egypt’s Sinai peninsula.
Key International Actors
Israel has been the largest overall recipient of foreign aid from the US since
World War II, receiving US$3 billion in military aid in 2011. In February the US
vetoed a United Nations Security Council resolution that sought to reaffirm that
Israeli settlements are illegal under international law, even though the US and
virtually every other government has found such illegality.
The US continued to train and equip Palestinian security forces and provided
$200 million to the PA in budgetary support. In response to the PA’s bid for
statehood at the UN in September, as of October the US Congress was blocking
$150 million in funding for PA security assistance and $192 million in humanitarian
assistance to the West Bank and Gaza. The EU allocated €295 million
($405 million) to the PA for 2011, including for projects in Gaza, as well as €125
million ($172million) to the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA).
JFI;8E
International observers considered voting in the November 2010 parliamentary
elections a “clear improvement” over the 2007 elections, which were widely
characterized as fraudulent. The elections were held under an amended voting
system that continues to under-represent Jordanians of Palestinian origin.
On February 1, after demonstrators inspired by events in Tunisia and Egypt took
to the streets in January to protest the slow pace of political reform and continued
corruption, King Abdullah II replaced the prime minister after only three
months in office, and again in October.
The king ordered Marouf al-Bakhit, the newly appointed prime minister in
February, to implement political and economic reforms as protests spread.
Reform initiatives included convening a national dialogue committee in March,
and appointing a royal committee to revise the constitution in April. The committees
proposed modest reforms to the electoral system, and significant
reforms to the constitution, though they left out guarantees for gender equality.
Parliament rejected proposed constitutional restrictions on the military-dominated
State Security Court’s powers to try civilians.
The General Intelligence Department affirmed in May that its agents were no
longer present on university campuses, in response to the king’s directives.
A committee established in April to restore nationality to Jordanians of
Palestinian origin, from whom officials had previously arbitrarily withdrawn
nationality, benefited only around 50 persons according to the National Center
for Human Rights.
Enforcement of legal protections for approximately 70,000 migrant domestic
workers in the country—including limits to working hours, a weekly day off, and
criminalization of traffickers—remains negligible.
Freedom of Expression
Jordan criminalizes speech critical of the king, government officials and institutions,
Islam, and speech deemed insulting to other persons. In 2010 a revision of the penal code increased penalties for some speech offenses, and the 2010
Law on Information System Crimes extended these provisions to online expression.
Following the protest resignation in June of government spokesperson
Taher ‘Udwan the government withdrew controversial proposed amendments to
the Press and Publications Law, which would have allowed for the banning of
local and foreign publications that violate the law. In September the government
amended a draft anti-corruption commission law, replacing a six-month
prison sentence on anyone who accused others of corruption without justification
with a hefty fine.
In 2011 the legal aid unit of the Amman-based Center for Defending Freedom of
Journalists assisted journalists with 70 ongoing criminal cases for speech in
violation of articles 5 and 7 of the Press and Publications Law requiring journalists
to be objective.
Attacks against journalists increased in 2011. In February unknown assailants
attacked Basil al-‘Ukur, and threatened Samir al-Hiyari, executives at online
Ammonnews. In March Sami Zubaidi of the online Ammanpost said a prominent
member of parliament threatened him with physical harm. In April relatives of
Khalid al-Sarayira, retired armed forces chief of staff, ransacked the office of
journalist Jihad Abu Baidar and threatened to kill him. Yahya Sa’ud, a member
of parliament, led protesters who ransacked the Amman bureau of Agence
France Presse on June 15, demanding that bureau chief Randa Habib be tried in
the State Security Court over what Sa’ud claimed were false reports of attacks
on the king’s convoy. On July 15, police attacked 19 journalists covering a
demonstration in downtown Amman, the capital. Despite recommendations for
a police investigation to prosecute officers involved, this did not occur.
Freedom of Assembly
In March an amended Public Gatherings Law, which no longer required government
permission to hold public meetings or demonstrations, took effect.
Since January hundreds of protests demanding political and economic reforms
have taken place. Almost all remained peaceful. In February pro-government
protestors in downtown Amman attacked peaceful opposition demonstrators with clubs, unhindered by nearby police. There was no investigation into police
conduct. On March 25, pro-government protestors approached Amman’s
Interior Circle, a busy roundabout opposition protesters had occupied, and
attacked the protesters. Police at one point formed a protective cordon around
the opposition demonstrators, but also allowed pro-government protesters free
access to the area and later joined pro-government protesters in beating the
opposition demonstrators, one of whom died as a result. No investigation of
police conduct has taken place.
On April 15 several hundred persons demonstrated in Zarqa for the application
of Islamic law and the release of prisoners. In an ensuing brawl with government
supporters, in which police participated, numerous police and demonstrators
were injured. The police arrested around 100 demonstrators and charged
150 others, though no government supporters or police, with “carrying out terrorist
acts,” “assault,” “rioting,” and “unlawful gathering.” No evidence of terrorist
acts beyond the brawl was presented at the State Security Court.
On July 15, police attacked opposition protesters in Amman, including journalists
wearing distinctive media vests.
Labor Rights
Hundreds of migrant workers working in the Qualified Industrial Zones, agriculture,
and domestic work complained about labor violations, including unpaid
salaries, confiscation of passports, and forced labor. In July the government
mandated that migrant domestic workers’ salaries be paid directly into verifiable
bank accounts and in September proposed lifting restrictions on the freedom
of movement of migrant domestic workers. A Ministry of Labor committee
charged with solving labor disputes failed consistently to secure unpaid
salaries of domestic workers, or to adequately protect workers from working
long hours and from remaining trapped in abusive households. Jordan has no
shelter for domestic workers who escape abusive conditions.
NGOs repeatedly presented domestic workers who had suffered a range of
abuses to investigators who almost never classified them as trafficking victims,
sometimes even detaining them for “escaping” employers.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
In September the Royal Committee on Constitutional Review proposed amendments
to Jordan’s constitution, including an amendment (to article 6) which
prohibits discrimination based on race, language, or religion. The Royal
Committee promised women’s rights activists that it would include the term
“gender” in the new revised article. The final draft handed to King ‘Abdallah did
not include this.
Article 9 of Jordan’s nationality law denies women married to foreign-born
spouses to pass on their nationality to their husbands and children. Women’s
rights activists called on the government to amend the law in accordance with
its obligations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women.
There were four reported “honor” crimes in 2011. In June a court sentenced a
father who murdered his daughter to 15 years in prison, later reduced to 10
years because her husband dropped private claims against him. A February
2011 study by the National Council for Family Affairs concluded that perpetrators
in 50 “honor” crimes between 2000 and 2011 received reduced sentences
because of dropped private claims.
Jordan’s personal status code remains discriminatory despite a 2010 amendment.
A Muslim woman is forbidden from marrying a non-Muslim. A non-Muslim
mother forfeits her custodial rights after the child reaches seven-years-old.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Administrative Detention
Perpetrators of torture enjoy near-total impunity. The redress process begins
with a deficient complaint mechanism, continues with lackluster investigations
and prosecutions, and ends in police court, where two of three judges are
police-appointed police officers.
In April officers of a special unit arrested scores of suspected participants in a
demonstration in the town of Zarqa, northeast of Amman, and beat them for
hours before delivering them to Amman’s criminal investigation unit. No investigation
into the police abuse took place. At the demonstrators’ trial , police witnesses testified that they “did not remember” whether a demonstrator complained
about ill-treatment, although at least one had been brought to custody
from a hospital for injuries sustained during police beatings, defense lawyers
claimed. The Public Security Directorate did not respond to a request submitted
in August under the Law on the Right to Freedom of Information for the number
of deaths in custody, their reasons, and results of any investigations.
Interior Minister Mazin al-Sakit in September recommended changes in the
Crime Prevention Law, under which provincial governors can detain people
administratively. The suggested changes, if approved by the Council of
Ministers and parliament, would restrict administrative detention to a nonrenewable
15-day period, require the detainee’s release or referral to the judiciary
thereafter, and prohibit use of administrative detention for “protective custody”
of women whose family members threaten them with violence.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia was Jordan’s largest donor in 2011, announcing a grant of US$400
million in January, and a further $1 billion in July. Saudi Arabia also supported
the initiative by the Gulf Cooperation Council to invite Jordan and Morocco to
join, in what analysts described as an exchange of Gulf financial support for
Jordanian military expertise and manpower.
The United States has a memorandum of understanding, going into effect in
2010, to provide Jordan with a minimum of $360 million in economic assistance,
and $300 million in foreign military financing annually. In October 2010
the US Millennium Challenge Corporation committed $275 million to Jordan
over the coming five years.
The European Union in October 2010 upgraded its relations with Jordan to
“advanced status,” indicating closer ties in all areas, as well as more funding.
The EU will provide Jordan with a €223 million ($310 million) aid package over
three years until 2013. The EU was developing a three-year plan designed to
provide more support for human rights reform.
KLN8@K
Hundreds of stateless people in Kuwait, known as Bidun, took to the streets in
early 2011 demanding citizenship and other rights. The government violently
dispersed the protests, but later promised to restore to the Bidun social benefits,
including government-issued documentation and free education and
health care. However, Bidun claims to Kuwaiti citizenship remained unresolved.
Kuwaiti authorities continued to restrict free expression, increasing internet surveillance
and arresting individuals for criticizing the government.
Migrant workers in Kuwait, who comprise 80 percent of the country’s workforce,
continued to face exploitation and abuse under the sponsorship system.
Although Minister of Labor Mohammad al-‘Afasi announced that the government
would abolish the sponsorship system in February 2011, the government
made no major sponsorship reforms during the year.
In May Kuwait won election to its first term on the United Nations Human Rights
Council, stepping in after Syria withdrew its bid.
Bidun
At least 106,000 stateless persons, known as Bidun, live in Kuwait. After an initial
registration period for citizenship ended in 1960, authorities shifted Bidun
citizenship applications to a series of administrative committees that have
avoided resolving their claims.
While maintaining that most Bidun are “illegal residents” who deliberately
destroyed evidence of other nationality, the government has not provided individualized
review of Bidun citizenship claims. Kuwaiti law bans courts from ruling
on citizenship claims.
The Bidun cannot freely leave and return to Kuwait. The government issues
them temporary passports at its discretion, mostly valid for only one journey.
As “illegal residents,” the Bidun cannot legally hold most public and private
sector jobs, and Bidun children may not enroll in free government schools.
Unregistered Bidun, whose citizenship applications the authorities have either closed or refused to register, are even more vulnerable than others, with restrictions
on their freedom of movement and constant fear of deportation.
In February and March 2011 hundreds of Bidun protested the government’s failure
to act on their citizenship applications. Security forces used water cannons,
tear gas, smoke bombs, and concussion grenades (sound bombs) to break up
the demonstrations; they beat some protestors, and detained dozens. Bidun
detained during the protests reported beatings and physical abuse in detention.
In response to the protests, the government promised benefits, including free
health care; free education at private schools that primarily serve Bidun children;
birth, marriage, and death certificate; and improved access to jobs. Bidun
have confirmed receiving many of these benefits, but continue to cite problems
accessing employment and increased difficulty receiving passports.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
While 2011 saw some gains for free expression, authorities increased internet
surveillance, and continued to detain and criminally prosecute individuals
based on nonviolent political speech, including web commentary.
In early February the emir ordered the Ministry of Information to withdraw all
lawsuits it had filed against local media. However, the local Al Jazeera bureau,
closed by government order in 2010 after covering security forces’ crackdown
on a peaceful gathering, remained shuttered.
In June the government arrested and detained for four months Nasser Abul, a
26-year-old Kuwaiti man, for Tweets critical of the Bahraini and Saudi royal families.
According to his lawyer, state security officers beat and insulted Abul in
detention. Kuwait continued to crack down on public gatherings and demonstrations.
In addition to violently dispersing Bidun protests in February and
April, authorities repeatedly warned foreign nationals not to participate in public
demonstrations and threatened to deport them. In August police officers
turned non-Kuwaitis away from protests calling for the expulsion of Syria’s
ambassador from the country.
Migrant Worker Rights
In June the government voted to adopt the International Labour Organization’s
Convention on Decent Work for Domestic Workers, which establishes the first
global labor standards on domestic work.
The government passed a new private sector labor law in February 2010 that set
maximum working hours, required a weekly rest day and annual leave, and set
end-of-service bonuses. However, the law excluded migrant domestic workers,
who come chiefly from South and Southeast Asia and work and live inside
employers’ homes in Kuwait. Many domestic workers complain of confinement
in the house; long work hours without rest; months or years of unpaid wages;
and verbal, physical, and sexual abuse.
A major barrier to redressing labor abuses is the kafala (sponsorship) system,
which ties a migrant worker’s legal residence to a “sponsoring” employer.
Migrant workers who have worked for their sponsor less than three years can
only transfer with their sponsor’s consent (migrant domestic workers always
require consent). If a worker leaves their sponsoring employer, including when
fleeing abuse, the employer must register the worker as “absconding.” This can
lead to detention and deportation. In September 2010 the government
announced that it would abolish the sponsorship system in February 2011, but
made no major sponsorship reforms during the year.
Few perpetrators of abuse are investigated and prosecuted. In November 2010
doctors in Sri Lanka removed 14 nails from the body of V.R. Lechchami, a
domestic worker recently returned from Kuwait. The government failed to properly
investigate Lechchami’s allegations that her employers inserted these
objects after she asked for six months of unpaid salary.
Women’s Rights
Kuwait’s nationality law denies Kuwaiti women married to non-Kuwaiti men the
right to pass their nationality on to their children and spouses, a right enjoyed
by Kuwaiti men married to foreign spouses. The law also discriminates against
women in residency rights, allowing the spouses of Kuwaiti men but not of
Kuwaiti women to be in Kuwait without employment and to qualify for citizen ship after 10 years of marriage. In June 2011 Kuwaiti women were granted the
right to sponsor their foreign husbands and children. However, this privilege is
not extended to women who were previously naturalized, if they are widowed or
divorced.
In 2005 Kuwaiti women won the right to vote and to run in elections, and in May
2009 voters elected four women to parliament. However, courts have denied
women the right to become public prosecutors and judges.
Kuwait adjudicates family law and personal status matters for Sunni and Shia
Muslims pursuant to interpretations of Islamic law, with no option to seek adjudication
pursuant to a civil code. The law in particular discriminates against
women in matters of divorce, inheritance, and child custody, granting men privileged
status in these matters.
Kuwait has no laws prohibiting domestic violence, sexual harassment, or marital
rape.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In 2007 Kuwait passed an amendment to article 198 of the penal code, which
criminalized “imitating the appearance of the opposite sex,” imposing arbitrary
restrictions upon individuals’ rights to privacy and free expression.
Police have since arrested scores of transgender women (persons designated
male at birth but who identify and present themselves as female) under this
law. Human Rights Watch has documented multiple arrests of 33 transgender
women, many of whom have reported ill-treatment in detention, torture, sexual
harassment, and assault. Victims say they rarely report police abuse due to fear
of retaliation and police threats of rearrest.
Key International Actors
The United States, in its 2010 State Department Trafficking in Persons report,
classified Kuwait as Tier 3—among the most problematic countries—for the fifth
year in a row. The report cited Kuwait’s failure to enact comprehensive anti-trafficking
legislation, provide a large-capacity shelter for trafficking victims, and
pass a law on domestic work.
L<98EFE
2011 was mostly a year of political paralysis for Lebanon. The country had no
government for the first six months, and while political life resumed in July following
the formation of a new government, there was no progress on draft laws
to prevent torture, improve the treatment of migrant domestic workers, and protect
women from domestic violence.
Following multiple riots by inmates demanding better conditions, parliament
approved in September the building of additional prisons to reduce overcrowding,
but failed to tackle the underlying causes of lengthy pre-trial detention.
Activists and artists who usually operate freely faced increased harassment for
criticizing the army and certain high-ranking officials.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Prison Conditions
Despite repeated pledges by the Lebanese government to prevent torture,
accountability for acts of torture remains elusive. A number of detainees, especially
suspected spies for Israel and armed Jihadists, told Human Rights Watch
that their interrogators tortured them in detention facilities, including in the
Ministry of Defense and the Information Branch of the Internal Security Forces.
Lebanon has not yet established a national preventive mechanism to visit and
monitor places of detention, as required under the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture, which it ratified in 2008.
Conditions in prisons remain poor, with overcrowding and lack of proper medical
care a persistent problem. In April the Interior Ministry stated that the country’s
main prison in Roumieh, a facility built for 1,500 inmates, held 3,700. Of
those, 2,757 were awaiting trial. Prisoners rioted on multiple occasions to
protest their conditions of detention. On April 6, security forces killed two
inmates during a raid to end a four-day riot. In September parliament approved
the building of additional prisons to reduce overcrowding in prisons, but failed
to tackle the reasons behind lengthy pre-trial detention periods.
According to the Internal Security Forces, around 13 percent of detainees in
Lebanese prisons were foreigners who had finished serving their sentences.
The group included asylum seekers and refugees who cannot safely return to
their countries.
Lebanon maintained its de facto moratorium on executions, but military tribunals
passed at least three death sentences in 2011 against men suspected of
spying for Israel.
Freedom of Expression
2011 saw increased harassment of activists, bloggers, and artists who criticized
the army and certain high-ranking officials. In March the general prosecutor
opened a criminal investigation against the Lebanese Center for Human Rights
(CLDH) after Amal, a leading political party, filed a complaint against CLDH for
alleging that some detainees reported being tortured by members affiliated
with Amal. In July Military Intelligence summoned Saadeddine Shatila of the
international human rights group Alkarama for his work documenting torture by
security forces and detained him for seven hours. At this writing a military
investigative judge was investigating Shatila for “publishing information harmful
to the reputation of the Lebanese Military.” Also in July Lebanese judicial
authorities detained musician Zeid Hamdan for several hours based on an
accusation that he had defamed the Lebanese president in a song calling on
the president to “go home.”
Refugees
Since April Lebanon has witnessed an influx of Syrians escaping the crisis in
their country. While many subsequently returned to Syria, by mid-October there
were 3,149 Syrian refugees registered with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and Lebanon’s High
Relief Commission. Most of the Syrians reside with host families, often in difficult
circumstances. Lebanese authorities have provided some material assistance:
around 200 refugees are accommodated in two schools in northern Lebanon. In May security forces detained at least 15 Syrian refugees for crossing
illegally into Lebanon, but subsequently released them.
The estimated 300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon live in appalling social
and economic conditions. 2011 saw no improvement in their access to the labor
market, despite a labor law amendment in 2010 that was supposed to ease
such access. The main reason was the government’s failure to implement the
amendment. Lebanese laws and decrees still bar Palestinians from working in
at least 25 professions requiring syndicate membership, including law, medicine,
and engineering. Palestinian refugees are still subject to a discriminatory
law introduced in 2001 preventing them from registering property. In
September, after repeated delays, authorities completed the reconstruction of a
first batch of houses in the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp, which was destroyed
in the 2007 battle between Lebanon’s army and the armed Fatah al-Islam
group. The new houses can accommodate 317 families; at least 8,000
Palestinians from the camp remain displaced.
As of September 30 there were 11,295 non-Palestinian refugees and asylum
seekers registered with the UNHCR, more than 80 percent of them from Iraq.
Since Lebanon has not ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention, it does not give
legal effect to UNHCR’s recognition of refugees and generally treats most as illegal
immigrants subject to arrest; 17 recognized refugees or asylum seekers were
in detention solely for illegal entry.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Following a visit to Lebanon in October, the UN special rapporteur on contemporary
forms of slavery urged the government to enact laws to protect the estimated
200,000 migrant domestic workers who face exploitation and abuse by
employers, including excessive work hours, non-payment of wages, confinement
in the workplace, and in some cases, physical and sexual abuse.
The minister of labor had proposed a draft law to regulate the work of migrant
domestic workers in February but no steps have been taken since. Migrant
domestic workers suing their employers for abuse face legal obstacles and risk
imprisonment and deportation due to the restrictive visa system.
In August the Lebanese parliament enacted an anti-trafficking law strengthening
legal protections for victims of trafficking. It enacted the measure after the
United States government downgraded Lebanon to tier 3, the worst possible
level, in its 2011 report on trafficking in persons.
Male migrant workers—mostly from Syria and Egypt—working in construction
and other manual jobs face hazardous working conditions and are regular targets
for robbery and violent attack. State authorities have not made any concerted
effort to protect them or bring perpetrators to justice.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
In August parliament annulled a provision of the criminal code that had mitigated
sentences for so-called honor crimes. However, parliament has yet to consider
a bill referred to it by the government in April 2010 that would protect
women from domestic violence. The bill requires anyone who witnesses domestic
violence to report it, and obliges perpetrators to provide the plaintiff with
alternative living arrangements, an allowance, and medical expenses. Both Dar
al-Fatwa, the country’s highest Sunni Muslim authority, and the Higher Shia
Islamic Council, oppose the draft bill, and it is feared that their opposition has
paralyzed parliamentary action.
Discriminatory provisions that significantly harm and disadvantage women continue
to exist in personal status laws, determined by an individual’s religious
affiliation, in matters pertaining to marriage, divorce, child custody and
guardianship, and inheritance, as well as in nationality laws and penal laws
relating to violence in the family. In September the minister of labor introduced
a regulation to exempt foreign husbands of Lebanese women and their children
from many restrictions placed on foreign workers, but Lebanese women, unlike
Lebanese men, still cannot pass their nationality to foreign husbands and children.
Legacy of Past Conflicts and Wars
In March, as part of the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review
process, the government pledged to establish a national commission to investigate the fate of the Lebanese and other nationals who “disappeared” during
and after the 1975 to 1990 Lebanese civil war and to ratify the International
Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances.
However, the government took no steps to fulfill these pledges.
An official joint Syrian-Lebanese committee established in May 2005 to investigate
cases of Lebanese who “disappeared” at the hands of Syrian security
forces had not published any findings at this writing. In February three Syrian
brothers from the Jasem family were kidnapped in Lebanon. Military
Intelligence had detained one of them two days earlier for distributing flyers
calling for reform in Syria. The Lebanese judicial investigation stalled despite a
leaked report showing that the Internal Security Forces had information linking
the kidnapping to a Lebanese security official working at the Syrian embassy. In
May Shibli Aisamy, an 86-year-old Syrian dissident, was abducted in the mountain
town of Aley; at this writing there was no information regarding his whereabouts.
Hariri Tribunal
In June the UN’s special tribunal for Lebanon indicted four members of
Hezbollah for the killing of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005. The four
have not been arrested, and the pre-trial chamber is seeking to initiate in
absentia proceedings. The government’s ongoing support for the tribunal was
in doubt as leading parliamentary blocs, including Hezbollah and the Free
Patriotic Movement, criticized the tribunal.
Key International Actors
Multiple international and regional actors compete for influence in Lebanon.
Regionally, Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia maintain a strong influence on
Lebanese politics through their local allies.
France, the US, and the European Union provide assistance for a wide range of
programs, including military training, seminars on torture prevention, and civil
society activities. However, these countries have not fully used their leverage to
push Lebanon to adopt concrete measures to improve its human rights record, such as investigating specific allegations of torture or adopting laws that
respect the rights of refugees or migrant workers.
The UN deploys over 12,000 peacekeepers at Lebanon’s volatile southern border
with Israel as part of its 33-year-old peacekeeping force in the country.
L@9P8
2011 was a dramatic year for Libya. A popular uprising and government crackdown
led to an armed revolt, NATO intervention, and the death of a dictator
who had amassed a deplorable human rights record over 42 years. At this writing
Libya’s new interim leadership, the National Transitional Council (NTC), was
struggling to rein in the many militias and local security forces across the country,
secure unguarded weapons, and build a new Libya based on independent
institutions and the rule of law. A weak criminal justice system, torture and mistreatment
of detainees, and revenge attacks against Gaddafi officials and supporters
were pressing concerns, as was the apparent execution of Libyan leader
Muammar Gaddafi, his son Muatassim, and dozens of his supporters.
The Uprising
On February 15, 2011, anti-government protests began in Libya’s second-largest
city, Benghazi, following popular uprisings in neighboring Tunisia and Egypt.
The protests were triggered by the arrests of government critics, including a
lawyer representing the families of an estimated 1,200 prisoners who had been
killed at Tripoli’s Abu Salim prison in 1996.
Government forces responded by arresting and attacking peaceful demonstrators
in Benghazi and other eastern cities. The government used excessive force
when protests spread to the western cities of Tripoli, the capital, Misrata,
Zawiya, Zuwara, and Zintan. Human Rights Watch documented the government’s
lethal use of live fire on peaceful protesters, as well as the arrest and
disappearance of hundreds of people suspected of involvement in anti-government
demonstrations.
The international response to Gaddafi’s crackdown was swift. On February 25
the United Nation Human Rights Council condemned “gross and systematic”
violations in Libya and called for the creation of a commission of inquiry. The
next day the UN Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1970, imposing
an arms embargo, sanctions on Gaddafi and key members of his family and
government, and referring the situation in Libya to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The resolution gave the ICC jurisdiction over war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Libya from February 15. In June ICC judges
authorized arrest warrants for crimes against humanity against three suspects:
Muammar Gaddafi, his son Saif al-Islam, and Gaddafi’s intelligence chief and
brother-in-law Abdullah Sanussi. Muammar Gaddafi died on October 20, but at
this writing the other two suspects remained at large.
Faced with violent government repression, the uprising rapidly evolved into an
armed conflict, especially after opposition forces seized arms from abandoned
government military depots in eastern Libya. On March 17, as Gaddafi’s military
forces closed in on Benghazi, the key opposition stronghold, the UN Security
Council passed Resolution 1973 imposing a no-fly zone over Libya and authorizing
the use of “all necessary measures”—with the exception of an occupation
force—to protect civilians. This led to NATO’s Operation Unified Protector, with
a mandate to protect civilians, which prevented Gaddafi forces from retaking
Benghazi and eastern Libya. The NATO mission expanded over time beyond its
mandate to give air support for anti-Gaddafi forces. France, Qatar, the United
Arab Emirates, and possibly other governments provided weapons and training
to opposition fighters. Qatar later said it had deployed hundreds of its own
forces on the ground.
The Armed Conflict
From February until August, when Tripoli fell, Gaddafi forces arrested thousands,
if not tens of thousands, of people across the country, including antigovernment
protesters, suspected government critics, and people alleged to
have provided information to international media and human rights organizations.
Many of those arrested were fighters, but many others were civilians,
including doctors, journalists, and people caught in areas where fighting took
place. The Gaddafi government provided no information regarding how many
people it had arrested, where they were being held, or the charges they faced.
Detainees who were released from government custody during and after the
conflict reported frequent torture, including beatings with wooden sticks and
plastic pipes, and the use of electric shock. Some prisoners apparently died
from the abuse or the subsequent lack of medical care.
In the fighting, government forces repeatedly launched indiscriminate attacks
with mortars and GRAD rockets into civilian-inhabited areas, especially in
Misrata and towns of the western mountains. The coastal city of Misrata suffered
a two-month siege with near daily attacks that killed scores of civilians
and for a while blocked delivery of humanitarian aid. Human Rights Watch confirmed
the government’s use in Misrata of mortar-fired cluster munitions in residential
areas, and the use of “parachute” antivehicle mines fired by GRAD rockets.
The government laid thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of antipersonnel
and antivehicle landmines in various parts of Libya, including in Ajdabiya,
Brega, Misrata and the western mountains. Human Rights Watch confirmed the
use of five types of landmines in six separate locations, which will likely endanger
civilians for many years. The Brazilian T-AB-1 antipersonnel landmine
appears to have been the most frequently used mine; its low metal content
makes the mine more difficult to detect and clear.
Human Rights Watch documented 10 cases of apparent gang rape and sexual
assault of men and women by Gaddafi forces during the conflict, including of
detainees in custody. The extent of sexual violence during the conflict remains
unknown, due in part to the stigma surrounding rape in Libya and the dangers
that survivors may face when they publicize such crimes.
During the conflict, and especially just before the fall of Tripoli, Gaddafi forces
executed prisoners in their custody. Members of the Khamis Brigade, a powerful
military force run by Gaddafi’s son Khamis, appear to have summarily executed
at least 45 detainees in a warehouse in Tripoli in August. Thirty-four bodies
exhumed from a mass grave near the town of al-Qawalish in western Libya
in August seemed to be those of men detained by Gaddafi forces in early June.
In September the bodies of 18 detainees, who died by suffocation when
detained by Gaddafi forces in June in al-Khoms, were discovered buried in
western Libya. In May security forces apparently executed 10 antigovernment
protesters in Bani Walid.
At this writing Libya was still dealing with the problem of missing persons from
the conflict. The number of missing and dead remains unclear. Mass graves continued to be discovered, but the lack of forensic expertise complicated the
identification process.
Rebel forces also committed human rights and humanitarian law violations during
the armed conflict. The most significant documented case came in October,
when militias from Misrata appeared to have executed 53 Gaddafi supporters in
Sirte.
In areas of eastern Libya under NTC control since late February and early March,
volunteer security groups arbitrarily arrested dozens of suspected Gaddafi loyalists.
This led to serious abuses, including torture. Human Rights Watch documented
one apparent death in custody by a local security group in Baida, and
heard credible reports of other such deaths. At least 10 former Gaddafi security
officials were found dead in Benghazi and Derna in what appear to be revenge
killings.
When the Gaddafi government retreated from the east, tens of thousands of
sub-Saharan African foreign workers came under threat of violence and arbitrary
arrest, forcing thousands to flee. These migrants, along with dark-skinned
Libyans, were widely accused without evidence of having fought as mercenaries
for Gaddafi, although mercenaries from some countries did come to fight.
In July the commander of the opposition forces, Gen. Abdul Fatah Younes, was
killed with two aides in unclear circumstances. Despite promises, the authorities
appear not to have conducted an independent investigation.
In the western mountains, rebel forces engaged in revenge attacks in some
towns they captured, including looting, arson, and some physical violence.
As NTC forces took control of western Libya in late August, local militias arbitrarily
arrested hundreds, if not thousands, more sub-Saharan migrant workers
and dark-skinned Libyans from the south, accusing them of being mercenaries.
In some cases, the militias subjected these detainees to physical abuse and
forced labor in detention. Thousands of African migrants sought shelter in
makeshift camps with very poor living conditions and security.
Prison conditions in post-Gaddafi western Libya were sub-standard, with overcrowding,
inadequate food and water, and consistent reports of abuse, including
beatings and some use of electric shock. The NTC has failed to provide most
detainees with prompt judicial reviews, let alone access to a lawyer.
A key problem was the large number of local security forces in Tripoli and other
cities and towns, many of which maintained their own makeshift detention
facilities. At this writing the NTC was struggling to bring these disparate forces
under a unified civilian command.
Revenge attacks against populations deemed to have supported Gaddafi also
grew in September and October. In particular, militias from Misrata prevented
about 30,000 people from returning to their homes in Tawergha, a town near
Misrata, because they accused them of having committed atrocities in Misrata
together with Gaddafi forces. Displaced Tawerghans were subject to arbitrary
arrests and torture in detention, in some cases leading to death. Members of
the Mesheshiya tribe in the western mountains, accused of past loyalty to
Gaddafi, also reported harassment and revenge attacks.
On October 20, after weeks of fierce fighting in Sirte, NTC forces captured
Muammar Gaddafi and his son Muatassim. Video footage strongly suggests
that they were executed in custody. The NTC said it will form a commission of
inquiry to examine the deaths.
Three days after Gaddafi’s death, Human Rights Watch found 53 bodies of
apparent Gaddafi supporters outside the Mahari Hotel in Sirte, where rebel
forces from Misrata had been based. Some victims had their hands bound
behind their backs; they all seemed to have been shot at that location. The NTC
said it will investigate.
Despite promises, the NTC had failed through October to secure some of the
military weapons and munitions depots abandoned by Gaddafi forces. These
stockpiles included unsecured surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and vast amounts
of explosive weapons. Many of these sites were extensively looted by civilians
and armed groups.
The NTC responded positively to some requests from human rights organizations
during and after the conflict, for instance by granting Human Rights Watch
and other groups unrestricted access to their detention facilities. The NTC publicly
promised to respect the laws of war and to cooperate with the ICC, and
political leaders repeatedly condemned revenge attacks. On April 28 the NTC
officially pledged not to use antipersonnel and antivehicle landmines, and to
destroy all mines in its forces’ possession. At the same time, NTC leaders said
they had limited control over the many local militias and brigades who had
committed abuses during and after the fighting.
NATO forces led by the French and British, with significant support from the
United States, launched thousands of air strikes on government targets during
the conflict, some of which killed civilians. Based on a partial Human Rights
Watch investigation, the number of civilian deaths appeared far lower than
claimed by the Gaddafi government, but higher than acknowledged by NATO.
In early August Human Rights Watch investigated four sites in Gaddafi government-
held territory of western Libya in which about 50 people appear to have
died, some of them clearly civilians. It was not possible under the circumstances
to determine at any of the sites whether these civilians had died in an
unlawful NATO attack. NATO has failed to provide detailed information about
these targets and the reasons for the civilian casualties. NATO forces were also
accused of failing to rescue African migrants at sea who were fleeing the conflict,
on one occasion leading to 63 deaths.
Key International Actors
Many countries played crucial roles in Libya in 2011, especially those who participated
in the NATO campaign. Qatar and the United Arab Emirates provided
significant support to the anti-Gaddafi opposition, and then to some post-
Gaddafi groups. All these countries, and the European Union, have a major
stake in seeing that future Libyan governments respect human rights and the
rule of law. A UN mission is tasked with assisting Libya’s transition, especially
democratic elections and transitional justice.
Libya’s new leaders face an enormous challenge: to build a country based on
the rule of law after 42 years of one-family rule, while preventing revenge
attacks, ensuring accountability for abuses by all parties to the conflict, and
promoting reconciliation. All these processes will take time and will require outside
assistance. But the events of 2011 have given Libyans the opportunity to
begin this arduous process.
MFIF::F 8E; W<JK<IE S8?8I8
Responding to the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements and to pro-reform
demonstrations in Morocco, King Mohammed VI proposed in June constitutional
amendments with substantial human rights guarantees but few significant
curbs on the monarch’s own powers. The electorate voted the amendments into
law in July.
The new constitution recognizes Amazigh, the Berber language, as an official
language and prohibits torture, inhuman, and degrading treatment; arbitrary
detention; and enforced disappearances. It also requires any person who is
arrested to be informed “immediately” of the reason for his arrest, and to enjoy
the presumption of innocence and the right to a fair trial. However at this writing
the amendments had yet to transform Morocco’s decidedly mixed human
rights performance.
Freedom of Assembly, Association, and Expression
Inspired by popular protests elsewhere in the region, Moroccans began marching
on February 20 to demand sweeping political reforms. The marches—usually
spearheaded by the youthful, loosely-organized February 20 Movement for
Change and backed by other political and civil society forces, including the
powerful Islamist Justice and Spirituality movement—sometimes exceeded
10,000 participants and were staged in several cities simultaneously. The
police tolerated some of the protests, but on some occasions attacked and
beat protesters severely. Some of the harshest police violence occurred at
peaceful protests in Casablanca, Kenitra, and Rabat, the captial, during the
weeks prior to the king’s much-anticipated speech in June outlining constitutional
reforms.
On May 29, security forces in the town of Safi beat Kamal Ammari, a 30-year old
protester. He died on June 2. The Office of the Prosecutor announced that forensic
doctors concluded that Ammari died from a pre-existing condition that was
“aggravated” by “a simple blow to the torso that would normally have been
benign.” The case remains under investigation.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
On April 28, a bomb exploded in a Marrakesh cafe frequented by foreign
tourists, killing 17 persons and wounding dozens. No group claimed responsibility
for what was the deadliest terrorist attack in Morocco since 2003. The
special terrorism chamber of the Rabat Court of Appeals on October 28 convicted
nine suspected Islamist militants in the attack and sentenced one to death
and the others to prison. Moroccan courts continue to impose the death penalty
but Morocco has not executed anyone since the early 1990s.
Hundreds of suspected Islamist extremists arrested in the aftermath of the
Casablanca bombings of May 2003 remain in prison. Many were convicted in
unfair trials after being held in secret detention and subjected to mistreatment
and sometimes torture. Since further terrorist attacks in 2007, police have
arrested hundreds more suspected militants, many of whom were convicted
and imprisoned, not for having committed acts of terrorism, but for belonging
to a “terrorist network” or preparing to join “the jihad” in Iraq or elsewhere.
There were fewer reports than in previous years of intelligence agencies interrogating
terrorism suspects at unacknowledged detention centers and holding
them in pre-charge custody for longer than the 12-day maximum period the law
allows for terrorism cases. In May delegations from parliament and the new
National Human Rights Council (NHRC), which the king established in March to
replace his Advisory Council on Human Rights, visited the reported site of the
most notorious of these detention centers, the headquarters of the General
Directorate for the Surveillance of the Territory in Témara, near Rabat. They
reported finding no evidence during their visit of a detention facility operating
there.
Police Conduct and the Criminal Justice System
Courts seldom provide fair trials in cases with political overtones. Judges routinely
ignore requests for medical examinations from defendants who claim to
have been tortured, refuse to summon exculpatory witnesses, and convict
defendants based on apparently coerced confessions.
The minister of justice in August 2010 suspended Judge Jaâfar Hassoun from
his post as president of the Marrakesh Administrative Court. Then in December
2010 Hassoun was ousted from his membership in the High Council of the
Magistrature (HCM). Authorities accused Hassoun of disclosing confidential
deliberations of the HCM to Essabah newspaper. Hassoun said he was innocent
and the authorities were persecuting him for his judicial independence, such as
his 2009 ruling that invalidated a Marrakesh mayoral election won by a candidate
from a pro-palace party. In January the king signed an order expelling
Hassoun from the judiciary.
In January an appeals court upheld the conviction and imprisonment of champion
boxer Zakaria Moumni for fraud after trials at which the complainants never
appeared and a confession allegedly coerced by torture was used as evidence.
Moumni, who was being retried at this writing, contends that his prosecution is
politically motivated and stems from his persistent and public lobbying of the
palace for government benefits to which he says he is entitled.
In March Mohammed VI pardoned and freed retired Maj.-Col. Kaddour Terhzaz.
In November 2008 a military court convicted Terhzaz of disclosing “national
defense secrets” based on a 2005 letter he wrote to the king criticizing what he
saw as Morocco’s bad treatment of its pilots whom the Polisario had imprisoned
for a quarter century.
In April the king also pardoned five political figures convicted in the mass
“Belliraj” trial on charges of mounting a terrorist plot. In 2010 an appeals court
had upheld the guilty verdict against all 35 defendants even though most had
repudiated their confessions. The court refused to investigate the defendants’
allegations of torture, detention in secret jails, and the falsification of confessions.
Twenty-nine other defendants in the case continued to serve their prison
terms, which included a life term for alleged ringleader Abdelkader Belliraj.
Another defendant had already been freed in 2010 after serving a two-year
term.
A Casablanca court on April 14 provisionally released prominent, non-violent,
pro-independence, Sahrawi activists Ali Salem Tamek, Brahim Dahane, and
Ahmed Naciri, after 18 months of pre-trial detention. The police had arrested them and four other activists in October 2009 upon their return from a visit to
the Polisario-run refugee camps in Algeria. The trial of the seven, on charges of
“harming [Morocco’s] internal security,” started in October 2010, but was postponed
repeatedly. At this writing it had not resumed.
Twenty-three Sahrawi civilians remained in pre-trial detention before a military
court for their alleged role in clashes in and around El-Ayoun in November 2010
between security forces and Sahrawis that caused fatalities on both sides.
Another 120 Sahrawis were bailed and faced less serious charges before a civilian
court for their role in the clashes. One year after they occurred, no trials had
begun.
Freedom of Association
Morocco boasts of thousands of independent associations, but government
officials arbitrarily impede the legalization of many, undermining their freedom
to operate. Groups affected include some that defend the rights of Sahrawis,
Amazighs (Berbers), sub-Saharan immigrants, and unemployed university graduates,
as well as charitable, cultural, and educational associations whose leadership
includes members of Justice and Spirituality, a well-entrenched, nationwide
movement that advocates for an Islamic state and questions the king’s
spiritual authority. The government, which does not recognize Justice and
Spirituality as a legal association, tolerated many of its activities but prevented
others.
Local and international human rights organizations operate with few impediments
in the major cities, but individual activists sometimes pay a heavy price
for whistle-blowing. Chekib el-Khayari, president of the Association for Human
Rights in the Rif, served two years of a three-year term for “gravely insulting
state institutions” and minor currency violations, before the king pardoned him
in April. The authorities jailed el-Khayari after he accused certain Moroccan officials
of complicity in narcotics trafficking.
Women’s Rights
The new constitution guarantees equality for women, “while respecting the provisions
of the Constitution, and the laws and permanent characteristics of the
Kingdom.” Major reforms to the Family Code in 2004 raised the age of marriage
and improved women’s rights in divorce and child custody. However, the new
code preserved discriminatory provisions with regards to inheritance and the
right of husbands to unilaterally repudiate their wives.
On April 8 Morocco withdrew its reservations to articles 9(2) and 16 of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
while maintaining other reservations. The withdrawal signaled a commitment to
eliminate gender discrimination in marital rights and responsibilities and in the
right of spouses to confer Moroccan nationality on their children when the other
spouse is non-Moroccan. In its first national study on violence against women
the Haut Commissariat au Plan, a government agency tasked with compiling
national statistics, found that 55 percent of Moroccan women surveyed
between 18 and 64-years-old experienced domestic violence during 2009; 15
percent reported suffering physical violence and 48 percent emotional violence.
Domestic Workers
In July an employer allegedly beat to death an 11-year-old domestic worker in el-
Jadida. The case drew attention to the tens of thousands of Moroccan children
employed as live-in household workers, and the abusive conditions to which
they are often subjected. The case was still in court at this writing. Morocco
approved a draft law in October that, if approved by parliament, would toughen
sanctions on persons who violate the prohibition on employing children under
15 and would tighten conditions for employing persons aged 15 to 18 in households.
Freedom of Media
Morocco’s independent print and online media investigate and criticize government
officials and policies, but face prosecution and harassment when they
cross certain lines. The press law includes prison terms for “maliciously” spreading “false information” likely to disturb the public order or for speech
that is defamatory, offensive to members of the royal family, or that undermines
“Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or territorial integrity,” that is,
Morocco’s claim on Western Sahara.
Moroccan state television provides some room for investigative reporting but
little for direct criticism of the government, or dissent on key issues. Hundreds
of journalists who work for state-controlled media, notably the television channels
and the state news agency, held protests on March 25 to demand, among
other things, more editorial independence.
In April authorities arrested Rachid Nini, a popular columnist and editor of al-
Masa’ daily. In June a Casablanca Court of First Instance convicted him of
attempting to influence judicial decisions, showing contempt for judicial decisions,
and falsely accusing public officials of crimes. The court gave him a oneyear
prison term and refused to free him provisionally pending appeal. The evidence
against him consisted of articles he wrote that criticized Morocco’s intelligence
agencies and accused persons close to the royal palace of corruption.
An appeals court confirmed the verdict and sentence on October 24.
Morocco revoked or delayed renewal of accreditation of some journalists working
for foreign media. Voicing its displeasure with Al Jazeera’s coverage of the
Western Sahara conflict, the government closed the station’s news bureau in
Morocco in 2010.
Key International Actors
In 2008 the European Union gave Morocco “advanced status,” placing it a
notch above other members of the EU’s “neighbourhood policy.” Morocco is
the biggest Middle Eastern beneficiary of EU aid after the Occupied Palestinian
Territories, with €580 million (US$808 million) earmarked for 2011 to 2013.
France is Morocco’s leading trade partner and source of public development aid
and private investment. France increased its Overseas Development Assistance
to €600 million ($810 million) for 2010 to 2012. France rarely publicly criticized
Morocco’s human rights practices and openly supported its autonomy plan for
Western Sahara. On July 18 the French presidency of the G8 praised the results of the constitutional referendum and pledged the G8 countries’ “concrete support”
for “the full and swift implementation of Morocco’s reform agenda.”
The United States provides financial aid to Morocco, a close ally, including a
five-year $697 million grant beginning in 2008 from the Millennium Challenge
Corporation to reduce poverty and stimulate economic growth. On human
rights, the US continued to publicly praise Morocco’s reform efforts and
advances made by women. However, US Deputy Assistant of State Tamara
Wittes, on a visit to Morocco in June, said that US officials had voiced concerns
to the Moroccan government about police violence when handling peaceful
demonstrations.
The 2011 United Nations Security Council resolution renewing the mandate of
the peacekeeping force for Western Sahara (MINURSO) contained human rights
language more explicit than in previous years but did not enlarge the MINURSO
mandate to include human rights monitoring, an enlargement that the Polisario
supports and Morocco opposes. MINURSO is the only peacekeeping operation
created since 1990 that has no human rights monitoring component. Resolution
1979 encouraged “the parties to work with the international community to
develop and implement independent and credible measures to ensure full
respect for human rights.” It welcomed “the commitment of Morocco to ensure
unqualified and unimpeded access to all Special Procedures of the United
Nations Human Rights Council.”
OD8E
Oman’s 3.5 million citizens have little opportunity to change their government
or affect its policies. All legislation and regulations are promulgated by royal
decree.
Omani authorities generally respected the right to freedom of expression,
though public criticism of Sultan Qaboos bin Sa’id and his family remains offlimits.
On several occasions in 2011 authorities arrested journalists who wrote
articles supportive of large-scale protests calling for reforms.
Authorities placed restrictions on the freedoms of association and assembly,
both in law and in practice, but tolerated spontaneous peaceful sit-ins and
informal gatherings from late February to May 2011.
Freedom of Assembly
Beginning in February thousands of Omanis took to the streets in cities
throughout the country to demand jobs, an end to corruption, and the dismissal
of senior officials perceived to be corrupt. Though police and security forces initially
tolerated the largely peaceful protests, on February 27 they used tear gas,
rubber bullets, and live ammunition against several thousand protesters who
attacked and burned a police station in the northern coastal town of Sohar. The
clashes led to dozens of injuries, and police shot dead protester Abdullah al-
Ghimlasi. On April 1, police and army units fired tear gas and rubber bullets at
stone-throwing protesters. Khalifa al-Alawi, 22, was killed by a rubber bullet
that struck him in the face.
In a coordinated move on May 13 and 14, riot police assisted by regular army
units used tear gas and police batons to disperse peaceful sit-ins in the northern
cities of Muscat, the capital, and Sur, as well as in the southern city of
Salalah. Following the May 13 dispersal of the Muscat sit-in in front of the Shura
council building, authorities arrested at least seven activists who attempted to
return to the site the next day. They charged Basma al-Kayoumi with “illegal
gathering” and released the others without charge.
Also on May 13, police broke up a sit-in in front of the governor’s office in the
southern city of Salalah, detaining several hundred protesters for 24 hours
before releasing all but a few. Authorities transferred at least eight demonstrators
from Salalah to Sama’il Central Prison, outside Muscat, where they were
held for 54 days without charge, including 13 days in solitary confinement. The
public prosecutor initially charged at least one of them with “dishonoring the
sultan,” though eventually the charges were dropped and all eight released.
On June 28 the Misdemeanor Court of First Instance in Muscat handed down
sentences in a group trial ranging from six months to five years imprisonment.
Authorities charged 15 demonstrators from Sohar with “shutting down work at a
government organization,” “blocking roads,” and “humiliating on-duty civil servants.”
To Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, authorities have not investigated or held
accountable any officials in connection with the protest-related deaths,
injuries, or arbitrary arrests and detentions carried out by Omani security forces
during the protests.
Freedom of Expression
Omani authorities generally respected the right to freedom of expression and
allowed several independent publications in the capital to operate freely, some
of which regularly published articles criticizing official corruption as well as
crackdowns on protesters.
Some journalists, however, claimed that officials retaliated against them for
their reporting. At 3 a.m. on March 29, security forces raided the home of
Ahmed al-Shezawi, head of the press relations department at the governmentowned
daily al-Shabiba, after he published stories on the Sohar demonstration;
he is a relative of one of the protest leaders. Authorities held him for several
days before releasing him without charge. One week later the Ministry of
Information revoked his journalism license and his newspaper fired him.
On September 21 a lower court in Muscat convicted journalist Yusif al-Haj, a
reporter at the independent newspaper Azzamn, and Ibrahim al-Ma’mari, his
editor, of defaming and insulting the Minister of Justice and his deputy in an article alleging that they had improperly intervened in an employment dispute.
The judge sentenced al-Haj and al-Ma’mari to five months in prison and ordered
the newspaper to close for a month. Al-Haj has been a prominent voice for
reform and was an active participant in the Muscat sit-in.
Pro-Reform Activists
Several pro-reform activists reported threats, intimidation, and physical abuse
by unknown assailants and security forces.
On April 8, masked plainclothes men abducted Said al-Hashemi and Bassima
al-Rajhi, two activists involved with the Muscat sit-in, and drove them deep into
the desert, where they beat them, subjected them to mock executions, and
abandoned them. Al-Hashemi said that the men behaved in a manner reflecting
they were subject to a clear chain of command, and that the black clothes and
boots that several wore were typically associated with security services. He said
that the van used to transport him and al-Rajhi into the desert was identical to
the well-equipped GMC vans known to be used by security services. At this writing
authorities have released no information regarding the investigation they
said they had opened into this case.
Human rights activist and blogger Salem Al Towayyah reported receiving emails
and chat messages from anonymous sources threatening him with retribution
for criticizing government officials and calling for a constitutional monarchy on
a March 9 show that aired on al-Hurra television. On April 1 a representative of
the Royal Oman Police called a member of Al Towayyah’s family to ask about
his activities and threatened to charge him with “inciting” people if he did not
discontinue his pro-reform activities.
Naming Issues
The Ministry of Interior’s Committee for the Correction of Tribal Names and
Titles continued to regulate and arbitrarily change tribal surnames, effectively
assimilating members of one tribe into another. Despite numerous court decisions
against ministry orders compelling members of the Al Towayyah and al-
Khalifin tribes to change their surnames to names of other tribes, ministry officials continued to challenge the names of individuals when they attempted to
renew identification documents.
In 2011 the Directorate General of Civil Status, a branch of the Royal Oman
Police, continued its policy of restricting names permitted to newborns to those
found on a civil registry database and rejecting names not in the database. Any
newborn whose name was rejected could not get a birth certificate until the parents
submitted an acceptable name. Activists reported that the appeals
process was lengthy and unclear.
Women’s Rights
Article 17 of Oman’s Basic Law officially bans discrimination on the basis of
gender, and authorities have made efforts to ensure that women are visibly represented
at the highest levels of government and society.
Oman adjudicates family law and personal status matters in religious courts in
which judges base rulings on their interpretations of Islamic law. Individuals
have no option to seek adjudication pursuant to a civil code. Family law as generally
interpreted discriminates against women in matters of divorce, inheritance,
child custody, and legal guardianship, granting men privileged status in
these matters.
Key International Actors
Oman, as well as Bahrain, received a US$20 billion development grant from
wealthier Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states in 2011, reportedly in order to
counter popular uprisings in the two countries.
Oman is one of the few GCC members that maintains friendly relations with
Iran. On September 21 Sultan Qaboos helped negotiate the release of two
detained American hikers imprisoned in Iran for 26 months.
Both the United States US and United Kingdom provide significant economic
and military aid to the sultanate and maintain military bases there.
Q8K8I
Qatar has the highest ratio of migrants to citizens in the world, with only
225,000 citizens in a population of 1.7 million. Yet the country has some of the
most restrictive sponsorship laws in the Persian Gulf region, leaving migrant
workers vulnerable to exploitation and abuse. Forced labor and human trafficking
remain serious problems.
While the constitution protects freedom of expression “in accordance with the
conditions and circumstances set forth in the law,” in practice Qatar restricts
freedom of speech and the press. Local media tend to self-censor, and the law
permits criminal penalties, including jail terms, for defamation.
Qatar currently holds a seat on the United Nations Human Rights Council, winning
an election to its second consecutive term in May 2010. In June the government
voted to adopt the International Labour Organization’s Convention on
Decent Work for Domestic Workers, which establishes the first global labor
standards on domestic work.
Migrant Workers
More than 1.2 million migrant workers—mostly from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka,
the Philippines, Nepal, and Bangladesh—live and work in Qatar. The largest
sector, construction, employs 506,000 migrants.
Law 14 of 2004—governing labor in the private sector—limits working hours,
requires paid annual leave, sets requirements on health and safety, and
requires on-time wages each month. Neither the law nor supporting legislation
set a minimum wage. The law allows Qatari workers to form unions, and permits
strikes with prior government approval. Migrant workers have no right to
unionize or strike, though they make up 99 percent of the private sector workforce.
The labor law excludes approximately 132,000 migrant domestic workers. While
the Advisory Council, a 35-member appointed legislative body, approved a separate law covering domestic work in 2010, at this writing the law awaited the
approval of Emir Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani.
Migrant workers reported extensive labor law violations. Common complaints
included late or unpaid wages and employers’ failure to procure work permits
that proved workers’ legal residence in the country. Many workers said they
received false information about their jobs and salaries before arriving and
signed contracts in Qatar under coercive circumstances. Some lived in overcrowded
and unsanitary labor camps, and lacked access to potable water.
Qatar employs only 150 labor inspectors to monitor compliance with the labor
law, and inspections do not include worker interviews.
A major barrier to redressing labor abuses is the kafala (sponsorship) system,
which ties a migrant worker’s legal residence to his or her employer, or “sponsor.”
Migrant workers cannot change jobs without their sponsoring employer’s
consent, except in exceptional cases with permission from the Interior Ministry.
If a worker leaves his or her sponsoring employer, even if fleeing abuse, the
employer can report the worker as “absconding,” leading to detention and
deportation. In order to leave Qatar, migrants must obtain an exit visa from
their sponsor, and some said sponsors denied them these visas. Workers widely
reported that sponsors confiscated their passports, in violation of the
Sponsorship Law.
In October 2011 Qatar passed new legislation to combat human trafficking,
using the definition of trafficking provided in the UN Trafficking Protocol. Those
who commit offenses specified in the law could face up to fifteen years in
prison.
Statelessness
Between 1,200 and 1,500 stateless Bidun, who claim they have a right to Qatari
citizenship, live in Qatar. The 2005 Nationality Law allows individuals to apply
for citizenship after living in Qatar for 25 years, but limits naturalization to only
50 people per year. Bidun cannot register for education or health benefits, or
legally hold employment. The government does not register the birth of Bidun
children.
In 2004 and 2005 the government stripped more than 5,000 Qataris from the
al-Murra tribe of citizenship as delayed punishment for some members’ participation
in a 1996 coup attempt against the current emir. In 2006 the Qatari government
officially reinstated the citizenship of most of this group, but an estimated
200 remain stateless. They cannot legally work in the country and report
economic hardship.
Women’s Rights
Both women and men vote in municipal elections, though representatives have
limited power. Qatari women do not have the same rights as Qatari men to
obtain nationality for their spouses and children. In 2010 Qatar appointed its
first female judge.
Qatar has no law specifically criminalizing domestic violence, and the government
currently publishes no data on incidents of domestic violence.
Representatives of the Qatar Foundation for the Protection of Women and
Children, a government-funded charitable institution, told local media that
domestic violence continued to be a problem, based on their work with women
and children who sought assistance.
Qatar adjudicates family law and personal status matters in religious courts in
which judges base rulings on their interpretations of Islamic law. People have
no option to seek adjudication pursuant to a civil code. Family law as generally
interpreted discriminates against women in matters of divorce, inheritance, and
child custody, granting men privileged status in these matters.
Freedom of Expression
On March 2, plainclothes individuals believed to be state security agents took
into custody Sultan al-Khalaifi, a Qatari blogger and former secretary general of
Alkarama, a Geneva-based NGO monitoring human rights in the Arab world.
They searched his home for two hours and confiscated possessions, including
al-Khalaifi’s laptop. Authorities released him a month later without charge.
In June Qatar’s Advisory Council approved a new media law that allows for criminal
penalties against journalists who write critically on “friendly countries” or
matters pertaining to national security, but arrests require a court order. The
emir had not approved the law at this writing. Under the media law still in
effect, journalists may be arrested without a court order. In April police arrested
two Swiss sports journalists for Radio Television Suisse (RTS) and interrogated
them for several hours. The journalists had been filming a segment on soccer
(football) in Qatar after the country won its bid to host the 2022 soccer World
Cup. An RTS statement said a judge ordered them to pay a fine, and that
authorities prevented them from leaving the country for 13 days.
Al Jazeera, the international news agency broadcasting in both Arabic and
English, is headquartered in Doha, the capital, and funded by the Qatari government.
While the station covers regional and international news, and played
an important role in reporting the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements, few
stories report on Qatar.
Key International Actors
On December 2, 2010, the Fédération Internationale de Football Association
selected Qatar to host the 2022 World Cup. Qatar’s winning bid included commitments
to build nine new stadiums, a new airport, metro and rail systems, a
bridge to Bahrain, 54 team base camps, and significant new hotel stock, at a
total estimated cost of US$80 to 100 billion. Local media estimated that these
projects would require recruitment of hundreds of thousands of new workers
from abroad.
In March Qatar was among the first countries to recognize Libya’s National
Transitional Council, and was the first Arab country to contribute to NATO’s
enforcement of a no-fly zone over Libya. On June 2 the Qatari government
forcibly returned to eastern Libya Eman al-’Obeidi, a refugee recognized by UN
high commissioner for refugees, who said that forces loyal to the government
headed by Muammar Gaddafi gang-raped her in Tripoli.
S8L;@ AI89@8
Saudi Arabia responded with unflinching repression to demands by citizens for
greater democracy in the wake of the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements.
King Abdullah bin Abd al-‘Aziz Al Saud announced economic benefits worth
over US$130 billion, but authorities continued to jail Saudis for peaceful dissent.
New laws introduced or proposed in 2011 criminalize the exercise of basic
human rights such as freedom of expression, assembly, and association.
Authorities continue to suppress or fail to protect the rights of 9 million Saudi
women and girls, 8 million foreign workers, and some 2 million Shia citizens.
Each year thousands of people receive unfair trials or are subject to arbitrary
detention.
In March Saudi troops helped quell Bahrain’s pro-democracy protests. Saudi
Arabia reacted with dismay to the toppling of Egypt’s President Hosni Mubarak,
but supported a transition of power, at least in public, in Yemen and Libya and
urged Syria to stop internal repression. At Saudi urging, the Gulf Cooperation
Council invited Arab monarchies Jordan and Morocco to join the council, and
provided Jordan, Bahrain, Oman, Egypt, and Yemen with substantial financial
aid.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
The Saudi guardianship system continues to treat women as minors. Under this
discriminatory system, girls and women of all ages are forbidden from traveling,
studying, or working without permission from their male guardians. In 2009 the
Ministry of Commerce, though not other ministries, stopped requiring women to
conduct ministerial business through a male representative.
On September 25 King Abdullah announced that women will be able to vote in
municipal elections in 2015. The government continued to exclude women as
voters or candidates in the September 2011 municipal elections, despite a twoyear
delay to allow for logistical preparations to include women. In March 2011
women activists launched the Baladi (My Country) campaign in protest, trying—
unsuccessfully—to register to vote. In the first municipal elections in 2005, authorities said that election workers could not verify a woman’s identity since
many did not have identity cards. However, the Interior Ministry began issuing
identity cards to women over 22 years old in 2000. The king also promised to
appoint women as full members of the Shura Council.
On May 22, Saudi authorities arrested Manal al-Sharif after she defied the kingdom’s
de facto ban on women driving. Al-Sharif appeared in a video showing
herself behind the wheel. Prosecutors charged her with “tarnishing the kingdom’s
reputation abroad” and “stirring up public opinion,” according to Saudi
press reports. On May 30, Khobar police released al-Sharif from prison after she
appealed to King Abdullah.
On June 17 around 40 women with international drivers’ licenses participated in
a “women2drive” campaign. No law bars women from driving, but senior government
clerics have ruled against the practice. Saudi Arabia is the only country
in the world to prohibit women from driving.
Migrant Worker Rights
Over 8 million migrant workers fill manual, clerical, and service jobs, constituting
more than half the national workforce. Many suffer multiple abuses and
labor exploitation, sometimes amounting to slavery-like conditions.
The kafala (sponsorship) system ties migrant workers’ residency permits to
their “sponsoring” employers, whose written consent is required for workers to
change employers or exit the country. Employers abuse this power to confiscate
passports, withhold wages, and force migrants to work against their will.
In August Jadawel International, owned by Saudi Arabia’s third richest man,
Shaikh Muhammad bin Issa Al Jaber, was six months in arrears with salary payments,
as in previous years, and managers threatened workers not to pursue
complaints in labor court.
Some 1.5 million migrant domestic workers remain excluded from the 2005
Labor Law. As in years past, Asian embassies reported thousands of complaints
from domestic workers forced to work 15 to 20 hours a day, seven days a week,
and denied their salaries. Domestic workers, most of whom are women, frequently endure forced confinement, food deprivation, and severe psychological,
physical, and sexual abuse.
In December 2010, authorities made no attempts to rescue an Indonesian
migrant domestic worker who had worked for 10 years without pay and whose
sponsors were “renting” her out to other houses, according to one Saudi
woman who informed authorities. In November 2010, authorities in Abha,
southern Saudi Arabia, recovered the body of Kikim Komalasari, a 36-year-old
Indonesian domestic worker, bearing signs of extensive physical abuse. In
September an appeals court overturned a three-year prison sentence for the
employer found guilty of severely assaulting Sumiati Mustapa, her Indonesian
domestic worker. In June the government beheaded Ruyati binti Sapubi, an
Indonesian domestic worker convicted of murdering her employer who allegedly
refused to allow binti Sapubi to return home. Courts sentenced another
Indonesian domestic worker to death for killing her employer after he allegedly
tried to rape her.
Saudi Arabia continued to deport hundreds of Somalis to Mogadishu,
Somalia’s capital, according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, despite the acute violence there.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Detainees, including children, commonly face systematic violations of due
process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and torture and ill-treatment
in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants to thousands of
lashes.
Judges can order arrest and detention, including of children, at their discretion.
Children can be tried and sentenced as adults if physical signs of puberty exist.
The Interior Ministry said it had executed Bandar al-Luhaibi, a child, in October
for killing his grandmother.
Authorities rarely inform suspects of the crime with which they are charged, or
of supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code, so prosecutors and
judges largely define criminal offenses at their discretion. Lawyers do not assist suspects during interrogation and face difficulty examining witnesses or presenting
evidence at trial.
From January to October 2011 Saudi Arabia had executed at least 61 persons,
including two women and one child, mostly for murder or drugs offenses, but
also a Sudanese man, Abd al-Hamid al-Fakki, for “sorcery.”
In March a court, after only two sessions, sentenced four Iraqis and two Syrians
to the amputation of one foot and one hand each for stealing money from a
supermarket. One of the Iraqis told Human Rights Watch that interrogators
physically tortured him for eight days into a signing, unread, a prepared confession.
Secret police detained without trial or access to lawyers, in many cases for
years, thousands of persons suspected of sympathies for or involvement with
armed groups, or for their peaceful political views.
In July the government proposed a counterterrorism law that would criminalize
“infringing upon the interests of the kingdom” or “describing the king—or the
crown prince—as an unbeliever, doubting his integrity, defaming his honesty,
breaking the [oath of] loyalty [to him], or inciting such [acts].”
Prisoners and detainees in several facilities described inhumane conditions. On
January 3 Mikhlif al-Shammari, a rights advocate detained in Dammam prison
since June 2010, alleged that guards beat inmates. According to his family,
guards assaulted al-Shammari in July for his criticisms by putting a chemical
agent in his mouth.
Freedom of Expression, Belief, and Assembly
Authorities further tightened the space for public criticism of officials or government
policies in the wake of the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements. The
Ministry of Culture and Information heavily censored print and broadcast
media. Internet critics crossing vague “red lines” faced arrest.
In October 2010 the General Court in Qubba, in northern Saudi Arabia, sentenced
to lashes Fahd al-Jukhaidib, a local journalist and teacher who reported on a rare protest against the local electricity company. In December authorities
detained incommunicado for three months Muhammad al-’Abd al-Karim, a professor
of Islamic jurisprudence, for an online article speculating whether Saudi
Arabia would survive as a political entity without the ruling Saudi royal family.
In July the authorities arrested prominent cleric Dr. Yusuf al-Ahmad, one day
after he criticized the Interior Ministry’s policy of long-term detention without
charge or trial.
In January Minister of Culture and Information Abd al-‘Aziz Khuja issued the
Executive Regulation for Electronic Publishing Activity, which subjects virtually
all news and commentary distributed electronically to the country’s press law,
including the requirement for a press license.
In April King Abdullah amended the 2000 Press and Publications Law to further
prohibit speech that “contradicts rulings of the Islamic Sharia [law] or regulations
in force,” or “call[s] for disturbing the country’s security, or its public
order, or … caus[es] sectarianism or … damage[s] public affairs in the country.”
New restrictions also include a prohibition on damaging the reputation of the
chief mufti, members of the Council of Senior Religious Scholars, or any other
government official or government institution.
Saudi Arabia does not tolerate public worship by adherents of religions other
than Islam and systematically discriminates against its religious minorities, in
particular Shia and Ismailis (a distinct branch of Shiism). Official discrimination
against Shia encompasses religious practices, education, and the justice system.
Government officials exclude Shia from certain public jobs and policy
questions and publicly disparage their faith.
This discrimination sometimes amounts to persecution. Professing Shia beliefs
in private or in public, in particular at holy sites in Mecca and Medina, may lead
to arrest and detention. In October the Interior Ministry said that it would pursue
what it called “radicalized or hired instigators” among the Shia with an
“iron fist.”
Prince Badr bin Jilawi, governor of Ahsa’ province, repeatedly had Shia citizens
detained, in violation of Saudi criminal procedure law, for private prayer or public display of Shia banners or slogans. The domestic intelligence agency in
February summoned and then arrested Shia cleric Tawfiq al-‘Amir after he had
called for a constitutional monarchy and equal rights for Shia in his Friday sermon.
On March 5 the Interior Ministry categorically prohibited public protests
“because they contradict the principles of the Islamic Shari’a and the values
and customs of Saudi society.” The royally appointed Council of Senior
Religious Scholars, whose interpretation of religious law is binding, seconded
the ban, and intelligence forces in March arrested Muhammad al-Wad’ani, and
Khalid al-Juhani for advocating protests for political change.
Small, peaceful protests by Shia took place since late February in the Eastern
Province, demanding the release of nine “forgotten” Shia detained for over 13
years without charge or trial on suspicion of involvement in a 1996 attack on a
United States military installation in Khobar, which killed 19. Saudi authorities
detained 160 protesters until May, and at least 40 remained in detention at this
writing.
In March a small group of Sunni Saudis demonstrated in Riyadh, the capital,
calling for the release of thousands of people detained for years without charge
or trial on suspicion of involvement in militant activity. Police arrested several,
including three women as well as lawyer Mubarak bin Zu’air and rights activist
Muhammad Bajadi, both of who remain in detention. In August Judge Abd al-
Latif al-‘Abd al-Latif prohibited defense lawyers for Bajadi from attending a trial
session in a secret location of the Specialized Criminal Court, a state security
tribunal for terrorism cases, where Bajadi faced charges of “insurrection
against the ruler,” “instigating demonstrations,” and “speaking with foreign
[media] channels.”
Police in October arrested human rights activist Fadhil al-Manasif after he complained
about the police seizing two elderly citizens in order to pressure their
sons to give themselves up. The sons were wanted in connection with peaceful
demonstrations in the Eastern Province. Al-Manasif, who was detained from
May until August for peaceful protest, remains in incommunicado detention. A
judge in September charged rights activist Walid Abu al-Khair with “offending the judiciary,” “asking for a constitutional monarchy,” and “participating in
media [programs] to distort the reputation of the country.”
Saudi Arabia does not allow political or human rights associations. In February
intelligence forces arrested six persons who planned to found the kingdom’s
first political party.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the US and European countries. The US failed to
publicly criticize Saudi human rights violations or its role in putting down prodemocracy
protests in neighboring Bahrain. US President Barack Obama failed
to mention Saudi Arabia in a major speech on the Arab uprisings and continued
to pursue a $60 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia, the biggest-ever US arms
sale.
In June Germany proposed to sell the kingdom over 200 tanks, worth $5 billion.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navenathem Pillay criticized a spate
of executions in October. Indonesia’s President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono in
July publicly criticized treatment of Indonesian workers in Saudi Arabia, as did a
fact-finding delegation of Philippines lawmakers in a report issued in January.
SPI@8
Syria, a repressive police state ruled under an emergency law since 1963, did
not prove immune in 2011 to the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements. Antigovernment
protests erupted in the southern governorate of Daraa in mid-
March and quickly spread to other parts of the country. Security forces responded
brutally, killing at least 3,500 protesters and arbitrarily detaining thousands,
including children under age 18, holding most of them incommunicado and
subjecting many to torture. The security forces also launched large-scale military
operations in restive towns nationwide.
In parallel, Syria’s government enacted a number of reforms in an unsuccessful
effort to quell the protest movement, lifting the state of emergency, introducing
a new media law, and granting citizenship to stateless Kurds. But at this writing
the ongoing bloody repression signaled the government’s determination to
crush dissent and reject reforms that might undermine its authority.
Killings of Protesters and Bystanders
Security forces and government-supported armed groups used violence, often
lethal, to attack and disperse overwhelmingly peaceful anti-government protesters
from mid-March onwards. The exact number of dead is impossible to
verify due to restrictions on access, but local groups documented 3,500 civilian
dead as of November 15.
Many of the killings took place during shootings on protesters and funeral processions,
such as the April killings in the central city of Homs of at least 15 people
at the New Clock Tower Square when protesters tried to organize a sit-in,
and in the southern town of Izraa of at least 34 protesters. While in some cases
security forces initially used tear gas or fired in the air to disperse the crowds,
in many others, they fired directly at protesters without advance warning. Many
victims sustained head, neck, and chest wounds, suggesting they were deliberately
targeted. In several cases, security forces chased and continued to shoot
at protesters as they ran away.
Syrian authorities repeatedly claimed that security forces were responding to
armed attacks by terrorist gangs. In most cases that Human Rights Watch documented,
witnesses insisted that those killed and injured were unarmed and
posed no lethal threat. Instances where protesters used lethal force against
Syrian security forces were limited, and often came in response to lethal force
by security forces.
Violations during Large-Scale Military Operations
Security forces conducted several large-scale military operations in restive
towns and cities, resulting in mass killings, arrests, and detentions as well as
the use of torture. In April tanks and armored personnel carriers imposed a
siege on the city of Daraa for 11 days, killing at least 115 residents according to
local activists. Daraa residents told Human Rights Watch that security forces
occupied all neighborhoods, placed snipers on roofs of buildings across the
city, and prevented any movement of residents by firing on those who tried to
leave their homes. Security forces launched a massive arrest campaign, arbitrarily
detaining hundreds. Released detainees said that security forces subjected
them, as well as hundreds of others they saw in detention, to various forms
of torture and degrading treatment.
In May security forces attacked the coastal city of Banyas, using the town’s
sports stadium as a detention facility, and the town of Tal Kalakh, near the
Lebanese border, forcing more than 3,000 Syrians to flee over the border to
Lebanon. In June security forces sent tanks into the northern town of Jisr al-
Shughur following armed confrontations between locally posted security forces
and residents. In July security forces stormed Hama, which had witnessed the
largest anti-government protests in Syria, killing at least 200 residents in four
days, according to lists of the names of those killed provided by local activists.
In August tanks and armored vehicles entered al-Ramel neighborhood in the
coastal town of Latakia. Security forces also stormed the neighborhoods of Bab
Sba, Bab Amro, and Bayyada in Homs on multiple occasions between May and
September.
Arbitrary Arrests, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture
Security forces subjected thousands of people to arbitrary arrests and widespread
torture in detention. The exact numbers are impossible to verify but
information that Human Rights Watch collected suggests that security forces
detained more than 20,000 people between March and September. Many
detainees were young men in their 20s or 30s; but children, women, and elderly
people were also included. While the government appears to have released
most after several days or weeks in detention, several hundred remained missing
at this writing.
According to released detainees, the methods of torture included prolonged
beatings with sticks, twisted wires, and other devices; electric shocks; use of
improvised metal and wooden “racks”; and, in at least one case, the rape of a
male detainee with a baton. The interrogators and guards also subjected
detainees to various forms of humiliating treatment, such as making them kiss
their shoes and declare that President Bashar al-Assad was their god. Several
detainees said their captors repeatedly threatened them with imminent execution,
and all described appalling detention conditions, with overcrowded cells
in which at times detainees could only sleep in turns.
At least 105 detainees died in custody in 2011, according to local activists. In
cases of custodial death reviewed by Human Rights Watch, the bodies bore
unmistakable marks of torture including bruises, cuts, and burns. The authorities
provided the families with no information on the circumstances surrounding
the deaths and, to Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, no investigation has
been launched. In some cases, families of dead detainees had to sign statements
that “armed gangs” had killed their relatives and promise not to hold
public funerals as a condition to receiving the bodies. Some of those who died
in detention were prominent protest leaders like Ghiyath Mattar, a 26-year-old
community organizer from Daraya—a Damascus suburb—whose body security
forces returned to his family four days after detaining him in September.
Denial of Medical Assistance
Syrian authorities in many cases denied wounded protesters access to medical
assistance. On several occasions security forces prevented ambulances from
reaching the wounded and, in at least three instances that Human Rights Watch
documented, opened fire on medical personnel, in one case killing a doctor
and a nurse in Daraa in March.
Security forces also arrested many injured protesters at hospitals, forcing many
wounded to instead seek treatment in makeshift field hospitals—set up in private
homes or mosques—for fear of arrest. In September hospital workers told
Human Rights Watch that security forces forcibly removed 18 wounded persons
from al-Barr hospital in Homs, including five who were still in the operating
room.
Arrest of Activists and Journalists
The Syrian security forces have arrested hundreds of activists since protests
erupted in mid-March, often merely for communicating with media or helping to
organize protests. In April security forces detained Rasem al-Atassi, 66, former
president of the Arab Organization for Human Rights in Syria, and a board member
of the regional Arab Organization for Human Rights. A military investigative
judge ordered his detention for 15 days to investigate his role in supporting
protests. In May security forces detained Mohammed Najati Tayyara, a human
rights activist from Homs who had spoken to international media about the government’s
crackdown. He remained in detention at this writing.
Women activists were also targeted. In May security forces detained journalist
and activist Dana al-Jawabra from outside her house in Damascus. Al-Jawabra,
who hails from Daraa, was active in attempts to break the siege of the town by
attempting to arrange a relief convoy. Also in May security forces detained
human rights lawyer Catherine al-Talli, 32, in Damascus and held her incommunicado
for two days.
In some instances, when the security forces were unable to locate the activist
they were seeking, they detained family members. In May security forces
detained Wael Hamadeh, a political activist and husband of prominent rights advocate Razan Zeitouneh, from his office. The security forces had gone to the
couple’s house on April 30 searching for them but instead detained Hamadeh’s
younger brother, Abdel Rahman, 20, when they could not find them. Security
forces released Wael and Abdel Rahman months later.
The Syrian government also detained journalists trying to report on Syria’s
crackdown. In March Syrian security services detained Reuters journalist
Suleiman al-Khalidi, a Jordanian national, for reporting on the violence in
Daraa. They expelled him from the country after holding him incommunicado for
four days. In April security services detained Khaled Sid Mohand, a Franco-
Algerian freelance journalist, and held him incommunicado for almost one
month. Security services also detained Dorothy Parvaz—a national of the United
States, Canada, and Iran—upon her arrival in Syria in April and held her incommunicado
for six days, and detained Ghadi Frances and Ghassan Saoud, two
Lebanese journalists, for short periods of time.
Reforms
In an attempt to quell the protests, Syrian authorities enacted a number of
reforms, but the ongoing repression undermined their impact and made it
impossible to assess the government’s intent to implement them. On April 4
President Assad enacted a decree that would grant citizenship to a number of
Syria-born stateless Kurds. On April 21 he lifted the state of emergency in place
since 1963 and abolished the State Security Court, an exceptional court with
almost no procedural guarantees. In May and June Assad also issued two general
amnesties, which benefited a small group of political prisoners.
The Syrian authorities also enacted a number of reforms that they say will open
up the political system in Syria and increase freedom of media. On July 28
Assad issued a decree approving a new political parties law. In August Assad
issues a decree for a General Elections Law and approved a new media law
meant to uphold freedom of expression, although the law still requires media
to “respect this freedom of expression” by “practicing it with awareness and
responsibility.”
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Syria’s constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active in
public life. However personal status laws and the penal code contain provisions
that discriminate against women and girls, particularly in marriage, divorce,
child custody, and inheritance. While the penal code no longer fully exonerates
perpetrators of so-called honor crimes, it still gives judges options for reduced
sentences if a crime was committed with “honorable” intent. The nationality
law of 1969 prevents Syrian women married to foreign spouses the right to pass
on their citizenship to their children or spouses.
Key International Actors
In response to the crackdown, the US and European Union imposed sanctions
against individuals and entities, including travel bans and asset freezes against
senior officials in the government and security forces, business officials who
benefited from and/or aided government oppression and a host of entities.
Both the US and the EU froze the assets of Syrian companies and banks tied to
the government or its supporters, and the US government prohibited US entities
and citizens from doing business with those companies and banks. In
September the EU, which buys 95 percent of Syria’s oil exports, prohibited the
purchase of Syrian oil and banned EU companies from investing in Syria’s oil
sector.
A number of Arab states joined together in condemning Syria’s crackdown. In
August Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, and Tunisia withdrew their ambassadors
from Damascus for consultations. In November the Arab League voted to suspend
Syria’s membership after Syria failed to implement an agreed-to plan to
end to the violence.
Turkey, until recently a close ally and major trade partner, repeatedly condemned
the Syrian crackdown and stopped at least two weapons shipments to
Syria. It also hosted a number of meetings for Syria’s opposition.
In August the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted a presidential
statement condemning ‘the widespread violations of human rights and the
use of force against civilians by the Syrian authorities.” However, in October Russia and China, as well as India, Brazil, and South Africa, refused to support
a Security Council resolution applying significant pressure on the Syrian
government.
In April the UN Human Rights Council “unequivocally condemned the use of
lethal violence against peaceful protesters.” In August a report from the Office
of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights “found a pattern of human
rights violations … which may amount to crimes against humanity,” and the
council again condemned the “grave and systematic human rights violations by
the Syrian authorities” and established “an independent international commission
of inquiry to investigate all alleged violations since March 2011.” The commission
was appointed in September and was due to issue its report in late
November, but had not been granted access to Syria at this writing. Navi Pillay,
the UN high commissioner for human rights, recommended in a briefing to the
Security Council in August that it refer Syria to the International Criminal Court.
TLE@J@8
Tunisia experienced historic changes in 2011. Street protests triggered by the
self-immolation of Mohamed Bouazizi, a street vendor in Sidi Bouzid, on
December 17, 2010, spread from city to city. The protests persisted, despite
police using live ammunition against mostly peaceful demonstrators until
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali fled the country on January 14. The protests
were fuelled by long-simmering grievances against a government that had
relentlessly stifled dissent and meaningful pluralism, and whose repressive
laws suffocated Tunisians’ freedom of expression, association, and assembly.
Human rights advanced during the year, most significantly with the adoption of
the pluralist electoral law for choosing the Constituent Assembly; ratifying the
Rome Statute, and thereby becoming a member of the International Criminal
Court; the lifting of most of Tunisia’s reservations on the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; and adoption of a
new press code and decree laws on political parties and associations.
Tunisians were allowed to demonstrate, express themselves, and form parties
and associations to an extent unmatched since independence in 1956.
However, the consolidation of human rights protection in the post-Ben Ali era
was hampered by the police resorting to excessive force against continuing
protests, delays in adopting decisive reforms toward a more independent judiciary,
and challenges to freedom of expression that the interim government did
not properly address.
Key Political Developments
Two interim governments quickly succeeded one another after Ben Ali’s ouster
in January. After large-scale protests in Tunis, the capital, a third interim government
formed on March 7 that pledged to organize the free and transparent
election of a Constituent Assembly tasked with writing a new constitution.
Elections for the assembly occurred on October 23.
More than 106 parties were legalized in the wake of the uprising, including the
Islamist an-Nahdha party and the Tunisian Communist Workers Party, both of which had been illegal and the targets of repression during Ben Ali’s presidency.
Similarly, many associations considered illegal under Ben Ali, such as the
International Association in Support of Political Prisoners and the Tunisian
Association to Combat Torture, received their official authorization soon after
Ben Ali’s departure.
The interim government dissolved the Democratic Constitutional Rally, Ben Ali’s
ruling party, and announced the dismantling of the so-called political police,
whose ubiquitous plainclothes agents had monitored and harassed dissident
activists.
On February 19 the interim government adopted a general amnesty law for political
prisoners, which allowed for the release of the more than 500 remaining
prisoners being held for political offenses. Most of these had been convicted or
were facing charges under the counterterrorism law.
The interim government also ratified the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and joined the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which establishes monitoring mechanisms
to fight torture, as well as the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which requires the state to
abolish the death penalty.
Accountability for Past Crimes and Reform of the Judiciary
The interim government took some positive steps in order to investigate crimes
committed during the uprising and compensate those who were injured or who
lost family members. The first interim government established a national commission
to investigate abuses committed during the protests, which made public
its preliminary conclusions on the abuses committed between December 17,
2010, and the end of January.
The commission identified 240 civilians killed during the uprising in towns and
cities around the country, most of them by police gunfire. In addition, it found
that 1,464 were injured in the month-long protests, and scores of inmates perished
in prison mutinies and fires between January 13 and 16. On October 24 the government promulgated a decree-law on the reparation for the victims of
the uprising that provides for a monthly allocation and free access to public
medical care and free public transport for them and/or their families.
On September 14 the office of the military prosecutor announced the filing of
charges against Ben Ali, the two ministers of interior who held office at the time
of the uprising, and 40 other high officers within the state security apparatus
for committing intentional homicide during the uprising. At this writing no one
had been held accountable for most killings committed by security force members,
although several trials of policemen were underway in civilian and military
courts.
In the first of several trials initiated, the former president, his wife Leila
Trabelsi, members of their families, and close allies of the couple were convicted
of embezzlement and sentenced in absentia to 35 years in prison.
While the interim authorities improved the military justice system, most importantly
by adding the possibility of appellate review, they have been slow to put
in place long-needed reforms of the judiciary, which played a repressive role
under Ben Ali.
Freedom of Expression, Press, and Association
The arsenal of repression under the rule of Ben Ali included a wide range of
laws crafted and then abusively interpreted by courts to suppress the expression
of dissent. The High Commission for the Protection of the Objectives of the
Revolution Political Reform and Democratic Transition approved new laws that
were then promulgated by the acting president.
The decree-law on associations, promulgated on September 24, eliminates the
crime of “membership in” or “providing services to” an unrecognized organization,
a provision that had been used to imprison thousands of opposition party
activists. The decree-law on political parties eliminated an article stating that a
party may not base its principles, activities, and programs on a religion, language,
race, sex, or region, a provision used in the past to restrict the basis
upon which Tunisians could found parties.
Similarly, the new press code is significantly more liberal as it eliminates criminalization
of defamation against state institutions, and of “offending” the president
of the republic. However, it maintains defamation as a criminal offense,
although it eliminates prison terms as a punishment for it while preserving
fines. It also maintains the criminal offense of defaming religions “whose practice
is permitted” as well as the offense of “distributing false information,” a
concept that the Ben Ali government used to prosecute many dissidents and
human rights activists.
On occasion the interim government availed itself of these repressive provisions.
For example, on May 29 authorities detained high-ranking police officer
Samir Feriani on charges under the penal code of “harming the external security
of the state” and distributing information “likely to harm public order” because
he wrote a letter to the interior minister that accused current high-level ministry
officials of responsibility for killing protesters during the Tunisian revolution. He
also accused ministry officials of destroying classified documents showing collaboration
between the Ben Ali administration and Israel’s secret service.
The Tunis military court provisionally released Feriani on September 22, and
acquitted him one week later of the charge of harming the external security of
the state. However, the charge of distributing false information was still pending
at this writing.
The interim government failed at times to respond forcefully to assaults on free
speech. On October 9, hundreds of protesters rallied against the decision by
the private television station Nessma to broadcast the animated feature film
Persepolis, which tells the story of a girl living in post-revolution Iran. One
scene was perceived by some as violating the Islamic precept of prohibiting
images personifying God. Two days later a prosecutor in Tunis announced that
it would open an investigation in response to a complaint filed against the TV
owners on the basis of press and penal code articles criminalizing defamation
of religion and assaults on public decency.
On June 29 several dozen protesters forced their way into the screening in Tunis
of a film on atheism in Tunisia. Although a police station is located close to the  cinema and the organizers of the screening had already contacted the police to
ask for protection, the security forces remained idle in the face of the attack.
Women’s Rights
Tunisia, long viewed as the most progressive Arab country with respect to
women’s rights, marked additional advances in this field. The adoption of a
gender parity requirement in the Constituent Assembly electoral law required
political parties to alternate between males and females on each of their lists of
candidates. However, few parties put women in the first place on many of the
lists, with the result that only 49 women were elected to the Constituent
Assembly out of 217 seats.
On August 16 the Council of Ministers adopted a draft decree to lift Tunisia’s
reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. However, the government maintained “a general declaration”
suggesting that it might not implement reforms that conflict with Islam.
The Tunisian personal status code outlaws polygamy and repudiation, the practice
by which a man can divorce his wife merely by declaring his decision to do
so. The code gives men and women equal rights to divorce and requires they go
through the courts to obtain a divorce. The code establishes 18 as the minimum
age for marriage for both sexes. A 1993 amendment to the law granted women
the right to pass their name and nationality to her children. However discrimination
still exists in matters of inheritance and child custody.
Abuses against Protesters
Following Bouazizi’s self-immolation, thousands of Tunisians took to the
streets to protest against the government. The protesters were mostly peaceful,
although some threw rocks and in some cases Molotov cocktails. They braved
the deadly force of the security forces, who killed more than 200 by firing into
crowds, with high numbers of deaths sustained in Tunis and the inland cities of
Kasserine, Thala, and Regueb.
Police violence against protesters continued after the ouster of Ben Ali, especially
on January 29, February 27 and 28, and again at the beginning of May,
when the police assaulted several demonstrators and bystanders, arbitrarily
arrested them, and subjected them to harsh treatment that may amount to torture.
This came as a disturbing reminder that, while Tunisians enjoy the right to
demonstrate to a far greater degree than in the past, the security apparatus
continues to rely on its violent methods of the past and has yet to implement
crowd control techniques aimed at minimizing the use of force.
Refugees and Migrants
Since late February 2011, in the wake of the Libyan uprising, Tunisia has been
confronted by a humanitarian crisis due to the influx of refugees and migrants
crossing the borders from Libya. Tunisia hosted at least 195,241 third-country
nationals as of June 30. Overall, the military authorities—aided by Tunisian civil
society, international organizations, and volunteers—made significant efforts to
respond to the humanitarian needs. However, in May several violent incidents
took place in the refugee camps near Ras Jedir that left at least six migrants
dead and parts of the camp destroyed by fire. The Tunisian military, which provided
security at the camp, failed to prevent the violence and may have taken
part in some attacks on camp residents.
Key International Actors
France has continued to be the closest European partner of Tunisia, although
the relations between the two countries suffered during the uprising, when the
French authorities showed reluctance to denounce the crackdown on the
demonstrators. In January the European Union decided to freeze the assets of
46 allies and relatives of Ben Ali and his wife.
The interim authorities welcomed the visits of the United Nations special rapporteurs
on torture and on counterterrorism and granted them access to detention
facilities, which the International Committee of the Red Cross continued to
visit on a regular basis. The interim authorities also legalized branch offices of
various international human rights organizations, including Human Rights
Watch, and allowed the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
to open an office in the country.
UE@K<; AI89 ED@I8K<J
The human rights situation in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) worsened in 2011,
as authorities cracked down on peaceful dissent by arresting activists, disbanding
the elected boards of civil society organizations, and preventing peaceful
demonstrations. Despite some progress in addressing violations of migrant
workers’ rights in Saadiyat Island, a high profile development and construction
zone, the issue remained a source of concern.
Freedom of Association and Expression
Human rights defenders and government critics face harassment, imprisonment,
and criminal prosecution. The UAE’s penal code criminalizes speech
based on broad content-based restrictions, allowing the government to prosecute
people for speech critical of the government, in contravention of international
standards.
In April UAE security forces arrested Ahmed Mansoor, a prominent blogger and
a member of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East and North Africa Advisory
Committee. For at least seven days authorities held him in solitary confinement
and refused him access to his lawyer and family. His arrest followed a campaign
of harassment against him and other activists after they, and dozens of
other UAE nationals, signed a petition in March demanding constitutional and
parliamentary reforms. Prior to his arrest Mansoor, a prominent reformer,
received six death threats and was the target of an online smear campaign.
In April security forces also detained Nasser bin Ghaith, an economics lecturer
at the Abu Dhabi branch of Paris’s Sorbonne University. Bin Ghaith had criticized
the government’s failure to undertake significant political reforms.
Authorities also arrested three other online activists: Fahad Salim Dalk, Hassan
Ali al-Khamis, and Ahmed Abdul Khaleq. The government formally charged the
activists under article 176 of the penal code, which makes it a crime to publicly
insult the country’s top officials. Authorities additionally charged Mansoor with
inciting others to break the law by calling for an election boycott and demonstrations.
The Supreme Court said it would issue a verdict in the largely closed-door trial
on November 27. There is no right of appeal.
UAE authorities widened their clampdown on freedom of expression by disbanding
the elected boards of the Jurists Association and the Teachers’
Association after they and two other NGOs co-signed a public appeal in April
calling for greater democracy in the country. Social Affairs Minister Mariam
Mohammed Khalfan Al Roumi issued decrees to replace the two boards with
state appointees.
According to the decrees, the associations violated section 16 of the UAE’s
2008 Law on Associations, which prohibits NGOs and their members from interfering
“in politics or in matters that impair state security and its ruling regime.”
The Law on Associations tightly controls NGOs permitted to operate in the UAE.
On September 24 the UAE held national elections for the Federal National
Council (FNC), a government advisory board without legislative powers. The UAE
authorities increased the number of eligible voters to 129,000, from about
7,000 in the previous election in 2006. Voters chose only 20 of the 40 FNC
seats; the rulers of the seven emirates appointed the other half.
Migrant Worker Rights
According to the latest statistics, foreigners account for more than 88.5 percent
of UAE residents, many of them poor migrant workers. Immigration sponsorship
laws grant employers extraordinary power over the lives of these workers. They
have no right to organize or bargain collectively and face penalties for going on
strike. Employment protections laid out in the Labor Law of 1980 do not extend
to domestic migrant workers employed in private households. Although the law
calls for a minimum wage, the Ministry of Labor has yet to implement it.
Across the country, abuses include unsafe work environments, the withholding
of travel documents, and low and nonpayment of wages, despite a mandatory
electronic payment system introduced in 2009.
In May Athiraman Kannan, a 32-year-old Indian foreman, jumped to his death
from the 147th floor of the Burj Khalifa, the world’s tallest building. Local media reports said that Kannan jumped after his employer denied granting him leave
to go home. His death was the 26th known suicide by an Indian worker in the
country in 2011.
In January more than 3,000 workers employed by Arabtec went on a two week
strike to demand a wage increase. The workers had been making between 650
and 800 dirhams (US$175 and $220) a month. Some alleged that they had not
been paid for overtime work. UAE authorities deported 71 Bangladeshi nationals
for their alleged role in instigating the strike. According to the government,
the UAE saw 34 worker protests in the first three months of 2011, less than half
the number from the same period a year ago. The protests were related to
delayed payment of salaries, non-payment of overtime, or demands for pay
increases, the government said.
The year 2011 saw some positive developments for migrant workers, particularly
on Saadiyat Island, the site of a major development and construction project. In
March New York University (NYU) announced that it would be hiring the United
Kingdom construction firm Mott MacDonald to monitor labor conditions on its
Abu Dhabi campuses, while in May the Abu Dhabi Tourism Development and
Investment Company (TDIC), a government entity that is the largest developer in
Abu Dhabi, announced its appointment of international auditing firm, PwC, to
monitor workers’ conditions on Saadiyat Island. Both firms will publish yearly
reports on their findings. However, neither NYU nor TDIC have released comprehensive
information about the terms of reference and monitoring methodology
of their new independent monitors.
In March TDIC also amended its Employment Practices Policy to require contractors
to reimburse their employees for any recruitment costs or fees associated
with their employment on Saadiyat Island. This followed new labor regulations
issued by the UAE government in January to curb exploitative recruiting agents
who entrap foreign workers with recruiting fees and false contracts. The new
regulations explicitly prohibit UAE recruitment agencies from imposing recruitment
fees on workers or intermediaries. If a worker is found to have paid a fee
to anyone associated with an Emirati recruitment agency either inside or outside
the UAE, the Labor Ministry may compel the agency to reimburse the worker.
The regulations also hold recruitment agencies partly liable if they place the worker with an employer who subsequently does not pay the workers, and ban
recruiters from placing workers with companies involved in collective labor disputes.
Recruiters will have to put down a Dh 300,000 ($81,000) minimum
deposit, which will be available to pay workers’ salaries if the company fails to
do so. Additionally, agencies must pay Dh 2,000 ($540) per worker for insurance.
Many female domestic workers in the UAE suffer unpaid wages, food deprivation,
long working hours, forced confinement, and physical and sexual abuse.
The standard contract for domestic workers introduced in April 2007 calls for
“adequate breaks” but does not limit working hours or provide for a weekly rest
day, overtime pay, or workers’ compensation.
In June the UAE, along with other governments, trade unions, and employers’
organizations, voted to adopt an International Labour Organization (ILO) treaty
that extends key labor protections to domestic workers. The ILO Convention on
Decent Work for Domestic Workers, which establishes the first global standards
for domestic workers worldwide, addresses their routine exclusion from labor
protections guaranteed to other workers, such as weekly days off, limits to
hours of work, and a minimum wage.
Women’s Rights
The UAE adjudicates family law and personal status matters for Muslims pursuant
to interpretations of Islamic law, with no option to seek adjudication pursuant
to a civil code. The law in particular discriminates against women by
granting men privileged status in matters of divorce, inheritance, and child custody.
Emirati women can obtain a divorce through khul’a (a no-fault divorce)
thereby losing their financial rights. They may only ask for a divorce in exceptional
circumstances. Females can only inherit one-third of assets while men
are entitled to inherit two-thirds.
The law further discriminates against women by permitting Emirati men, but not
women, to have as many as four polygamous marriages and forbidding Muslim
women, but not men, from marrying non-Muslims. Emirati women married to
non-citizens do not automatically pass citizenship to their children, a right enjoyed by Emirati men married to foreign spouses.
Despite the existence of shelters and hotlines to help protect women, domestic
violence remains a pervasive problem. The penal code gives men the legal right
to discipline their wives and children, including through the use of physical violence.
The Federal Supreme Court has upheld a husband’s right to “chastise”
his wife and children with physical abuse.
In the September elections 85 women out of 450 ran for 20 FNC seats. Only one
woman was voted into office.
Y<D<E
Human rights violations increased significantly in Yemen in 2011, as authorities
sought to quash largely peaceful demonstrations challenging the 33-year rule of
President Ali Abdullah Saleh. State security forces, often acting together with
armed plainclothes assailants, responded to anti-government protests with
excessive and deadly force, killing at least 250 people and wounding more than
1,000.
Clashes on several fronts between government forces and various armed
groups killed scores more civilians and displaced more than 100,000 others.
State security forces, opposition tribal fighters, and Islamist militants may have
committed laws of war violations during some of these confrontations.
Attacks on Protesters
In January, inspired by popular uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt, thousands of
Yemenis began protests in major cities to force President Saleh’s resignation.
Popular discontent, fueled by widespread unemployment and government corruption,
soared in late 2010 after the ruling party proposed to amend electoral
laws and the constitution so that Saleh could stand for re-election when his
seventh term expires in 2013.
Security forces responded to the largely peaceful demonstrations with excessive
force, often firing live ammunition directly at unarmed protesters. These
forces include Central Security, a paramilitary unit commanded by President
Saleh’s nephew, Yahya Saleh; the Republican Guard, an elite army unit led by
the president’s son, Ahmed Saleh; and General Security. Central Security
includes a counterterrorism unit that receives United States training, but
Human Rights Watch was unable to verify allegations that the unit participated
in the attacks on protests. The security forces sometimes attacked protesters
together with armed assailants in civilian clothing, or stood by during attacks
by armed gangs.
At least 250 civilians and bystanders died in these attacks, most in Sanaa, the
capital, as well as in Taizz, and Aden. At least 35 of those killed were children.
On March 18, snipers firing on a protest in Sanaa killed at least 45 people.
Between May 29 and June 3, security forces killed at least 22 people in Taizz
and razed a protest encampment. On September 18 and 19, Central Security
and other government forces shot directly at rock-throwing protesters in Sanaa,
killing about 30. In the following days security forces killed dozens more protesters
and other civilians with gunfire, rocket-propelled grenades, and mortar
rounds.
In Sanaa, Aden, and Taizz, security forces blocked wounded protesters’ access
to medical care. They also raided and looted hospitals, and threatened,
detained, or beat medical workers who sought to treat wounded protesters. In
June Republican Guard forces began occupying al-Thawrah Hospital in Taizz
and using it as a base to shell opposition neighborhoods. In September Central
Security forces attacked opposition forces from Sanaa’s Jumhuri hospital. In
November a government shell struck al-Rawdha Hospital, killing at least one
patient.
A September report from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) found that elements “seeking to achieve or retain
power” were “collectively punishing” the population by curtailing access to
electricity, fuel, and water.
Authorities failed to prosecute any members of the security forces for serious
human rights violations.
Armed Clashes
In May, after Saleh reneged for a third time on signing a Gulf Cooperation
Council-brokered agreement to cede power, dozens of civilians were killed in
fighting between government forces and various armed factions.
In May and June fighters of the opposition al-Ahmar clan skirmished with government
forces in Sanaa. On June 3, an explosion in the mosque of the presidential
palace in Sanaa killed 11 people, and gravely wounded Saleh and several
high-ranking officials. Saleh spent three months in Saudi Arabia for medical
treatment.
In mid-2011 government forces began fighting with tribal opposition fighters in
Arhab, outside Sanaa, and in Taizz. In September Central Security and
Republican Guards in Sanaa began clashes with fighters of the al-Ahmar clan
and with soldiers from the First Armored Division, a military unit led by Gen. Ali
Mohsen al-Ahmar—no relation to the al-Ahmar clan—who defected to the opposition
in March.
During these armed confrontations there were credible reports of extrajudicial
killings and indiscriminate attacks by security forces on densely populated
areas. On June 22, at al-Buraihi checkpoint outside Taizz, a soldier of the
Republican Guard fired on a minibus that his unit had just searched and
authorized to proceed, killing a 15-year-old boy.
In May the government also launched a military campaign in Abyan province
against Ansar al-Sharia (Partisans of Islamic Law), an armed group reportedly
backed by Yemen-based al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). Ansar al-
Sharia had previously captured two provincial cities, Zinjibar and Jaar. On May
20, Central Security forces opened fire with assault rifles in a crowded market
in Zinjibar, killing six merchants and shoppers and wounding three dozen others.
The forces opened fire after a car bomb nearby killed four members of
Central Security, but there were no reports of militants or other suspects inside
the market.
Witnesses said that opposition fighters repeatedly deployed in densely populated
neighborhoods in Taizz, and that Islamist forces did the same in Abyan,
potentially placing civilians at unnecessary risk of attack. Both government and
opposition forces deployed children to patrol streets and guard checkpoints.
Freedom of Expression and Opinion
Government forces and armed gangs attacked, harassed, or threatened scores
of Yemeni journalists and human rights activists, many for reporting on or
denouncing attacks on protesters.
Two journalists were killed covering protests in Sanaa. Jamal al-Sharabi, a photojournalist
for the independent weekly al-Masdar, was killed during the March
18 attack. Hassan al-Wadhaf of the Arabic Media Agency died five days after being hit in the face by sniper fire on September 19; he filmed his own shooting.
At a protest in Sanaa on February 18, men armed with sticks beat Al-Arabiya’s
bureau chief, Hamoud Munasser, and his cameraman, then attacked his car in
front of the director of Yemen’s US-funded Counterterrorism Unit and a Central
Investigation Department official, both of whom failed to intervene.
Authorities expelled several foreign journalists and confiscated press runs of
independent Yemeni print media, including Al-Yaqeen, that contained reports
on security force attacks on Saleh’s opponents.
On May 25, pro-Saleh forces fired machineguns and mortar rounds at the satellite
TV station Suhail, owned by the opposition al-Ahmar clan. On August 12,
government forces arrested Ahmed Firas, a Suhail TV cameraman, as he left
Arhab and confiscated his equipment. At this writing he remained detained
without charge.
Authorities continued to prosecute journalists in specialized criminal courts
that failed to meet international standards of due process. On January 18 the
Specialized Criminal Court in Sanaa sentenced Abdulelah Haidar Shae’ of the
state-run Saba New Agency to five years imprisonment after convicting him of
membership of a terrorist group in a trial fraught with procedural irregularities.
Shae’ had criticized government approaches to fighting al Qaeda.
Scores of human rights defenders were beaten or received frequent anonymous
threats. In January some human rights defenders who were active in protests
were briefly detained, including Tawakkol Karman of Women Journalists
Without Chains and human rights lawyer Khaled al-Anisi. On February 24, five
armed assailants repeatedly stabbed a guard at the Sanaa offices of the Yemen
Observatory for Human Rights following anonymous threats against the group
for releasing information on attacks on protestors.
Internally Displaced People
Armed clashes displaced about 100,000 people, mostly from Abyan to Aden.
Approximately 300,000 had already been displaced during the intermittent sixyear armed conflict in the north between government forces and Huthi rebels,
who despite a ceasefire recaptured Sa’da governate in March. Up to 100,000 of
these displaced people reportedly returned home. Aaid agencies were unable
to access many displaced people due to insecurity, inadequate funding, and a
lack of government permission.
Terrorism and Counterterrorism
US officials in 2011 designated AQAP as a greater threat to its security than the
core al Qaeda group in Pakistan.
AQAP claimed responsibility for placing bombs aboard two US-bound cargo
planes in October 2010. The group also reportedly provided support to Ansar al-
Sharia, the armed group that captured Jaar and Zinjibar in Abyan. Dozens of
civilians were killed during clashes between government forces and Ansar al-
Sharia in Abyan.
The US reportedly conducted more than a dozen drone strikes and piloted air
attacks on alleged AQAP militants in Yemen, including one in September that
killed the cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, and Samir Khan, editor of AQAP’s English-language
magazine Inspire. Another suspected drone strike in October killed nine
people including al-Awlaki’s 16-year-old son, Abderrahman. Both Awlakis and
Samir were US citizens. US President Barack Obama called Awlaki the “leader
of external operations” for AQAP, but the killing of three Americans outside a
traditional battlefield heightened a controversy over the US targeted killing program.
Unnamed US and Yemeni officials said the drones and other air strikes killed
dozens of militants. Local officials reported some civilian casualties but lack of
access to the targeted areas prevented independent verification.
Campaign against Southern Separatists
Security forces targeted activists of the Southern Movement, an umbrella group
seeking independence or greater autonomy for southern Yemen, a separate
state until 1990. After the Southern Movement joined anti-Saleh protests in February, security forces briefly detained dozens of its members and forcibly
disappeared at least eight of them for days or weeks. The eight who were “disappeared”
included a leader of the Southern Movement, Hassan Baoum, 68,
and his son Fawaz, 34. Masked security forces kidnapped the pair on February
20 from an Aden hospital where the elder Baoum was receiving medical treatment.
They were held incommunicado until July and at this writing remained
detained without charge.
In June soldiers in Aden killed Jiyab Ali Muhammad al-Saadi, 35, the son of a
Southern Movement leader, when he asked them to stop blocking a burial procession
for Ahmad al-Darwish, whom local activists alleged was tortured to
death in police custody in 2010. Authorities transferred Aden’s Chief of General
Security Abdullah Qairan to Taizz in March after a local court accused him in
connection with al-Darwish’s death.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Women in Yemen generally have low social status and are excluded from public
life.
Child marriages and forced marriages remain widespread, exposing young girls
to domestic violence and maternal mortality and truncating their education.
Judges are not obliged to ensure a girl’s free consent before notarizing a marriage
contract. In August a 12-year-old bride from Hudeida was reportedly
injured after being drugged and raped by her 50-year-old husband. Despite
such cases, conservatives have stalled a draft law that would set the minimum
age for marriage at 17.
Women played an important role in anti-Saleh protests, despite beatings,
harassment, and, in some cases, shame from relatives. In April Saleh admonished
women demonstrators, saying “divine law does not allow” public intermingling
of the sexes. Women responded with further protests. Karman was
named a co-recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize in October for her role in the
protests.
Yemen has a high maternal mortality rate of 370 deaths per 100,000 live births.
Approximately seven to eight women die each day from childbirth complications.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and other Gulf states provided substantial assistance to
the Yemen government, tribal leaders, and religious institutions. The US was
the largest donor outside the region. European Union states also provided
humanitarian and development aid.
A Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, supported by the UN Security Council,
offered immunity to Saleh and top officials in return for Saleh relinquishing
power.
By May most Western and Gulf states had withdrawn public support for Saleh
and informally suspended military assistance and arms sales, but ignored calls
to freeze the president’s assets abroad. The US delayed counterterrorism assistance
to Yemen because of political unrest after providing an estimated US$172
million in fiscal year 2010.
In September the UN Human Rights Council condemned human rights violations
in Yemen, but failed to authorize an international, independent investigation
into them or to establish an OHCHR field office in the country, despite calls
for these actions from the OHCHR.
In October, for the second consecutive year, President Obama issued a waiver
allowing Yemen to receive military assistance prohibited by the Child Soldiers
Prevention Act of 2008, despite documented use of child soldiers by government
forces and militias allied to the government.
UE@K<; SK8K<J
The US incarcerates more people than any other country in the world, sometimes
imposing very long sentences marred by racial disparities. Increasing
numbers of non-citizens—363,000 in 2010—are held in immigration detention
facilities, although many are not dangerous or at risk of absconding from immigration
proceedings.
The federal government continues abusive counterterrorism policies, including
detentions without charge at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; fundamentally flawed
military commissions; and effectively blocking lawsuits seeking redress for torture
victims.
The US Census reported in 2011 that 46 million people live in poverty, the
largest number in the 52 years for which poverty estimates have been published.
Widespread poverty, its many intersections with racial and gender
inequalities, and its disproportionate impact upon children and the elderly,
raises serious human rights concerns.
Death Penalty and Extreme Criminal Punishments
In 2011 the state of Illinois joined 15 other states in abolishing the death penalty.
Thirty-four states continue to allow its imposition. At this writing 39 people
have been executed in 2011, continuing a downward trend from 2009, when 52
people were executed.
The state of Georgia executed Troy Davis on September 21, 2011, despite significant
doubts about his guilt. Davis, who was sentenced to death for the 1989
murder of off-duty police officer Mark MacPhail, maintained his innocence until
the last moment. The prosecution’s case rested almost entirely on testimony
from eyewitnesses, but seven of the nine who testified against Davis at his trial
recanted and said they were no longer sure who shot MacPhail, and another
three people said that another man confessed to the crime.
While the US Supreme Court held in 2010 that youth offenders under age 18
convicted of non-homicide crimes could not be sentenced to life without the possibility of parole, about 2,600 youth offenders continue to serve such a sentence
for homicide-related crimes. State-level efforts continue to reform life
without parole when sentencing youth. For example, California is slated in early
2012 to vote on a bill to allow reconsideration and resentencing of youth
offenders serving life without parole.
Youth convicted of sex offenses in adult and juvenile courts also met with harsh
treatment. July 2011 marked the deadline for all states and other jurisdictions to
comply with the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act. The act requires
jurisdictions to register people aged 14 and up convicted of certain sexual
offenses on a national, publicly accessible, online registry. In some cases youth
will be registered for life. The Department of Justice (DOJ) says 14 states have
now substantially implemented the act.
Prison Conditions
The US continued to have the world’s largest incarcerated population at 2.3 million,
and the world’s highest per capita incarceration rate at 752 inmates per
100,000 residents.
In December 2010 Human Rights Watch reported on the unnecessary pre-trial
detention of thousands of people accused of minor crimes in New York City due
to their inability to pay even small amounts of bail. Almost 90 percent of those
arrested in 2008 for non-felony crimes who had bail set at US$1,000 or less
were incarcerated pre-trial solely because they could not post bail.
The US Supreme Court decided in May that the state of California must reduce
prison overcrowding. California prisons have failed to provide adequate medical
and mental health care for decades, and a lower court panel found that
prison under-staffing and severe overcrowding had led to such substandard
care. The panel directed the state to significantly cut its prison population to
improve care; the US Supreme Court agreed.
In February 2011 the DOJ issued its long-overdue proposed standards to implement
the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA). While some standards meet the
2009 PREA Commission recommendations, several proposed standards are significantly
weaker. For example, the proposed DOJ standards do not clearly require facilities to be staffed sufficiently to prevent, detect, and respond to the
sexual abuse of prisoners. The standards would leave survivors of sexual
assault without legal remedy because they were unable to comply with unduly
strict internal grievance procedures. The proposed standards also explicitly
exclude immigration detention facilities from coverage. At this writing the final
PREA standards have not been issued.
This year Nevada, Hawaii, Idaho, and Rhode Island enacted laws restricting the
shackling of pregnant prisoners, bringing the number of states with such laws
to 14.
Racial Disparities in the Criminal Justice System
Racial and ethnic minorities continue to be disproportionately represented in
the criminal justice system. Whites and African Americans engage in drug
offenses at roughly equivalent rates, and African Americans account for only
about 13 percent of the US population, yet African Americans comprised about
33 percent of all drug arrests in 2009. Not surprisingly, higher arrest rates lead
to higher incarceration rates. For example, 45 percent of inmates in state prisons
for drug offenses in 2009 were African American; only 27 percent were
white.
Persons of color comprise 77 percent of all youth serving life without parole
sentences. And for the first time in the country’s history in 2011, people of Latin
American origin made up the majority of federal prisoners in the US, due to the
federal government’s increased focus on prosecuting unauthorized immigrants.
African Americans have historically borne the burden of far harsher federal sentences
for crack cocaine offenses compared to powder cocaine offenses. The
Fair Sentencing Act, passed in August 2010, partially reduced these sentencing
disparities. However the act was not explicitly retroactive. In June 2011 the US
Sentencing Commission voted to make the new sentencing guidelines retroactive,
so that 12,040 offenders are now eligible for reduced sentences.
Non-Citizens’ Rights
There are approximately 25.3 million non-citizens in the US, of which the government
estimates 10.8 million are without authorization. Sixty-one percent of
these unauthorized immigrants have lived in the US for 10 years or more.
In fiscal year 2010 US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) deported
387,242 non-citizens—over twice as many as in fiscal year 2000—and detained
over 363,000 persons in immigration detention facilities, an increase of over 50
percent since fiscal year 2005. The unchecked expansion of immigration detention
in the US over the past two decades has led to a nationwide detention system
comprised of over 300 facilities, from small local jails to large, dedicated
immigration detention facilities.
In June Human Rights Watch documented the vast numbers of detainees who
are subjected to chaotic, frequent, and recurrent transfers between facilities.
Between 1998 and 2010 there were over two million detainee transfers. Two
hundred thousand detainees were transferred three or more times. On average,
detainees were moved 370 miles between facilities, while a common transfer
route between Pennsylvania and Texas covered 1,600 miles. The frequent transfers
interfere with detainees’ access to counsel, witnesses, evidence, and family
support.
In August the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) declared a fingerprintsharing
program mandatory, reversing prior policy. The Secure Communities
program requires local law enforcement to share fingerprints with DHS, which
claims that Secure Communities is used to identify and remove non-citizens
convicted of serious crimes. However, 59 percent of those removed under the
program between October 2008 and July 2011 had no criminal convictions or
had convictions only for minor offenses, including traffic offenses. Several local
law enforcement agencies and community groups across the country have vigorously
opposed Secure Communities, arguing it impedes community policing
and encourages racial profiling. DHS plans nationwide implementation by 2013.
In one of the few rights-protective immigration reforms in 2011, DHS announced
that it will undertake case-by-case reviews of over 300,000 pending deportation
cases and cases deemed to be low-priority will be administratively closed, allowing some potential deportees to remain in the country with temporary
legal status. In identifying low-priority cases DHS will weigh non-citizens’ family
and community ties, military service, and whether they arrived in the US as children.
Congress criticized the flaws in the country’s immigration system but failed to
act. The Senate held a hearing in June on the DREAM Act, a bill that would grant
legal status to non-citizens brought to the US as children, but it took no further
action. The House of Representatives held several hearings on bills that would
tighten border and visa security, require the detention of certain immigrants,
and reduce both unauthorized and authorized immigration, but voted on none
of these measures.
In April the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals partially enjoined Arizona’s Senate
Bill 1070 from going into effect. Governor Jan Brewer has appealed the decision
to the US Supreme Court. Alabama surpassed Arizona in mid-2011 by passing
what is likely the country’s strictest state-level immigration measure. The law
criminalizes transporting or renting to an unauthorized immigrant and requires
public schools to document their students’ immigration status, among other
measures. The Alabama law has also been temporarily partially enjoined, as
have similarly problematic laws in Utah, Indiana, and Georgia. Nevertheless,
appeals courts allowed several problematic provisions in the Alabama law to go
into effect.
Labor Rights
US workers continue to face severe obstacles in forming and joining trade
unions, and the federal government and many state governments are failing to
meet their international obligations to protect the free exercise of these rights.
Several states—including Arizona, Indiana, Michigan, New Hampshire, Ohio,
Oklahoma, and Wisconsin—placed severe restrictions in 2011 on workers’ rights
to bargain collectively.
Hundreds of thousands of children work on US farms. The 1938 Fair Labor
Standards Act specifically exempts farmworker children from the minimum age
and maximum hour requirements that apply to all other working children, exposing them to work at younger ages, for longer hours, and under more hazardous
conditions. As a result, child farmworkers, most of who are of Latin
American descent, often work 10 or more hours a day and risk pesticide poisoning,
heat illness, injuries, life-long disabilities, and death. More than half of all
working children who suffered fatal occupational injuries in 2010 worked in
crop production, up from previous years. Many child farmworkers drop out of
school, and girls are sometimes subjected to sexual harassment. Federal protections
that do exist are often not enforced: agricultural inspections and child
labor law violations declined in 2010. Notably, in August the Department of
Labor proposed to expand the list of hazardous agricultural tasks prohibited for
children under age 16. (Outside agriculture federal law bans hazardous work for
children under age 18).
Millions of US workers, including parents of infants, are harmed by weak or
non-existent laws on paid leave, breastfeeding accommodation, and discrimination
against workers with family responsibilities. A February 2011 Human
Rights Watch report showed that having scarce or no paid leave contributed to
delaying babies’ immunizations, postpartum depression, and other health
problems, and caused mothers to stop breastfeeding early.
Health Policy
HIV infections in the US continued to rise at an alarming rate in 2011, particularly
in minority communities. Many states continue to undermine human rights
and public health with restrictions on sex education, inadequate legal protections
for HIV-positive persons, resistance to harm-reduction programs such as
syringe exchanges, and failure to fund HIV prevention and care. Human Rights
Watch reported in 2011 on state laws and policies that are blocking access to
HIV treatment and services in Mississippi, where half of those testing positive
for HIV are not in care and the death rate from AIDS is 60 percent higher than
the national average. Human Rights Watch also highlighted the struggle to
expand syringe access to injection drug users in North Carolina, where laws
criminalizing syringe possession are forcing exchange programs to operate
underground and advocates to risk arrest on a daily basis.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
In a 2011 decision the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights ruled that
the US violated the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man when
the government failed to enforce a restraining order obtained by a wife against
an abusive husband who abducted the couple’s daughters in Colorado in 1999.
The commission recommended that the US make enforcement of protection
orders mandatory, adopt protection measures for children in domestic violence
situations, and better train officials on domestic violence prevention and
response.
The US Supreme Court ruled in June 2011 that 1.5 million women employees of
Walmart could not constitute a class for a class action suit against the corporation
for discrimination in pay and advancement opportunities. The decision
calls into question the viability of large-scale gender discrimination suits in the
US, where women earn an average of 77 cents for every dollar earned by men.
Rights relating to abortion access continued to be heavily contested in 2011,
with fights at the state and national levels over insurance coverage for abortion
and over patients’ rights to information and services. Federal judges ruled
against laws in Baltimore and New York City that would have required “crisis
pregnancy centers” to inform clients that they do not provide abortions or certain
methods of contraception.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
US law offers no protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation
or gender identity. In December 2010 President Barack Obama signed the
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell Repeal Act of 2010,” which repealed the discriminatory
policy barring gays and lesbians from serving openly in the US military, pending
military review. The repeal went into effect in September 2011.
The Defense of Marriage Act continues to bar recognition of same-sex marriage
at the federal level. However, in February the DOJ informed Congress that it
would not continue defending in the courts the constitutionality of the provision
that defines “marriage” as a legal union between one man and one
woman.
Same-sex marriages are not recognized or performed in forty-one states. In June
New York state passed the Marriage Equality Act, becoming the sixth and
largest state (Washington, DC, is the seventh jurisdiction) to grant these marriage
licenses. At this writing the California Supreme Court was considering
jurisdictional questions raised by a challenge to a district court decision that
California’s 2008 same-sex marriage ban (Proposition 8) was unconstitutional.
Hawaii, Connecticut, and Nevada passed measures to ban employment discrimination
based on sexual orientation or gender identity. In August a federal
appeals court upheld a lower court’s decision that declared unconstitutional a
Wisconsin law barring transgender inmates from receiving hormone therapy or
sex reassignment surgery, even when medically necessary.
Disability Rights
According to the US government, persons with disabilities are almost twice as
likely as those without disabilities to be victims of violence. While the
2009 Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Hate Crime Prevention Act increased
awareness of hate crimes against people with disabilities, underreporting of
these crimes remains a concern.
Counterterrorism
Despite overwhelming evidence that senior Bush administration officials
approved illegal interrogation methods involving torture and other ill-treatment
after September 11, 2001, the Obama administration failed to criminally investigate
high-level officials or to establish a commission of inquiry.
A long-awaited investigation by Special Prosecutor John Durham concluded
that further criminal investigation was warranted only with respect to the
deaths in custody of two detainees, but there have been no investigations into
hundreds of other instances of detainee abuse. The Obama administration continued
to invoke an overly broad interpretation of the “state secrets” privilege
in civil suits brought by current and former detainees alleging abuse, further
limiting a possible avenue for redress for victims of torture and other ill-treatment.
In December 2010 Congress enacted funding restrictions limiting the administration’s
ability to repatriate and resettle Guantanamo detainees. The only
detainee transferred in 2011 was sent against his will to Algeria where he feared
he would be tortured. While Human Rights Watch has not received reports of
abuse since his return, the US refused to allow an independent arbiter to review
his claim of fear of torture.
In March 2011 Obama signed an executive order establishing a periodic administrative
review system for detainees currently held at Guantanamo and either
designated for indefinite detention, or for trial but not yet facing charges. At
this writing no implementing regulations have been issued.
Proposed legislation in Congress seeks to expand US domestic authority to
detain alleged terrorism suspects indefinitely without charge and to mandate
military detention for a certain category of terrorism suspects. In February a
detainee pled guilty before a military commission and was sentenced to 34
months, conditioned upon his continued cooperation with the government, or
14 years otherwise.
The military commission appellate court ruled in two cases that military commissions
have jurisdiction over conspiracy and material support for terrorism,
crimes that have never previously been considered as war crimes under international
law. In April 2011 Attorney General Eric Holder announced that he had
reversed his earlier decision to prosecute the five men accused of plotting the
9/11 attacks in federal court and would instead try them before a military commission.
Charges were sworn against the five men. Charges were also referred
against the man accused of plotting the bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen in
October 2000; he was arraigned in November before a military commission.
The Obama administration announced in July 2011 that it had captured a terrorism
suspect off the coast of Somalia and detained him on a ship for nearly two
months before the International Committee of the Red Cross was allowed to
visit him in detention. He was later transferred to New York for prosecution in
federal court.
In May 2011 a team of US Navy SEALS killed al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden
in Abbotabad, Pakistan. In September Anwar al Awlaki, a cleric with US citizen ship who Obama described as the “leader of external operations” for al Qaeda
in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), was killed by a US-operated drone strike in
Yemen. Another US citizen, Samir Khan, who was the editor of AQAP’s online
magazine Inspire, was killed in the same strike. In October a drone attack killed
Awlaki’s 16-year-old son, along with several others; the US has said the son
was not the target. Despite calls for greater transparency, the US continues to
be vague about the legal justifications for these killings and about who can be
targeted, when, and under what conditions.
In September Human Rights Watch uncovered a cache of documents in Tripoli
that detailed the CIA’s role in the rendition of terrorism suspects to Libya, as
well as its role in questioning those suspects once in Libya. The CIA participated
in these actions despite overwhelming evidence at the time that the suspects
would likely face torture.