INTRODUCTION
In the wake of the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, the
United States government articulated a single overriding goal—defeating
terrorism—and sought to build a global alliance committed to that end.Yet determined
as this campaign has been, it remains to be seen whether it is merely a fight
against a particular set of criminals or also an effort to defeat the logic of terrorism.
Is it a struggle only against Osama bin Laden, his al-Qaeda network, and a few likeminded
groups? Or is it also an effort to undermine the view that anything goes in
the name of a cause, the belief that even a deadly attack on skyscrapers filled with
civilians is an acceptable political act?
The September 11 attacks were antithetical to the values of human rights.
Indeed, it is the body of international human rights and humanitarian law—the
limits placed on permissible conduct—that explains why these attacks were not
legitimate acts of war or politics. If the human rights cause stands for anything, it
stands for the principle that civilians should never be deliberately slaughtered,
regardless of the cause.Whether in time of peace or war,whether the actor is a government
or an armed group, certain means are never justified, no matter what the
ends.
As many of the world’s governments join the fight against al-Qaeda, they face a
fundamental choice.They must decide whether this battle provides an opportunity
to reaffirm human rights principles or a new reason to ignore them. They must
determine whether this is a moment to embrace values governing means as well as
ends or an excuse to subordinate means to ends. Their choice will not determine
whether any particular perpetrator is captured or killed. But over the long term it
will affect the strength of the ends-justify-the-means ideology that led a group of
men deliberately to crash civilian passenger planes into the World Trade Center and
the Pentagon. Unless the global anti-terror coalition firmly rejects this amorality,
unless the rules of international human rights and humanitarian law clearly govern
all anti-terror actions, the battle against particular terrorists is likely to end up reaffirming
the warped instrumentalism of terrorism.
Unfortunately, the coalition’s conduct so far has not been auspicious. As this
introduction describes, its leading members have violated human rights principles
at home and overlooked human rights transgressions among their partners. They
have substituted expediency for the firm commitment to human rights that alone
can defeat the rationale of terrorism.Whatever its success in pursuing particular
terrorists, the coalition risks reinforcing the logic of terrorism unless human rights
are given a far more central role.
This report is Human Rights Watch’s twelfth annual review of human rights
practices around the globe. It addresses developments in sixty-six countries, covering
the period from November 2000 through November 2001. Most chapters
examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the
response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the
United Nations, and various regional organizations; and the freedom of local
human rights defenders to conduct their work. Other chapters address important
thematic concerns.
Highlights of 2001 include, on the positive side, several strikes against the
impunity that so often underwrites severe abuses, including the surrender of former
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic for trial before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia; the indictment in Chile of former President
Augusto Pinochet (although the prosecution was then ended on medical grounds);
an Argentine judicial decision declaring the country’s amnesty laws unconstitutional;
and rapid progress toward the establishment of the International Criminal
Court, with forty-seven of the needed sixty countries having ratified its treaty by
early December.Other milestones include the entry into force of the protocol outlawing
the use of child soldiers; the highlighting at the World Conference Against
Racism of caste-based discrimination as an issue of global concern; the international
community’s speed and resolve (for the first time in a decade of Balkan atrocities)
in defusing the armed ethnic conflict in Macedonia; and the U.N.Commission
on Human Rights’ condemnation of ongoing Russian atrocities in Chechnya and
the government’s persistent failure to hold abusers accountable. On the negative
side, the World Trade Organization agreed to launch a new round of talks on reducing
barriers to trade without giving the protection of labor rights a significant place
on the agenda; efforts to create internationally sponsored tribunals were stalled in
the case of Cambodia and proceeding painfully slowly in the case of Sierra Leone,
while the principal architects of atrocities in East Timor in 1999 continued to walk
free in Indonesia; and abusive wars and political violence continued to claim large
numbers of civilian victims in Algeria,Angola,Burundi,Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Indonesia, and Sudan.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2001 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human rights
activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of the Human Rights
Watch advocacy team, which monitors the policies of governments and international
institutions that have influence to curb human rights abuses.Human Rights
Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain more elaborate accounts
of the brief summaries collected in this volume. They can be found on the Human
Rights Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works,nor does it discuss every issue of importance.The failure
to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing limitations
and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the problem.
There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights Watch simply
lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2001 (and
hence the content of this volume) included the severity of abuses, access to the
country and the availability of information about it, the susceptibility of abusive
forces to influence, and the importance of addressing certain thematic concerns
and of reinforcing the work of local rights organizations.
HUMAN RIGHTS VALUES
AS AN ANTIDOTE TO TERRORISM
Any fight against terrorism is only in part a matter of security. It is also a matter
of values. Police, intelligence units, even armies all have a role to play in meeting
particular terrorist threats. But terrorism emanates as well from the realm of public
morality.Terrorism is less likely when the public embraces the view that civilians
should never be targeted—that is, when the public is firmly committed to basic
human rights principles.
It is beyond the scope of Human Rights Watch’s work to address the political
grievances, let alone the pathology, that might lead a group of men to attack thousands
of civilians. Our concern is with the mores that would countenance such
mass murder as a legitimate political tool. Sympathy for such crimes is the breeding
ground for terrorism; sympathizers are the potential recruits. Building a
stronger human rights culture—a culture in which any disregard for civilian life is
condemned rather than condoned—is essential in the long run for defeating terrorism.
Many of the policies of the major powers, both before and after September 11,
have undermined efforts to build a global culture of human rights. These governments
often embraced human rights only in theory while subverting them in practice.
Reversing these policies is essential to building the strong human rights culture
needed to reject terrorism.
The importance of such a policy reappraisal is especially acute in the Middle
East and North Africa, where al-Qaeda seems to have attracted many of its adherents.
But it is also needed more broadly—in evaluating the policies guiding the new
global coalition against terrorism and in assessing the conduct of many of the leading
members of that coalition.
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
The Middle East and North Africa do not have a monopoly on producing practitioners
of terrorism. Armed groups have resorted to attacking civilians and sowing
terror in Colombia, India, Spain, Sri Lanka, Spain, the United Kingdom, and
many other places. The rationale of various groups may have differed, but the
amorality of their methods was comparable.
Yet today the focus of global attention is on al-Qaeda, both because of the target of its alleged actions—the world’s superpower—and because of the magnitude of
its presumed and projected crimes. Thus the Middle East and North Africa is one
of the regions where it is essential to affirm a culture of human rights as an antidote
to terrorism.
Many in the region see Western tolerance for human rights abuse reflected in the
failure to rein in Israeli abuse of Palestinians or to restructure sanctions against Iraq
to minimize the suffering of the Iraqi people. Such policies—both closely followed
in the region—suggest that the West’s commitment to human rights is one of convenience,
to be forsaken when abuses are committed by an ally or in the name of
containing a foe. That grievance has become all the more acute since September
2000 as the death toll mounts from Israeli-Palestinian violence and as Iraqi sanctions
drag on with no indication that Saddam Hussein will acquiesce to U.N.
demands.
But a feeble commitment to human rights can also be found in the West’s attitude
toward the region as a whole. Saudi Arabia and Egypt provide good examples.
Saudi Arabia, the home of Osama bin Laden as well as fifteen of the nineteen presumed
hijackers of September 11, imposes strict limits on civil society, severely discriminates
against women, and systematically suppresses dissent. But Western
governments to date have contented themselves with purchasing Saudi oil and
soliciting Saudi contracts while maintaining a shameful silence toward Saudi
abuses. Egypt, home of the accused September 11 ringleader as well as other key al-
Qaeda leaders, features a narrowly circumscribed political realm and a government
that does all it can to suffocate peaceful political opposition. Yet as a “partner” for
Middle East peace, Egypt has secured from the U.S. government massive aid and
tacit acceptance of its human rights violations.
In societies where basic freedoms flourish, citizens could have pressed their government
to respond to grievances, on threat of being publicly scorned and voted
out of power. But in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and many of the other countries where
Osama bin Laden strikes a chord of resentment, governments restrict debate about
how to address society’s ills. They close off avenues for peaceful political change.
They leave people with the desperate choice of tolerating the status quo, exile, or
violence. Frequently, as political options are closed off, the voices of non-violent
dissent are upstaged by a politics of radical opposition.
The West has quietly accepted this pattern of repression because, in the short
term, it seems to promise stability, and because the democratic alternative is feared.
Indeed, the brilliance of the strategy from the perspective of these repressive governments
is that they have created a political landscape in which the only available
alternative to supporting their authoritarian rule is risking their overthrow by radical
opponents. In an environment in which the political center has been systematically
silenced, these governments can credibly portray themselves as the only
bulwark against extremism.
The challenge for global proponents of human rights—and for any successful
campaign to defeat the logic of terrorism—is to recognize the role that governmental
repression plays in constructing this dilemma. The more the government
closes off legitimate avenues of dissent, the more the government’s portrayal of itself as the only alternative to repressive radicalism becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
The conduct of the Saudi government is illustrative. As corruption flourishes
among the ruling family and the country’s vast but finite oil wealth proves inadequate
to provide a promising economic future for a rapidly growing population,
the Saudi government’s position is increasingly precarious. But just when the need
for openness is greatest, so are the dangers. With peaceful political opposition
firmly repressed, the voices of violence and intolerance have grown in volume.
Riyadh can thus claim that it alone stands before the abyss, that human rights must
be suppressed for their own protection, that democratization would lead to its own
demise. The stark choice today, it is posited, has now been reduced to blocking any
political liberalization, as occurred in Algeria in 1992 when the country’s military
chiefs intervened to head off an imminent electoral victory by an Islamist party, or
witnessing a repetition of the Iran scenario of 1979, in which the West’s backing
away from the authoritarian Shah led to a repressive theocratic state.
Only from an ahistorical vantage point are the choices so stark and unappealing.
An immediate democratic transition may not be possible in such a warped political
environment, but steps can and should be taken to begin to provide a meaningful
array of electoral choices. Of course, in a democracy there is no guarantee of any
particular political result. But if pressure is put on authoritarian governments to
allow a spectrum of political options, the likelihood increases that democracy will
lead to governments that respect human rights.
Several Middle Eastern and North African governments have begun the process
of liberalization without empowering extremists. In recent years,Morocco and Jordan
have become more open societies, while Qatar and Bahrain have begun to
loosen political restraints and have promised to hold elections. Kuwait already has
an elected parliament, although its powers are limited and all women and many
other native-born residents continue to be denied the vote. Even in Iran, a gradual
and partial political opening has corresponded with the emergence of a movement
demanding respect for civil liberties. Although the correlation is not always neat,
these experiences suggest that the appeal of violent and intolerant movements
diminishes as people are given the chance to participate meaningfully in politics
and to select from a range of political parties and perspectives. Promoting the full
respect for human rights needed to produce this range of political options thus
should be a central part of any anti-terrorism strategy for the region.But if the West
continues to accept repression as the best defense against radical politics, it will
undermine the human rights culture that is needed in the long run to defeat terrorism.
THE GLOBAL COALITION
In the days following September 11, various governments tried to take advantage
of the tragedy by touting their own internal struggles as battles against terrorism.
For example, President Vladimir Putin of Russia embraced this rhetoric to
defend his government’s brutal campaign in Chechnya. China’s foreign minister Tang Jiaxuan did the same to defend his government’s response to political agitation
in Xinjiang province. Egyptian Prime Minister Atef Abeid, brushing off criticism
of torture and summary military trials, rejected “call[s] on us to give these
terrorists their ‘human rights’” and suggested that Western countries should “think
of Egypt’s own fight against terror as their new model.” Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon repeatedly referred to Palestinian Authority President Yasir Arafat as “our
bin Laden.”Alluding to September 11,Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah
Ahman Badawi defended administrative detention under his country’s longabused
Internal Security Act as “an initial preventive measure before things get
beyond control.”A spokesman for Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe justified
a crackdown on independent journalists reporting on abuses by his government as
an attack on the “supporters” of terrorism.
Particularly in the case of Russia, this cynical strategy seemed to work. In the
days following September 11, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and Italian
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said that Russia’s actions in Chechnya must be
reassessed.The U.S. government,which in April had supported the U.N. resolution
condemning atrocities in Chechnya, began to play down its human rights concerns
and play up alleged links between Chechen rebels and the Qaeda network. In general
remarks at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Shanghai in
October, in the presence of Putin but without reference to any particular country,
U.S. President George W. Bush did publicly warn that “the war on terrorism must
not be a war on minorities” and that countries need to “distinguish between those
who pursue legitimate political aspirations and terrorists.” But during a bilateral
summit with Putin in November, Bush spoke at length of Russian progress toward
respect for human rights and democratic principles while mentioning Chechnya
only to praise “President Putin’s commitment to a political dialogue.”Nothing was
said publicly about Russian atrocities and the continuing impunity of those who
commit them.
Uzbekistan further illustrates the selectivity of concern with attacks on civilians.
With the possible exception of Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan has done the most
among the post-Soviet states to perpetuate the ruthless repression of the Soviet era.
There are no political parties, no independent media, no civil society of any sort.
Efforts by Muslims to pray outside the state-controlled mosque are met harshly,
with torture and long prison sentences frequent.As a state bordering Afghanistan,
Uzbekistan was an obvious potential military ally of the United States, particularly
since it faces its own al-Qaeda-linked rebel movement, the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan. But it remains unclear whether the U.S. government will prevent its
new military alliance with Uzbekistan from becoming an endorsement of the
repressive policies of Uzbek President Islam Karimov. President Bush repeatedly
insisted that the U.S. campaign against terrorism was not directed against Islam, yet
the U.S. government made no visible effort to curb Uzbekistan’s severe repression
ofMuslims who wanted only to practice their faith peacefully outside state control.
The biggest opportunity lost was when, as required by legislation, the U.S. State
Department in October named “countries of particular concern” for their repression
of religious freedom. Uzbekistan, an obvious candidate under any objective
standard, was not on the list. (Nor, for that matter, was Saudi Arabia, despite the State Department spokesman’s admission that there is “no religious freedom”
there.)
This inconsistent attention to violent abuse against civilians could be found
elsewhere as well.Washington (though not the European Union) put effective pressure
on Belgrade to surrender former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic for
trial in The Hague for the depredations he allegedly sponsored in Bosnia, Kosovo,
and Croatia. But throughout the year NATO troops in Bosnia failed to arrest former
Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic from his sanctuary in Bosnia,
and the international community did little to pressure Belgrade to surrender former
Bosnian Serb military leader Ratko Mladic, both of whom stand accused of
comparable crimes. Closer to home, the U.S. government continues to shelter
Emmanuel “Toto”Constant, the ruthless former Haitian paramilitary leader, from
Haiti’s efforts to secure him for trial. During the military dictatorship of 1991-94,
Constant oversaw the killing and tortured of many Haitian civilians who were perceived
as opponents of military rule.
In some parts of the world, particularly Africa, violent abuse against civilians
was virtually ignored by the U.S. government, except insofar as a link might be
found with al-Qaeda. Atrocities were routine in conflicts in Angola, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and Sierra Leone, yet the U.S. government’s attention
seemed to focus almost exclusively on Sudan, Somalia, and other countries in
the Horn of Africa where the Qaeda network was said to operate. Typical was the
November visit to Washington of Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo; no mention
was made of soldiers’ recent massacre of civilians in central Nigeria, but President
Obasanjo was praised for his support of the fight against terrorism.
The message sent by this inconsistency was that, as seen from Washington, violence
becomes intolerable based not on whether civilians are attacked but on whose
civilians are attacked and who is doing the attacking. Attacks against civilians on
U.S. soil are to be vigorously opposed, but attacks against other civilians often are
not.Rebel or insurgent attacks on civilians are condemned, but government attacks
on civilians—especially attacks by key government allies—are ignored. Such a message
hardly helps to build broad public support for human rights.
The annual meeting next March in Geneva of the U.N.Commission on Human
Rights will test the West’s willingness to condemn violence against innocent civilians
wherever it occurs. For the last two years, with reluctant but eventual support
by the U.S. government and the European Union, the commission has condemned
Russia for its atrocities in Chechnya and its failure to prosecute those responsible.
Now is no time to abandon that effort, as Russian forces continue to be responsible
for summary executions, torture, and arbitrary arrests, and no progress has been
made in bringing the authors of past massacres to justice. Western governments
will also be judged by whether they finally mount a serious effort at the commission
(for the first time without U.S. membership) to condemn China’s persistent
repression. In the case of Washington, it will be judged by whether it applies laws
designed to sanction religious repression in Uzbekistan and Saudi Arabia. Finally,
the question remains whether the West will overcome its traditional downplaying
of atrocities in sub-Saharan Africa. To squander such opportunities to condemn
and curb political violence will suggest that violent attacks on civilians warrant serious action only when they strike close to home. It will not take long for the
world to see through this selectivity.
THE IMPORTANCE OF
ENFORCEABLE HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARDS
If the battle against terrorism is to be understood as a fight for human rights, the
most ardent combatants have often been the least willing to be bound by its principles.
Washington stands out because its resistance to enforceable human rights
standards has been most fundamental. That is not to say that the United States
ignores human rights; most U.S. citizens enjoy a wide range of rights protections.
But Washington has never been willing to subject itself to binding international
human rights scrutiny. September 11 offered an opportunity to rethink this unwillingness.
Washington immediately realized that to fight a global terrorist network,
it needed global cooperation—for gathering intelligence, blocking finances, making
arrests, and defending the legitimacy of its military efforts. The U.S. government’s
appeal for help was widely answered, but that did not alter Washington’s
resistance to international human rights law.
Often the U.S. government simply refuses to ratify leading human rights
treaties, such as those on women’s rights, children’s rights, and economic, social and
cultural rights.Most significantly in time of war, the U.S. government still has not
ratified the First Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949—
the leading standards on the use of air power,Washington’s primary warfare tool.
Moreover,when periodically the U.S. government ratifies a human rights treaty,
whether under a Republican or Democratic administration, it always does so in a
way to ensure that there will be no right of enforcement, so that ratification imposes
no practical constraint on official action. The formal embrace of a treaty thus
becomes an act for external consumption—an empty declaration that the United
States is part of the international human rights system—not an act to grant or even
solidify rights in the United States.
Perhaps the greatest disappointment is that the Bush administration actually
intensified U.S. opposition to the International Criminal Court—a potential
forum for prosecuting future crimes against humanity such as the attacks of September
11.With the number of countries that have ratified the ICC treaty growing
rapidly, the treaty’s entry into force in 2002 is a virtual certainty. But Washington
has opposed the court because it theoretically could be used to scrutinize the conduct
of U.S. armed forces. Just two weeks before it launched its bombing campaign
in Afghanistan, the Bush administration endorsed legislation that would authorize
sanctions against governments that ratify the ICC treaty (other than NATO and
certain other key allies)—legislation that, in modified form, was working its way
through Congress in early December. The administration’s endorsement was part
of a tactical bargain that allowed overdue U.N. dues to be paid and was supposed to
give the president the power to waive sanctions. Yet even in this light, the Bush
administration’s willingness to endorse an attack on the ICC at a time when it was
appealing for international cooperation in the fight against terrorism smacked of hypocrisy. It seemed that the Bush administration was willing to seek protection for
its own citizens, but determined to undermine an institution that many governments
see as essential for the protection of others.
This resistance to accountability—which was replicated in international negotiations
on climate change, nuclear weapons, biological weapons, small arms, and
racism—gave the U.S. government the latitude, for example, to continue using
cluster bombs in Afghanistan, even though these imprecise weapons with their history
of littering the landscape with deadly and highly volatile bomblets had caused
a quarter of the bombing-related civilian deaths in Yugoslavia. More fundamentally,
this resistance to accountability heightened global unease about the U.S. use
of force, especially in light of repeated incidents of civilian casualties.The U.S. government
seems to assume that if its policy is to respect international humanitarian
law, its conduct should be beyond reproach. But much of the rest of the world
understandably condemns the United States for refusing to countenance any independent
enforcement, or even formal scrutiny, of the standards it claims to uphold.
Accountability is a key missing component of the legitimacy that Washington seeks
but so often fails to achieve.
THE FUTURE OF AFGHANISTAN
Human rights will also be put to the test as the international community works
to construct a post-Taliban Afghanistan.The Taliban had an abysmal human rights
record, most notably its systematic discrimination against women, its ready use of
violence against those who failed to abide by its harsh vision of Islam, and its periodic
resort to massacres of perceived sympathizers with its military adversaries.
The demise of this regime creates an opportunity for positive change in Afghanistan.
But many of the forces vying to replace the Taliban, including elements of the
Northern Alliance, also have horrendous human rights records, ranging from their
own massacres in recent years to their part in the destruction of vast swathes of
Kabul while they shared power in 1992-96.
The test of the anti-terror coalition’s commitment to human rights will come in
the pressure it exerts on the Afghan parties to break definitively with the atrocities
of the past. The international community should not simply replace the Taliban
with whichever set of forces gains de facto control of the country, joins a broadbased
coalition, and promises to cooperate in the fight against international terrorism.
That would risk replacing a regime that helped to sponsor international
attacks on civilians with one that simply directs its violence against civilians inward.
It would also severely handicap Afghanistan as it struggles to rebuild and to meet
dire humanitarian needs. In the short term, even if abusive commanders must be
accepted as the de facto powers in certain parts of Afghanistan, intense pressure
should be put on them to avoid reprisals against civilians or captured or surrendering
combatants. In the longer term, those responsible for the worst atrocities
should be precluded from any role in a future Afghan government or in any Afghan
security forces.
Meanwhile, the international community should actively collect evidence of abuses by all Afghan factions, make that evidence available to either a newly established
international tribunal or a reinforced national court, and ensure that no
amnesty is given to those responsible for serious crimes. The U.N.-sponsored
accord on Afghanistan, agreed to in Bonn in December, was a useful step in this
direction. The international community should also work to end discrimination
against women so they are given a full opportunity to participate in a new government,
and to ensure that civil society as a whole, including women, is given a meaningful
voice in determining priorities for reconstruction and economic
development. These are among the steps that will allow Afghans to break from a
long line of persecutors, rather than simply substitute one set of persecutors for
another.
HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE WEST
In the West, the danger of an inappropriate balance between security and
human rights was particularly acute after September 11 because of the focused
nature of the anti-terrorism efforts. If the entire population had faced scrutiny
under new security measures, popular pressure might have gone a long way toward
avoiding unreasonable restraints on rights. But because the anti-terrorism effort
was aimed largely at young men from the Middle East and North Africa, most residents
ofWestern countries believed that they would not be personally targeted by
new law enforcement powers. In these circumstances, political leadership is
required to ensure that rights are not unnecessarily sacrificed in the rush to enhance
security. Such leadership was largely lacking.
For example, emergency legislation rushed through the US Congress, the socalled
USA Patriot Act, permits the indefinite detention of nondeportable non-citizens
once the attorney general “certifies” that he has “reasonable grounds to
believe” that the individual is engaged in terrorist activities or endangers national
security. These broad and vague criteria could allow the attorney general to certify
and detain any alien in the United States who had any connection, however tenuous
or distant in time, with a group that had once unlawfully used a weapon to
endanger a person.
Still more flagrant in its affront to international fair-trial standards was President
Bush’s order establishing “military commissions” to prosecute non-U.S. citizens.
To begin with, the order was notably vague about the crimes that could give
rise to the commission’s jurisdiction. The commission could be used to try people
accused of membership in al-Qaeda, involvement in the undefined crime of “international
terrorism,” or harboring anyone charged with these offenses. It thus
extended far beyond any traditional use of military tribunals—to address offenses
by combatants in war—to include people who might be charged with acts far
removed from Afghanistan or any other armed conflict.
Moreover, the virtual lack of procedural protections in the order raised the
prospect of suspects being tried, convicted, and even executed with no appearance
before an independent judicial tribunal, no right to appeal, no right to a public trial,
no presumption of innocence, no right to confront evidence or testimony against them, and no requirement that proof be established beyond a reasonable doubt.
Some of these due-process transgressions may still be remedied through the adoption
of additional regulations—none had been issued through early December—
but the Bush order itself displayed a disturbing indifference to international fair
trial standards and long-expressed U.S. values. While promising “a full and fair
trial,” the order explicitly rejected scrutiny of military commission proceedings by
any other court, domestic or international, and ignored the Uniform Code of Military
Justice—the procedural code used for regular courts-martial—which would
have ensured most basic fair trial rights.
Such indifference to human rights standards will undermine the important
value, as people accused of violent abuse are punished, of ensuring that justice is
done and can be seen to be done. By precluding public confidence that the rule of
law is being applied fairly, secret, summary trials of accused terrorists undermine
the principles of human rights that stand in the way of terrorism. A Spanish judge’s
refusal to extradite alleged al-Qaeda members to the United States without assurances
that they would avoid trial before such commissions illustrates at a practical
level the obstacle that such fair-trial shortcuts pose to cooperative efforts to bring
accused criminals to justice.
The Bush order, even if later modified by the fine print of regulations, also
threatens to silence the U.S. voice in support of human rights.Washington had routinely
objected when similar military tribunals were used against alleged “terrorists”
in Peru, Nigeria, Russia, and elsewhere. By suddenly proposing to sponsor
similar travesties of justice in the face of its own security threats, the U.S. government
compromises its capacity to defend human rights abroad. Indeed, tomorrow’s
military dictators need do nothing more than photocopy the Bush order to
secure a repressive mechanism that promises to be highly effective in warding off
U.S. criticism. Finally, the proposed military commissions, as the other conduct
outlined above, send the profoundly damaging message that human rights are mere
standards of convenience, to be applied when other countries face security threats,
but not when the United States is at risk. Such a la carte principles, of course, are no
principles at all.
Similar human rights compromises could be found in other aspects of the global
response to terrorism. Australian Prime Minister John Howard, stoking post-September
11 fears of foreigners, built his candidacy for reelection in November
around his summary expulsion, in blatant violation of international refugee law, of
asylum-seekers who had reached outlying Australian territory. Proposed European
Union-wide security measures included a broad definition of terrorism that threatens
freedom of association and the right to dissent; a European arrest warrant to
facilitate transfer of terrorist suspects without fair-trial safeguards; and a “re-evaluation”
of the right to seek asylum in Western Europe in light of new security considerations.
Proposals by the British government would permit the prolonged
arbitrary detention of foreigners suspected of terrorist activity and severely curtail
the right to seek asylum. The Indian government used the new focus on terrorism
to push for sweeping new police powers of arrest and detention—powers last used
to crack down on political opponents, social activists, and human rights defenders.
The U.S. government detained over 1,000 suspects following the September 11 attacks, but threw a shroud of secrecy over the cases that made it impossible to
determine whether criminal justice powers were being appropriately applied.
At the United Nations, Western governments are rushing to push through an
anti-terrorism treaty that, according to the draft of early December, threatened to
codify an overly broad definition of terrorism without adequate guarantees that the
fight against terrorism would be circumscribed by human rights guarantees. Ironically,
the major obstacle to adopting the treaty was not states defending human
rights but states arguing that terrorist means should be tolerated if used as part of
a war for “national liberation.” The result threatens to be an anti-terrorism treaty
that reinforces the ends-justify-the-means rationale of terrorism.
HYPOCRISY MATTERS
This hypocrisy matters because it is profoundly more difficult to promote the
values of human rights if some of the most visible and powerful proponents seek to
exempt themselves from these same standards.This exceptionalism remains strong
after September 11, as governments seek to justify extraordinary constraints on
rights in the name of combating extraordinary threats. Yet in the long term, this
trend is counterproductive. If the logic of terrorism, not just immediate terrorist
threats, is ultimately to be defeated, governments must redouble their commitment
to international standards, not indulge a new round of excuses to ignore them.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
August 2001 marked the first anniversary of the U.N. secretary-general’s
special representative for human rights defenders. Hina Jilani was the
first to carry out the post’s mandate, which called for her to press for the implementation
of the 1998 Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and intervene in
cases of threats to and harassment of human rights defenders worldwide. Since
October 2000, Jilani had sent urgent appeals and communications to, among
others, the governments of Colombia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia,
Tunisia, and the United Kingdom voicing her concerns over the targeting of human
rights defenders in those countries. Jilani worked closely with other U.N. thematic
mechanisms, such as the special rapporteurs on torture, on extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions, and on violence against women, and the chairman-rapporteur
of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. Since her appointment,
Jilani had focused on countries where immediate attention to the safety of human
rights defenders was needed. She visited Kyrgyzstan in August,where she stated her
concerns that basic civil rights were not being systematically observed; Kyrgyz
authorities refused to allow her to meet with Topchubek Turgunaliev, a political
activist who was in a prison hospital at the time.
Colombia continued to be extremely dangerous for human rights defenders.
On December 13, 2000, Fernando Cruz Peña, from the city of Cali, Valle, was
forcibly disappeared. Cruz represented Colombians accused of support for guerrilla
groups.On December 24, 2000,Fernando Rafael Castro Escobar, from Sabanas
de Angel, Magdalena, was killed. Castro served as the personero of Sabanas de
Angel, and collected local reports of rights violations. On February 12, 2001, Iván
Villamizar Luciani, a former public advocate, was shot and killed by ten gunmen
outside the Free University in Cúcuta,Norte de Santander,where he was serving as
president. On February 17, Carmenza Trujillo Bernal, a member of the Caldas
Human Rights Committee, was killed in Chinchiná, Caldas. On May 5, Gonzalo
Zárate Triana, a founding member of the Meta Civic Committee for Human Rights,
was killed in Villavicencio. On May 12, Dario Suárez Meneses, the leader of a local
displaced group, was killed, in the city of Neiva, Huila. On May 19, José Jorge
Navarro G. was killed near San Antonio,Tolima.He was the director of a local chapter
of the Colombian Red Cross. Kimy Pernia Domicó, a leader of the indigenous
Emberá-Katío, was forcibly "disappeared" on June 2, in Tierralta, Córdoba, and was
presumed dead. On September 2, former Apartadó,Antioquia, town council member
José de Jesús Geman was killed in a Bogotá hotel. Geman was preparing to deliver material to the attorney general’s office as part of the continuing case against
retired general Rito Alejo del Río, who was being investigated for supporting paramilitary
groups. Alma Rosa Jaramillo Lafourie’s, a lawyer who worked with the
Middle Magdalena Development and Peace Program (Programa de Desarrollo y
Paz del Magdalena Medio,PDPMM),was found dead on July 1 near the city of Barrancabermeja,
Santander, after she had been kidnapped by paramilitaries who had
been engaged in a deadly campaign against rights workers in the region. On July 18,
Eduardo Estrada, also with PDPMM, was murdered in the town of San Pablo,Bolívar.
On September 19, armed men shot and killed Roman Catholic nun and human
rights defender Yolanda Cerón Delgado in front of a church in Tumaco,Nariño.On
September 20, Juan Manuel Corzo, the director of the attorney general’s investigative
unit in the city of Cúcuta, Norte de Santander, was shot and killed as he drove
with his mother.At the time, Corzo was investigating several killings of colleagues.
On October 17, Julian Rodríguez Benítez, a member of CREDHOS,a human rights
group, was killed in Barrancabermeja, Santander. Also in 2001, Miguel Ignacio
Lora, Yolanda Paternina, Carlos Arturo Pinto, María del Rosario, and Maria del
Rosario Rojas Silva were killed.All had investigated paramilitary or guerilla activities.
In October 2001, human rights lawyer Digna Ochoa was found shot to death in
her Mexico City office. A note left by her side warned members of the Miguel
Agustín Pro Juarez Human Rights Center, where Ochoa had worked for several
years, that the same could happen to them.
Aceh province experienced the loss of at least seven human rights defenders over
the past year. On December 6, 2000, four workers for the Rehabilitation Action for
Torture Victims of Aceh (RATA) were stopped outside Lhokseumawe,North Aceh,
and abducted by a group of armed soldiers and civilians.Three of them were extrajudicially
executed. On February 28,Muhamad Efendi Malikon, the secretary of the
human rights organization Care Forum for Human Rights (Forum Peduli HAMAceh
Timur) was killed in Peukan Langsa village, East Aceh. On March 29, Suprin
Sulaiman, a lawyer with Koalist-HAM in South Aceh was killed after accompanying
his client to a police interrogation session. On September 8,Yusuf Usman, also
a member of Forum Peduli HAM-Aceh Timur, was killed. On October 3, the body
of an Indonesian Red Cross (PMI) volunteer, Jafar Syehdo, known as Dabra, from
Bireun, Aceh was discovered shot in North Aceh. The PMI was the lead agency
responsible for removing the bodies of those killed in the conflict and helping
return them to their families.
In India, in November 2000, T. Puroshottam, the joint secretary of the Andhra
Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee (APCLC) was stabbed to death by a group of
unidentified men. In February 2001, Azam Ali, the district secretary of the Nalgonda
branch of APCLC was killed by two sword-wielding youths.
In Uzbekistan, Shovruk Ruzimuradov, an activist in the Human Rights Society
of Uzbekistan, died in custody, apparently tortured to death by police. Officers
arrested forty-four-year-old Ruzimuradov on June 15 in southwestern Uzbekistan
and held him incommunicado for some twenty-two days before returning his
corpse to his family on July 7. In June, Viktor Popkov, a Russian human rights
defender, died of wounds inflicted when his car was shot at in Chechnya.
AFRICA OVERVIEW
MAJOR POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS
Longstanding wars continued to plague several countries in sub-Saharan
African countries; in others, political leaders and parties engaged in elections, some
of them more satisfactory than others. Everywhere, human rights defenders continued
the struggle to improve respect for basic human rights. The year 2001 saw
new international attention to Africa, mainly focused on combating the scourge of
diseases related to HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and on efforts to counter
impoverishment aggravated by the globalization of the world economy. But
African human rights issues, from those related to public health crises and the
economy to the stark immediacy of repression, lost visibility as the international
community turned to combating terrorism in the wake of the September attacks in
the U.S.
THE SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS:
COLLATERAL DAMAGE IN AFRICA
Just how big an impact would the September 11 attacks in the United States have
on Africa? It was a question which was on the minds of state and non-state actors
alike across the continent as the year closed.Though everything remained fluid, the
devastation wrought by the attacks could mean:
Political Fallout in a Number of Countries
Pre-existing political tensions between Muslim and Christian populations in a
number of African countries threatened to become more inflamed, and increasingly
violent. Côte d’Ivoire,Ethiopia,Kenya,Nigeria, South Africa, and Tanzania all
faced the possibility of worsening communal tensions. Bloody riots between Muslims
and Christians in Kano, northern Nigeria, following demonstrations against
the U.S. bombing of Afghanistan, had already left a high death toll. A pro-Taliban
demonstration was also reported in Kenya’s predominantly Muslim coastal city,
Mombasa.
Restrictions on Political and Civil Rights
Governments in the region might manipulate and redefine terrorism to justify crackdowns on legitimate dissension.The U.S.“with us or against us”mantra could
set a trend in Africa with African leaders labeling their opponents as terrorists
and justifying restrictions on civil liberties that would previously have seemed
unacceptable. In the aftermath of the attacks, President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal
proposed the adoption of an African pact against terrorism. He said the move
would help the continent “to team up with the world coalition against this evil”and
commit each African state “not to accept on its territory individuals or groups with
terrorist intentions.” Responding to President Wade’s call, more than ten heads of
state and delegates from twenty other African countries attended a one-day summit
on October 18 in Senegal to discuss terrorism-related issues and closed the
meeting with a declaration against terrorism. In particular, there were growing concerns
that these steps would detrimentally affect refugee populations, particularly
Muslim refugees, and encourage growing xenophobia and anti-refugee sentiment.
Subordination of Human Rights Concerns
to Diplomacy’s Antiterrorism Priorities
The Horn/East Africa region,where a number of al-Qaeda cells were suspected,
was seen as a likely focus of U.S. interest. Sudan enthusiastically announced its
cooperation in the fight against terror, leveraging its intelligence resources regarding
al-Qaeda to reshape its bilateral relations.Kenya,Ethiopia, and Eritrea appeared
ready to use the opportunity to marginalize reformist elements. African governments
in a position to contribute to the global fight against terrorism by providing
access to intelligence, airfields, and military bases might take advantage of a willingness
on the part of more powerful nations like the U.S. to overlook abuses which
might previously have come under greater scrutiny. For example, an October massacre
by the Nigerian army of at least two hundred people in Benue State went all
but unremarked during President Obasanjo’s visit to the United States just a few
weeks later to discuss the antiterrorism campaign.
Declining Economic Activity
Falling consumer demand in Western economies as a recession took hold might
send commodity prices, already depressed, into a slump, and export-oriented
countries into a nosedive; investment inflows would be dampened because of the
combined effect of heightened perceptions of risk and the fall in prices for Africa’s
exports.Almost every sector would be affected: travel and tourism, a mainstay of a
number of countries,would be badly disrupted, and recession and unemployment
among African immigrants in the diaspora would decrease remittances sent to support
their relatives at home.
Reduced Humanitarian and Development Assistance
The expected global downturn and a ratcheting up of security and defense
expenditures in the west, could translate into major cuts in both development and
humanitarian aid. President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa warned on October 3 that: “We have to ensure that there is no possibility of these attacks creating negative
consequences, whereby the development issues that we have been grappling
with for decades are sidelined to the margins of the global agenda.The countries of
the world must simultaneously deal decisively with terrorism and effectively
address and defeat poverty and underdevelopment.”
HIV/AIDS STRAIGHT TALK:
AFRICA TAKES STEPS TO CHANGE
To many Africans, the continent’s key challenge was the response to HIV/AIDS.
Of the estimated twenty-two million people to have died of AIDS-related illness
worldwide by the end of 2000, seventeen million were Africans. The most severely
affected region was southern Africa, including Botswana, with the highest known
prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the world, and South Africa,with the largest number of
people living with AIDS in any country in the world. There were around twentyfive
million Africans living with AIDS, 3.8 million of whom were infected in 2000
alone.
In the past year, AIDS in Africa gained an unprecedented level of media coverage.
With it came some public and political will to fight the worst epidemic in the
history of mankind, as well as growing scrutiny of the pandemic’s root causes.
Nearly every government from tiny Gabon to repressed Mauritania engaged in
high-level discussions about the problem, and the failure or success of their programs.
At a special summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in Abuja,
Nigeria, in April 2001, OAU member states pledged to use 15 percent of their
annual budgets to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and other infectious diseases.Whether
this would happen, particularly in countries with notoriously opaque budgets, was
yet to be seen. Even with the Abuja Declaration, the current cost of the recommended
drug treatments remained unfeasible in much of Africa.
There was global pressure on the pharmaceutical industry to remedy this situation,
through lowered prices, donations, and relaxation of patent laws. In April, following
a sustained campaign against them, pharmaceutical companies dropped a
court challenge to a South African law enacted in 1997, but not yet promulgated,
that would allow the production and importation of generic AIDS drugs. It was a
major victory for the treatment lobby both in South Africa and internationally,
with potentially important benefits for health and human rights. A similar law was
passed in Kenya in March, and was pending in other countries, but the flow of
cheap drugs was yet to be seen. Drug firms in Uganda also appealed to the government
to allow them to produce anti-retroviral drugs locally.
Botswana, a relatively rich country, announced that, hopefully by 2002, all such
drugs would be free for its 350,000 infected citizens. In the first week of September,
Nigeria announced that it would be the first country in Africa to launch trials with
generic drugs, which, in initial phases, would treat 15,000 Nigerians, for around
U.S. $350 a year per person. Several countries moved first to provide the cheap,
effective, and easy to provide drug nevirapine to women before giving birth in
order to prevent mother-to-child transmission. But South Africa, despite its economic resources and success in facing down the drug industry, was held back by the
embarrassing performance of President Thabo Mbeki, who persisted in questioning
the link between HIV and AIDS. An NGO, the Treatment Action Campaign,
went to court to force the government to provide drug treatment that, it argued,
would even save the government money.
SOUTH AFRICA AND NIGERIA—
THE ANCHOR COUNTRIES?
Since the extraordinary political and constitutional transition of 1994, South
Africa had established a reputation for openness, transparency, and rational leadership
on a turbulent continent.But in 2001, President Thabo Mbeki’s government
seemed to prefer to invest political capital in fighting public relations skirmishes
rather than addressing the economic and social challenges that confronted the
country. In February, there were extraordinary allegations by Steve Tshwete, the
minister for police, of a conspiracy by three politicians-turned-businessmen to
oust Mbeki from office.Observers were alarmed by the willingness to use the tools
of state security to tackle what seemed to be an internal party issue. The government
was plagued by corruption scandals in connection with a multi-million rand
arms deal. African National Congress Chief Whip Tony Yengeni, former chair of
parliament’s committee on defense, was charged with corruption, perjury, and
fraud; other arrests were anticipated. President Mbeki’s refusal to confront his
country’s catastrophic AIDS epidemic risked undermining all other achievements.
Although the president’s reputation and standing had been damaged, most
observers thought the situation was retrievable.By general consensus, the transformation
of South Africa’s political landscape over the previous seven years had been
so profound that it was irreversible. South Africa could still count on one of the
most progressive constitutions in the world, guarded by an impeccable Constitutional
Court; vigorous independent news media, unions, and academia; ample provision
for a constitutional opposition; and government policies that—despite
ongoing controversies on their direction—generally managed to negotiate reconciliation
of the demands for radical redistribution of wealth with the needs of economic
growth.
South Africa’s continued regional leadership was demonstrated late in the year,
as the first of about seven hundred South African peacekeeping troops arrived in
Burundi. Their task was to form a protection force for politicians returning from
exile to join a power-sharing transitional government that was sworn in on November
1.
In Nigeria, the continent’s most populous country, it seemed as though time
might be running out for President Olusegun Obasanjo. In May 1999, sixteen years
of military rule had ended. Though many Nigerians were skeptical, they had nonetheless
hoped that the new civilian government would take the difficult steps to
restore accountable government and the rule of law, as well as Nigeria’s standing in
the world.More than two years later, the country was a land of rising discontent,and
questions multiplied about the president’s leadership capabilities.
In the past year, Nigeria saw a surge of religious and ethnic conflicts at the cost
of thousands of lives.Riots, the ravaging of churches and mosques, violent demonstrations,
military and police abuses, and a general lawlessness continued to tear at
the daily lives of Nigerians. In October, the Nigerian army was responsible for massacring
at least two hundred unarmed civilians in central Benue State, in an area
torn by ongoing ethnic conflict. Corruption remained rampant, despite the adoption
of anti-corruption legislation in 2000, distorting economic management, corrupting
law enforcement, and starving desperately needed public services. In his
Independence Day speech on October 1, the president conceded that his administration
had failed to lift most Nigerians out of poverty, end violence, and solve other
huge obstacles that the country confronted. Yet he offered little hope that these
issues would be addressed in the remainder of his term.
Nigeria still enjoyed a comparatively greater degree of freedom in contrast to the
dark days of military rule, and a commission set up in 1999 to investigate human
rights abuses committed under previous governments had somewhat dented the
historical wall of impunity. But the country desperately needed a democratically
enacted constitution, accountable politicians and civil servants, and restored
respect for the rule of law. With government revenue coming almost exclusively
from a single source, Nigeria’s substantial oil and gas deposits, it would remain
extremely difficult to create a functioning democracy.
BUCKING THE TREND?
A few countries registered success in strengthening or maintaining democratic
institutions. Botswana and Mauritius headed the table, and South Africa remained
an example in many ways, but Mali, Mozambique, Ghana, and Senegal were also
strong contenders for Africa’s first division status. Botswana had the highest credit
rating in Africa from the international ratings agency Moody’s—four notches
above that of South Africa—and ranked alongside central European countries.
Mauritius was ranked second (behind Tunisia and ahead of Botswana) out of
twenty-four countries surveyed in the World Economic Forum’s Africa Competitiveness
Report.
The connection between economic prosperity and stable political institutions
was underlined by the September 13, 2000 elections in Mauritius. An opposition
alliance, of the Mouvement Socialiste Mauricien (MSM) and Mouvement Militant
Mauricien (MMM), swept into power in a landslide victory with high turnout.
Outgoing Prime Minister Navinchandra Ramgoolam gracefully accepted defeat. In
terms of the electoral pact, the MSM leader Sir Anerood Jugnauth would be prime
minister for the next three years and then hand over the reins to the MMM leader,
Paul Berenger, for the final two years. In the meantime, they would introduce a constitutional
amendment to give the president, a ceremonial figure, more power; Sir
Anerood would become president. Berenger would be the first non-Hindu to
occupy the premiership since Mauritius won independence in 1968.
Ghana saw a peaceful transfer of power when, on January 7, President Jerry
Rawlings, who came to power in two coups and retained power through two subsequent elections, stepped down from his nineteen year presidency and surrendered
power to John Kufuor. Like Mali and Senegal, Ghana looked set to become
one of the “democratic dominos” in West Africa. Once in power, the new president
promised sweeping human rights improvements. In July, Ghana’s parliament voted
unanimously to repeal the criminal libel law first introduced by the British colonial
administration.At this writing,debate was underway regarding legislation to establish
a mechanism for truth telling and reconciliation in relation to past abuses.
Kufuor also agreed to exhume for positive identification and proper reburial the
bodies of eight generals who had been executed in 1979 on charges of corruption
and treason. This was the first official step towards confronting and resolving various
extrajudicial executions which took place both before and during Rawlings’
reign.
Mozambique remained another African success story, though it faced some serious
threats during the year. The country’s post-conflict stability continued to be
reinforced by the generally human rights-friendly leadership of President Joachim
Chissano, and by robust economic growth.The economy grew by nearly 15 percent
in the first half of the year, recovering strongly from the devastating 2000 floods.
But the government’s reputation was tarnished by attacks against journalists. In
November 2000, unknown attackers gunned down journalist Carlos Cardoso, editor
of the independent Metical who had been sharply critical of hard line elements
in both the ruling party and the opposition in the wake of political clashes that left
forty-one people dead. In a separate attack later the same day, a gang stopped Radio
Mozambique journalist Custodio Rafael on his way home from work. The attackers
reportedly told him, “You talk a lot,” before beating him and cutting his tongue
with a knife. In January, a Mozambican parliamentary commission visited northern
Cabo Delgado province to investigate the suffocation-deaths of more than one
hundred imprisoned opposition demonstrators in the town of Montepuez. The
commission had joint government and opposition membership. A Mozambican
human rights group that carried out its own inquiry blamed the tragedy on both
police negligence and retaliation for the killing of six police officers during the
protests.
ELECTIONS, BUT NOT NECESSARILY DEMOCRACY
A number of other African countries held presidential or parliamentary elections
during the year.However, all were characterized by intimidation of the media
and opposition, killings, and gross and widespread vote rigging. Leaders in Guinea,
Malawi,Namibia,Zambia, and elsewhere attempted or were reported to be considering
constitutional amendments to overcome term limits and remain in power.
Political and social unrest continued to plague Côte d’Ivoire during 2001, following
presidential and parliamentary elections in late 2000. Laurent Gbagbo,
leader of the Front Populaire Ivorien (FPI), was installed as president despite very
serious concerns surrounding the legitimacy of the October presidential elections—
over the widespread violence and the exclusion of principal opposition
leader Alassane Ouattara from the contest. Gbagbo then used the same methods as his predecessor during the December parliamentary elections, including incitement
of religious and ethnic hatred. Ouattara was once again not allowed to run.
In both October and December security forces arrested, tortured, and killed perceived
opposition supporters, including foreigners and members of northern ethnic
groups.After assuming office,Gbagbo failed to acknowledge the flawed manner
in which he had become head of state, to promise new elections, to seek accountability
for the violence, or to take adequate steps to ensure that, under his leadership,
Côte d’Ivoire would be characterized by the rule of law, not by ethno-religious tension
and military impunity.
In Benin, presidential elections in late March 2001 saw the reelection of President
Mathieu Kerekou. Kerekou failed in the first round to gain a majority, so a
runoff with the runner-up, Nicephore Soglo, was called. Soglo, citing widespread
fraud, dropped out before the final round, and encouraged his supporters to boycott
as well. The runoff was further delayed by the resignation of several members
of the electoral commission in protest at the way the vote was organized. The third
place contender also pulled out, leaving only the fourth-place primary finisher,
Bruno Amoussou. This dubious run-off slate gave Kerekou the presidency,with 84
percent of the votes. Earlier in the year, on January 19, police beat up two journalists
working for private media and violently broke up a demonstration they were
covering in the capital, Cotonou.
The election campaign in Chad was marred by intimidation and violence, but
on May 27 Idriss Deby was re-elected president with more than 67 percent of the
vote. Opposition candidates alleged fraud and called for the result to be annulled,
appealing to the constitutional court. A quarter of the members of the electoral
commission resigned in protest in advance of the announcement of Deby’s victory.
On May 28,Brahim Selguet, an opposition activist, was shot and killed by the police
as they violently broke up an opposition meeting. Six opposition presidential candidates
were briefly detained at the meeting, and were again arrested in the morning
ofMay 30 with some thirty other opposition activists and trade unionists.They
were all released without charge the same day, but two of the opposition leaders,
Ngarledjy Yorongar and Abderhamane Djesnebaye, were reportedly tortured,
including being beaten with iron bars, during their detention.
Uganda’s March presidential election and May parliamentary elections were
both marred by manipulation and human rights abuses.As political parties are not
allowed to operate freely in Uganda, opposition presidential candidates had to
mobilize support and resources as individuals. Incumbent president Yoweri
Museveni, however, relied on the administrative and political officials of the ruling
“movement system” to bring in the vote. Harassment of journalists and editors,
self-censorship, and inequality in media access intensified as the date for the poll
neared. Supporters of opposition candidates were also threatened and harassed
when campaigning for their candidates. In January, unidentified gunmen killed a
member of President Museveni’s campaign task force, and, in a separate incident,
two supporters of opposition presidential candidate Dr. Kizza Besigye.At least one
person was killed when members of the Presidential Protection Unit opened fire on
opposition demonstrators on March 3. Both international observers and Ugandan
human rights groups expressed concern at the role played by the Ugandan army in the election and that elections took place on a far from level playing field.Museveni
was declared the winner.At least seven people were shot dead on June 27, in violence
surrounding parliamentary elections. On July 6, the Foundation for Human
Rights Initiative, a national NGO, criticized the government’s treatment of Besigye
and strongly condemned what it called the authorities’ “persistent, consistent and
violent intolerance and disrespect for divergent views.”
Gambia’s tense presidential election was held on October 18. After pressure
from the international community, President Yahya Jammeh had lifted a ban on
opposition parties in July, inviting former politicians who had sought political asylum
in other countries to return. On August 27,President Jammeh expelled Deputy
British High Commissioner Bharat Joshi for attending an open press conference,
which Jammeh alleged was an opposition party rally. The day before the election,
security forces opened fire on a crowd of opposition supporters, killing at least one.
In the days following the election, private radio station Citizen FM was shut down
and state security agents reportedly detained its owner for four hours.
On November 28, 2000,Mauritania’s 40th anniversary of independence, President
Ould Taya promised democratic reform, and on December 4, the government
held consultations with political parties. It was announced that proportional representation
in the legislature would be introduced in the 2001 elections, and that
the government would fund political parties, based on their performance in
municipal polls.Not a week later,Union of Democratic Forces leader Ould Daddah
was arrested upon his return to Mauritania, and charged with “contact with terrorist
groups.”He was released on December 13. On June 14, 2001, three members of
the opposition Front Populaire Mauritanien were jailed, accused of conspiring
with Libya to foment the violent overthrow of the government. Their lawyers
alleged numerous serious irregularities in the proceedings and initially withdrew in
protest; they later agreed to represent the three men, while making clear their concern
at government interference and other fair trial concerns.
In Guinea-Conakry opposition parties criticized as a “constitutional coup d’état”
and a “masquerade”a referendum held on November 11, 2001, in which 98 percent
of those who voted supposedly supported changes to key constitutional
provisions. The proposed changes would increase presidential terms from five to
seven years and allow presidents to remain in office indefinitely, giving incumbent
president Lansana Conte the option of a third term. An 87 percent turnout was
reported, though observers estimated that only 20 percent of the population could
have voted. In Malawi too, controversy surrounded the issue of whether President
Bakili Muluzi should be allowed a third term in office when his current term
expires in 2004, something that would entail alteration of the constitution.
Malawi’s two largest churches issued separate letters warning President Muluzi
against standing for reelection, prompting a government statement in May denying
that either the cabinet or the ruling party had discussed a constitutional amendment.
But in August, a debate on whether the president should extend his rule into
a third term resurfaced.“Muluzi will stand again in 2004 because people want him.
We will change the constitution so Muluzi can stand,” said a key supporter.
In two other countries whose leaders were mooted to be set to join “third term”
campaigns requiring constitutional change, external and internal pressure provided a check on ambitions in that direction.But though President Daniel arap Moi
of Kenya hinted at an exit at the end of his second and constitutionally-last term, he
invested heavily in a careful succession plan and efforts to hinder a full constitutional
review. In Zambia,which had appeared to be losing any claims to democracy,
President Chiluba, with his party in revolt and facing massive public pressure and
predictions of large-scale violence, on May 3 abandoned his efforts to change the
constitution’s two-term limit and announced that he would step down when his
second term ended at the end of the year. The news sparked celebrations in the
country.
SILENCING THE CRITICS
In too many countries, effective mechanisms for querying,much less contesting
or contributing to, government policy and operations were lacking. In the absence
of autonomous electoral authorities, independent judiciaries, and the provision of
equal access for competing political factions to government controlled media,
opposition voices could only rely on getting their message across through the
much-harassed independent media and the grassroots influence of trade unions or
civil society organizations. Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Kenya, Mauritania, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, and numerous other countries
remained reluctant to commit themselves to the imperatives of democracy
and respect for human rights.
In Equatorial Guinea, the government continued to use military courts, repressive
laws, and arbitrary arrests and prosecutions to restrict political freedoms. In
November 2000, hundreds of copies of the latest issue of independent weekly La
Opinion were seized by the authorities in Mongome, a town in the east of Equatorial
Guinea.The newspapers were confiscated on the order of the government’s representative
in the district.According to the government, the paper was too close to
the opposition. In February 2001, the mayor of Malabo closed the offices of the
Equatorial Guinea press association.
On April 1, 2001, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso publicly apologized
for the torture and “all other crimes” committed by his government in a blanket
act of state contrition. However, the 1998 killing of journalist Norbert Zongo
remained a source of both national and international outrage. To commemorate
the two-year anniversary of Zongo’s death, human rights advocates and opposition
parties along with members of the international press attempted to gather in Ouagadougou
in December 2000 to demand that the perpetrators be found and prosecuted.
Many journalists were prevented from entering the country by security
forces and riot police thwarted commemoration activities.
In Cameroon, police in Yaounde dispersed supporters of the opposition Social
Democratic Front as they marched on November 27, 2000, to demand the creation
of an independent electoral commission. Five opposition parties walked out of parliament
on December 7, 2000, as the house passed a bill creating an election-monitoring
body known as the Observatoire National des Elections, its members to be
appointed single-handedly by President Paul Biya. In July 2001, police raided the offices of independent newspaper Mutations, seized copies of the paper, and summoned
the publisher,Haman Mana, to a hearing, accusing him of having published
confidential state documents.Mana refused to reveal his source, citing Cameroonian
law; he was released on August 3. On October 3, 2001, police summoned
Jean-Marc Soboth, editor-in-chief of the independent La Nouvelle Expression and
demanded that he reveal his sources for a story about security measures in the
country’s English-speaking provinces. The authorities maintained that the newspaper
revealed a “defense secret.”The journalist refused to do so, again citing privilege,
and was released the same day.
Togolese police used tear gas on August 14, 2001, to break up a demonstration
by opposition parties and human rights activists demanding the release of opposition
leader Yawovi Agboyibor, sentenced to six months imprisonment for defamation.
He had reportedly said in 1998 that the prime minister, Messan Kodjo, was
associated with a militia whose members killed supporters of his party, the Comité
Action pour le Renouveau.
Guinea Bissau saw new problems following an alleged coup plot in November
2000. General Ansumane Mané, the former leader of the disbanded military junta,
was killed in early December 2000 in mysterious circumstances after challenging
the president over military promotions. Despite national and international
appeals, there was no independent investigation of his death. Ten opposition leaders,
including several parliamentarians, who had also criticized the government
handling of the promotions,were arrested without warrant between November 24
and 26, 2000. They were not freed until March. Journalists were also under threat.
In March, the deputy procurator-general threatened to bomb a radio station,Radio
Bombolom, in order to interrupt a radio debate about the alleged coup attempt. In
mid-September the attorney general reportedly went to Radio Pidjiquiti and
threatened its workers after they refused to give him the tapes of a program on
which journalists had commented on his appointment.
Gabon’s President Bongo promoted a constitutional amendment to give former
heads of state immunity from legal prosecution. Several privately owned radio stations
and television channels were regularly threatened with withdrawal of their
broadcasting licenses by the authorities.But some news from Gabon was good.The
satirical weekly La Griffe, banned two years before, was authorized in late July by the
National Communication Council to begin publishing again.Two of its publishers,
who had been sentenced to eight years in prison, received a presidential pardon on
October 29th, 2000. Another satirical publication, La Cigale Enchantée, closed
down at the same time for accusing the minister in charge of infrastructure of corruption,
remained banned.
In the Horn of Africa, political liberties faced serious threats. Eritrea’s strongman
President Isaias Aferwerki cracked down harshly on those who dared to speak
out. In February, the president removed the minister of local government after he
questioned the country’s leadership. In May, fifteen members of the seventy-five
strong central committee of the ruling party published an open letter demanding
reforms. Among the signatories were several former ministers and ambassadors,
and three generals. On September 18 and 19, the government arrested without
charge eleven signatories of the “G-15” letter—three others were abroad and one had previously retracted his signature of the letter. In July, the government arrested
student leader Semere Kesete for strongly protesting the government’s management
of the university’s mandatory summer work program. On September 19, the
government withdrew the licenses of all eight independent newspapers in the
country, claiming they had violated media law and undermined national unity.The
minister of information (previously the security chief) announced that he would
review each newspaper to determine whether it could reopen.At this writing, none
had reopened. The government-controlled media were left as the only source of
information for Eritrea’s citizens.
In neighboring Ethiopia, there was a marked erosion of civil liberties during
2001. The government jailed civil rights advocates, political rivals, students, and
journalists without formal charges, and police used excessive force against
unarmed civilians. In March, key members of the Tigrayan People’s Liberation
Front, the lead party in the government coalition, issued a twelve-point critique of
the prime minister’s policies. The dissenters, joined by members of other government
parties, complained that the government had concluded a premature and
unfavorable peace agreement with Eritrea. They also accused the prime minister,
Meles Zenawi, of corruption.
In Rwanda, the government continued to disregard the constitution’s guarantee
of the right to form political parties. The ruling Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF)
maintained a ban on the activities of all other parties,while the RPF itself recruited
new members and campaigned in district elections. The government barred former
president Pasteur Bizimungu from organizing a new political party and
harassed party members and journalists reporting the story.
Tanzania’s image was badly tarnished by serious abuses in the semi-autonomous
islands of Zanzibar during late January and early February. Police blocked a
demonstration by opposition supporters against the much-criticized 2000 elections,
marred by serious violence and described by the Commonwealth as a “shambles.”
A climate of harassment and repression of political activity continued for the
better part of the year. On October 9, 2001, a deal was signed by the Zanzibar
authorities and the opposition agreeing on tension-reducing measures including
electoral reform, provision of equal access to all parties on state media, and the
holding of by-elections for seats that remained vacant after the disputed 2000 elections.
Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe’s indifference to legal norms and
encouragement of political violence persisted—threatening the entire southern
African subregion with instability. Against the backdrop of a worsening economic
crisis precipitated in part by the violent seizure of white-owned commercial land,
the government continued its hard line attitude towards the political opposition,
media, and judiciary.Widespread violence was visited on opposition supporters,
especially in rural areas, and on the owners and residents of white-owned commercial
farms by veterans of the liberation war and supporters of the ruling party.
The police did little or nothing to intervene to protect those who were the victims
of this violence; human rights organizations noted increasing politicization of the
criminal justice system. The year saw the forced resignation of the chief justice,
Anthony Gubbay, on the grounds that the government, which had itself scorned court orders, could no longer guarantee his personal safety. Leading opposition
leaders were also subjected to arrests on controversial charges of inciting violence
and harassment of supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC)
had worsened severely by the end of the year. In November,more than twenty MDC
activists were arrested in Bulawayo, on charges of involvement in the murder of a
war veteran leader; the MDC suggested that the veteran had been killed by the security
forces to silence him. Zimbabwe faced increasing diplomatic isolation, including
the first public criticism from its neighbors in the Southern African
Development Community (SADC).
Also in the south the year was a difficult one for King Mswati of Swaziland.
Under pressure to implement governmental reforms, faced with increased HIV
infection in his population, a worsening economy, and an outspoken media, King
Mswati attempted to maintain iron-fisted control. For its part, the opposition
demanded an end to the twenty-seven-year ban on political parties and the state of
emergency, and called for the creation of an interim government. In January, leaders
of this movement were arrested and charged with “misconduct.” Royal Decree
No.2, promulgated on June 24, gave the king the power to ban any book, magazine
or newspaper, prohibited anyone from impersonating or ridiculing the king, prevented
legal challenges to any of the monarch’s executive decisions, and eliminated
bail for a range of crimes, including holding illegal public demonstrations. The
decree also gave the justice minister the power to appoint and fire judges at will, and
prohibited newspapers from challenging publishing bans. But one month later, the
king bowed to international pressure and revoked the decree. After a four-month
court battle the Guardian, an independent weekly, had a banning order against it
overturned on September 3. In November, amid a crackdown on the opposition,
President Joachim Chissano of Mozambique, speaking on behalf of SADC,
expressed concern that the situation in Swaziland threatened the stability of the
subregion.
Namibia,which had boasted one of the most liberal constitutions at the time of
its independence in 1990, saw serious threats to its liberties during 2001. President
Sam Nujoma’s outspoken attacks on gays, lesbians, foreigners, and white Namibians,
as well as his dismissal of several judges, created a troubling environment for
human rights during the year. In March, the government imposed an advertising
boycott on the independent Namibian, claiming the paper was too critical of its
policies.
There was some good news on a different front. The internet became an ever
more useful tool for the dissemination of information on the continent—despite
the efforts of governments such as Zimbabwe’s, where the pending Post and Communications
Act would give the government unfettered powers to intercept postal
and electronic communications.At this writing, however, eleven African countries
had no private sector involvement in providing Internet service. In those countries,
such as Ethiopia and Niger, costs remained exorbitant for local users, and government
monitoring of communication easy. Lines could be cut off with no explanation,
access to websites blocked, and owners of cyber cafés forced to supply
government intelligence officials with copies of e-mails sent or received by them.
Even in Mauritania, where the private sector was not barred, the two private Internet
service providers had very close ties to the president.
SMOLDERING FIRES
Wars continued to smolder and flare across the continent, most seriously in
Angola,Burundi,Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
Despite repeated commitments to peaceful resolution of conflict, the warring parties
remained heavily engaged in armed operations. In the Great Lakes area, the
warring factions’ forced recruitment of civilians, including children, appreciably
escalated.
The war in the DRC continued to be characterized by shocking brutality. Talks
meant to forward implementation of the Lusaka agreements to end hostilities
resumed following Joseph Kabila’s assumption of the presidency in January. International
pressure on Uganda and Rwanda to withdraw their troops from Congo
increased. A preliminary inter-Congolese dialogue took place in Gaborone in mid-
August, with follow up “national dialogue” convened on October 15 in Addis
Ababa.But incessant disagreements between Congolese rebels and the government
and a shortfall in funding prevented much progress being made at the talks. Relations
between Rwanda and Uganda worsened, owing to a combination of personal
animosities between the top leadership and colliding interests in the DRC war, and
further undermined progress towards a solid cease-fire and a political solution to
the conflict.
Burundi endured its eighth year of civil war—intertwined with conflicts in
neighboring DRC and Rwanda—with both governmental and rebel forces guilty of
killing, raping, and assaulting civilians and destroying their property.Civilian casualties,
however, were fewer than in previous years, and there were fewer large-scale
massacres. Late in the year the government and opposition political parties hobbled
towards implementing the Arusha Accord signed in August 2000. Following installation
of a transitional government on November 1, rebel movements stepped up
combat; one of them abducted hundreds of schoolboys, apparently to force them
to become child soldiers.
In West Africa, the countries of the Mano River Union—Liberia, Sierra Leone,
and Guinea—were caught up in an ongoing subregional conflict which spilled
across borders. From late 2000 to April 2001 fierce fighting occurred between Sierra
Leonean rebels and their Liberian government allies in a series of border clashes
with the armed forces of neighboring Guinea. Thousands of Liberian and Sierra
Leonean refugees in Guinea were trapped in the border attacks. For their part, the
Guinean authorities allowed Liberian rebels to operate from their territory, and
seemed at minimum to have provided logistical support and sponsored cross-border
incursions into Liberia.The rebel incursion into northern Liberia continued to
make gains, with serious abuses against civilians by both rebel and Liberian government
forces. Thanks in large part to the deployment of British forces in 2000
and their continued presence, together with some 17,000 U.N. peacekeepers’move
into former rebel strongholds in Sierra Leone, and the disarming of over 20,000
Sierra Leonean rebel and government troops, there was at year’s end some hope of
a lasting peace in Sierra Leone. However, there appeared to be no end to the
renewed civil war in Liberia, and the continued instability in the subregion.
There also seemed no end to conflict in Angola, as attacks by the rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) led by Jonas Savimbi, and to
a much lesser extent government troops, resulted in yet more civilian casualties.
The continuing violence formed a grim backdrop to hints of a political deal to
break the deadlock between the warring parties. In August, President José Eduardo
dos Santos’ announcement that he would not run in the country’s next elections
was greeted with surprise and skepticism.Many were aware of the reality that the
refusal by the government to re-enter negotiations for a political solution would
leave the country stuck in a military standoff.
In Sudan, war raged on, with President al-Bashir continuing his practice of
dropping bombs on civilians in the south and preventing humanitarian aid from
getting to them. Oil money,which first began to flow into the government’s coffers
in late 1999, continued to fuel intensified fighting in the south, with predictable
results for human rights.
Just over a year after a U.N. peacekeeping force had been fully wound down in
February 2000, the Central African Republic was plunged into an ongoing political
and human rights crisis when former President Andre Kolingba spearheaded his
third coup attempt in five years on May 28. Reports said fifty people were killed in
the fighting to regain government control after rebels took over the airport, radio
station, and other parts of Bangui’s infrastructure. Although the coup was swiftly
put down by the forces of President Ange-Félix Patassé, with the assistance of
Libyan troops (not to mention Chadian troops and rebel troops from DRC), unrest
continued in the months following as unarmed civilians, particularly members of
the Yakoma ethnic group to which Kolingba belongs, were targeted for arbitrary
detention and arrest. The government reportedly tortured and killed numerous
civilians and members of the security forces.
The Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) continued to limp back to normalcy after
the ferocious civil wars of 1993, 1997, and 1998. The past year was officially one of
“national reconciliation,” and a “non-exclusive dialogue” which was scheduled to
end in April. A reconciliation convention was held, but no election date had been
set at this writing.
FLEEING WARS, ONLY TO FIND MORE WOES
War continued to swell the tide of refugees and internally displaced persons,
spawning bleak, overcrowded camps, where responsible authorities were barely
able to provide the necessities of life and violence often seemed uncontrolled.As of
January 2001, there were at least 3,346,000 refugees in Africa out of a total
14,544,000 worldwide. The numbers of internally displaced people also remained
high,with Angola, Sierra Leone, Eritrea, and Sudan having the largest populations.
In many conflicts more people were internally displaced than crossed international
borders: about 4.4 million Sudanese were internally displaced and 420,000 were
refugees in neighboring countries.Yet international law and structures for protecting
the internally displaced remained weaker than those for refugees.
The major refugee crisis of the year occurred in Guinea, which experienced
enormous upheaval while serving as host to some 400,000 refugees from Sierra Leone and Liberia. Several months of fierce cross-border fighting between Guinean
government forces and Sierra Leonean rebels acting together with Liberian government
troops drove refugees and local residents alike from their homes in border
regions.At the same time, the Guinean government closed its border to new Liberian
refugees who were trying to escape the civil war. As refugees moved inland to
escape the border violence, they remained vulnerable to beatings, strip searches,
extortion, sexual assault, arbitrary arrest and detention, and widespread intimidation
at the hands of the Guinean authorities. Sierra Leonean refugees who fled the
dire conditions in Guinea by walking home through Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) territory were raped, killed, and abducted for fighting or forced labor by the
RUF rebels as they attempted to reach Sierra Leonean government-held towns.The
Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Guinean
government finally agreed to move the camps further inland and to provide facilitated
return by boat from Conakry to Sierra Leonean refugees who wanted to
return home. The situation in Guinea remained difficult for both refugees and
NGO workers through April 2001. By May 2001, an organized relocation program
had moved some 60,000 refugees inland. Some 35,000 refugees were returned to
Sierra Leone. By mid-2001, the situation seemed significantly calmer.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS:
RESILIENT IN A RISKY ENVIRONMENT
The human rights community remained one of the most dynamic segments of
civil society in Africa. But while human rights organizations were able to operate
without hindrance from state agencies in countries such as Botswana, Ghana,Mauritius,
Nigeria, Senegal, and South Africa, security forces in numerous other countries
closely scrutinized their activities.Activists were arrested, beaten and detained
in Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Zimbabwe,
and elsewhere. In Sierra Leone and DRC, among other places, an active
human rights community challenged abuses despite a hostile environment.
In Guinea-Bissau, soldiers and state security police arrested Fernando Gomes,
former president of the Liga Guineense dos Direitos Humanos (LGDH), at his
home on November 25, 2000. He was severely beaten in the presence of his family
and neighbors and, although seriously ill as a result of the beating, was denied medical
treatment while in detention. After his release on November 30, 2000, he was
refused permission to travel abroad for treatment until January 2001.
In Angola, Rafael Marques, a leading critic of the government and representative
of the Open Society Foundation, faced harassment by government officials
twice during the year. In December 2000,Marques was prevented from leaving the
country. In July 2001,Marques was assaulted and arrested by police for taking pictures
of tents in the Viana resettlement camp. A week prior to Marques’ arrest, government
demolition of houses in the Boa Vista section of Luanda, in order to force
residents to Viana, had resulted in two deaths. Yet the Angolan government did
allow greater discussion of concerns about the ongoing war.
Four members of Cameroon’s Collectif contre l’Impunité were arrested in April and detained at the central police station in Douala. The authorities alleged they
had held an illegal demonstration, though it appeared that their detention was in
fact related to an investigation of the January “disappearance” of nine youths. The
U.N. Human Rights Committee in June ruled that the government of Cameroon
pay U.S. $137,000 to Cameroonian human rights activist Albert Mukong, in compensation
for abuses committed against him by Cameroonian authorities in 1988
and 1990,when his book Prisoner Without a Crime was banned and he was detained
incommunicado.
In Chad, the period following the May election saw a violent crackdown on
human rights defenders. The government banned gatherings of more than twenty
people. On June 11, tear gas canisters and what was believed to be a grenade were
hurled into a crowd of peaceful demonstrators gathered in front of the French
embassy in the capital N’Djamena.Among those injured was leading activist Jacquy
Moudeina.Numerous pieces of shrapnel lodged in her leg and she was hospitalized.
Several human rights defenders fled Liberia and applied for political asylum. The
Liberian Bar Association conducted a boycott of the courts in October to protest
the harassment of colleagues who were detained for calling for due process protections
in the courts.Despite intensifying state harassment, a few brave activists continued
to work undaunted.
The head of Amnesty International in Gambia,Mohammed Lamin Sillah, was
detained incommunicado for four days in late October after he had been picked up
by state security agents for “questioning.” Sillah’s arrest was one among a reported
score of arrests in the wake of the presidential poll.
There were efforts to tighten regulatory regimes on NGOs in a number of countries
including Eritrea, Ethiopia, Mauritania, Rwanda, and Uganda. In Uganda,
NGOs operated generally quite freely and became more outspoken during 2001 in
their critique of the human rights practices of their government.But a draft law, the
Nongovernmental Organizations Registration (Amendment) Bill, would require
that NGOs obtain a special permit from the registration board before they could
operate. It would also increase the registration board’s powers to reject or revoke an
NGO’s registration; and it would stiffen the penalties for operating without official
sanction, potentially criminalizing legitimate NGO activities.
In Rwanda, a restrictive NGO law came into force in April, giving the government
wide-ranging powers to interfere with the work of NGOs, and to suspend or
dissolve associations. The Rwandan government was also preparing a decree to
increase the government’s control over the day-to-day work of NGOs. The government
stepped up harassment of the leading human rights NGO LIPRODHOR after
the organization published a statement critical of prison conditions.
In neighboring Burundi, local authorities threatened a human rights observer
from Ligue Iteka, one of the main human rights NGOs in the country, who was
leading an investigation into the government’s arming of civilians.
Conditions for human rights defenders worsened in the Horn.The Eritrean government
tolerated the operation of only one human rights organization,Citizens for
Peace in Eritrea, but only so long as it limited advocacy to the rights of war victims.
In Ethiopia, police arrested two leading activists, Professor Mesfin Woldemariam
and Dr. Berhanu Nega, in early May and held them in custody until June. The government leveled spurious charges against both that they had “incited students to
riot.”Mesfin was the founding president of the Ethiopian Human Rights Council
(EHRCO). On the day of the arrests, the government raided and sealed the EHRCO
offices, although the closure was lifted after ten days.
Two of the main human rights organizations in Mauritania, SOS-Esclaves
and the Association Mauritanienne des Droits de l’Homme (AMDH) continued to
be denied registration by the government and were therefore restricted in their
activities.
African activists Kodjo Djissenou and Ndungi Githuku, of Togo and Kenya
respectively, were two of the four winners of the Reebok Human Rights Award for
activists under age thirty. Kodjo Djissenou, a youth activist, had been working to
protect human rights in Togo since the age of twelve. Ndungi Githuku, who had
used his talents as a playwright, graphic artist, and performer since the age of nineteen
to raise awareness of police torture, political corruption, and democratic principles,
became the first artist to win the award. In October,D. Zacarias Camuenho,
president of the Bishops’ Conference of Angola and Sao Tome, won the Sakharov
peace prize—indicating the growing role of the churches as a possible mediator
between the two parties in the Angolan conflict.
REGIONAL INTERGOVERNMENTAL BODIES
African Union:
Making Over the Organization of African Unity
The year marked what was touted as the beginning of a new era for African
cooperation. At the July summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in
Lusaka,members agreed to set up a new organization, the African Union (A.U.); its
first summit would be held in 2002, in Pretoria, South Africa. Ivorian diplomat
Amara Essy was elected secretary-general after an all-night round of voting. The
A.U., like the OAU, would be based in Addis Ababa.
The treaty establishing the A.U. had important new provisions strengthening
the (theoretical) commitment of its member states to human rights. The A.U.
would also be looking into a common currency, a continental parliament, and a
court of justice. The summit decided to incorporate the OAU mechanism for conflict
prevention, management, and resolution as one of the organs of the A.U. It
conspicuously failed to do the same for the African Commission on Human and
People’s Rights, also an OAU body—this was said to be an oversight that could be
corrected.
The launching of the African Union coincided with the introduction of the New
African Initiative (NAI), intended to address Africa’s chronic failure to address its
economic and political problems. The plan was announced by the outgoing chair,
President Frederick Chiluba of Zambia, and was later formally launched on October
23 at a ceremony in Abuja,Nigeria, attended by presidents Olusegun Obasanjo
of Nigeria, Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal, and Abdelaziz
Bouteflika of Algeria.The NAI was a merger of the Millennium Partnership for the African Recovery Programme (MAP) proposed by the governments of South
Africa, Nigeria, and Algeria and the OMEGA plan proposed by President
Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal. In October, the NAI was renamed the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD).
At first glance, the concept of the African Union looked promising. But, apart
from words, it was far from clear that it represented any real progress.The core ideal
continued to be that continental cooperation should be a means to facilitate and
consolidate respect for democracy and human dignity across the continent.But the
obstacles that had prevented the OAU from achieving these aims remained. The
African Union would need to overcome the same ingrained clash of cultures and
egos that perennially split the Anglophone, Francophone, and Arab constituencies
of the organization.The refusal of member states to surrender their veto power had
ensured that the OAU had served merely as a clearinghouse for discussions that
could be ignored at will.Moreover, the OAU had failed to insist that its members
respect democratic and human rights norms. The much stronger human rights
language of the African Union might prove no less difficult to enforce.At the World
Conference Against Racism, held in Durban, South Africa, just a few weeks after the
last OAU summit, African countries largely refused to see racism and other forms
of intolerance as a problem that affected them internally—except with regard to
black-white relations especially in southern African countries—and focused
instead on the demand for reparations for the Atlantic slave trade.
Clear leadership from South Africa and Nigeria in particular would help to
address these issues. President Olusegun Obasanjo expressed a strong determination
to make the new initiatives succeed. In his words: “Within and outside Africa
we must put the Afro-pessimists and other cynics to shame by coming together to
work for the success of NAI.”Most probably President Obasanjo meant well. But it
would take more than presidential assurances to deliver a system that could be
relied on to fight effectively for peace, good governance, human rights, and economic
development.
Southern African Development Community
The Southern African Development Community (SADC),which had struggled
to find common ground and speak with a unified voice in 2000, hit its stride in mid-
2001 and made significant progress toward increasing its ability to engage in conflict
resolution in the region.SADC tended toward greater cohesion in the past year,
attending the G8 conference in Genoa as a block instead of as individual states, and
in its efforts to resolve the Zimbabwean crisis—seen as a threat to the entire subregion.
Considered the most significant step taken by SADC in its twenty-year history,
but with unclear consequences for human rights, was the creation of a
southern Africa free trade zone, which came into effect on September 1, 2000.
At a meeting in Windhoek in March, through a Protocol on Politics,Defense and
Security Cooperation, SADC turned the chairmanship of its security organ into a
one-year rotating position with clear reporting lines to the heads of state. President
Robert Mugabe had held this position since 1999; he was replaced by President
Joachim Chissano of Mozambique. This summit committed the community’s fourteen members to resolving conflicts in the region and for the first time adopted
operational principles and rules for the security organ.Nevertheless, going into the
August summit in Blantyre, Malawi, all sources pointed to a continuation of low
key “quiet diplomacy” towards Zimbabwe. But the final communiqué of the Blantyre
summit for the first time publicly “expressed concern on the effects of the Zimbabwe
economic situation on the region,” and in the months following,SADC took
a more active role in trying to find a solution.When an initially promising deal brokered
in August by the Commonwealth in Abuja, Nigeria, started to break down,
SADC leaders convened a further meeting in Harare in September.There they were
reported to have pressed President Mugabe to settle the crisis, and some appeared
ready to break ranks with him, a big change from “quiet diplomacy.” The meeting
ended with a recommitment by Harare to end land seizures in exchange for funding
by Britain of its land reform program; once again, the commitment seemed to
have little effect.Meanwhile on September 20,SADC agreed to create a special ministerial
task force on land issues in the region, the Food, Agriculture and Natural
Resources Directorate.
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Like its southern African counterpart, ECOWAS added force to its Protocol
relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution,
Peace-keeping and Security, signed in Lomé, Togo in December 1999. However,
human rights considerations remained low on the various diplomatic agendas pursued,
and ECOWAS member states demonstrated a general unwillingness to criticize
each other’s human rights records.
ECOWAS took the lead in rejuvenating the troubled Sierra Leonean peace
process by facilitating a ceasefire agreement between the government of Sierra
Leone and the rebel Revolutionary United Front (RUF), signed on November 10,
2000 in Abuja,Nigeria. In December 2000, the heads of state of the fifteen-member
organization directed the deployment of a force along the borders of Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone.But the entire plan was abandoned after it ran into major
hurdles. Guinea argued that force’s mandate was too weak; neither Guinea nor
Liberia signed the status of forces agreement; and ECOWAS insisted upon U.N.
Security Council involvement and funding.
In May 2001, the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, the United
Nations, the Government of Sierra Leone, and the RUF met in Abuja to review the
implementation of the peace deal. The review meeting stressed the need for the
Sierra Leonean government to facilitate the restoration of authority to areas previously
under RUF control where UNAMSIL, the U.N. peacekeeping force, had been
deploying.During the meeting, a six-member RUF delegation agreed to withdraw
its combatants from Kambia district, a point of departure for infiltration into
neighboring Guinea.The withdrawal would enable the deployment of troops from
the Sierra Leone Army to ensure the cessation of armed incursions into the two
countries.
Some progress was also recorded towards the implementation of the Plan of
Action of the April, 2000 Accra Declaration on War-Affected Children in West Africa. In March,ECOWAS and Canada signed an agreement for the establishment
of a Child Protection Unit within the ECOWAS Secretariat.
THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
Human Rights on Hold?
The events of September 11, 2001, seemed destined to reduce yet further the
chances of serious diplomatic attention to human rights issues in Africa by the
wider international community.With the spotlight on efforts to build and maintain
a global anti-terrorism coalition, there was likely to be more tolerance towards
countries that had previously been castigated as human rights abusers.At this writing,
it was already evident that talk about human rights, good governance, and
accountability was markedly reduced, and abuses more easily tolerated, as the U.S.
in particular became more preoccupied with short-term considerations such as
access to intelligence, airfields, and military bases.
But the more the international community uncritically aligned itself with autocratic
regimes in exchange for their support, facilities, and cooperation, the more it
risked unwittingly creating long-term instability, perfect conditions for further terrorist
support. A more prudent policy would seek to prevent security issues from
disproportionately influencing dealings with Africa. First, it would be essential to
continue to support movement toward democracy and respect for human rights on
the basis of explicit benchmarks. Second, as supplements to human rights protection,
economic and social uplift would be key. Third, external pressure—rather
than silence and condemnation—would be a prerequisite for meaningful political
and economic development.
United Nations
The U.N. was engaged in a wide variety of African crises, including those in
Angola, DRC, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, and showed a greater
sense of urgency and commitment than in the previous year.
There was a renewed focus on demobilization, the peace process, political dialogue,
and economic rehabilitation in the DRC. Two groundbreaking reports, in
which the U.N. showed an increased willingness to “name and shame” individuals
involved in the illicit arms-for-diamonds trade, examined the link between the
exploitation of natural resources and the fueling of conflict. On Liberia/Sierra
Leone, U.N. efforts centered on deploying targeted sanctions to stem the flow of
illicit diamonds and arms flows; in May 2001, the purchase of diamonds exported
from Liberia (believed to originate mainly from rebel-held territory in Sierra
Leone) was banned; and in December 2000 and November 2001 the committee
monitoring these sanctions followed the example of the Angola committee in issuing
hard-hitting reports. There was also some forward movement toward the setting
up of a special court for Sierra Leone and enhancing the capability of the U.N.
peacekeeping force to protect the civilian population there—though the human rights agenda was still often trumped by political considerations.With respect to
Angola, the main activity concentrated on monitoring and verification by the sanctions
panel on arms and illicit diamonds and on improving the response of government
and U.N. agencies to the needs of internally displaced persons.
The U.N. began to engage with the issues surrounding HIV/AIDS, so key for
Africa. The Security Council discussed AIDS three times over eighteen months,
including a meeting in the summer of 2000 in which, for the first time, the pandemic
was characterized as a security concern. In late June 2001, the first ever General
Assembly session about a disease was held. Secretary-General Kofi Annan
officially declared the creation of a Global Fund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and
malaria, hoping to raise U.S. $7-10 billion for the purpose. However, nothing like
this sum had been pledged by November, while NGOs criticized a lack of transparency
in administering the fund and an implicit refusal to use the money for
treatment as well as prevention. Annan also met with the executives of the seven
major drug firms to investigate ways of lowering the price of HIV/AIDS drugs.Both
the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNAIDS welcomed the offers by
Indian pharmaceuticals manufacturer Cipla to provide drugs at low prices. The
WHO advocated “differential pricing” of drugs on the basis of a country’s economic
strength to the World Trade Organization; though this was partly a concession
to drug company resistance to a global reduction in prices. The International
Labor Organization put out guidelines on AIDS in the workplace and joined
UNAIDS. The World Food Programme launched several special feeding projects
for people living with HIV/AIDS, including one in Congo. Though criticized as
tokenistic, they were at least a recognition of the need.
European Union
Though the lack of coherence in European Union (E.U.) policy towards Africa
endured, there were attempts to remedy the problem through improved coordination.
France and the United Kingdom, the dominant players, continued to state a
commitment to ending their tradition of competitive foreign policies toward
Africa, though the practice did not always live up to the rhetoric. Clear policy differences
among key European players remained, and were evident in policy conflicts
among E.U. member states, especially the U.K. and France, regarding Côte
d’Ivoire, the Mano River Countries, the Great Lakes, and Zimbabwe.While Britain
spoke out strongly against President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, for example,
France’s President Jacques Chirac received the president in Paris after a special OAU
summit in Libya focusing on the African Union. The British foreign office was
quoted as being shocked by the French decision.
Under the Swedish presidency, the E.U. appointed Hans Dahlgren, the state secretary
of the Swedish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as its special envoy to Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone, responsible for framing a coordinated E.U. policy on the
three countries and promoting cooperation with the U.N. and the Economic
Community ofWest African States. Dahlgren affirmed the E.U.’s support for sanctions
against Liberia. An E.U. delegation led by Dahlgren visited Mali, Guinea,
Sierra Leone, and Liberia between May 29 and June 1. Talks focused on the serious humanitarian and political crisis in the region.The visit included meetings with the
presidents of the four states and representatives of relief organizations and civil
society. The E.U.’s special envoy to Ethiopia and Eritrea, Sen. Rino Serri, appointed
in December 1999, played an important role in ensuring that human rights issues
were highlighted in Europe’s response to the conflict between and developments
within the two countries.
The E.U. invoked article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement, the human rights clause
of the document regulating its relations with members of the African-Caribbean-
Pacific (ACP) group of countries, in relation to Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, and Zimbabwe
in 2001, calling for consultations on worsening respect for human rights,
democratic principles, and rule of law. The E.U. also acted in unison in protest at
the crackdown by the Eritrea government on dissenters.All member states recalled
their ambassadors for consultations after Eritrea expelled the Italian ambassador
following his critical comments about the government’s human rights record.At a
meeting in October with the heads of state of Algeria, Nigeria, Senegal, South
Africa, and the representative of Egypt’s head of state, E.U. officials committed the
union to supporting the NAI.
However, the same coordinated approach was absent in policy regarding the
Great Lakes, where the E.U. seemed to defer to Belgian and French leadership. The
United Kingdom continued its support for Rwanda and Uganda,while other member
states, especially France and Belgium, leaned more toward Kinshasa. On June
30, Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstad signaled the resumption of bilateral
cooperation with the DRC by signing a new aid package, dedicated to health, education,
and infrastructure.He also pledged to use Belgium’s six-month presidency
of the E.U. to lobby other member states to reengage with the DRC. The E.U.’s
special envoy for the Great Lakes, Aldo Ajello, continued to be active on the diplomatic
front for the E.U. The region was also visited by several high-level European
delegations, including the Belgian prime minister and foreign minister, and E.U.
commissioner Poul Nielson. For his part, French Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine
visited the region in August.
The ACP-E.U. Joint Parliamentary Assembly sent a delegation on a fact-finding
mission to Sudan from June 26 to July 2, 2001. In a September report, the delegation
urged the Sudanese government to improve its record in human rights and
also noted that the record of rebel groups on human rights “is also very far from
being acceptable.” By resolution of November 1, 2001, the ACP-E.U. Joint Parliamentary
Assembly stated that it believes the SPLM/A should not seek formal control
over any E.U. funding, which would then allow for resumption of E.U.
humanitarian assistance to SPLA areas. It also called on the government of Sudan
to take more effective action against torture, discrimination against Christians, and
abductions (which particularly affect women and children).
United Kingdom
Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom pledged to make Africa a priority
of the Labor Party’s second term. In July 2001, during the G-8 Summit in
Genoa, the prime minister announced plans to build on the launch of the U.S. $1.5 billion U.N. global health fund with a five-point “modernization plan” for Africa
linking trade, aid, investment, conflict resolution, and the fight against AIDS to
combat poverty in the world’s poorest continent. Britain would provide $200 million
to the U.N. fund.While debt campaigners criticized the fund as “inadequate”
and “a gimmick,” it did at least represent a commitment to the continent rare
among Western leaders. Britain was one of the few wealthy countries that actually
increased aid to Africa during the year, though from a low base. Government officials
linked the commitment to a government white paper of December 2000 entitled
“Eliminating World Poverty: Making Globalization Work for the Poor.” Like
other European countries, however, Britain refused to accede to the demand made
at the World Conference Against Racism that the historical slave trade be acknowledged
as a crime against humanity for which reparations were due.
The United Kingdom backed the “New African Initiative,” under which poor
countries would receive financial help and better access to rich Western markets in
return for cleaning up their governments and economic reform. The prime minister
renewed his pledge in September at a meeting with six “reforming”African presidents—
of Botswana, Ghana, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania—
focused on trade, good governance, and conflict resolution. The only public statement
from the meeting, however, was a response to the September 11 attacks and
the question of terrorism.
Additionally, the U.K. continued to play a central role in the stabilization of
Sierra Leone. Jonathan Riley, the then British brigadier commanding in Sierra
Leone, pledged in January that British troops would stay until the RUF was either
defeated militarily or diplomatically. The U.K. also continued its commitment to
rebuild the Sierra Leonean army and police. From June 2000 through September,
some six hundred British troops were involved in training 8,500 Sierra Leonean
Army soldiers. After September 2001, the 360 U.K. military personnel who
remained would continue to play a major role in advising and directing military
operations, including the staffing of key positions within the Sierra Leonean
defense headquarters. Other sectors which benefited from British aid included
demobilization programs, human rights and civil society groups, rehabilitation of
the legal system, humanitarian aid and programs, and the restoration of local government.
Concerns remained, however, that among the newly-trained soldiers
were many human rights abusers.
International Development Minister Clare Short showed unusual interest in the
DRC. In early August, she made a focused three-day visit to the country. On top of
her agenda was the role the United Kingdom could play in supporting the demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups in the region. In previous years, she had
focused her attention principally on Rwanda and Uganda—problematically offering
uncritical support for those governments.
France
France reiterated previous statements of the main elements of its rethought
Africa policy: loyalty to a tradition of commitment and solidarity, modernization
of France’s cooperation machinery, and the opening up of France’s policy to embrace the whole of the continent. In April, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin insisted
that his country’s approach marked a new era: a break with the imperialist past and
a new pragmatism which would be based on noninterference in domestic African
issues. During an official visit to South Africa, Prime Minister Jospin insisted that
Paris had decided to break with its networks of influence in its former colonies.
South Africa, he said, was a country he called “a strategic axis not only in French
African policy but also in French international policy.” His statements were supposedly
put to the test by an attempted coup d’état in the Central African Republic.
France did not intervene in Bangui. However, France was also reluctant to
openly criticize “old friends,” or apply diplomatic pressure aimed at improving
human rights in former French colonies, including Burkina Faso, Togo, and Côte
d’Ivoire (where new president Laurent Gbagbo’s longstanding links to socialist
politicians in Paris protected him from serious pressure to ensure accountability for
election atrocities).
France’s military training program in Africa, the Renforcement des Capacités
Africaines de Maintien de la Paix (Recamp), continued. In May, military officers and
diplomats from fifteen African countries and twenty non-African partners met to
prepare for a military exercise scheduled for Tanzania in February 2002, the first big
Recamp event in non-francophone southern Africa. Britain, previously skeptical
about the initiative, also attended; future U.S. cooperation was discussed, with its
own Africa Crisis Response Initiative up for review. However, Recamp did not
effectively screen trainees for the purpose of excluding known human rights
abusers.
International Monetary Fund and World Bank
In February 2001, the heads of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
World Bank undertook an unprecedented tour of Africa, visiting Kenya, Mali,
Nigeria, and Tanzania, and meeting leaders from most of sub-Saharan Africa. The
Bank’s vice-president for Africa asserted, “We are working with Africa very differently
from the way we have worked in the past,” underlining a shift in jargon of the
Bretton Woods institutions over the previous two years from the predominance of
“structural adjustment” to “poverty reduction.”
The two institutions worked more proactively toward rapid implementation of
the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) program in twenty-three countries,
nineteen of which were in Africa. Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Gambia,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, São Tomé and Príncipe, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia
reached their “decision point,” at which it was decided that they qualified for relief
under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. The twenty-three countries were receiving
relief which could amount to some U.S. $34 billion over time.Uganda and Mozambique
reached “completion point,” indicating they had established a track record of
good performance under the original HIPC initiative and qualified for additional
relief. Zambia ($2.5 billion), Tanzania ($2 billion), Mozambique ($2 billion),
Cameroon ($1.3 billion) and Uganda ($1 billion) topped the December 2000 list of
the African countries receiving the greatest dollar value of committed debt relief.
Guinea-Bissau had the greatest percentage of debt reduction, at over 80 percent.Yet
the World Bank itself acknowledged that any benefits expected from HIPC would
likely be wiped out by a worldwide slump in commodity prices. In the wake of the
September 11 attacks, the IMF gave assurances that it would be ready to make additional
resources available to African countries experiencing problems as a result of
a downturn in the world economy.
The IMF, backed by the U.S. and U.K., refused to renew lending to Kenya in
August, citing corruption. In September, responding to the crisis in Zimbabwe, the
IMF announced that it had barred the country from future IMF loans or use of its
general resources. An agreement with Nigeria, however, was extended in August,
despite the failure of the government to observe the conditions set, and both the
World Bank and IMF ramped up their support for the DRC. They facilitated the
preparation of the government’s program for a meeting of bilateral and multilateral
donors in early July in Paris. In late July, the IMF approved a staff-monitored
program and a U.S. $50 million grant for the economic recovery program. The two
institutions also expressed willingness to assist the DRC to address its debt of U.S.
$800 million owed to them.
The World Bank, under the leadership of James Wolfensohn, came to see
HIV/AIDS as one of the central issues it had to address. However, instead of the
debt reduction hoped for in severely AIDS-affected countries, the bank played an
old tune, offering U.S. $500 million in additional loans for sub-Saharan Africa, to
be used almost exclusively for prevention.
United States
Even before the September 11 attacks, Africa had low expectations of the new
U.S. administration under President George W. Bush.During his campaign for the
presidency Bush barely mentioned Africa.When specifically asked about his vision
for the continent, his reply was terse: “While Africa may be important, it doesn’t fit
into the national strategic interests, as far as I can see them.”
But after coming into office, the administration’s approach was somewhat
nuanced.Confronted by the continuing armed conflicts that ravaged large parts of
Africa, including the wars in Angola, Burundi, DRC, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, the
administration started sending signals that it would continue to play a role in
resolving Africa’s crises and in particular would seek to play a more neutral role in
the Great Lakes wars. But U.S interest in peacemaking or peacekeeping remained
minimal and official statements still focused mainly on trade and investment,
revealing a fundamental lack of engagement with human rights issues. However,
the administration exhibited some interest in training African armies to perform
peacekeeping functions, and the U.S. trained battalions during the year from
Ghana, Nigeria, and Senegal, and prepared to train troops from Guinea. Walter
Kansteiner, assistant secretary of state for African affairs, told Congress at his May
confirmation hearing:“Sub-Saharan Africa is a priority for this administration.We
are not immune from Africa’s problems,” and proceeded to list them as being the
spread of HIV/AIDS, rampant poverty, and civil strife. In line with this tack, it was
not surprising that senior U.S. officials argued that the mandate of UNAMSIL, the U.N. peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone, should be extended not because of the
civilian population at risk, but because of the criminal networks in the country that
would undermine U.S. economic and political interests.
Secretary of State Colin Powell undertook a trip to the region in May, visiting
Mali,Uganda,Kenya, and South Africa. Powell stated: “We cannot ignore any place
in the world, and Africa is a huge continent in great need—so we have to be
engaged.”A major focus of the trip was HIV/AIDS.He also discussed regional conflicts,
including with leaders of the DRC and Sudan, but the broad message
throughout the trip appeared to be that Africa’s future depended on the actions of
its own leaders, not the international community. Echoing the administration’s
plans to use trade as a major tool and to send aid primarily to countries it viewed
as making economic and political progress, Powell said,“Money loves security and
stability.” The United States Trade Representative for Africa revisited this theme in
a speech to the Congressional Black Caucus on September 28, when he reiterated
the administration’s belief that the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA)
was the primary vehicle for U.S. trade and development in Africa. This underlined
the continuity in Africa policy since the Clinton administration. Although there
was a change in attitude and style towards Africa, the strategic priorities remained
the same, namely economic. For the Bush team, this implied greater interest in free
trade and open markets; though the concessions to Africa offered by AGOA were in
fact limited.
Notwithstanding Colin Powell’s vow of engagement, in practice the Bush
administration remained detached from African issues, seemingly preferring,with
the exception of Sudan, to defer to the Europeans, or to the so-called anchor states
of South Africa and Nigeria. Sudan galvanized sustained high-level attention
because of a powerful coalition of religious and conservative forces that pressured
the administration to take a stronger line against the Khartoum government. The
establishment in September of the position of special envoy to Sudan mirrored that
pressure. President Bush named former U.S. Senator John Danforth to the position,
saying, “Sudan is a disaster for all human rights.We must turn the eyes of the
world upon the atrocities in Sudan.”
The withdrawal of the U.S. delegation from the World Conference Against
Racism,Racial Discrimination,Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in South
Africa from August 31 to September 8, showed disregard for African activists as
well as the efforts devoted to the event within the region.What could have been an
excellent opportunity for the U.S. to contribute to the understanding and remedy
of such serious issues as discrimination against refugees, sexism, and the disproportionate
impact of HIV/AIDS on people of color resulted instead in disappointment.
In the wake of the September attacks, it was likely that the administration’s interest
would be focused on the Horn and East Africa (embracing Sudan, Eritrea,
Ethiopia,Kenya, Somalia, and Tanzania). Sudan was reported to have offered extensive
cooperation with the U.S., including sharing intelligence on the al-Qaeda network.
Reports suggested that beyond Afghanistan, Somalia might be a target of U.S.
military operations in pursuit of al-Qaeda cells. That would significantly reshape
U.S. relations with the subregion, with potentially serious human rights implications.
Throughout the continent, there was concern that enhanced cooperation with the U.S. on the terrorism agenda would silence criticism of allies’ attacks on
domestic political enemies. National security adviser Condoleezza Rice insisted
that in building alliances, it was “clear our job is to make certain that we draw a line
in all our discussions between legitimate dissent or legitimate movements for the
rights of minorities, and the fact that there may be international terrorism in various
parts of the world.”However, past conduct by the U.S. on making such human
rights issues a priority—prior to the September attacks when the stakes for the U.S.
were much lower—did not back her assurances.
For example, in the case of Ethiopia, the U.S. had rarely spoken out and exerted
no meaningful pressure when abuses—including excessive force against demonstrators,
silencing of dissent, and the violent repression of minorities in restless
regions—were perpetrated by the government. On the contrary, the government
was rewarded with generous aid packages. In the wake of September 11, exchanges
between Ethiopia and the U.S. increased, but were focused exclusively on antiterrorism
rather than any human rights concerns. In one of the only three telephone
calls to African leaders reported prior to launching the strikes against Afghanistan,
President Bush spoke with Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia on October 5, thanking
him for his offer to cooperate in the campaign against terrorism and discussing
his intent to take action against terrorists and their sanctuaries. Mainstreaming
human rights considerations was not on the agenda.
Colin Powell, during his whirlwind tour of Africa, had praised democratic
trends in Kenya but emphasized the importance of constitutional rule, hinting at
Kenya’s need for a thorough constitutional review. His comments were widely
viewed by observers as a diplomatic way of saying that President Moi should step
down from the presidency in 2002, as he was required to do so by the constitution.
But September 11 might have pushed such concerns to the back burner.According
to a White House press release, the president spoke with President Moi of Kenya on
October 5, emphasizing the need for cooperation on many fronts—financial, intelligence,
diplomatic, and military. He suggested further talks between the United
States and Kenya on how to meet the challenges ahead.Again, there appeared to be
no room for valuing human rights as integral to regional security.
When a State Department spokesperson was asked about the implications of
coalition making for U.S. policy regarding Sudan, he responded that cooperation
with the U.S. would not relieve Sudan of its responsibility to terminate its abusive
domestic practices, including denial of humanitarian access, bombing attacks on
humanitarian operations and civilian targets, and religious discrimination. The
spokesperson contended that all those issues remained firmly fixed on the U.S
agenda despite an alignment with Sudan to fight terror. It remained to be seen,
however, whether the demands of the terrorism coalition would override human
rights and humanitarian concerns, in this and other cases.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
While focusing on areas of prolonged conflict,Human Rights Watch continued
to cover all of sub-Saharan Africa and to expand monitoring of French-speaking
countries.We carried out research and advocacy on Angola,Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Eritrea, Ethiopia,Guinea-Conakry, Kenya,
Liberia,Nigeria,Mozambique, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Additionally, the Africa division tackled
cross-country, thematic research on arms flows, natural resources and corporate
responsibility, national human rights commissions, and the rights of children,
women, refugees, and the internally displaced.We also increased the level and scope
of our monitoring of non-state actors, placing special focus on the violence perpetrated
by rebel forces, and practical methods to influence them through dialogue
and third country leverage.
We fielded investigative and advocacy missions to Angola, Burundi, Côte
d’Ivoire, DRC, Gambia, Guinea-Conakry, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa,
Tanzania,Uganda,Zambia, and Zimbabwe.Human Rights Watch maintained field
offices in Kigali, Rwanda; Freetown, Sierra Leone; and Bujumbura, Burundi.
Human Rights Watch continued its strong collaboration with national human
rights organizations. Behind the scenes,we continued to build the capacity of local
NGOs to effect change on the human rights record in their countries.When human
rights defenders were harassed,Human Rights Watch pushed for diplomatic measures
to end the problem. In October 2001,Human Rights Watch published a briefing
paper, Freedom of Association at Risk: The Proposed NGO Bill and Current
Restrictions on NGOs in Uganda, about a new law before the Ugandan parliament
that would severely limit or curtail the rights of NGOs whose work did not conform
with “government policies or plans.”
The Great Lakes region remained a priority, as the conflict in the DRC continued
to involve and spill over into all neighboring states. In meetings with senior
officials in Washington,New York, Brussels, Berlin, London, and in the region, and
in presentations to United Nations bodies, Human Rights Watch continued to
highlight the exploitation of resources and illegal importation of arms that added
fuel to the conflagration. In a March 2001 report,Uganda in Eastern DRC: Fueling
Political and Ethnic Strife,we explicated the role of Uganda in escalating the conflict
in eastern Congo, and called on the Ugandan government and rebel groups to alleviate
the suffering they were causing there.
Enhancing the organization’s work on economic and social rights, Human
Rights Watch published two reports addressing the indivisibility of human rights.
In Uprooting the Rural Poor in Rwanda, we detailed the government practice of
forced villagization and dispossession of land of tens of thousands of impoverished
Hutu and Tutsi in the countryside. In Unequal Protection: The State Response to Violent
Crime on South African Farms,we highlighted rural violence and abuses against
farm workers. Another report on South Africa, Scared at School: Sexual Violence
Against Girls in South African Schools, complemented previous work on violence
against women in South Africa by considering the danger girls faced in schools as a
violation of the right to education.
Human Rights Watch extended its Africa-wide advocacy through the publication
of a major report on the performance of government-sponsored human rights
commissions, Protectors or Pretenders? Government Human Rights Commissions in
Africa.The study reported on the often disappointing record of these commissions,
which had received large sums of money for their creation from the donor community.The report found that many commissions did more to deflect international
criticisms of their government than to solve human rights problems, but also singled
out the commissions of Uganda, Ghana, and South Africa as exceptions. The
study was widely circulated amongst donors to national human rights institutions—
including the Office of the U.N.High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Development Program—as well as to high-level government
officials and the human rights commissions themselves, and catalyzed a larger
debate about the roles and expectations of such commissions.
Violence surrounding elections was a particular focus of the division during the
year, with a report on the manipulation of the electoral system and accompanying
violence in Uganda (Uganda: Not a Level Playing Field) and a detailed report on
Côte d’Ivoire (The New Racism: The Political Manipulation of Ethnicity in Côte
d’Ivoire) published at the time of the World Conference Against Racism in Durban.
The latter report chronicled wide-scale torture, murder, and rape, and the official
manipulation of ethnic tensions during presidential and parliamentary elections in
Côte d’Ivoire in late 2000, garnering intense media interest. Human Rights Watch
also alerted the international community to governmental interference and irregularities
in local elections in Rwanda.
Throughout the year we remained active on international justice issues.Human
Rights Watch experts took part in genocide trials in Belgium and at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in Arusha, Tanzania, acting as expert
witnesses on the human rights situation in the Rwanda.We also called upon the
international community to invest in the future of Sierra Leone by funding its
special court for the prosecution of crimes related to the decade long conflict.
Human Rights Watch intervened regularly to protest abuse of refugees and internally
displaced. Our report on the treatment of refugees in Guinea,Refugees Still
at Risk: Continuing Refugee Protection Concerns in Guinea,documented harassment
and assault of Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees by Guinean security personnel
and civilians, leading to changes in the provisions for those in refugee camps there.
ANGOLA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Civil war persisted in Angola, accompanied by a dramatic escalation of violations
of the laws of war. The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola
(UNITA), a rebel group led by Jonas Savimbi, killed, abducted, and terrorized civilians
with impunity. Government forces abused civilians during forced relocations
and beat or killed civilians displaced in the course of looting, extortion, and forced
recruitment of boys and men.
The situation worsened since the breakdown of the Lusaka Peace Protocol in
mid-1998 when UNITA resumed fighting. In 2001, the numbers of internally displaced persons grew to over four million, and some 435,000 Angolan refugees lived
in camps in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Zambia, and Namibia.
Within Angola, security was limited to areas within a narrow perimeter around the
government-controlled provincial capitals and the major municipalities, making
safe land travel almost impossible.Humanitarian aid delivered by air only reached
10 to 15 percent of Angola. Ambushes of civilians and humanitarian workers
increased, preventing travel by humanitarian ground convoys and impeding delivery
of aid to thousands in desperate need.
UNITA stepped up hit-and-run tactics against civilians. Rebels used terror as a
policy, to obtain supplies and coerce and intimidate civilians. Indiscriminate
killings,mutilation of limbs or ears, and beatings were used by rebels to punish suspected
government sympathizers or as a warning against betraying UNITA.UNITA
continued to forcibly recruit men and teenage boys to fight. Girls were held in sexual
slavery and used as a source of forced labor.
In an apparent bid for international attention, UNITA struck against government
targets several times while foreign officials visited Angola. For instance, in
early May the visiting United Nations (U.N.) secretary general’s special adviser for
Africa, Ibrahim Gambari, commented that “Progress is being made to find solutions
for the conflict and to end war in Angola.” But on May 5 the rebels attacked
Caxito, a provincial capital sixty kilometers north of the capital, Luanda, killing
more than 150 people and kidnapping sixty children from a Danish-run orphanage.
After an international outcry, rebels handed over the children to a Catholic
mission.
Similarly, during a visit by a U.S. delegation, the Consortium for Electoral
and Political Processes Strengthening (CEPPS), there to evaluate conditions for
national elections, UNITA blew up a train 130 kilometers from Luanda. Passengers
fleeing the flames were ambushed, leaving 256 dead and more than 170 wounded.
During the last week of August alone, rebels killed 268 civilians. On August 31, they
ambushed a bus near Cacolo, thirty kilometers from Malanje, and set the bus on fire
with passengers still alive inside, killing fifty-three passengers.UNITA deliberately
targeted humanitarian workers and aircraft. On April 15, they looted a warehouse
belonging to relief organizations in Benguela province. In June, rebels launched
missiles towards two planes carrying relief supplies near the cities of Kuito and
Luena.That same month, they attacked the city of Uige, forcing evacuation of U.N.
and other humanitarian workers. Civilian vehicles were also ambushed in Bie,
Benguela,Huila, Cuanza Sul, Cuanza Norte and Malanje provinces. During a May
14 attack on a truck convoy in Benguela, two people were killed and fifty kidnapped.
In late 2000, government forces mounted an attack on UNITA forces in central
Angola. Fighting reached neighboring Namibia,with Namibian troops taking part.
In November, a government assault in Malanje aimed at controlling towns near the
DRC border drove many civilians to Malanje’s provincial capital. UNITA regained
control of the area in February and March, leading the government to undertake
another campaign in April.When no displaced civilians appeared, concerns arose
over their safety.Also in February,UNITA forces held the town of Quibaxe in Bengo
province, killing and abducting many civilians and causing others to flee. An estimated
8,000 people from Quibaxe were missing.
Unprecedented numbers of internally displaced persons were registered in
twelve of the eighteen provinces throughout the year,with an average of 30,000 new
arrivals each month.The most affected areas were Golungo Alto,Caxito,Mussende,
Camacupa Cuemba, and Matala. Humanitarian services were overburdened. In
Matala, in January, for instance, some 28,000 displaced persons were living in desperate
conditions and the average of seventy new arrivals registering daily found no
food, shelter, or health care. In September, there were some 60,000 newly displaced
with 24,000 in the provinces of Cuando Cubango,Moxico, Luanda Sul and Norte,
and 10,000 in Bie province alone. As of early October, there were 160,000 in Kuito
and 60,000 in Camacupa and Catabola. Eight people died daily in Cuemba from
lack of food and medicine.
The internally displaced primarily suffered abuses at the hands of UNITA.
Yet allegations of abuse by government forces continued, ranging from forced relocation
to killing and looting. Violations occurred mainly during military operations
and while army and police implemented “limpeza” (“cleansing”) operations
near recently recaptured towns, to clear the area of the local residents, ostensibly for
their safety, but thereby depriving UNITA of a potential source of food and labor.
During cleansing operations, government troops forced families to move from the
area carrying goods looted by the army; those who refused were beaten or killed.
Allegations of soldiers raping women during these operations were confirmed in
Moxico and Malanje provinces.
Those driven from their home areas by government forces were in many cases
first moved to the government-controlled municipalities. Conditions for the displaced
in these areas were often terrible, with insufficient assistance, sanitation,
health services, and security. In addition to extortion, the army also forced displaced
persons to accompany government troops to search for food in mined or
otherwise insecure areas. When the numbers in the municipalities became overwhelming,
the government relocated the displaced women, elderly, and children to
internally displaced camps on the outskirts of the provincial capitals under government
control.Men and adolescent boys were often forced to remain in combat
areas to fight.
Gains were made in strengthening the legal framework to protect the internally
displaced—a new law, the Norms for the Resettlement of the Internally Displaced,
was passed in January 2001, and several other plans of action were drafted. However,
practical mechanisms for their implementation were not put in place, particularly
at the provincial and municipal levels. Many of the internally displaced
camps were located at the outskirts of government-controlled towns, serving in
effect as a human shield or buffer zone against UNITA attacks. The internally displaced
were regularly subjected to assaults at the hands of the security forces in the
camps and served as a source of exploitable labor by nearby landowners. Regular
looting and extortion by the security forces of the displaced populations provided
a source of goods, including food, to the security forces, which were often not paid
for months.
A continuing flow of military arms and equipment sustained the conflict. On
February 26, Spanish authorities intercepted a Georgian freighter in the Canary
Islands en route to Angola, carrying an undeclared 636-ton cargo of Russian-made
weapons. On September 30, a shipment of five hundred anti-tank rockets from Iran bound for Angola was seized at Bratislava airport.Two days later, the Angolan army
uncovered a large cache of weapons close to the Mavinga airport.
In one positive development, government use of antipersonnel mines appeared
to decline in 2001. Nevertheless, troops reportedly laid mines at night around
defensive positions, removing them in the morning.UNITA continued to lay mines
to prevent residents from fleeing to government-held areas or to keep them from
reaching their fields. Rebels also used anti-vehicle mines to interrupt transportation
and ambush humanitarian convoys and civilian vehicles. 70 percent
of the casualties were civilians, and more than half were displaced people fleeing
fighting.
Freedom of expression in Angola remained a concern. Restrictions on journalists
continued, despite assurances by the vice minister of social communications,
who met with the Committee to Protect Journalists in October 2000 and May 2001.
On July 7, Gilberto Neto, a reporter for the independent weekly Folha 8, and
Philippe Lebillon, a researcher from the London-based Overseas Development
Institute, were arrested at an airport in Malanje province and escorted back to
Luanda. During interrogation at the National Directorate of Criminal Investigation,
their documentation and equipment were confiscated.
Neto was also blocked from leaving the country at Luanda International Airport
on August 23. He was charged with endangering state security and defaming the
police. (He had reported in 1999 on a police raid on the independent, church-affiliated
Radio Ecclesia.) The charges were not pursued in court. In an earlier case in
December 2000, immigration authorities at Luanda Airport prevented Raphael
Marques, a free-lance journalist, from leaving Angola. They confiscated his passport
and he was sent home without explanation, although he carried a provincial
court order lifting any travel restriction against him. In July, several reporters,
including British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) correspondents, faced obstacles
in covering the violent forcible relocation of residents from the Boa Vista district of
Luanda. On the positive side, Radio Ecclesia resumed broadcasting countrywide.
That same month, the director of Radio Morena in Benguela was dismissed following
a broadcast about a UNITA attack.
While authorities allowed some open discussion of public affairs, especially
through the privately owned media, it cracked down on opposition political parties
by denying freedom of association and assembly, in some cases violently. In December
2000, the army seriously injured a Catholic deacon suspected of being a sympathizer
of the separatist Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave (FLEC)
and beat other members of the church. A month later, members of the army and
police beat, arrested and detained eight members of the Party for Democracy and
Progress in Angola (PADPA) for protesting against the government. In March, local
authorities blocked the National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA) from
activities in Bie. In three other cases,UNITA-Renovada representatives were threatened,
arrested, and tortured. The provincial secretary of the Party for Social Renovation
(PRS) was detained and four militants of the Democratic Party for the
Progress of the Angolan National Alliance (PDP-ANA) were detained and interrogated
about their political activities. In April, the Provincial Government of Luanda
dismissed a petition by church groups to organize a march on peace and human rights, and in July it refused to allow a demonstration by Boa Vista residents, citing
security concerns.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights activity increased, mainly in the capital, as the government
allowed civic and church groups to discuss human rights violations and concerns
about the war—for example in conferences held by two organizations, the Open
Society and the Women’s Movement for Peace and Development. However, the
ability of human rights organizations to function outside the capital was greatly
constrained by insecurity, and no human rights groups were able to obtain access
to or function in UNITA-held territory. In October, D. Zacarias Camuenho, president
of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of Angola and Sao Tome and a member
of the Inter-Ecclesiastical Committee for Peace in Angola (COIEPA), was awarded
the 2001 Sakharov Human Rights Prize by the European parliament, signaling the
growing importance of the churches as a possible mediator between the two parties
in the conflict. In July, COIEPA launched a sensitization campaign to end the war,
while the Open Society and the Catholic Pro Peace Movement followed suit with an
antiwar campaign in September.
Medicines Sans Frontieres released a report in November 2000 titled “Angola:
Behind the Façade ofNormalization,Manipulation,Violence and Abandoned Populations”
detailing the heavy price paid by civilians in the conflict.The report highlighted
the increasing violence and policy of terror by both sides, but mainly
blamed UNITA. Oxfam echoed those condemnations in a September 2001 report
on the catastrophic humanitarian situation of Angolans.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
An economic reform program agreed on by the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank, and the government of Angola in April 2000 was designed to monitor
oil revenues.Angola is the second largest oil exporter in sub-Saharan Africa and
gains significant revenues from its oil exports. Dampening hopes for greater government
transparency and accountability, the government failed to publish
required auditing reports, despite two deadline extensions. (See Business and
Human Rights.)
International donors continued to criticize the government’s chronic underfunding
of humanitarian services for its citizens, and in recent years donor support
for humanitarian operations was reduced.Donors urged the Angolan government
to use its substantial revenues from oil sales on humanitarian services rather than
on military spending.Additionally, with the changing military situation, the move
away from conventional warfare to counterinsurgency strategies was expected to
reduce military spending by the government.
United Nations
The U.N. continued to support the Angolan government’s efforts to resolve the
conflict. The U.N. reiterated its call to UNITA to fully implement its commitments
under the 1994 Lusaka Protocol. A number of U.N. Security Council sanctions on
UNITA remained in force, including an arms and petroleum embargo in force since
1993, prohibitions on diamond trading, prohibition on travel of senior UNITA
officials outside Angola, and a freeze on UNITA’s financial assets. The U.N.’s Monitoring
Mechanism that verified compliance was extended again in October 2001.
In April and October, the Sanctions Committee’s Independent Panel of Experts
issued reports concluding that UNITA retained vast quantities of weapons hidden
throughout Angola. The panel identified at least sixteen diamond companies
responsible for sanctions busting. The report made clear that efforts to reduce the
illicit diamond trade fueling the war, including U.N. sanctions, met with little success.
Angola’s so-called “blood diamonds” represented 5 percent of the world’s
rough diamond trade, with a value of U.S.$420 million a year. Smuggled through
Burkina Faso, Congo, Cyprus, South Africa, Tanzania, or Zambia, these diamonds
ended up in cutting centers in Belgium, India, and Israel.
Two high-level U.N. visits were made to Angola during the year.When the secretary-
general’s senior adviser Ibrahim Gambari visited in May, he strongly condemned
UNITA, stating that it was “solely responsible for the war in Angola,” and
pledged U.N. assistance for reconstruction efforts. In April the special coordinator
of the Network on Internal Displacement,Dennis MacNamara, visited Angola and
noted the need for the U.N. to strengthen its overall capacity to address serious gaps
in assistance and protection to the internally displaced.
The U.N. Office in Angola (UNOA) continued to implement capacity-building
projects such as improving access to the judicial system, increasing human rights
awareness through legal counseling, and supporting media programs. The
appointment of a new director in July to head UNOA’s human rights division was
followed by the office’s internal reorganization and the preparation of a strategic
plan of action.
European Union
The European Union (E.U.) maintained a focus on trade and oil sales, rather
than on human rights abuses. In its 2001 annual human rights report, the E.U. condemned
UNITA’s abuses and called on the Angolan government to assume greater
responsibility for protecting displaced populations. It also recommended that the
U.N. create a permanent group of independent experts to follow diamond trafficking
in violation of the U.N. sanctions.
Human rights issues were also not high on the agenda of the “troika” monitors
of the 1994 Lusaka Peace Agreement—Portugal, Russia, and the U.S. Since 1998,
Portugal has increased export of light weapons and ammunitions, including to
Angola, in violation of the E.U. code of conduct that prevents arms sales to conflict
countries where human rights are extensively violated.
United States
Good relations between Luanda and Washington concentrated largely on
improving trade and investment. Angola rose in importance for the U.S. due to its
vast oil resources. In ten years, the U.S. is projected to rely on Angola for 15 percent
of its oil. In May, the first trade mission to Angola since September 1997 examined
possibilities of corporate partnerships in the areas of data processing, industry,
water systems, environment and conservation, transportation, aviation, legal services,
shipping, and banking.
However, the U.S. did not always disregard human rights in relation to trade.
According to the president’s 2001 report on the implementation of the African
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), prepared by the U.S. Trade Representative,
Angola did not receive AGOA beneficiary country designation due to “concerns
related to corruption, labor and human rights.” The report cited extrajudicial executions
by security forces and scorched-earth policies by certain army units,
including burning villages and killing civilians in Cuando Cubango and Lunda Sul
provinces, as well as government repression of independent media.Angola was one
of only ten countries that sought to participate in AGOA but was denied.
The U.S. gave some aid for humanitarian assistance and civil society activities,
although it did not play a strong role in efforts to end the war.U.S.development and
humanitarian assistance was over U.S. $39 million for FY 2001.
BURUNDI
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
A transitional government installed November 1 inherited a civil war in which
both governmental and rebel forces were killing, raping, and otherwise injuring
civilians and destroying their property. Civilian casualties in 2001, however, were
fewer than in the previous seven years of warfare, in part because there were fewer
large-scale massacres than in the past.The government greatly expanded a program
of civil defense, giving arms training and access to weapons to thousands of civilians.
According to authorities the program was meant partly to curb increases in
crime but instead it led to more exactions on ordinary people.Along with theft and
looting, rape increased sharply in many areas where large numbers of soldiers were
posted. Hundreds of detainees were released in 2000 and early 2001 but hundreds
more replaced them in the over-crowded jails by year’s end. Courts functioned
slowly and badly whether handling current cases or those resulting from ethnicallybased
killings in 1993 and 1994.
By establishing the transitional government, the former government and opposition
political parties implemented a key provision of the Arusha Accord of August
2000. But the two major rebel movements, the Forces for the Defense of Democracy (Forces pour la défense de la démocratie, FDD) and the Forces for National
Liberation (Forces pour la Liberation Nationale, FNL), had not signed the agreement
and stepped up attacks just before and after the new government took power.
Some 130 civilians and scores of government soldiers and rebels were slain in the
first weeks of November as combat increased in many parts of the country.
Although the new government incorporated some opposition leaders recently
returned from exile, it failed to win a cease-fire in discussions with rebels held in
October and November. International actors invested considerable energy in trying
to end the war, with South African troops, funded by Belgium, providing security
deemed necessary to establishing the new government.
Shortly after taking power, the new government signed the optional protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child which establishes eighteen as the minimum
age for forced recruitment, conscription, or participation in armed conflict,
so confirming an order of the outgoing government that children under eighteen
should not be recruited for the army.But the government observed no such rule for
the civil defense program, where children as young as fourteen were enrolled this
year. The rebels recruited and in some cases abducted children for military service.
In mid-November, the FDD kidnapped several hundred school children, the
youngest thirteen years old, apparently to use them as soldiers. The majority
escaped, but at the end of November a dozen remained in rebel hands.
The war in Burundi was intertwined with conflicts in the neighboring Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) and Rwanda (see Democratic Republic of Congo
and Rwanda). For several years Burundian rebels, particularly those of the FDD,
had launched attacks inside Burundi from bases in the DRC. The Congolese government
supported them in return for help fighting a rebel movement against it
backed by neighboring Rwanda. During the year, thousands of rebel combatants
came home, hastened by signs that the Congolese government was moving towards
ending its own war. Hundreds of Rwandans, also previously based in the Congo
and engaged in war against the Rwandan government, came into Burundi as well,
perhaps to assist Burundian comrades, perhaps to prepare an assault against
Rwanda. By late in the year, soldiers of the Rwandan Patriotic Army had begun
fighting rebels of both groups inside Burundi. Burundian rebels based in Tanzania
frequently crossed the border to raid communities inside Burundi, leading to an
increase in tensions between Burundi and Tanzania which military authorities
from both countries tried to calm in the latter half of the year.
Military officers opposed to President Pierre Buyoya and the terms of the Arusha
Accord attempted two unsuccessful coups, one in April, the other in July. Forces
loyal to the president foiled the attempts and arrested those responsible, thirty of
whom were detained in the first case, some one hundred in the second. As of this
writing, their detentions had not been confirmed by magistrates, a violation of legal
procedure.
During the year combat intensified in the provinces of Bujumbura-rural,
Cibitoke, and Bubanza in the north and in Bururi, Makamba, and Rutana in the
south. In February, FNL combatants entrenched in the hills around Bujumbura
took control of the Kinama neighborhood of the capital for nearly two weeks.
Dozens of civilians were killed or wounded during the combat and thousands more
displaced. In early April, government soldiers killed at least twenty-five civilians, including one two-year-old child, when they searched houses in Rubirizi,Mutimbuzi
commune, for suspected rebels shortly after FNL combatants attacked military
posts in the area. That same month, other soldiers reportedly fired on civilians
in a bar in Gitega, assuming them to be rebel supporters. They killed eleven and
wounded three.After an FDD attack in late June, government soldiers fired from a
boat in Lake Tanganyika on the village of Rubindi, killing five civilians and seriously
wounding several others. Soldiers attempting to repel FNL attacks on their posts in
the vicinity of Mageyo, near Bujumbura, on September 20 killed nineteen civilians
and wounded at least eighteen.Although one officer was heard to order his men not
to fire at civilians, soldiers “shot at anything which moved,” according to one witness.
On October 4, FNL combatants shot and killed at least eight soldiers who were
drinking in a bar at Muzinda market in Bubanza province. Other soldiers from
nearby posts then took reprisals, firing indiscriminately on civilians in the area and
looting and burning their homes and shops. One baby was shot on her mother’s
back as the mother was fleeing and an estimated eight other persons were also killed
by soldiers. Soldiers killed at least thirteen civilians, ten of them women and children,
on October 25 in Bubanza province after an attack by FNL combatants in the
area. On October 30, soldiers killed forty-two civilians, eighteen of them women
and children, in apparent reprisal killings after an FNL attack in Maramvya,
Bujumbura-rural province. Government soldiers killed an estimated twenty civilians
and wounded six others in an air attack on the Congolese village of Mwaba,
which they supposed to be a FDD base.During the year several civilians were killed
and many others were maimed by mines in Burundi, apparently laid by government
soldiers throughout the countryside.
Hundreds of civilians died from rebel fire during combat or were slain in
ambushes and robberies or were deliberately targeted for having supposedly
assisted the government. In one of the worst cases, FNL rebels ambushed a bus from
Rwanda near Mageyo in late December 2000. According to witnesses, they separated
the passengers by ethnic group and killed twenty persons, all Tutsi or those
who appeared Tutsi and one English woman. Several other persons were wounded
and left for dead. Rebels, presumably of the FNL, murdered a university student
and his uncle, a former soldier, in Bujumbura on September 8. FDD rebels killed
civilians in ambushes on roads in the southern provinces and in raids in the eastern
provinces launched from Tanzanian bases. In April, thousands of FDD rebels
moved through eastern and central Burundi from the Tanzanian frontier to the
Kibira forest, killing more than a dozen civilians and burning hundreds of houses,
shops, health centers, and schools. In late April, FDD combatants reportedly murdered
the communal administrator of Gisagara commune,Cankuzo province, and
his family as well as five other civilians and in mid-November, they killed an administrator
and two other civilians in Mutumba, Karuzi province. In May, FDD combatants
abducted six workers of the international humanitarian agency Memisa in
Makamba province and took them into Tanzania before releasing them several days
later. In June, rebels, apparently FDD, killed the driver of a vehicle of the humanitarian
agency Children’s Aid Direct in Bubanza province and briefly detained other
employees. In November, FDD combatants killed at least thirteen civilians in
ambushes in eastern Burundi and on November 4 they killed another eighteen
civilians in an attack on Munini in Bururi province.
In several cases unidentified assailants used grenades to attack markets or places
of business. In late August, four persons were killed and more than fifty injured at
Kinama market in Bujumbura.
Women reported dozens of rapes and cases of sexual torture by soldiers, many
in areas in or near the part of Bujumbura taken briefly by rebels, after their withdrawal
in early March. Rebels abducted scores of women to provide sexual and
domestic services in their camps. Both government soldiers and rebels forced civilians
to transport goods or wounded members of their forces or to do other labor in
combat zones, putting them at risk of injury or death.
Authorities recruited thousands of children and young men, the vast majority of
them Hutu, to expand the “Guardians of the Peace,” a purportedly civilian force
established with no clear legal authority or regulations. The “Guardians,” many of
whom were obliged to serve against their will, ordinarily operated at the direction
of soldiers who also provided them with firearms to use on duty. First active in
the northwest and south, “Guardians” were organized this year in most other
provinces. Some guarded communities, displaced persons camps, and roads; others
engaged in combat, often sent in advance of regular troops and thus exposed to
greater risk of injury or death.Minimally trained and unpaid,many lived by extorting
money or goods from the people they were supposed to protect. Several killed
or raped local residents.Authorities also provided weapons training in urban areas,
usually to Tutsi residents, and encouraged them to patrol their own neighborhoods.
The economic situation worsened, the result of years of war and stagnation
exacerbated by the exhaustion of emergency funds provided by the World Bank and
the European Union.With firearms easily available, armed robbery increased in the
form of ambushes and attacks on homes, sometimes injuring or killing residents.
Often assailants wore military uniform and could have been soldiers, rebels, or
neither. Authorities proved ineffective both in halting and in prosecuting such
crimes.
As stipulated by the Arusha Accord, the government drafted laws concerning
genocide and provisional immunity from prosecution for certain crimes related to
the 1993-1994 events.As of this writing, the legislature was still debating the terms
of laws deemed a necessary precursor to the establishment of the transitional government
on November 1. The accord also provided for a commission of experts
comprising both international jurists and Burundians to examine the cases of
political prisoners. It was due to begin work in November.
Lack of resources, difficulties with travel due to insecurity, and demoralization
related to uncertainty about the future contributed to the sluggish performance of
the prosecution and courts. As of mid-year, the criminal courts dealing with the
ethnically-related killings of 1993-1994 had sat only once and sessions ordinarily
held by itinerant courts had not been convened at all.Many cases were adjourned
because judicial personnel or witnesses were not present. Judicial reforms implemented
in 2000 resulted in the provisional liberation of hundreds of detainees that
year, but the rate slowed noticeably during 2001. Some fifty prisoners over the age
of seventy and some twenty minors were provisionally released. Although some
prosecutors and police tried to follow the new regulations, others flouted measures
meant to limit arbitrary detention and the use of torture. Particularly in the aftermath
of the FNL occupation of part of Bujumbura, authorities detained and tortured dozens of persons whom they suspected of supporting the rebels. In several
cases, persons tortured by soldiers, the police, or “Guardians of the Peace” died
from their injuries. Dozens of persons were held in miserable conditions in illegal
places of detention, particularly in military camps. In a number of cases authorities
who had arbitrarily detained persons released them after obliging them to pay a
“fine” for unspecified offenses.
Some 9,000 persons were held in prisons, about 75 percent of them awaiting
trial, most accused of crimes related to the massacres of 1993-1994. Conditions
improved slightly in a few prisons, largely as a result of efforts by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and a local organization, the Association Burundaise
de Défense des Prisonniers (ABDP), but remained very poor in others.
In 2000, the government officially closed the regroupment camps which had
been established in the name of security several years before. Hundreds of thousands
of persons who had been held against their will returned home, but more
than 370,000 remained in camps because they feared continuing combat in their
home regions. In some areas soldiers and “Guardians” demanded services from
camp residents, such as transporting supplies or fetching water, or prevented them
from going to work their fields unless they paid for the privilege.
Burundian authorities detained or forced back to the Congo several dozen Congolese,
some of whom had recognized refugee status in the country, apparently at
the request of the Rally for Congolese Democracy (RDC), the Rwandan-backed
rebel authorities in eastern Congo. In May communal authorities sent more than
one hundred Congolese back over the border without regard to the risks they might
run in returning home. In October, authorities detained a Congolese human rights
activist for nearly a week but released him after extensive protests from local and
international colleagues.
On several occasions, authorities detained members of political parties or other
organizations opposed to government policy. Fearing detention, the head of Pouvoir
d’ Auto-Dèfense Amasekanya, a Tutsi militia group, took refuge for several
weeks in the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights. A
spokesman for a party opposed to President Buyoya was arrested after giving a press
conference and was charged with insulting the head of state.
Authorities permitted the establishment of African Public Radio, the second
major private station to operate in Burundi, but soldiers harassed its journalists,
occasionally confiscating briefly their vehicles and cameras. In November, agents of
the special investigations bureau detained and beat an African Public Radio journalist
after he reported on the arrival of South African troops to facilitate installation
of the new government. He was released after paying a fine. In March, two
journalists of the other private station, Radio Bonesha, were detained and one was
fined for broadcasting an interview with a rebel spokesperson.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Local and international human rights organizations functioned with little interference
from the government. The leading human rights organization, Ligue Iteka,
expanded its activities throughout the country, adding monitors to deal with economic and social rights and established a web site to disseminate its information.
In one case Iteka monitors were threatened and harassed by soldiers while investigating
alleged abuses. ABDP monitored prison conditions, helped detainees with
judicial assistance, and organized a conference on torture where several victims
spoke out publicly about their abuse by authorities.
In April,members were named to a national human rights commission that had
been established the previous year.All were governmental representatives from the
office of the president and vice-presidents and various ministries. At the time of
writing, the commission had not published any reports.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Representatives of other governments and of the United Nations, the Organization
of African Unity, the European Union (E.U.), and other bodies followed the
situation in Burundi closely, many of them concerned to avoid a repetition of previous
massive slaughter in Burundi and of the genocide that devastated Rwanda. In
addition to making numerous public statements denouncing human rights abuses
and encouraging peace, they invested millions of dollars and untold diplomatic
effort in negotiations for the Arusha Accord and in getting it implemented. In
December 2000 donors pledged some U.S. $440 million in previously promised
and new aid to help restart the economy. Little of this aid was delivered as donors
awaited the installation of the new government, but in late November 2001 the E.U.
agreed to deliver U.S. $58 million to rebuild infrastructure, deliver health services,
and assist economic recovery, resuming development assistance halted since 1997
because of the war.
In mid-2001 officials at the U.S. National Security Council and State Department
debated options, including the possible deployment of U.S. troops, should
Burundi explode into large-scale violence. In the wake of the September 11 attacks,
however, it became clear that the U.S. would at most fund military intervention by
others.The U.S. provided $1 million in development assistance for fiscal year 2001,
$3.5 million for justice under the Great Lakes Justice Initiative, and $5.8 million in
food assistance.
In October, South Africa agreed to provide troops for a protection force
demanded by opposition politicians before they would return to join the transitional
government and Belgium pledged $5 million for their expenses with a promise
to secure another $17 million from the E.U. The South African troops were
supposed to be joined by others from Senegal, Nigeria, and Ghana and eventually
to be replaced by a Burundian force that would be composed half of Tutsi, half of
Hutu.
The U.N. special rapporteur for Burundi, Marie-Therese Keita Boucoum, visited
the country twice and issued strong denunciations of human rights abuses.
The field office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, hampered by lack of
funds and personnel, helped provide judicial assistance to the accused, monitored
prison conditions, and undertook educational activities. It addressed abuses with
authorities but published no reports locally.
The U.N.High Commission for Refugees also suffered funding cuts, hampering
provision of its services, including protection, for refugees just at a time when
increasing numbers of Rwandans and Congolese sought their assistance and when
planning was needed for the hundreds of thousands of refugees who may return
home if the war ends.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
To Protect the People: The Government-Sponsored “Self-Defense” Program in
Burundi, 12/01.
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF CONGO (DRC)
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
With the accession of Joseph Kabila as president of the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC), hopes were raised in January for an end to the disastrous war that
has cost more than two million lives. During the four years of war, all parties routinely
attacked civilians, killing, raping, and maiming thousands. Hundreds of
thousands of civilians died of hunger, diseases, or exposure as a result of the war.
Belligerents this year implemented some terms of the 1999 Lusaka Accords meant
to end the war: troops disengaged along the front lines, some Ugandan and Rwandan
government soldiers returned home, some 1,500 Rwandan rebels laid down
their arms, and United Nations troops (U.N. Organization Mission in Congo,
MONUC) began monitoring compliance with the accord.But late in the year fighting
still raged almost daily in the eastern provinces and the inter-Congolese dialogue
among Congolese actors about the future of their country was suspended
days after it began. The DRC government, supported by Zimbabwe, Angola, and
Namibia, controlled the western half of the country. Rebel movements, the most
important being the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), backed by Rwanda,
and RCD-Kisangani and the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo (MLC),
both backed by Uganda, controlled the east. The Congolese government and rebel
authorities declared support for political openness and Kabila implemented some
reforms, but all continued to limit dissent and harass and punish journalists and
human rights defenders.
Rwanda and Uganda originally claimed their troops were in Congo to fight
armed groups hostile to their governments and based in the DRC.But by 2001 they
seemed equally concerned to control resources, trade routes, and access to tax revenues.
A U.N. Security Council expert panel reported extensive exploitation of
Congolese resources by Rwandans and Ugandans, acting in both public and private capacities, underlining the importance of economic motives for the war. In
November, the panel confirmed these findings and also criticized the massive
exploitation of DRC resources by Kabila’s allies, particularly Zimbabwe. Belgium,
named in the report, set up a parliamentary commission to inquire into the role of
its nationals in this exploitation.
In eastern DRC various armed groups continued the war, often acting as proxies
for governments. Those which generally benefited from the support of the
Congo government included Mai-Mai, militia hostile to all foreign presence;
Rwandan rebels, including a nucleus of those who participated in the 1994 genocide
in Rwanda, formed into the Army for the Liberation of Rwanda (ALIR) in the
north and the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) in the
south; and Burundian rebels, usually fighting as part of the Forces for the Defense
of Democracy (FDD). Those supported by Rwanda and Uganda included the
armed groups linked the different branches of the RCD and MLC. In addition
Rwandan army and RCD forces supported the militia of the Banyamulenge, a
people generally associated with the Tutsi of Rwanda, and Ugandan forces frequently
backed the Hema in their two-year-long conflict with neighboring Lendu
over control of land. In the worst recent episode of this conflict which has cost some
15,000 lives, approximately four hundred Hema and Lendu were killed in Bunia in
January. Burundian army troops also operated in the southern part of eastern
DRC, attacking Burundian rebels and collaborating with RCD and Rwandan army
soldiers.
Mai-Mai represented a diverse group of autonomous actors, some of whom
opportunistically switched alliances. By September their groups had gained such
importance that government and RCD alike tried to incorporate Mai-Mai into
their delegations to the inter-Congolese dialogue but Mai-Mai maintained they
should participate on their own.
All parties to the war abducted and recruited children to be trained and
deployed as soldiers, as members of local militia or civil defense forces, or as workers
attached to military units.
President Kabila, chosen by consensus among leading domestic and foreign
players rather than by any constitutional mechanism, inherited autocratic powers
from his father, the late President Laurent-Desiré Kabila.According to Decree Law
No. 3 of 1997, all executive, legislative, and judicial powers rest in his hands. Kabila
promised human rights reforms but delivered relatively little. He did impose a
moratorium on the execution of death sentences in March which was still in effect
in late November and in May he began demobilizing child soldiers from the Congolese
army. But the security agencies continued the numerous abuses for which
they were notorious in the past. Government agents were allegedly responsible for
the summary execution of eleven Lebanese just after the assassination of the elder
Kabila. Agents of the National Security Agency and the Military Detection of
Antipatriotic Activities (DEMIAP) played an important part in investigations of
the assassination. This occurred under the aegis of a commission set up in February
and including Congolese and representatives of foreign allies of the government.
The commission exercised unlimited power to interrogate and arrest
suspects and afforded them no due process guarantees.Many detained by the commission were reportedly tortured and some were “disappeared.” The worst abuses
occurred in unofficial detention places run by the security agencies, including the
death of one detainee from torture in mid-April. Bending to domestic and international
outcry at abuses linked to the investigation,Kabila closed down unofficial
places of detention and ordered detainees transferred to Kinshasa central prison. In
September, authorities released some two hundred people detained mostly in connection
with the investigation.
Kabila’s promises to limit the powers of the abusive Court of Military Order
brought no reform by late October. In November 2000, the court found former
presidential security adviser Anselme Masasu and eight of his subordinates guilty
of conspiracy and ordered their execution, a sentence which was carried out before
the moratorium mentioned above. In September 2001, in Katanga province, the
court sentenced eight people to death and eighteen others to between five and
twenty years imprisonment on charges of plotting to overthrow the government.
All were said to have been tortured and to have had no legal counsel before the trial.
There is no appeal to decisions by this court.
Officials in the Ministry of Interior and some provincial governors obstructed
political party activities despite the promulgation of a new law in May that purported
to liberalize political life. Leaders of opposition parties refused to acknowledge
the new law. Police on July 30 arrested and beat participants in an opposition
march in support of the peace process.
In areas under Rwandan government control, the RCD attempted to legitimate
its de facto control by declaring eastern Congo a “federal state” and by establishing
regional legislative assemblies. Many local leaders rejected these initiatives as
preparatory moves towards secession.Anxious about challenges to their legitimacy,
RCD authorities detained scores of Uvira residents, including leaders of civil society,
when they sought to boycott a celebration of the August 2 anniversary of the
RCD rebellion. Soldiers accused detainees of supporting the Mai-Mai and beat several
of them,one so severely as to require hospitalization. In other areas as well,RCD
and Rwandan soldiers routinely held persons accused of backing the Mai-Mai in
military detention centers, private houses, or shipping containers and tortured and
otherwise mistreated them. Several were reported to have “disappeared” while in
custody. In Kisangani, RCD authorities denounced journalists and activists of the
peace movement on the radio and at rallies, calling them traitors allied with hostile
foreigners.After Radio Amani, owned by the Catholic Church, broadcast programs
seen by the authorities as critical, agents of the Department of Security and Intelligence
abducted and severely beat the clergyman who headed the Catholic Justice
and Peace Commission.Authorities prohibited other civil society leaders from traveling
and harassed them by sending soldiers to their homes at night.
This year, however, the RCD permitted Radio Mandeleo, banned two years
before, to resume broadcasting.
Determined to avert any demonstration that might turn critical, RCD authorities
banned public events planned by women’s organizations to celebrate International
Woman’s Day on March 8. In September RCD soldiers broke up a
demonstration of Bukavu residents who wanted to show support for a recent
announcement that the Congo government would pay three years back pay to state employees. RCD soldiers shot into the crowd and killed one fourteen-yearold
boy.
In areas under Ugandan control, Ugandan soldiers and their local allies arbitrarily
detained, ill-treated, or tortured political opponents, holding some in pits
underground.
Banyamulenge militia, Rwandan rebels, and Mai-Mai attacked persons whom
they suspected of supporting their opponents, killing and maiming civilians and
destroying or pillaging their property. In May, Mai-Mai abducted twenty-six foreign
nationals who worked for a logging company, but later released them all. In
early September Mai-Mai in the area of Butembo ambushed a vehicle carrying two
local civil society leaders who sought to mediate between their group and another.
The assailants killed two Mai-Mai from the rival group and badly beat one of the
civil society leaders.
Throughout eastern DRC armed men from various governmental and rebel
forces have raped and otherwise sexually tortured thousands of women and girls.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Dozens of Congolese NGOs and other civil society organizations documented
and reported on human rights abuses by all parties and the larger human toll of the
war. Many NGOs also provided assistance to victims of abuses and advocated on
their behalf. Government and rebel authorities generally ignored their pleas and
mirrored each other in clamping down on vocal rights defenders, often by accusing
them of being enemy agents.
The government detained human rights activists Golden Misabiko and N’sii
Luanda for months without charges in connection with the Kabila assassination
but released them in September. Once free Misabiko said that he and other prisoners
had been tortured and inhumanely treated and that some had “disappeared.”
At a national human rights conference in June government delegates and civil
society participants from throughout the country adopted a Congolese Charter of
Human Rights and a National Plan of Action on human rights. The government in
May authorized the reopening of the Kinshasa office of the African Association for
the Defense of Human Rights (ASAHDO), a leading human rights organization
which it had closed in May 1998.
RCD officials frequently summoned and publicly threatened leading members
of Heritiers de la Justice, a human rights NGO in Bukavu. They warned members
of the Goma-based Center for Research on the Environment, Democracy, and
Human Rights (CREDDHO) not to divulge information to foreigners and made
death threats against them. The RCD subjected human rights defenders and
women activists to similar treatment in Kisangani.
In an early October press conference in the Ugandan-controlled town of Beni,
Hangi Bin Talent, the local representative of ASADHO, asked officials of the local
RCD branch (Congolese Rally for Democracy-Movement for Liberation, RCDML)
about the recent multiplication of underground detention cells. In response,
RCD-ML officials ordered him detained in such a cell,where he was severely beaten
for two days.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The international community welcomed Kabila’s overtures towards peace and
reform, ready to end the Congo’s decade of relative isolation.But donors reengaged
cautiously, unwilling to encourage Kabila to entrench himself as unelected head of
state. International leaders denounced human rights abuses and supported the
peacekeeping force to help assure an end to the war that was thought to be the
source of many of these abuses. They also called for accountability but established
no mechanism to assure it.
United Nations
Both U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the Security Council devoted
much attention to ending the DRC war and frequently denounced human rights
abuses and the humanitarian crisis spawned by it. In an effort to be well informed
about the situation in the DRC, eleven ambassadors of the council visited the
region and all members attended an Arria-formula briefing in which representatives
of Human Rights Watch and other nongovernmental organizations presented
analyses of the war.
Yet the council hesitated to commit significant resources to a war whose end was
not yet sure. It voted in February in resolution 1341 to deploy only 2,300 MONUC
troops, about half the number originally foreseen. Although the resolution condemned
war-related atrocities and reminded all parties that they were obligated to
protect civilians, it gave no mandate for civilian protection to MONUC.
In addressing the council in late May, the secretary-general spoke of the importance
of accountability for past crimes in establishing a lasting peace in the region.
The council extended the mandate for MONUC for a year in mid-June and itself
affirmed in resolution 1355 the importance of accountability. In his mid-October
report to the Security Council, the secretary-general denounced human rights
abuses in some detail and again called for accountability in the DRC. The council’s
adoption of resolution 1376 in November launched phase III of MONUC, requiring
the demilitarization of Kisangani, the restoration of freedom of movement
throughout the country, and the full cooperation of the belligerents with
MONUC’s activities.
Roberto Garretón, then special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the DRC, issued damning reports on abuses by government and rebels alike after
his two missions to DRC in March and June.During his tenure, he briefed the Security
Council several times on abuses in the DRC and in the speech marking the end
of his tenure he too called for accountability for past crimes in the DRC. The Field
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights continued to play a prominent
role in monitoring conditions in the country, assisting government reform initiatives
and supporting local rights groups.
In early December, child protection officers attached to MONUC and UNICEF
reported that Congolese children had been sent from Bunia to Kampala, Uganda’s
capital, for military training. In mid-December, the Security Council urged that
these children be demobilized and sent home for rehabilitation, steps which were taken several months later after continued pressure from MONUC, UNICEF,
Human Rights Watch, and other organizations.
In April, a U.N. panel of experts reported to the Security Council that the governments
of Uganda, Rwanda, and Burundi were illegally exploiting natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the DRC.The report also found that foreign
forces allied with the Congolese government were profiting from the conflict. This
exploitation had especially exacerbated the suffering of the population in parts of
eastern Congo occupied by the Ugandan and Rwandan armies. The governments
named contested the report and the Security Council extended the mandate of the
panel for three months to supplement its information.
European Union
Soon after being installed as president, Kabila visited Paris, Brussels, London,
and Bonn as well as Washington and New York, promising at each stop to cooperate
with the U.N., to facilitate the internal political dialogue, and to return the
country to the rule of law.
On a visit to the DRC in June,Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstad responded
to Kabila’s assurances by announcing a new aid package totaling U.S. $18 million
dedicated to health, education and infrastructure. In inaugurating his country’s
presidency of the E.U. in July, Verhofstad called for greater attention to the DRC.
The E.U. council of ministers in March approved a provisional allocation of about
U.S. $100 million for health, education, justice, and road repair programs, but had
insisted Congo could access the funds only after achieving real progress in the inter-
Congolese dialogue. During a July visit to the DRC, Paul Nielson, the E.U.’s commissioner
for development and humanitarian affairs, stated that E.U. structural
assistance would be delivered only after consensus had been achieved among the
Congolese.He indicated that part of the E.U. allocation would also go to finance the
reintegration of armed groups in eastern Congo, a program for which the United
Kingdom also pledged funds. In late November, an E.U. delegation headed by Belgian
Foreign Minister Louis Michel visited the DRC and other countries involved
in the war to promote peace.
In July, the European Parliament urged making the DRC a priority for the E.U.
It urged foreign forces to withdraw from Congo, condemned the plundering of
Congo’s national wealth, and appealed to the World Bank and the International
Monitory Fund (IMF) to stop supporting the countries implicated in that plunder.
Donor Community
Kabila initiated reforms including the floating of the Congolese franc, the
decontrol of prices, the improvement of collection of state revenues, and the commitment
to balance the state budget which rapidly strengthened the economy.
Impressed by the improvement, bilateral and multilateral donors in early July
noted that Congo had U.S. $280 million of programs underway and pledged further
assistance of U.S. $240 million before the end of the year, subject to adherence
to the Lusaka Accords and improved security for the population.
To encourage the new government, the World Bank and the IMF arranged relay loans to address its debt to them of U.S. $800 million. Both provided assistance to
the government in preparing for the July donor meeting and the IMF helped plan
a program which was expected to spur increased levels of international assistance,
starting with the IMF’s own heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) debt-relief
initiative.The World Bank in late July approved a U.S. $50 million grant for the economic
recovery program.
United States
The significant political changes that took place in Kinshasa in January coincided
with the installation of George W. Bush as the U.S. president. As the Clinton
administration drew to a close, its “new leaders” policy had lost credibility as those
once thought to be beacons of hope, such as the presidents of Rwanda and Uganda,
were more and more identified with serious human rights abuses and deadly wars.
The Bush administration made no dramatic changes, but pressed Uganda and
Rwanda more firmly to adhere to the Lusaka agreement in withdrawing their
forces. On November 10, President Bush discussed with visiting President Kabila
the state of the Congolese economy, humanitarian issues, and the nature of the war.
Despite this and earlier indications that the Congo crisis would attract high-level
attention, the State Department issued only one public statement on the DRC by
late October compared to twenty-five issued over the same period the year before.
The September 11 attacks on the U.S. and the focus on building an international
anti-terrorism coalition contributed to further diminishing U.S. attention on central
Africa.
In recognition of the growing misery in the DRC, however, the U.S. tripled its
humanitarian assistance in 2001 to approximately U.S. $80 million, most of it for
food and other emergency supplies, immunization programs, and refugee relief. It
also spent some U.S. $5 million on judicial programs under the Great Lakes justice
initiative.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Reluctant Recruits: Children and Adults Forcibly Recruited for Military Service in
North Kivu, 5/01
Uganda in Eastern DRC: Fueling Political and Ethnic Strife, 3/01
ERITREA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
A border war with Ethiopia that began in 1998 was a disaster for Eritrea. The
war, which ended with a cease-fire in mid-2000 and a peace agreement in December
2000, displaced over a quarter of the population; seriously undermined the country’s economy; and achieved no military gains. About 20,000 Eritreans died
during the war and the Ethiopian army advanced to within one hundred kilometers
of Asmara, the capital. (See also Ethiopia.)
After October 2000, civil liberties became the latest victims of that war. Critics
of government policy were jailed without charges, the small independent press was
closed, and university students who challenged a compulsory summer work program
were subjected to harsh treatment and to jail.
Since the country achieved independence from Ethiopia in 1993, after a thirtyyear
armed struggle, all governmental power had been held by the leading force in
the fight for independence, the Eritrean People Liberation Front, and its post-independence
incarnation, the People’s Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ). The
leader of the PFDJ, Isayas Afwerki, had been president of the country since independence.
A constitution, with provisions creating civil liberties, was adopted in
1997 but was never implemented. Elections for the new National Assembly were
scheduled for 1998 but were postponed indefinitely after the outbreak of the war
with Ethiopia.As a result, president Isayas governed by proclamation, unrestrained
by a transitional national assembly that met infrequently. In mid-2001, the government
circulated a draft Proclamation on the Formation of Political Parties and
Organizations and an Eritrean Electoral Law Proclamation. No electoral politics
were permitted and presidential rule was essentially unfettered pending adoption
of both measures.
There was no effective mechanism for questioning, much less challenging,
government policy and operations. In October 2000, thirteen academics and
professionals sent the president a letter suggesting a “critical review” of postindependence
development. The letter stated that the war raised “grave questions”
about the government’s conduct domestically and internationally. Although sent
privately to the president, its contents soon became known.The president met with
the group but rejected its criticisms. In February 2001, the president removed the
minister of local government after he questioned the president’s leadership and
requested meetings of the PFDJ’s central and national councils,which had met only
twice during the two-year war with Ethiopia.
Criticism of presidential rule gathered force in May 2001, when fifteen of the
seventy-five-member central council of the PFDJ published an open letter
demanding reforms. This “Group of 15” urged full application of the constitution,
multi-party elections, abolition of the non-judicial Special Court (discussed
below), and other reforms. Among the signatories were the former defense minister,
other former ministers and ambassadors, and three generals.
In July, the government arrested University of Asmara student union president
Semere Kesete for having protested the government’s management of the university’s
mandatory summer work program. (The university was the only institution
of higher education in the country). The work program supplemented a compulsory
national service program in which many ofUniversity of Asmara students participated
during the border war with Ethiopia.When about four hundred students
protested the arrest of their leader on August 10, the government rounded them up
and sent them to a work camp in Wia, near the Red Sea port ofMassawa,where daytime
temperatures exceed well over 100 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius).
The government later coerced 1,700 other students into joining the camp by threatening
to deny them registration for the new academic year. Two students died of
heat stroke, which the government attributed to “lack of adequate logistical support”
at the camp. In September, police used clubs to break up a demonstration of
mothers of the students who were protesting their treatment at Wia. Most of the
students were released after signing a form letter of apology, and the university
reopened on October 1, 2001.About twenty students who refused to sign the letter
remained under arrest, including student council president Semere.All but Semere
were released without charged in early November. Semere remained in detention
without being charged—despite a penal code provision requiring charges to be
brought within thirty days of arrest.
On September 18 and 19, 2001, the government arrested eleven signatories of
the Group of 15’s May letter. Only three members abroad for medical or business
reasons and one who had retracted his signature avoided arrest.Those arrested had
not been charged as of early November. However, government and PFDJ spokesmen
publicly accused them of plotting to create “opposition cells” in the army and
other governmental institutions; establishing relations with “neighboring countries”;
and cooperating with outlawed groups. A presidential spokesman said that
these were illegal acts that “jeopardized the nation’s sovereignty.”After the Group of
15 arrests, the government reportedly arrested four to five dozen other prominent
individuals, including elderly businessmen who had tried to act as intermediaries
between the group and the president. All of those arrested were held incommunicado
and information about their whereabouts was withheld from the public and
from their families.
The accusations leveled at the Group of 15 members were sufficiently grave to
fall within the jurisdiction of a secret Special Court established by presidential
decree in 1996–although at the time of writing charges had not been brought. The
court’s membership consisted of three military senior officers without legal training
who reported directly to the Ministry of Defense. Defendants had no right to
counsel or to appeal. In January 2001, the president issued a decree creating a
Special Committee of Investigation to investigate “crimes against the state” as a
complement to the Special Court.Among its members were the minister of justice
and the head of the Eritrean intelligence service.
The civil court system was not independent. It was administered as part of the
Ministry of Justice and depended on the ministry for logistical and financial support.
In mid-2001, the chief justice was fired after he complained about executive
interference in the work of the judiciary. Moreover, court decisions could be
reviewed by the Special Court.
On September 19, the second day of the Group of 15 arrests, the government
withdrew the licenses of the country’s eight independent newspapers on the
grounds that they had violated the 1996 Press Proclamation and were undermining
national unity. The minister of information (who had previously served as
security chief) announced he would review each newspaper to determine whether
it could reopen.As of early November 2001,none had reopened. Suppression of the
independent press left the government’s newspaper, television, and radio outlets as
the only public sources of information. Even before the mass closings, the government had frequently harried the private press by detaining journalists, explaining
that they had been called to perform national service. After ten journalists were
reportedly arrested in September, authorities again said that they had been called
for military service,but observers noted that at least two were exempt from national
service because of age or their status as veterans.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The Eritrean government tolerated the operation of only one human rights
organization,Citizens for Peace in Eritrea,which strictly limited its advocacy to the
rights of war victims.
The transitional civil code and the constitution prohibited discrimination
against women and the government had traditionally advocated improving the status
of women. The draft election law proclamation reserved 30 percent of parliamentary
seats for women and made women eligible to contest the other 70 percent.
The government had a record of taking a firm stance against domestic violence.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
In September 2001, the World Bank, the European Union, and individual E.U.
members pledged U.S. $130 million in loans and grants to help Eritrea demobilize
200,000 of its soldiers by early 2003. Financial assistance from the E.U. was jeopardized,
however, when the government expelled the E.U. representative, the Italian
ambassador, after he delivered a demarche from the E.U. expressing concern
about the deterioration in human rights protections.Ambassadors from other E.U.
states were promptly recalled for consultation. The government said the expulsion
was unrelated to the protest.
On the day the United States protested the arrests of the Group of 15 and press
closings in early October, Eritrea seized two local U.S. embassy employees in what
it said were unrelated arrests. The U.S., which in FY 2001 provided Eritrea with
$10.219 million in development and child survival assistance, and another
$155,000 under the IMET military training program, cancelled joint military exercises
planned for November.The Foreign Ministry issued a press release expressing
“puzzle[ment]” over “negative statements” issued by several countries: “The Government
of Eritrea particularly finds inexplicable the attempts to ‘whitewash’
crimes against the nation’s security and sovereignty and present it as advocacy for
democratic reform.”
But protest over the shrinking liberties in Eritrea was not limited to its international
partners alone.The government by year-end faced the prospect of losing U.S.
$300 million that it annually collected from Eritreans living abroad in taxes and
donations due to widening discontent in the diaspora about the deteriorating conditions
at home.
In mid-2001, Sudan, Eritrea, and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees reached agreement to repatriate most of the estimated 250,000 Eritreans
who fled to Sudan during the pre-independence fighting as well as the 1998-2000 war. Under the agreement, refugees from the more recent fighting would be repatriated
by the end of 2001; 160,000 others would follow by the beginning
of 2002.
The war with Ethiopia internally displaced as many as 960,000 Eritreans.At the
end of September 2001, 44,000 were still living in temporary camps. Their return
was hampered by fields strewn with landmines, the absence of basic social services
in their home districts, and general insecurity along the still disputed border with
Ethiopia. (See Ethiopia).
ETHIOPIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
There was a marked deterioration of civil liberties in Ethiopia during 2001 in the
wake of (and partially as a result of) the war with Eritrea. The government jailed
civil rights advocates, political rivals, students, and journalists without formal
charges, and police used lethal force against unarmed civilians. In July, the foreign
minister told journalists that conditions in Ethiopia were not conducive for liberal
democracy. The minister of education acknowledged that Ethiopia’s justice system
had major deficiencies.Government agencies, she said, interfered in the justice system.
The system also often abused its authority and lacked transparency and
accountability.
The judiciary,with rare exceptions, was complicit in the government’s violations
of human rights. The courts routinely granted extensions allowing individuals to
be held in detention without formal charges and without bail while the police
“investigated,” usually at a snail’s pace. Rarely did they inquire into the need for
holding suspects in custody. Court hearings convened every several weeks, only to
have the court uncritically permit the police to investigate for months. Court cases
historically lasted for years, during which time activists and government critics,
apparently held only for their nonviolent criticism of the government, endured
harsh detention conditions. Sometimes charges were eventually brought; sometimes
prisoners were released after months of captivity without charge or trial.
Although the war with Eritrea ended with a cease-fire in June 2000, and a comprehensive
Peace Agreement in December 2000, disputes over its prosecution and
conclusion continued to simmer within the political elite and the enmity created
permeated relations between the two countries. In March, twelve central committee
members of the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF), the lead party in the
government coalition, the Ethiopian Peoples’ Revolutionary Democratic Front
(EPRDF), issued a twelve-point critique of Prime Minister Meles Zenawi’s policies.
The dissenters, joined by members of other government parties, complained that
the government had concluded a premature and unfavorable peace agreement.
They also protested the government’s economic liberalization policies and accused
the prime minister of corruption.
The government’s initial response to this dissent in its own ranks was political.
It fired a number of ministers and generals, including the minister of defense Siye
Abraha, and organized successful recall petitions for members of parliament who
supported the dissidents. Later in the year, the EPRDF constituent parties purged
their leadership and ranks of those who had participated in criticism of the government.
That included Ethiopia’s (largely ceremonial) president,Negaso Gidada,
who was expelled from the central committee of his party, the Oromo People’s
Democratic Organization (OPDO).When Negaso’s term expired in October 2001,
parliament unanimously voted Girma Woldegiorgis president for a six-year term
and endorsed a new government.
Against the background of political dissent and stalemated war, university students
in April 2001 protested the government’s interference with academic freedom.
The students’ main demands were permission to republish a banned student
magazine, dismissal of two university administrators closely affiliated with the government,
and removal of security troops stationed inside the university campus.
While the government initially conceded the first two demands, it did not commit
to a schedule for removing the security forces.When students continued to press
their demands, the minister of education issued an ultimatum threatening students
who did not return to classes with arrest. The security forces’ efforts to enforce the
ultimatum set off clashes on April 17 and 18 that quickly got out of hand as nonstudents
joined in the protests. In suppressing the protest, the police used excessive
force, including live ammunition, and conducted massive arrests.At the end of the
two days, over forty civilians, primarily students, had been killed and another four
hundred injured.Other campuses also witnessed antigovernment protests.
The government immediately detained almost 2,000 students; although most
were quickly released, several hundred were shipped to prisons two hundred kilometers
or more from the capital.Aside from those arrested, over one hundred students
fled to Kenya and another seventy or so to Djibouti.
Also arrested in the weeks following the police crackdown on the students were
members of two opposition parties, the All-Amhara People’s Organization
(AAPO) and the Ethiopians’ Democratic Party (EDP). Over four hundred AAPO
members were arrested between April and June. According to the party, most of
those taken into custody were candidates in local elections.Over one hundred EDP
members were arrested. The police claimed that the AAPO and EDP members had
“a clear role in the violence” and had been active in organizing “hooligans” to riot.
Because of the mass arrests, prisons became severely overcrowded. While no
independent observers were allowed in to monitor prison conditions, prisoners
who were subsequently released complained of poor sanitation, leading to the proliferation
of water- and air-borne diseases such as typhoid, dysentery, and tuberculosis.
Four prisoners were reported to have died, including AAPO member
Gebrehana Wolde Medhin. Although the government claimed that he had died of
tuberculosis, AAPO asserted that he had died as a result of severe beatings, noting
that the family had never been informed that he was hospitalized and the body had
not been returned to the family.
In early July, the government announced that it released about a hundred of
those arrested in connection with the April events. They had not been charged but were nevertheless held two months or more.Another 150 were released on bail.The
government acknowledged continuing to imprison sixteen, but the number of students
actually being held remained unconfirmed. Although the government
released thirty-two of the AAPO detainees in July (two on bail), at least six
remained in jail without charges as of early November 2001. Of the hundred or so
EDP members, ninety were released without charges. Four others were released on
bail. Seven, however, remained in custody without charge as of November 2001.
In June 2001, the government amended its “anti-corruption”law to prohibit bail
for anyone charged with corruption by the police. The amendment was immediately
applied to former colleagues of the prime minister who had been purged from
the EPRDF’s constituent parties. Most prominent among those arrested was former
defense minister Siye.He and seven co-defendants were arrested in mid-June.
In an unusual move, the court ordered Siye’s release on bail but he was rearrested
outside the courthouse. In mid-August, a court ineffectually gave the police a “last”
two-week extension to complete the investigation. The two weeks came and went
without charges or release. In late October, almost five months after their arrests,
Siye and his co-defendants were charged with corruption. Bail was denied.
The amended anti-corruption law was also applied to another prominent dissident
politician, Abate Kisho, the former president of the province known as the
Southern Nations, Nationality and People’s State. He was arrested in late July for
allegedly steering contracts to a defendant in the Siye case.He claimed that the acts
for which the police arrested him predated the laws he is alleged to have violated but
he was kept in custody for four months without charge. Article 22.1 of the
Ethiopian constitution, echoes article 11.2 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights by providing that no one may be convicted “on account of any act or omission
which did not constitute a criminal offense” at the time it was committed and
no heavier penalty may be imposed than was applicable when the offense took
place. In late October 2001, Kisho was charged with having used his office to make
illegal purchases.
Governmental pressure on the courts was exemplified by the treatment of
judges who attempted to act independently. One EDP member arrested in April
was the party’s secretary general, Lidetu Ayalew. A court ordered his release in early
June but he was rearrested two weeks later and accused by the police of having used
his mobile phone to coordinate the student protests.He, however, was not the only
one to be sanctioned. Charges were also brought against the three judges who
formed the court panel ordering his release. Lidetu was released again in mid-July
without formal charges, after seventy days in jail.
The government also arrested about a dozen businessmen under the anti-corruption
law. They, too, were jailed for months without formal charges and their
financial assets businesses were frozen. Several of those arrested had no obvious
political ties.
Incarceration without trial for months at a time paled in comparison with the
treatment of officials of and accused collaborators with the former dictatorship,
the Derg, and those arrested on suspicion of assisting insurrectionary groups.Most
of the alleged Derg officials were arrested in 1991. In October, the Amhara State
court acquitted twenty-three more Derg defendants and sentenced two to sixteen years. Ethiopian courts by then had handed down 1,181 verdicts, acquitting 375.
After a full decade, 2,200 defendants had not been brought to trial. Since 1999, the
federal government has held 1,200 individuals in Oromiya State suspected of
assisting the Oromo Liberation Front.Half of those had not been charged.The federal
prosecutor’s office attributed the delays in bringing them to trial or releasing
them to the lack of trained police and prosecuting personnel and the lack of other
resources.
Journalists working for the independent press were often the victims of harassment
because of their reporting. Ethiopia has permitted an independent press to
operate, but in the past Prime Minister Meles Zenawi had described it as a “gutter
press,” and denied the reporters access to official news and briefings. In what passed
for “improvement” in October, the government announced that it would grant
“responsible and constructive” independent newspapers access to its information.
Control of all television and radio broadcasting remained in the hands of the government
and the ruling EPRDF. As of October 2001, only one journalist remained
in jail, the publisher of a defunct weekly, Akturot, but there remained pending
charges against eighty journalists from earlier reporting. The jailed journalist was
arrested for inciting violence by having published an article two years earlier quoting
a retired general who predicted the overthrow of the government. He was also
accused of defamation for publishing an article about alleged corruption at a government-
owned factory. In addition, short-term detention was still alarmingly frequent.
For example, two journalists were jailed in May and June for articles written
years earlier alleging corruption by church officials and at the Ethiopian Electric
Power Company, respectively. In July, the government arrested journalists from
eight publications after the foreign minister complained he had been defamed by
their reports that he had had a falling out with the prime minister. In July, an editor
was jailed for 1999 articles claiming that a regional official and that some of the
president’s security detail had defected. About two dozen journalists lived in exile,
including three who fled in 2001.
Opposing political parties have also been hampered in their legitimate activities,
even apart from the mass arrests following the April disturbances. The EDP was
denied a permit to hold its convention in Addis Ababa in August.AAPO directed its
six elected woreda (district) representatives in Addis Ababa not to participate in district
councils as a protest against what it claimed were rigged local elections. The
EDP,while not directing its ten woreda representatives to boycott the district councils,
also asserted that the elections had been tainted.
The Eritrean war sapped economic resources that could have been used to
improve the conditions of the civilian population and its baleful aftermaths linger.
The Ethiopian government announced that the war cost the impoverished country
U.S. $3 billion, including the expense of prosecuting the war and the expense of
rebuilding and resettlement once the war ended. A local research institute reported
that the war had a devastating impact on civilian life through displacement, loss of
livestock and stored food grains, and the destruction of houses, social infrastructure,
and commercial enterprises. The institute estimated the cost of lost social
infrastructure alone to be well over $200 million. Income also dropped as tourism
and international investment and aid fell.
The end of the war has enabled Ethiopia to decrease its security budget by 20
percent, to U.S. $350 million, but the country remained plagued by military threats
from ethnically-based separatist groups, especially in the Oromiya, Somali, Southern
Nations, and Benishangul-Gumuz states. Local skirmishes in which government
and rebel troops (and civilians) were killed and wounded continued to occur
occasionally. These small but deadly battles sometimes led to mass arrests of local
inhabitants suspected of abetting the rebels. They, too, have historically been held
for months or years without charges or trial.
The cease-fire ended the fighting but not the animosity between the two countries.
In June, Ethiopia forcibly expelled 772 people it identified as Eritreans from
its territory without prior notification to the International Committee of the Red
Cross as anticipated under article 2 of the truce agreement. In August, it announced
suspension of prisoner-of-war exchanges with Eritrea until it received information
about a missing fighter pilot. Exchanges resumed in October when Eritrea released
twenty-four Ethiopians “for health reasons” and Ethiopia reciprocated with the
release of twenty-three Eritrean POWs, also “for health reasons.”With the October
releases, 653 Ethiopian and 879 Eritrean POWs had been repatriated but about 350
Ethiopians and 1750 Eritreans still remained in POW detention camps as of early
November 2001. Voluntary civilian repatriation between the two countries progressed
more smoothly. During the war, about 345,000 civilians fled the fighting.
Most escaped to internal exile but others were trapped behind enemy lines as the
war front shifted. In November, the International Committee of the Red Cross
reported it had repatriated almost 55,000 Ethiopian civilians from Eritrea since
1998. In July, it had reported the repatriation of 1,000 Eritrean civilians from
Ethiopia.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In early May, about two weeks after the police actions involving university students,
the police arrested two leading human liberties activists, Professor Mesfin
Woldemariam and Dr. Berhanu Nega. They were both charged with having incited
the students to riot. The government produced no evidence then or since to substantiate
the claims. Mesfin was the founder and first president of the Ethiopian
Human Rights Council (EHRCO).On the day of the arrests, the government raided
and sealed the EHRCO offices. EHRCO was founded in 1991 to promote democracy,
human rights, and the rule of law, and to document human rights abuses.The
government refused to recognize the EHRCO until May 1999, and often harassed
those engaged in its monitoring activities. While in prison, Mesfin and Berhanu
began a hunger strike. This, together with considerable international publicity and
pressure, may have facilitated their release on bail in June after a month of captivity.
After their release, the EHRCO was allowed to reopen.
Harassment of organizations established to monitor and advance civil liberties
also extended to other activists. In August, the Ethiopian Women Lawyers Association
(EWLA) mounted a peaceful demonstration with several hundred participants
to demand that rape laws be strengthened and more aggressively enforced.At about the same time, it received extensive media coverage for its letter to a local
newspaper protesting the ministry of justice’s failure to prosecute an alleged sexual
assault by the son of a prominent family. Shortly thereafter, the ministry of justice
suspended EWLA’s charter and froze its bank accounts. It announced that EWLA’s
activity’s exceeded its charter,without offering details. In mid-October, a trial court
ordered the release of ELWA’s frozen accounts and the Justice Ministry—under a
new minister—restored ELWA’s license.
In May, a court acquitted eight founding members of the Human Rights League
after three-and-a-half years’ detention on unsubstantiated charges of involvement
in terrorist activities. The Human Rights League was a monitoring group founded
in 1996 by prominent members of the Oromo community that the government
never allowed to function. Other groups that government harassment forced
underground or into exile in past years included the Ogaden Human Rights Committee,
the Solidarity Committee for Ethiopian Political Prisoners, and the Oromo
Ex-Prisoners for Human Rights.
Both the Ethiopian constitution and legislation empower parliament to create a
Human Rights Commission and an ombudsman.Neither had yet been established.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The economic cost of the war was a key factor in pressing both Ethiopia and
Eritrea to conclude the December 2000 peace agreement. The Ethiopian government
subsequently received generous aid packages, even as it used lethal force
against demonstrators, silenced dissent, and violently repressed minorities in restless
regions. Contributing to the international community’s muted criticism of
these practices was the apparent perception that the dissenters were “hardliners,”
and the government’s was the “moderate” camp.
The dissenters considered the government’s espousing of a free-market economy
and its partnership with international financial institutions a betrayal of the
TPLF’s ideological roots. In a strong sign of support for the government’s policies,
the IMF in March approved a U.S. $112 million loan, and agreed to back Ethiopia’s
poverty reduction program. Likewise, a meeting of Ethiopia’s donors in early April
agreed to reschedule or cancel 70 percent of U.S. $430 million in foreign debts.
United Nations
Implementation of the peace agreement progressed relatively well,but both parties
repeatedly showed intransigence. The Security Council in Resolution 1369
(2001) passed in September extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)—a mission to monitor and help implement the
cease-fire agreement—to March 15, 2002, and called on the parties to settle all outstanding
issues. These included Ethiopia’s reluctance to supply maps detailing the
location of its minefields in Eritrea. About 70,000 internally-displaced Eritreans
still could not be resettled because of the danger of land mines. Both countries
balked at engaging in bilateral talks. Eritrea was accused of infiltrating militia into
its side of the buffer zone in violation of the cease-fire agreement but confirmation was difficult because Eritrea restricted the movement of UNMEE monitors.
UNMEE reported that no Ethiopian troops remained in the temporary security
zone separating the two countries.While matters could improve in 2002 when a
boundary commission demarks a permanent boundary, both sides expressed dissatisfaction
with the commission’s interim findings.
Both countries continued to evict those identified as the other’s nationals, causing
great suffering to the victims and their kin, and blatantly violating international
human rights norms in the process. Of concern also was the slow pace in implementing
the agreement’s compensation provisions for war-related losses.
A committee established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1298 (2000)
that imposed an arms embargo on the two parties complained in a May letter to the
council that it had no monitoring arm and was thus constrained in carrying out its
mandate of ensuring the effective implementation of the embargo. The Security
Council lifted the ban in May. By contrast, the European Union in March renewed
the arms embargo it imposed on Ethiopia and Eritrea in March 1999.
The United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child gave Ethiopia a mixed
review in 2001. It applauded the government’s adoption of a new Family Code. It
also welcomed the interim prohibition on the use of corporal punishment in
schools but expressed disappointment that the ban had not been implemented. It
identified ongoing abuses in violation of Ethiopia’s own constitution. Many children
continued to be subject to the adult justice system because neither a juvenile
court nor a juvenile detention facility existed outside the capital; children were
often exploited for child labor; and large numbers of children lived and worked in
the streets without access to education, health care, or nutrition. The U.N. report
echoed an April EHRCO report on the “frighteningly increasing number” of abandoned
children in Ethiopian cities. In addition, rapes of young girls were common;
even when reported, they were usually lightly punished, if at all.
United States
The U.S. continued to show reluctance to speak out publicly against rampant
human rights abuses in Ethiopia, with a noticeable exception in April when its
embassy in Addis Ababa denounced the use of excessive force against demonstrators.
Further, while the U.S. had initially sponsored the U.N.’s yearlong arms
embargo adopted on May 17, 2000, the outgoing Clinton administration
attempted, but failed, to get the ban lifted in the weeks that followed the signature
of the peace agreement in December 2000. The U.N. allowed the ban to expire in
May, but warned the parties it would take action if they resumed fighting. And
despite the close U.S. alliance with Ethiopia and Eritrea, the U.S. throughout the
war put insufficient pressures on countries supplying the belligerents, including
Bulgaria, China, France, Russia, and others, to stem the flow of arms.
In the wake of the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, the Horn
of Africa appeared poised to gain prominence in a U.S. foreign policy focused on
building a global coalition against international terrorism. Following the attacks,
the Ethiopian government had accused the Islamist group Al-Itihad Al-Islami,
which fought for the autonomy of Ethiopia’s Somali regional state from base in
Somalia,of having links to the Bin Laden network.The Bush administration sought to freeze the assets of that group. President Bush called Prime Minister Meles in
early October and thanked him for his offer to cooperate in the U.S. campaign.U.S.
assistance to Ethiopia totaled U.S. $146 million in FY 2001, most of which was earmarked
for food assistance and child survival programs.
KENYA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Amid an ongoing political crisis, constitutional reform remained critical to
Kenya’s future and promised to grow in urgency with the approach of the 2002
national election. From January 2001, when the chairman of the governmentappointed
Kenya Constitutional Review Commission was sworn in, progress on
substantive issues was bogged down in controversy about its composition and the
administration of its finances, and dissipated the public hopes initially vested in it.
The repeated efforts of the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) to control
the commission, to exclude or reduce significantly the input of civil society
groups, and to use police to prevent or violently disrupt civic education gatherings
or political opposition meetings further dashed public expectations.
In June 2001, the commission promised a draft of a new constitution by June
and then September 2002. Both dates were viewed as unrealistic. The political
opposition and civil society groups expressed concerns that the process would be
rushed through to completion without sufficient civic education or participation,
or if it proved patently impossible to meet the deadline that President Daniel arap
Moi would seize the opportunity to introduce “interim reforms” by decree. Overshadowing
reform efforts was the question of whether or not President Moi would
step down in 2002 in accordance with the existing constitution’s two-term limit.
When the ruling party and an opposition party merged in June, some saw the move
as a stratagem by Moi to stay in power after the 2002 election.
There was one hopeful development in May, when President Moi agreed to
include civil society representatives within the constitutional review commission.
This concession ended the stalemate that had existed since 1999,when the Ufungamano
group, a coalition of the political opposition and civil society, boycotted the
parliamentary committee originally charged with the task of reviewing the constitution.
As ofAugust 2001, the expanded twenty-seven-member commission,which
included members put forward by civil society groups, was gathering views from
citizens on how they want to be involved in the review process.
In addition to the debate over constitutional review, there were important discussions
over the grant of amnesty for economic and political crimes and over a
motion in parliament to establish a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to
explore human rights violations since 1966. But there was a lack of consensus in
parliament on the need to confront past abuses: the motion was defeated.
the year before, the country’s United Nations human development ranking sank to
123 out of 162 countries.
Many of the loans pledged by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (U.S.
$198 million), and the World Bank (U.S. $150 million) remained suspended due to
the lack of progress on anti-corruption efforts. In December 2000, the IMF suspended
its funding until the moribund Kenya Anti-Corruption Authority (KACA)
resumed work. The World Bank also suspended some development loans. In
August, hopes dimmed for resumption of IMF funding when Parliament failed to
pass a fresh anti-corruption bill, despite personal lobbying by President Moi. The
Constitutional Amendment Bill would have entrenched the new KACA in the constitution.
Opponents of the bill charged that it was too weak and saw in Moi’s advocacy
of it a cynical attempt to please donors without engaging in genuine reform.
In response, Moi immediately ordered the police to investigate corruption cases
pending before the KACA. Without a special session of parliament called by the
president, the bill could not be reintroduced and voted on again until March 2002.
Awaiting action were two other bills the IMF had also tied to renewed funding:
a Code of Ethics bill for public servants and an Economic Crimes bill. In July, the
IMF expressed satisfaction with the latter,which it helped draft, but flagged its dismay
with its most controversial clause—a blanket amnesty for all economic crimes
committed before December 1, 1997. President Moi and his cabinet approved the
amnesty measure, which was sharply criticized.
After initially wooing donors for renewed funding, a backlash against the international
pressure built among KANU politicians, increasing tension between the
donor community and the government. In March, soon after a meeting with World
Bank and IMF officials, the president fired the health minister and his assistant for
mounting a stinging attack on the two institutions. That month, the World Bank
issued a scathing report on ten African countries, including Kenya,which the report
charged was not serious about reform. Transparency International, a Berlin-based
watchdog group, ranked Kenya the fourth most corrupt country in the world
according to the perceptions of international business.
Shortly after, anti-corruption efforts were dealt a blow with the firing of Richard
Leakey in March, following twenty-one dramatic months as head of Kenya’s civil
service. President Moi had lured Leakey from the opposition camp and appointed
him and his “Dream Team” to streamline the civil service, root out corruption, and
revive the economy. Leakey’s appointment was instrumental in obtaining the
pledges of renewed assistance from the international financial institutions. In
Leakey’s short time in office, he was successful in reinvigorating the anti-corruption
initiative and tightening the economy. Resentful of the clout he wielded, a
group of parliamentarians pushed for Leakey’s ouster.
European Union
European Union (E.U.) representatives also pegged disbursement of future
funds to progress in fighting corruption, following a May meeting with President
Moi.While commending Kenya on progress in constitutional review, they said the
E.U. attached particular importance to effective preparation for the coming
national election.They also expressed concern over violations of freedom of speech and assembly, treatment of suspects and prisoners, and an increase in extrajudicial
executions. Denmark announced it would not increase aid until significant
progress was made on governance and fighting corruption, and called for respect
for human rights. And the United Kingdom, a traditionally staunch supporter of
the Moi government, issued two warnings that it would halt funding if reforms
continued to slip.
United States
President Moi held high level meetings with President George Bush and Secretary
of State Colin Powell, and used the opportunity to appeal for United States
intervention for renewed IMF and World Bank funding. In May, Powell visited
Kenya and pledged U.S. $8 million to fight AIDS and urged economic reform
efforts. Powell stressed that the U.S. would closely watch the 2002 elections, and
underscored the importance of democratization. The State Department issued a
formal statement in August urging passage of anti-corruption legislation. On June
27, President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney met with Moi in Washington,
and encouraged him to ensure continued progress on democratization and economic
reform.However, in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, anti-terrorism
efforts came to the forefront of U.S. policy regarding Kenya. In October, Powell
met with Kenyan foreign minister Christopher Obure on Kenya’s cooperation in
anti-terrorism efforts. In November, President Bush met again with President Moi;
this time the discussion centered around anti-terrorism efforts and peace initiatives
for Sudan and Somalia.
Other concerns included regional conflict and proliferation of small arms,
which the State Department warned had reached crisis proportions. President Moi
stepped up efforts to control arms flows by ordering his security and immigration
departments to get involved.Unfortunately, the government’s attempts resulted in
renewed harassment and indiscriminate crackdowns against refugees in Kenya.
The U.S. responded to outrage over the previous year’s shooting of Father John
Kaiser by sending a Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) team to investigate.
Kaiser, a U.S. citizen, was a Catholic parish priest in the Rift Valley and a human
rights activist. He was an outspoken critic of government sponsored “ethnic” violence.
The FBI’s finding of suicide created an uproar among Kenya’s clergy and
human rights community,who were convinced he was murdered.U.S. Senator Paul
Wellstone called for a new inquiry that took into account findings of the U.S.
Embassy’s own investigation. “Reports of ethnic cleansing, provocation of land
clashes, rapes of young women, and harassment of priests and human rights workers
are widespread,”Wellstone said in June.
U.S. assistance to Kenya in FY 2001 was approximately U.S. $66.7 million,
including development assistance, child survival, and food aid, and some $450,000
in International Military Education and Training (IMET) funding.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
In the Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Children’s Rights in Kenya, 6/01
LIBERIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Continued violence threatened to plunge Liberia back into civil war after nearly
five years of shaky transition to peace. Fierce fighting continued to rage in the
country’s north since the start of a rebel incursion in July 2000, the fifth serious outbreak
of violence since the 1997 elections that ended the civil war. The fighting and
repression blocked recovery efforts with the nation’s economy in tatters, 80 percent
of the workforce unemployed and 80 percent illiteracy.Basic services such as health
care, communications, electricity, and the public supply of drinking water
remained extremely limited. Public and private institutions deteriorated amid
widespread corruption and fear.
Fighting between government forces and the rebel group, Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD), intensified in northern Lofa County.
Amid the violence, widespread human rights abuses took place against civilians,
including women and children. Liberian government troops and rebels alike
detained, tortured, or killed hundreds of civilians, raping women and girls at will,
and forcing men and boys to fight. Reports by Amnesty International found that
government security forces—especially the Anti-Terrorist Unit (ATU), a security
force accountable only to President Taylor—detained, tortured, or executed more
than two hundred civilians suspected of supporting rebels, raping some of them.
The government denied these allegations and took no steps to investigate, punish,
or end the abuses. In April 2001, President Taylor called up 15,000 former fighters
from the faction he had led during the civil war to combat the growing rebel threat.
As of September, fighting had spread southward to within sixty miles of the capital,
Monrovia.
Responding to the rebel action, government repression of civil society continued
to intensify. President Taylor’s government functioned without accountability,
independent of an ineffective judiciary and legislature that operated in fear of the
executive. Ethnic Mandingo citizens, whom the government indiscriminately
accused of supporting the rebels, faced growing discrimination, arbitrary arrests,
and violence based solely on their ethnicity. In March, state security troops stormed
the University of Liberia in Monrovia, assaulting and arresting unarmed students
meeting to raise legal fees for detained journalists.More than forty students were
reportedly tortured and female students raped in the raid by the ATU and the
Special Operation Division, a special police unit.More than fifteen student leaders
from the University of Liberia went into exile in May following the justice minister’s
public claim that rebel collaborators operated from their campus. In August,
in an attempt to allay growing criticism, President Taylor freed three of thirteen
prominent ethnic Krahn leaders imprisoned on treason charges since 1998, pardoned
exiled opposition leaders, and announced an amnesty for rebels who disarmed.
Press censorship and arrests of journalists continued, as President Taylor and
other high-ranking officials blamed them for negative international publicity. In
February, four journalists from the Daily newspaper were arrested and held for
over a month on espionage charges following a report questioning government
spending on helicopter repairs. The government shut down four independent
newspapers in connection with the report. Harassment continued with the arrest
in August of the editor of the Monrovia Guardian following an article on police
brutality.The information minister announced in April that all war-related reports
had to be cleared by him. The government also tightened restrictions on foreign
journalists.
With most Liberians dependent on radio for their news, government silencing
of independent radio broadcasts deprived them of information. In August, President
Taylor banned all radio stations but the three currently licensed—his private
Liberian Communications Network and two others that only operated infrequently.
At the same time, he refused to lift a ban on Veritas, a station of Liberia’s
Roman Catholic Church, and the independent Star radio.
The violence was part of a growing subregional struggle over control of diamonds
and other resources. In 2001, President Taylor shifted his commercial focus
from diamonds to logging, relying on the same men who organized the arms-fordiamonds
trade to export timber and ship weapons from Monrovia to Sierra
Leone. Illustrating the corruption at the heart of the Taylor government, two of the
individuals involved in diamond trading sat on the board of directors of the Liberian
Forestry Development Authority that oversees logging. A Strategic Commodities
Act reportedly passed secretly in 2000 gave President Taylor “the sole power to
execute, negotiate and conclude all commercial contracts or agreements with any
foreign or domestic investor” for designated commodities, including timber and
diamonds. The act was challenged as unconstitutional by the legal community.
Divisions and tensions in the subregion deepened as the internal conflicts
within Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea continued to spill across the borders.
Guinea and Liberia accused each other of supporting armed anti-government
rebels, and the Sierra Leonean government accused Liberia of providing support to
the Sierra Leonean rebel group, the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).
The insecurity and violence in the subregion displaced thousands of Liberians.
Humanitarian agencies estimated in July 2001 that more than 40,000 persons had
been newly displaced in Lofa County since April. In the country’s six internally displaced
camps, about 70 percent were women and children who had fled south into
areas with scarce food, clean water, shelter, or medical assistance. An unknown
number remained in areas inaccessible to humanitarian workers, and without
assistance in unsafe conditions in forests and villages.
Liberians also fled across the borders. In 2001, some 15,000 Liberians fled to
Sierra Leone and nearly 5,000 to Ivory Coast.Although some Liberians were able to
flee into Guinea, the Guinean government officially closed the border to Liberian
refugees from Lofa County following cross-border fighting between Liberian,
Guinean, and Sierra Leonean rebel and government forces in late 2000. This crossborder
fighting also affected a longstanding Liberian refugee population that had
been in Guinea for the past decade. Guinean security and civilians also targeted refugees for attack following xenophobic statements by President Lansana Conte in
September 2000. In early 2001, as the violence at the border subsided, the Office of
the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Guinean government
relocated some 60,000 refugees (largely Sierra Leoneans) to inland camps in
Guinea. In May 2001, the relocation program ended and an unknown number of
refugees chose to remain at the embattled border.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Following the escalation of fighting in Lofa County and a stinging December
2000 U.N. report on Liberian support of Sierra Leonean rebels, the government
intensified attacks on human rights groups. Liberian security forces harassed,
arrested, and tortured perceived critics, and human rights activists continued to
flee the country in fear of government reprisals. Despite the threats, a small but
dedicated human rights community continued to work in Liberia.
The leader of the Catholic Church’s Justice and Peace Commission, a key human
rights defender, said in March that he had received threats from “prominent individuals”
in retaliation for a report critical of the government’s human rights record.
The commission’s premises,which had been the object of previous attacks by security
forces, were burglarized a few months later.Despite the climate of fear, human
rights organizations persisted in their activities. By contrast, the government’s
National Human Rights Commission was inactive.
Thompson Ade-Bayo, a human rights activist who had been in hiding for a
week, was arrested and detained by the police in September.He was wanted for criticizing
as illegal the government’s anti-terrorist security unit, which he had
described as functioning like President Taylor’s private army.
Lawyers in the Liberian National Bar Association came under attack for speaking
out against the lack of due process in the courts. In October, two lawyers—Marcus
Jones, vice president of the Liberia National Bar and Ishmael Campbell,
president of the Montserrado County Bar—were ordered detained by the House of
Representatives and fined after they protested its order for the detention of their
colleague and Bar Association president Emmanuel Wureh. Wureh was detained
for contempt of court in late September, but was released the first week of October
after a week-long boycott of courts by lawyers. The two lawyers had called the
House of Representative’s order “unconstitutional” and urged a boycott of the
courts. Although the two paid the fine, they were informed that they would be
detained until March 2002 unless they retracted their statement. On October 11,
lawyers started a second round of boycotts to protest the continued detention of
their two colleagues.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
A downturn in foreign aid for development and relief efforts created a humanitarian
crisis. Relief organizations struggling to help Liberians displaced by war expressed strong concerns over dwindling resources.Donors stayed away, accusing
the Taylor government’s of human rights violations, poor economic policies, and
continuing involvement in arms smuggling.
United Nations
The U.N. Security Council played an active role in attempting to end the armsfor-
diamonds trade in Liberia and the subregion. In December 2000, the U.N. panel
monitoring compliance with the arms embargo placed on supplies to the RUF in
Sierra Leone reported that the Liberian logging industry played a key role in arms
trafficking. In May, the Security Council imposed a ban on Liberian diamond
exports (believed in fact to derive mostly from Sierra Leone), as well as an arms
embargo on Liberia itself, and a ban on foreign travel by President Taylor and more
than 130 senior government officials and their spouses.An October 2001 report for
the Security Council prepared by the Independent Panel of Experts found that illegal
arms shipments to Liberia continued despite the arms embargo.
In response to the international scrutiny, the government made some gestures.
In January, it grounded all aircraft registered in Liberia to review their legality, following
accusations that Liberian-registered airplanes were flying arms to Sierra
Leone. In March, Liberia banned diamond exports as well as imports of uncertified
rough diamonds. However, arms continued to flow, financed by the unregulated
trade in Liberian timber, which was not affected by any sanctions. A Danish trading
company, however, announced in July that it would stop selling Liberian timber
in Europe.
On August 14, 2001, the U.N.Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
expressed concern about “reports of extrajudicial killings, allegations of
torture, including rape, and the lack of accountability of perpetrators, including
government security forces, for these abuses.” On August 16, 2001, the U.N. Security
Council publicly stressed “the need for human rights abuses to cease by whatever
parties they are committed” in Liberia. In contrast, the U.N. Office in Liberia
(UNOL) Peace-building Support Office played little or no active role in addressing
the growing repression and abuses in Liberia.
European Union
In July the E.U. agreed to open consultations with the Liberian government
about the worsening situation in human rights, democratic principles, and the rule
of law, citing “serious cases of corruption” as the primary impetus for the move. It
was the first time the commission proposed using articles 96 and 97 of the Cotonou
Agreement signed in Benin in June 2000 by the E.U. and the African, Caribbean,
and Pacific (ACP) nations. The E.U. expressed concerns over a “significantly deteriorated”
political situation, threats to freedom of the press, attacks on human
rights activists, and mismanagement of public funds. In October, European Union
(E.U.) envoy Hans Dahlgren visited Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea to examine
prospects for peace and security in the region, and to formulate an E.U. policy on
the crisis in the region.
The biggest aid donor to Liberia since the civil war ended, the E.U. suspended
approximately U.S. $50 million in aid in 2000 to pressure the Taylor government to
cut its support to RUF rebels. In May 2001, E.U. member states approved a 25-million-
euro (approximately U.S. $22 million) program to assist programs for resettling
refugees and displaced people.
United States
Relations between the U.S. and Liberia further deteriorated as President Taylor’s
role in fueling the war in Sierra Leone became more evident. Following U.N. sanctions
in May, the U.S. prohibited the importation of Liberian rough diamonds.The
Bush administration continued the Clinton policy of isolating Taylor politically
and diplomatically, although the U.S. was less public in its approach. Administration
officials stressed that until Taylor ceased efforts to destabilize the subregion,
including his support for the RUF in Sierra Leone, U.S. policy would remain
unchanged.
After the E.U., the U.S. was Liberia’s largest donor, providing one-third of the
country’s total assistance. From 1997 to 2000, the USAID program focused on the
resettlement of refugees and internally displaced persons and a modest, but less
successful, democracy and governance program. In August, USAID reported that
“the oppressive and irresponsible Charles Taylor government has overshadowed
these achievements and alienated its citizens and the donor community.” The
agency continued to support delivery of food and health care services in 2001, but
planned to put greater emphasis on strengthening civil society.
NIGERIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Halfway through the four-year term of Olusegun Obasanjo’s presidency, the
overall human rights picture in Nigeria was mixed. There were investigations into
past abuses but alarming developments, in particular recurring violence between
ethnic or religious groups in several parts of the country. The military responded
to attacks on its own personnel with indiscriminate killings of civilians. Political
tension increased in the run-up to elections scheduled for 2003. Nigerians were
expressing disillusion with the lack of fundamental change since the advent of a
civilian government in 1999. The legacy of decades of repressive military rule was
still keenly felt. The police were not only ineffective in maintaining law and order,
but also responsible for serious human rights violations themselves.
Corruption remained rampant, despite the creation of an anti-corruption commission
and adoption of anti-corruption legislation in 2000.However, the government
took steps to recover some of the wealth appropriated by senior members of former governments, in particular that of Sani Abacha (1993-1998), and asked
other governments to freeze some of their assets abroad.
The commission set up in 1999 to investigate human rights abuses committed
under previous governments, chaired by Chukwudifu Oputa (known as the Oputa
panel), received over 10,000 submissions, of which it was only able to consider
around two hundred; these included numerous testimonies of killings, rape, and
other abuses by the security forces against Ogoni civilians in the oil-producing
Niger Delta region in 1993-1994. The commission held public hearings in Lagos,
Abuja, Port Harcourt, Kano, and Enugu. Its summons to former heads of state
Abdulsalami Abubakar, Ibrahim Babangida, and Muhammad Buhari was the focus
of much attention.By October,when the commission concluded its hearings, none
of them had agreed to testify.President Obasanjo himself appeared before the panel
in September in connection with events during his first presidency as military
ruler (1976-1979). The Oputa panel was under-resourced and had limited powers:
it could only make recommendations, not ensure arrests or prosecutions. Nevertheless,
it played an important role in beginning to erode the decades of impunity
of human rights violators in Nigeria. Its hearings were televised and closely followed
by the public, raising awareness of human rights and the principle of
accountability.
In contrast, little action was taken by the government to investigate human
rights abuses committed since it came to power. There was still no public investigation
into the Nigerian military’s November 1999 massacre of hundreds of civilians
and widespread destruction in the town of Odi in Bayelsa State. President
Obasanjo visited Odi in March 2001, but no one was brought to justice for these
abuses. In August, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) called on the
government to speed up the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Odi.
Members of the security forces were responsible for numerous extrajudicial executions,
including a series of massacres by the military in Benue State in October.
On October 22 and 23, soldiers killed more than two hundred (and possibly many
more) civilians of the Tiv ethnic group in Gbagi, Zaki-Biam, and several other villages,
and engaged in widespread destruction of homes and property. The soldiers,
who were apparently acting in revenge for the murder of nineteen soldiers attributed
to a Tiv armed group less than two weeks earlier, gathered villagers for a “meeting”
then opened fire on them indiscriminately. Senior government and military
officials including President Obasanjo initially sought to excuse the military’s
actions by claiming that they were acting in self-defense.
When confronted with real or suspected common criminals, the police in many
cases appeared to make little attempt to arrest the suspects. They shot on sight suspected
armed robbers, alleged members of ethnic militia, and youth in the Niger
Delta region accused of plundering oil, vandalizing facilities,or obstructing oil production.
Detainees were also shot dead while in police custody. There were reports
of police brutality including beatings and arbitrary arrests when police broke up
rallies of opposition groups.
The police clamped down on the activities of the Movement for the Actualization
of the Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB), a group which advocates autonomy
for the Igbo people. MASSOB meetings were repeatedly and violently broken up by police, their offices raided, and hundreds of MASSOB members arrested;
many were detained without charge. Their leader, Ralph Uwazuruike, was arrested
several times. Police summarily executed several MASSOB members, in particular
during a police attack on their office in Okigwe in Abia state, in February, when at
least ten MASSOB members were reportedly killed.
The police were ineffective in controlling the high crime rate. The inadequate
size of the force, low morale, poor working conditions, and insufficient training all
encouraged corruption and brutality within the police force and reinforced its lack
of respect among the population. The government announced a major reform and
expansion of the police, including plans to increase its numbers by tens of thousands
as part of a five year program, and launched a campaign to improve its image.
Civilian “vigilante” groups were seen by some as the answer to, or a substitute
for, the inability of the police to reduce crime levels. Despite the violence and brutality
that characterized many of their operations, some of these groups, for example
in Anambra and Lagos states, enjoyed the active and public support of their
state governor. The Bakassi Boys in the south-east and the O’odua People’s Congress
(OPC) in the south-west were responsible for scores of deaths of alleged
armed robbers.When apprehending suspected criminals, they often killed them on
the spot. The Bakassi Boys also burned and mutilated their victims and systematically
tortured detainees in their custody with impunity and, in some cases, on the
effective authority of the state governor. In several southeastern states, the Bakassi
Boys were used to target suspected political opponents and critics, as well as to settle
scores and intervene in private disputes.
Members of the OPC, a more explicitly political group claiming to advocate for
the Yoruba cause and officially banned in 1999, had many violent clashes with the
police, attacking police stations and killing and injuring policemen. The police
response, in turn, was heavy-handed.Many real or suspected OPC members were
arrested and several killed. In August, prominent OPC leader Ganiyu Adams was
arrested and charged with several offences including murder, torture, arson, and
armed robbery; he was released in November.
In the north, civilian groups were used by the state authorities to enforce Sharia
(Islamic law) in those states which had extended its application to criminal law.
Some administered instant punishments to those caught violating Sharia law. In
January, the governor of Zamfara state announced that he was giving powers of
arrest and prosecution to local Islamic “vigilante” groups as the police had failed in
their duties.
Sharia criminal courts handed down judgments in several northern states; until
1999, they had operated only for personal status law. Punishments amounting to
cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment included floggings and amputations, for
offenses ranging from extra-marital sex to consumption or sale of alcohol, or theft.
Floggings were carried out in public, sometimes immediately after the sentence was
handed down by the court, apparently disregarding the right to appeal.The victims
included minors, such as a seventeen-year-old mother convicted for pre-marital
sex who was flogged in Zamfara state in January, less than a month after giving
birth. In June, a court in Kebbi state ordered that a fifteen-year-old boy’s hand be
amputated after he was found guilty of theft; it was not known whether the sentence was carried out. At least two people were sentenced to death by stoning,
including a pregnant woman in Sokoto; by November these death sentences had
not been carried out.
While government officials repeatedly stated that Sharia law only applied to
Muslims, it inevitably had consequences for Christians living in the northern states.
On several occasions, civilian groups attacked establishments owned by Christians
and destroyed consignments of alcohol. Rules such as those that forbid women
from traveling with men in public vehicles were applied to Christians as well as
Muslims. In January, a group claiming to enforce Sharia flogged a Christian man
for selling alcohol.
There were several waves of serious inter-communal violence in various parts of
the country. In the central state of Nasarawa, between one hundred and two hundred
people were killed in June and July in clashes between the Tiv and several other
ethnic groups; tens of thousands fleeing the violence were internally displaced.
There had been earlier spates of violence in this area, particularly during April and
May. In July and August, violence broke out between Christians and Muslims in
Tafawa Balewa in Bauchi state, apparently in response to the introduction of Sharia
there. In September, more than 1,000 people were estimated to have been killed in
violence between Muslims and Christians in Jos, Plateau State; Human Rights
Watch researchers who visited Jos in October gathered eyewitness testimony of
the violence from both communities. In October, further violence erupted in
the northern city of Kano following protests at the United States attacks on
Afghanistan.
The Niger Delta continued to experience tension between different ethnic
groups. There was also continuing conflict between local communities and the oil
companies operating in the area, as well as government representatives. Communities
continued to complain bitterly about the absence of local benefits from the
exploitation of natural resources and lack of compensation for damage to the environment.
The creation by the government of a Nigeria Delta Development Commission
in 2000 did little to pacify them and was not very effective. There were
several incidents in which security personnel posted at oil facilities shot and
wounded or killed young men protesting oil production. Other protesters were
arrested.
There were widespread violations of the rights of women and children. Reports
were common of trafficking of Nigerian women and teenage girls for prostitution
or slavery, to other West African countries as well as to Europe. In some cases trafficked
women or girls were deported back to Nigeria. In June, a report by the International
Labour Organization (ILO) identified a number of states in Nigeria as
central points for child trafficking, both in terms of supplying and receiving children
as well as acting as transit routes.There were also reports of trafficking of boys
and girls under the age of ten for child labor. Government officials repeatedly declared
their resolve to stamp out trafficking. A number of alleged traffickers were
arrested, but overall, the practice remained entrenched, despite initiatives by several
governmental and nongovernmental bodies, including the Presidential Task
Force on Human Trafficking and Child Labour.
While female genital mutilation remained a common practice, some states took welcome steps to eradicate it. The Rivers State House of Assembly passed a bill to
abolish female circumcision. There were moves towards adopting similar legislation
in Delta State. In March, it was reported that the Enugu State House of Assembly
passed a bill to protect women from traditional practices which are considered
physically, psychologically, or emotionally harmful to them.
Prison conditions remained poor and sometimes life-threatening, despite government
promises to release funds for improvements as part of longer-term prison
reform plans. Prisons were congested, with inadequate facilities and very limited
access to medical care.More than two-thirds of detainees were held without trial,
many having spent several years in detention. Torture and ill-treatment were widespread,
especially in police custody.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
A broad range of nongovernmental organizations continued to work actively on
a variety of issues including freedom of expression, women’s rights, and proposals
for reform of law enforcement agencies and the judiciary. They were generally able
to carry out their activities without hindrance or obstruction from the authorities.
Likewise, journalists were mostly able to report critically and encourage public
debate, including on sensitive issues. The NGO Media Rights Agenda, along with
journalists’ groups, initiated discussion of proposals for a draft law which would
harmonize laws governing the media and enshrine freedom of expression in the
legislation.
The National Human Rights Commission, a government-appointed body created
in 1996, suffered from a lack of resources and complained of difficulties in
compelling alleged human rights violators to cooperate with its investigations.
Nevertheless it attempted to carry out a range of activities as part of an ambitious
national program, including several workshops with nongovernmental human
rights organizations.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United States
Nigeria, the fifth largest supplier of U.S. crude oil imports in 2000, assumed further
importance to the United States as a leader in West Africa and throughout the
continent, often referred to by U.S. officials as an “anchor state.”U.S. policy focused
on supporting democratic and economic reform, including civil-military relations
and police reform, but rarely including public criticism on human rights grounds.
U.S. assistance to the Nigerian military came in two main forms.Military Professional
Resources International (MPRI), a consulting firm on contract with the
U.S. government, carried out a retraining and restructuring program as part of the
Nigerian government’s plans to reform the army. The stated aims of the program,
initially paid for by the U.S.Agency for International Development (USAID) along with the Nigerian government, included restoring greater civilian control over the
military. A separate military training program conducted by United States Special
Forces and designed for peacekeeping duty in Sierra Leone, known as Operation
Focus Relief, involved training and equipment for five Nigerian battalions. The
training was reportedly aimed at enhancing combat skills and strengthening command
and control, and included a human rights component; the equipment
included small arms, communications equipment and vehicles.However, the program
lacked an effective monitoring and accountability component, a serious
shortcoming given the history of abuses by the Nigerian military.
The United States, in part through USAID, was one of the major bilateral donors
to Nigeria, with an annual USAID budget of U.S. $20 million for support to democracy
and good governance and economic reform. The program of the Office of
Transition Initiatives (OTI), set up by USAID to assist Nigeria’s transition towards
reconciliation and democracy, concluded in 2001. It sponsored workshops on various
themes including election-related violence, conflict management, and relations
between police and local communities. Its annual budget was U.S. $6 million;
the majority of its grants were allocated to nongovernmental organizations and
civil society groups.
The U.S.Department of State country report on human rights practices for 2000
provided an accurate assessment of the human rights situation; it stated that the
Nigerian government’s human rights record remained poor,while commenting on
some improvements. It highlighted extrajudicial executions and excessive use of
force by the police and military, prolonged pre-trial detention, violence between
ethnic and religious groups, and violations of the rights of women as some of the
main human rights problems.
In May, the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom published a
report in which it expressed heightened concern about violent clashes between
Nigerian Muslims and Christians in 2000 and threats to religious freedom, including
reports of discrimination against Muslims in the south and Christians in the
north. The report commented on tensions sparked off by the extension of Sharia
law. A report on religious freedom published by the U.S. Department of State in
October also commented on a deterioration of religious freedom particularly in
northern states.
President Obasanjo visited the United States in May 2001 to meet President
George W.Bush and other U.S. government officials, and again in November to discuss
anti-terrorism measures.After the September 11 attacks on the United States,
President Bush called President Obasanjo to brief him on U.S. actions.
European Union
The United Kingdom was the main country providing assistance to Nigeria.The
Department for International Development (DFID) had an extensive program and
identified safety, security, and access to justice as priority themes. In January, a
workshop in Abuja on justice sector reform was sponsored jointly by DFID and
USAID. The European Commission also funded a variety of projects to promote
democracy and justice.
In September, the United Kingdom and Nigeria signed a Memorandum of
Understanding on military cooperation, under which advice on training and reequipment
would be supplied to the Nigerian armed forces through British personnel
on secondment to the Nigerian Ministry of Defense. President Obasanjo
visited the United Kingdom in September for a meeting of several African heads of
state called by British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
In August a re-admission agreement was signed between the Irish and Nigerian
governments to facilitate the deportation of Nigerians whose claims for asylum
in Ireland had been turned down, as well as other Nigerian immigrants rejected by
Ireland.The Irish Government denied claims that the deal was linked to an increase
in Irish aid to Nigeria.
The European Union (E.U.) itself worked towards strengthening relations with
Nigeria. A special joint meeting on Nigeria of the Africa Working Group and the
Africa, Caribbean and Pacific Working Group was held in March. It resulted in a
Common Position on Nigeria that will constitute the basis for regular political dialogue,
aimed at supporting consolidation of democracy, respect for human rights,
the rule of law, and good governance. In January, the E.U. condemned the use of
corporal punishment in the flogging sentence imposed on a seventeen-year-old girl
in Zamfara state.
World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF)
In 2001 two World Bank projects were approved: a community-based poverty
reduction project for U.S. $60 million and a privatization support project for U.S.
$114.3 million.Two projects were approved for 2002, including a U.S. $90.3 million
HIV/AIDS project.
NGOs in the Niger Delta complained to the World Bank about a decision to
establish the Niger Delta Contractor Revolving Credit Facility, a controversial
scheme set up by the International Finance Corporation (part of the World Bank
Group) in conjunction with Shell. The complaint centered around the absence of
consultation with local communities about the benefits of the scheme, which was
intended to relieve poverty by providing credit facilities to Nigerian contractors
working with Shell, and lack of confidence in Shell in the light of the company’s past
environmental and human rights record.
Representatives of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) visited Nigeria. In a
review of Nigeria’s economy, the IMF expressed concern about macroeconomic
imbalances, increased inflation and foreign exchange instability.
RWANDA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Rwanda appeared to be moving towards greater democracy by decentralizing
the administration, drafting a new constitution, and holding local elections. But at
the same time the government suppressed a new political party and imposed new
limits on civil society. The dominant Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) was permitted
to recruit extensively while other political parties were banned from any local
activities. Justice for the 1994 genocide that killed at least half a million Tutsi
advanced slowly in both national and international jurisdictions. Elections for
judges under a new system of “popular”justice called gacaca spurred hopes of faster
resolution of the cases of over 100,000 people still jailed on accusations of genocide,
but trials under the new system were unlikely before mid-2002.
Rwanda professed commitment to ending the war in neighboring Congo, but its
troops, allied with the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), intensified combat
in the eastern provinces of North and South Kivu during September and October.
At the same time Rwandan troops were reported fighting rebels inside Burundi,
some of them Rwandan, some Burundian, and late in the year troop movements
fed speculation about possible war with Uganda.
Rwandan army soldiers assisted their RCD allies in abducting and forcibly
recruiting children and men to serve in the RCD armed forces. Rwandan military
and civilian authorities continued to use some children as part of the official paramilitary
Local Defense Force which sometimes engaged in combat.
From May through July, Rwandan troops fought and defeated the rebel Rwandan
Liberation Army (ALIR) which had crossed from bases in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) into northwestern Rwanda. The Rwandan army reportedly
killed some 2,000 combatants and captured about the same number who were
then detained for “re-education” in “solidarity” camps. In contrast to previous
practices, neither Rwandan government soldiers nor ALIR rebels targeted civilians
during these months of combat.The ALIR forces had several hundred child soldiers
in their ranks, some of whom served in combat. In September and October, rebel
combatants fought several skirmishes with Rwandan army soldiers in southwestern
Rwanda.Assailants, said by the government to be rebels, ambushed a vehicle in
that region and killed one passenger.
In March, Rwandans voted, generally without incident, for district councils. A
complicated system of indirect elections gave disproportionate importance to the
vote of officials,many of whom had taken office since 1999. In some places RPF representatives
and some officials manipulated the registration of candidates, some 45
percent of whom ran unopposed. Party and administrative officials also exerted
pressure on voters in some cases, ordinarily in favor of the incumbent.More than
80 percent of incumbent district mayors were re-elected. The law organizing these
local elections prohibited political party activity in apparent violation of the constitution. Parties generally observed a moratorium on grass-roots activities, as
demanded by the RPF. Ignoring both the electoral law and the moratorium, the
RPF recruited new members and did electoral campaigning in some areas. It was
not called to account for its activities.
While a commission worked to prepare a new constitution which would supposedly
guarantee political freedoms, the government did not honor those guaranteed
under the existing fundamental law. In June, former president Pasteur
Bizimungu sought to organize a new political party, as permitted by the current
constitution. But the government declared the party illegal and twice put Bizimungu
under house arrest for brief periods after he had spoken with journalists.
Street gangs attacked Bizimungu and another prominent supporter of the new
party and several other founding members were threatened and felt obliged to
resign to protect themselves.
Others said to have been critical of the government were assassinated or fled the
country. A well-known military officer and diplomat, Alphonse Mbayire, was shot
in the head twenty-eight times by a RPF soldier in February.Although the assassin
was identified by several eyewitnesses, he escaped arrest.At least two other military
officers “disappeared” during the year. One,Major Alexis Ruzindana, was believed
to have been assassinated as well. Both Mbayire and Ruzindana were reportedly
suspected of dissatisfaction with the government and of contacts with dissidents
outside the country. These killings resembled that of leading genocide survivor
Assiel Kabera in 2000, a crime for which no one was charged.
A military officer of the former government’s army, taken into custody by Rwandan
military authorities in the DRC last year, was later traced to military detention
facilities in Gisenyi and Kigali, but subsequently “disappeared.” Civilians last
known to have been in custody also “disappeared” during the year, including a
Congolese tailor last known to have been detained in a military camp in May. A
farmer from Kigali Rural was reportedly last seen at the home of an influential
member of the RPF in February 2001 with whom he had a dispute. His family
received no official help in locating him.
A number of dissaffected RPA soldiers fled to Uganda where the Rwandan government
said they were organizing rebel forces to attack it. Rwanda accused
Uganda of aiding these efforts, one of the reasons for heightened tensions and
rumors of war between Rwanda and Uganda near the end of the year. In April, seven
jurists were detained for several weeks without charge, all of them returned former
refugees from Uganda and reportedly accused of links with Rwandan dissidents
there.
Several prominent civilians known to have been critical of the government also
fled Rwanda. They included a former cabinet minister who was Hutu and a bank
president who was Tutsi. In the latter case, the government accused the financier of
fraud and sought his arrest on an international warrant.A colonel suspected of having
favored Bizimungu’s new party was arrested when the new party was suppressed;
he was convicted of financial misconduct in a family affair and sentenced
to prison. A former parliamentarian who was arrested on charges of fraud in 2000
shortly after he issued a statement criticizing the government remained in prison
without trial.
In April, the government published a new law giving authorities broad powers
to control the management, finances, and projects of local and international nongovernmental
organizations. Ministerial directives to implement the law, under
discussion at the end of the year, seemed meant to tighten control further.Authorities
sent police to disrupt meetings of two human rights organizations in June and
August. Security agents detained and interrogated representatives of the Rwanda
Debt Relief Network in September after they made critical statements about
poverty in Rwanda. Authorities accused these civil society actors of representing
political parties and of inciting ethnic divisions.
The government permitted numerous journals to publish, some of them representing
independent voices, and granted the Voice of America FM broadcast rights
in Rwanda.But security agents called in staff of one critical newspaper twelve times
for questioning and the journal ceased publication of its English edition. Rwandan
journalists who interviewed Bizimungu when he tried to establish his new party
were questioned by security agents and intimidated into handing over a tape
recording of the interview. Authorities also threatened action against the British
Broadcasting Corporation after it aired an interview with Bizimungu.
With well over 100,000 persons still detained on accusations of genocide, the
government gave new attention to improving the delivery of justice. In April, the
gov-ernment published a law creating more than 11,000 jurisdictions for gacaca, an
innovative system of popular justice. Supposedly inspired by the spirit of local conflict-
resolution practices, the system in fact reflects the highly centralized administrative
system and will work from materials prepared by prosecutors.According to
the law, neither accused nor victim has the right to counsel.Nor has the accused any
right to appeal the categorization of his or her crime into one of four levels of gravity,
a designation with major consequences for punishment. Those assigned to category
one by gacaca jurisdictions are to be tried in regular courts and will likely be
sentenced to death if found guilty.Despite the absence of some basic guarantees of
due process, the innovative system offered the only hope of trial within the foreseeable
future for the tens of thousands now suffering inhumane conditions in prisons
and communal lockups. The election of more than 200,000 gacaca judges in October
raised expectations that trials would soon begin,but proceedings seemed unlikely
before mid-2002 at the earliest. Judges must be trained and prosecutors, over-burdened
with work in the regular courts, must prepare case files and summaries of
them from which the gacaca jurisdictions will work.The legislature must pass a law
on the indemnization of victims and authorities must work out implementation of
the community labor which may be imposed as punishment on the guilty.
Throughout the year authorities made some efforts to deal with the thousands
of detainees who still have no specific charges against them, sometimes after seven
years in prison. Prosecutors continued the practice begun in late 2000 of bringing
such persons before their home communities to ask for testimonies against them,
in the absence of which the persons were provisionally freed.Hundreds were liberated
in this way. Authorities also encouraged detainees to confess in a plea-bargaining
procedure which was meant to shorten trials but seemed unlikely to speed
proceedings greatly since prosecutors must establish the validity of each confession
and over 15,000 confessions awaited examination.
As of March 2001, 5,310 persons had been tried on charges of genocide in the
formal court system, some 17 percent of whom were acquitted.Courts worked at a
slightly faster pace in the two last years and sentenced fewer of the convicted to
death. From 1996 to 1999 more than 30 percent of those found guilty were sentenced
to die, but in 2000 only 8.5 percent received this penalty and no one was executed.
Despite the widespread prevalence of rape during the genocide, few accused
have been tried on this charge, in part because the predominantly male judicial personnel
showed little concern for such prosecutions, in part because victims hesitated
to come forward.
Hundreds of minors under the age of fourteen at the time of their supposed
crime and as such not criminally responsible under Rwandan law were held in
prison on charges of genocide until December 2000. After years of promises,
authorities finally released over four hundred to a “solidarity camp” for re-education.
Hundreds of others remained illegally in detention until September 2001
when they were sent for “re-education;” they were released in November. Thousands
of detainees who were aged fourteen to eighteen at the time of their alleged
crimes remained in detention.Although supposed to benefit from priority in processing,
most did not.
In several cases persons tried, acquitted, and released were later re-arrested after
public protest against the verdicts.Eight detainees acquitted in Butare in December
2000 were never released and were to be tried a second time on “new facts.” In
November 2001, one died, still in detention.Magistrates involved in their acquittal
were transferred to other posts with the result that no judgments in genocide cases
were issued in that jurisdiction in the first quarter of 2001. Three judges arrested in
2000 on charges of genocide remained in jail; two had served on panels that had
acquitted accused persons in well-publicized cases prior to their own arrests.
Authorities recognized corruption in the judiciary as widespread and serious
and called on judicial personnel to reform. Both prosecutors and judges were
accused of accepting bribes, either to free the accused or to assure their conviction
regardless of guilt.
In March the attorney general issued a revised list of category one genocide suspects,
those charged with the worst crimes. Some eight hundred persons had been
added to the previous list issued in 1999, bringing the total to nearly 2,900.Among
the additions was Pierre-Celestin Rwigema, prime minister of Rwanda from 1995
to 2000 and currently living in exile. Also listed was Col. Pierre Habimana of the
former Rwandan army, in the hands of Rwandan authorities since July 2001 but not
yet charged with genocide as of late 2001.
Authorities did little to protect children from abuse and exploitation and in the
capital local officials supervised a harsh campaign to rid Kigali of thousands of
street children.Police and members of the Local Defense Force forcibly rounded up
the children and sometimes beat them before detaining them in ill-equipped centers.
An estimated 400,000 orphans lived in child-headed households or in unofficial
fostering arrangements.Many were exploited as domestic laborers or lost their
property to adults.
The government debated a new policy on land holdings while at the local level
disputes over acquisition of large holdings by the powerful continued. Authorities slowed implementation of the forced villagization which had displaced hundreds
of thousands of persons in previous years.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Authorities harassed the Rwandan League for the Promotion and Defense of
Human Rights (LIPRODHOR), the most important human rights organization in
the country, after it published a press release criticizing conditions at one prison.A
journalist lost his job at the national radio after giving an internationally-broadcast
interview about the press release.Authorities threatened a LIPRODHOR representative
with arrest in one province and banned educational programs by the organization
in three provinces. Government officials attempted to interfere in staffing
decisions and blocked disbursement of funds granted LIPRODHOR by an international
agency.
Police disrupted an initial meeting of a new human rights organization, Justice
and Peace, but authorities later permitted the new group to meet.
The National Human Rights Commission expanded both staff and activities. In
its first substantial report on the human rights situation, the commission showed
some independence from authorities and detailed a number of cases of abuses.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
As the international community became increasingly critical of the Rwandan
role in the Congo war, the U.N. Security Council in October called upon Rwanda
and other signatories to the Lusaka Accords to implement their commitments,
including withdrawing their troops. The council also urged all parties to end their
continuing human rights abuses. In April a panel of experts named by the Security
Council published a report documenting the illegal exploitation of Congolese
resources by Rwandans and other foreign actors and suggesting that economic
rather than security considerations explained the continued presence of Rwandan
troops in the eastern DRC. After those criticized contested the findings, the Security
Council mandated a second report. Issued in November, it confirmed the original
conclusions regarding Rwandan conduct and added new criticism of
Zimbabwe and others.
The U.N. Commission on Human Rights ended the mandate of its special representative
for Rwanda.The result of extensive lobbying by Rwandan delegates, this
decision underestimated the gravity of continuing human rights abuses in Rwanda.
The European Union pressed for an end to the Congo war, sending a high level
delegation to the region in November. It budgeted some $100 million in assistance
to Rwanda for 2000-2001 but not all of that amount was spent. It granted $1.2 million
to the National Human Rights Commission to help it monitor gacaca proceedings.
Despite reservations about Rwandan involvement in the Congo war, international
actors expressed continued confidence in the Rwandan domestic political and economic situation.The International Monetary Fund (IMF) released U.S.$ 12
million for a three year poverty reduction plan and the World Bank, the IMF, the
African Development Fund, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development
cancelled $25 million of Rwandan foreign debt. France, in the past critical of
the Rwandan government, showed new willingness to support such international
aid measures after Foreign Minister Herbert Vedrine was well received in Kigali.
Germany granted $16.8 million for development and China granted $3.6 million
and forgave more than $16 million in Rwandan debt.The United Kingdom,still the
most enthusiastic supporter of the Rwandan government, continued its ten-year
program of $70 million in general budget support.
In the United States the Bush administration adopted a more neutral position in
the Great Lakes crisis coincidental with its general reduction of engagement elsewhere
in Africa and joined other donors in criticizing Rwandan involvement in the
Congo war. Embassy staff closely monitored the conduct of both Rwandan troops
and ALIR rebels during the combat in northwestern Rwanda in May through July,
thus encouraging observation of international humanitarian law. Permitted to
establish FM service for the Voice of America (VOA) in Rwanda, the U.S. failed to
criticize publicly government intimidation of the press even though a VOA journalist
was among those harassed. Although State Department officials privately
expressed more reservations about the Rwandan government than in the past, the
U.S. provided $14 million in development assistance and another $1.5 million
under the Great Lakes Justice Initiative.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda had fifty-two persons in custody,
eight of whom had been tried and convicted of genocide. One accused person
was acquitted in 2001. The tribunal continued to suffer from serious management
problems and was increasingly criticized for its expense and delays in delivering
justice. A Belgian court found four persons guilty of genocide in the first jury trial
held anywhere in connection with the 1994 slaughter and sentenced them to prison
terms ranging from twelve to twenty years.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Uprooting the Rural Poor in Rwanda, 5/01
SIERRA LEONE
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Three agreements between the Sierra Leonean government and the rebel
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) contributed to an improvement in the human
rights situation in Sierra Leone in 2001. The first, signed in Abuja, Nigeria in
November 2000, led to a ceasefire. The second and third agreements, signed in May 2001, committed both parties to restart the disarmament process, provide for
the reestablishment of government authority in former rebel held areas, and
release all child combatants and abductees.Military pressure on the RUF by both
the Guinean army, which responded to RUF cross-border raids by launching
ground and air attacks into Sierra Leone, and the British-trained and led Sierra
Leonean army, contributed to this process. Over 16,700 United Nations peacekeepers
deployed into RUF strongholds, including the diamond-rich Kono District,
and over 29,300 combatants were disarmed. The release of over 3,000 child
soldiers, abductees, and separated children by the RUF and by pro-government
civil defense militias was one of the most positive human rights developments of
the year. However, serious violations, which often involved victims and perpetrators
not only from Sierra Leone but also from neighboring Liberia and Guinea,
were persistent and served to highlight the region’s conflicts. The government
extended its own mandate, but announced that elections due in 2001 would take
place on May 14, 2002.
In 2001, Sierra Leone ratified the Mine Ban Treaty, the Convention against Torture,
and the optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the sale of children, child prostitution,
and child pornography.
Within government-controlled areas, pro-government militias committed
numerous human rights violations with impunity. In the southern city of Bo,
Kamajor militiamen intimidated and threatened police officers attempting to question
several Kamajor suspects, forcing the police to later release them. There were
numerous cases of sexual assault by Kamajor militiamen, including gang rape and
the rape of children. Members of civil defense militias returning from refugee
camps in Guinea through RUF-held areas attacked, looted, and burned several villages,
and in June massacred at least twenty-two civilians, including nine children,
in Yiriai village, in northern Koinadugu District, in what was the worst single atrocity
of the year.
From January through November 2001, the government released 137 detainees,
including thirteen children, who since May 2000 had been held without charge
under the 1991 State of Emergency Act.However, scores remained in detention and
were systematically denied the right to counsel and to have contact with their families.
The whereabouts of RUF leader Foday Sankoh remained undisclosed.At least
ten RUF prisoners died in custody. In December 2000, the International Committee
of the Red Cross received government authorization to visit detention facilities,
although its delegates were again excluded for some two months following a March
14 riot over poor prison conditions within Freetown’s central prison.
The human rights picture within RUF-held areas improved somewhat relative
to previous years. Some RUF commanders attempted to discipline combatants who
committed abuses. Nevertheless, RUF forces, often acting together with Liberian
government troops, committed scores of serious abuses including rape, murder,
abduction, and subjection to forced labor. The victims of these abuses included
Sierra Leoneans returning from refugee camps in Guinea; Guinean civilians,
attacked during a campaign of cross-border raids from September 2000 through
April 2001; and Liberians fleeing renewed fighting in Lofa county from April 2001.
The RUF abducted at least one hundred Guineans, including children and the elderly,
and held them in Kailahun for up to five months. UNHCR and other aid agencies
were on a few occasions refused permission to evacuate sick and severely
malnourished refugees. Refugees were very often forced to work in exchange for
permission to leave rebel held areas. Scores of refugees died of illness and hundreds
suffered moderate to severe malnourishment.While the RUF released or demobilized
more than 1,500 male child combatants, they were reluctant to release Sierra
Leonean and Guinean female abductees, most of whom were suspected of having
been sexually abused.
Fighting between the RUF and civil defense militias in the east of the country in
June through August 2001 left tens of civilians dead. In June and July, RUF combatants
attacked several villages, including Porpon, in which they killed at least
three children, hacked off the ear of one man, and abducted at least sixteen civilians.
On July 19, RUF combatants attacked Henekuma village and massacred at
least ten civilians. There were several reports of members of pro-government militias
having been tortured and summarily executed by the RUF, including the October
2000 execution of ten militiamen in Kambia District, and the May 2001
execution of two militiamen in Kono. In July,RUF rebels cut off the ear and severed
the Achilles tendons of a militiaman captured in Koinadugu District.
From September 2000 through April 2001,RUF rebels and Liberian government
forces acting together attacked refugee camps and villages just across the border
with Guinea, then home to several hundred thousand Sierra Leonean and Liberian
refugees. Following the attacks, Guinean security forces and the local population
retaliated against the refugees, frequently looting, extorting, raping, and unlawfully
detaining them. At least eleven refugees were tortured or beaten to death while
detained within the Forecariah Prison in Southwestern Guinean, and several more
detainees died of illness and starvation.
Guinean forces responded to RUF raids into Guinea by killing and wounding
dozens of civilians in indiscriminate helicopter and artillery attacks against rebelheld
areas of Sierra Leone in northern Kambia, Bombali, and Koinadugu districts.
At least forty-two civilians, including eleven children, were killed during at least
thirteen attacks between September 2000 and April 2001.Guinean troops also conducted
several ground attacks during which several civilians were gunned down,
several girls and women were raped, and houses were set on fire. Captured RUF
combatants were summarily executed and at least eighteen RUF detainees “disappeared”
following capture. In March 2001,Guinean troops amputated the hands of
several RUF combatants detained during attacks on the towns of Kychom and
Kasiri.
There were two reported cases of rape by U.N. peacekeepers, one involving a
Guinean soldier accused of raping a twelve-year-old girl in Bo, and another involving
a Nigerian. Both were at this writing under investigation. There were also
reports of excessive use of force and illegal detention of civilians by Nigerian peacekeepers.
In the most serious incident, in July 2001, the peacekeepers beat and in
some cases tortured civilians they had detained after a riot in Port Loko. Following
a UNAMSIL board of inquiry, disciplinary action was taken against two peacekeepers,
including one lieutenant.
The RUF abducted at least one hundred Guineans, including children and the elderly,
and held them in Kailahun for up to five months. UNHCR and other aid agencies
were on a few occasions refused permission to evacuate sick and severely
malnourished refugees. Refugees were very often forced to work in exchange for
permission to leave rebel held areas. Scores of refugees died of illness and hundreds
suffered moderate to severe malnourishment.While the RUF released or demobilized
more than 1,500 male child combatants, they were reluctant to release Sierra
Leonean and Guinean female abductees, most of whom were suspected of having
been sexually abused.
Fighting between the RUF and civil defense militias in the east of the country in
June through August 2001 left tens of civilians dead. In June and July, RUF combatants
attacked several villages, including Porpon, in which they killed at least
three children, hacked off the ear of one man, and abducted at least sixteen civilians.
On July 19, RUF combatants attacked Henekuma village and massacred at
least ten civilians. There were several reports of members of pro-government militias
having been tortured and summarily executed by the RUF, including the October
2000 execution of ten militiamen in Kambia District, and the May 2001
execution of two militiamen in Kono. In July,RUF rebels cut off the ear and severed
the Achilles tendons of a militiaman captured in Koinadugu District.
From September 2000 through April 2001,RUF rebels and Liberian government
forces acting together attacked refugee camps and villages just across the border
with Guinea, then home to several hundred thousand Sierra Leonean and Liberian
refugees. Following the attacks, Guinean security forces and the local population
retaliated against the refugees, frequently looting, extorting, raping, and unlawfully
detaining them. At least eleven refugees were tortured or beaten to death while
detained within the Forecariah Prison in Southwestern Guinean, and several more
detainees died of illness and starvation.
Guinean forces responded to RUF raids into Guinea by killing and wounding
dozens of civilians in indiscriminate helicopter and artillery attacks against rebelheld
areas of Sierra Leone in northern Kambia, Bombali, and Koinadugu districts.
At least forty-two civilians, including eleven children, were killed during at least
thirteen attacks between September 2000 and April 2001.Guinean troops also conducted
several ground attacks during which several civilians were gunned down,
several girls and women were raped, and houses were set on fire. Captured RUF
combatants were summarily executed and at least eighteen RUF detainees “disappeared”
following capture. In March 2001,Guinean troops amputated the hands of
several RUF combatants detained during attacks on the towns of Kychom and
Kasiri.
There were two reported cases of rape by U.N. peacekeepers, one involving a
Guinean soldier accused of raping a twelve-year-old girl in Bo, and another involving
a Nigerian. Both were at this writing under investigation. There were also
reports of excessive use of force and illegal detention of civilians by Nigerian peacekeepers.
In the most serious incident, in July 2001, the peacekeepers beat and in
some cases tortured civilians they had detained after a riot in Port Loko. Following
a UNAMSIL board of inquiry, disciplinary action was taken against two peacekeepers,
including one lieutenant.
or to emphasize concerns regarding ongoing violations against civilians.Members
of the UNAMSIL human rights section were, for most of the year, not allowed to
attend these meetings. The number of UNAMSIL human rights monitors—mandated
in 2000 to be fourteen—was in mid-2001 increased to twenty by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, but as of this writing, the unit never operated
with more than fifteen. For most of the year the unit concentrated on conducting
human rights education, and preparation for the TRC, rather than monitoring
ongoing violations.However, the unit did complete thorough reports on RUF and
Civil Defense Forces (CDF) violence in the east and on prison conditions, but
lacked a regular channel for disseminating information.
On August 14, 2000, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1315, which
authorized the secretary-general to enter into negotiations with the government
of Sierra Leone to establish a Special Court for Sierra Leone, using both international
and Sierra Leonean law, judges, and prosecutors, to bring the perpetrators
of the most serious violations since 1996 to justice.At this writing, the draft statute
for the court was yet to be finalized and, despite considerable efforts on the part of
the secretary-general, funds for its operation were yet to be secured. By May 2001,
the lack of member state contributions for the original budget of U.S.$114 (for the
first three years) led to budget revision. On June 14, 2001, the secretary-general
submitted a revised three-year budget of U.S.$56.8 million. On July 24, 2001, the
Security Council approved the plans to go ahead with the Special Court despite a
shortfall of one million dollars for the first year and forty million dollars for the
next two years. A Sierra Leonean government proposal that the temporal jurisdiction
of the court be extended back to 1991, the commencement of the war, was not
supported.
In 2000, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1306,which imposed an
eighteen month ban on the trade in rough diamonds from Sierra Leone that did not
have a government certificate, and mandated setting up a five-person panel of
experts to look into violations of sanctions and the link between the trade in diamonds
and arms. On December 20, 2000, the findings of the panel of experts were
published in a report which implicated, among others, the governments of
Liberia, Burkina Faso, United Arab Emirates, and Belgium in facilitating illicit
arms and diamond sales to the RUF. On March 7, 2001, the Security Council voted
unanimously in support of Resolution 1343, which placed a global ban on the
direct or indirect import of all rough diamonds from Liberia, and placed an
international travel ban on senior member of the Liberian government. The ban
came into effect two months later. On March 26, the U.N. secretary-general
appointed a Panel of Experts to investigate any violations of the sanctions and
possible links between the exploitation of natural resources and the fuelling of the
conflict.
On October 30, the Panel of Experts published its findings. The panel found
widespread violations of sanctions against Liberia and recommended that the
council impose an arms embargo on all rebel groups in Mano River Union countries,
extend the Liberian arms embargo and the rough diamonds sanctions and
urged all U.N. members to stop supplying weapons to Guinea and Sierra Leone.
The panel also focused on the importance of timber revenues for the government, and called for the U.N. to impose a ban on all log exports from Liberia starting in
July 2002.
Several high-level U.N. officials visited Sierra Leone, including Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Frechette who visited in April, and Undersecretary-
General of United Nations Peacekeeping Operations Hedi Annabi, in May. An
August visit by U.N. Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women Radhika
Coomaraswamy resulted in a call for more donor support to help victims of sexual
violence.
UNHCR struggled to respond to the subregional crisis.After visiting the area in
February 2001, High Commissioner Ruud Lubbers proposed a policy of humanitarian
corridors for Sierra Leonean refugees in Guinea to return through rebel-held
territory.However, following international criticism, it was decided rather to relocate
the refugees to camps further within Guinea.
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Responding to the unfolding regional crisis brought on by cross-border raids,
the ECOWAS Defense and Security Commission in December 2000 proposed to
deploy a force of some 1,700 troops to secure the borders between Guinea, Sierra
Leone, and Liberia. Although the OAU endorsed this plan in May, Guinea argued
that the protection and monitoring mandate of the force was too weak. When
neither Guinea nor Liberia had signed the status of forces agreement, and after
ECOWAS heads of states insisted upon Security Council involvement and funding,
the plan was dropped.
Nevertheless,members of the ECOWAS Committee of Six on Sierra Leone conducted
considerable shuttle diplomacy aimed at restarting the Sierra Leonean
peace process and seeking a diplomatic solution to the regional crisis.Together with
the United Nations,ECOWAS was directly involved in securing the November 2000
Abuja Ceasefire Agreement, and a subsequent meeting in Abuja in May 2001 which
committed the RUF and government to start disarming. During an extraordinary
ECOWAS summit in Abuja,Nigeria on April 11, an ECOWAS mediation committee,
comprising the presidents of Mali, Nigeria, and Togo was set up to encourage
dialogue between the Mano River countries.
Ethiopian Kingsley Mamabolo, who was appointed the OAU special envoy to
Sierra Leone in June 2000, made several low-profile visits to Sierra Leone, and representatives
from the OAU were present as observers in several key meetings surrounding
the Sierra Leonean peace process.
European Union
In February 2001, the European Parliament issued a resolution on the situation
in the Mano River Union strongly condemning cross-border incursions by all sides
and urging all parties to respect the human rights of refugees, civilians, and humanitarian
workers. In May, Hans Dahlgren, the Swedish State Secretary for Foreign
Affairs, led an eight-member European Union Ministerial Delegation to the Mano River countries. In July, Dahlgren was appointed E.U. special envoy in the Mano
River region.
Since l995 the European Commission has allocated more than 135 million ECU
(U.S.$120 million) to Sierra Leone for development, good governance, social-economic
infrastructure, child protection programs, and health and rehabilitation
projects over five years. In March 2001, the European Community granted 11 million
ECU (U.S.$9.7 million) to be distributed through the community’s Humanitarian
Office (ECHO) for humanitarian assistance in Sierra Leone, specifically to
help the internally displaced, women, children, and the disabled. In May, 4.5 million
ECU was dispatched to help Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees in Guinea,
and in October, an additional 5.1 million ECU was dispatched, much of it to be
channeled through UNHCR, for refugees, returnees and IDP’s within the Mano
River Union.
At this writing, the E.U. itself has not contributed to the Sierra Leone Special
Court. E.U. officials maintain that their contributions should focus on rehabilitation
and reintegration, including vocational skills and education for returning
refugees and IDP’s. However, a number of member states contributed, including
Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
United Kingdom
The United Kingdom continued to play a pivotal role in political and military
developments in Sierra Leone. In January, Jonathan Riley, the British brigadier
commanding in Sierra Leone, pledged that British troops would stay until the RUF
was either defeated militarily or diplomatically. The U.K. also continued its commitment
to rebuild and restructure the Sierra Leonean Army and the Sierra
Leonean Police. From June 2000 through September 2001, some six hundred
British troops were involved in training 8,500 Sierra Leonean Army soldiers. After
September 2001, the 360 U.K. military personnel who remained continued to play
a major role in advising and directing military operations, including the staffing of
key positions within the Sierra Leonean Defense Headquarters. They also helped
administer a program to train up to 3,000 ex-RUF and CDF combatants selected to
join the new SLA. In coordination with the commonwealth secretariat, the U.K.
provided officers and funds for training and administration of the Sierra Leonean
police, including the secondment of the inspector general.
U.K. assistance to Sierra Leone since April 2001 was estimated to be 84.5 million
pounds sterling, including funding for demobilization and reintegration programs,
training and equipment for the army and police, human rights and civil
society groups, rehabilitation of the legal system, humanitarian aid, and helping to
restore the local Paramount Chiefs.
United States
U.S. policy on Sierra Leone revolved around ending external support for the
RUF, supporting the British military actions, and providing humanitarian support.
The U.S. pledge of U.S. $15 million over three years to the proposed Special Court for Sierra Leone was the largest of any contributing nation. The U.S. total humanitarian
and emergency contribution in FY 2001, including grants to aid agencies,
UNHCR, and World Food Programme through USAID for food relief, assistance
to refugees, and development programs was U.S. $75 million.
After the May 2000 breakdown in the peace process, former U.S. president Bill
Clinton initiated a program called Operation Focus Relief (OFR) to train and
equip seven battalions of West African troops for peacekeeping with the U.N. in
Sierra Leone. The training was conducted by U.S. Special Forces. The first phase of
the program trained two Nigerian battalions that were deployed in January 2001
to serve with UNAMSIL.The second phase,which ended in August, trained troops
from Ghana and Senegal. The third phase,which will be completed before the end
of 2001, involved three further Nigerian battalions. For FY 2001, OFR was budgeted
at U.S. $24 million in peacekeeping funds, as well as U.S. $32 million in
Department of Defense funds for equipment and transportation. The U.S. also
deployed three military officers to work with the Sierra Leone army as part of the
British training program. These officers, as well as other U.S. Embassy officials,
had some responsibility for monitoring the performance of the U.S.-trained
troops.
In addition to OFR, in June the administration notified Congress of its intention
to provide U.S. $3 million in nonlethal training and equipment to the Guinean military
to assist that country in defending against the destabilizing activities of the
RUF and Charles Taylor in Liberia. Congressional concerns about abuses by the
Guinean military led to additional reporting and monitoring requirements.At this
writing, however, the program had not yet begun.
SOUTH AFRICA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
President Thabo Mbeki led a government dominated by the African National
Congress (ANC), though the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) remained a junior partner.
Apparently reflecting divisions within the ruling party,Minister for Safety and
Security Steve Tshwete announced in April that the police would investigate bizarre
allegations of a conspiracy against the president led by three prominent members
of the ANC. The Congress of South African Trades Unions (COSATU) and many
other commentators expressed concern about the use of state resources for political
purposes. Tensions within the tripartite alliance of the ANC, COSATU, and the
South African Communist Party (SACP) also increased on other fronts during the
year. In August, COSATU staged a two-day general strike in protest at the government’s
policies of privatization. A major investigation into corruption in relation
to government arms purchases led to the arrest of former ANC chief whip Tony
Yengeni in October; other arrests were expected. Later that month, the opposition Democratic Alliance split into its constituent parts, the Democratic Party and the
New National Party (NNP), provoked by clashes between the parties in the Western
Cape.An alliance between the ANC and the NNP (a reincarnation of the party
of government between 1948 and 1994) was mooted.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) continued hearing applications
for amnesty until May 31,when its work was formally ended.The mandate of
the TRC itself was extended only to complete the final two volumes of its report.
The government stated that legislation setting the framework for reparations to the
victims would be introduced to parliament in 2002. Also wrapping up business
from the past, the trial of Wouter Basson, a chemical weapons expert with the old
South African army, continued throughout 2001.
In November 2000, South Africa ratified the treaty to establish an International
Criminal Court; legislation to bring it into effect domestically was introduced to
parliament in July 2001. The Promotion of Access to Information Act came into
effect in March 2001, adding flesh to the constitutional right to access government
and privately held information. The Protected Disclosure Act, designed to shield
“whistle-blowers,” came into effect February. Among notable decisions, the Constitutional
Court ruled in May that the South African government’s deportation to
the U.S. ofMohamed Khalfan, a suspect in the 1998 bombing of the U.S. embassies
in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, was unlawful. The court found that South Africa
should have sought assurances from the U.S. government that Khalfan would not
be subject to the death penalty.
In July, there were scenes uncomfortably reminiscent of the past when the government
evicted squatters from land outside Johannesburg who had been “sold”
plots by the opposition Pan Africanist Congress (PAC). In response to these developments,
and land invasions taking place in Zimbabwe, the Democratic Alliance
joined with the PAC in demanding a national debate on South Africa’s land reform
program.
Torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects by the police remained a serious
problem. The Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD), set up in 1997 to investigate
or oversee the investigation of complaints against the police, reported 650
deaths in custody or as a result of police action during the year to March 2001, a
slight decrease on the previous year. The number of complaints lodged with the
ICD increased by 11 percent, to 4,863. Encouragingly, the ICD reported that there
had been a decrease in allegations of torture. In November 2000, a booklet titled
“The ABC of Human Rights and Policing,” produced with funding from the Danish
Embassy, was launched and distributed among police officers.
In July,Minister Tshwete announced that the government intended to increase
the size of the police force from 121,000 to 127,000 over the next three years. In May,
the minister announced progress in carrying out a review of police collection of
crime statistics, and that publication of those statistics, suspended since July 2000,
would be resumed at the end of the third quarter of 2001. Trial projects to establish
“community safety forums”were launched in the Western Cape, involving all sectors
of government in improving safety and security, and not only the police. In
January 2001, it was announced that all specialized units within the police would
be phased out, and their personnel redeployed to priority crime units at local police stations. New metropolitan police forces were launched in Johannesburg and
Tshwane (the greater Pretoria area).
In February 2001, the first of sixty planned government-funded legal assistance
centers opened in Benoni, outside Johannesburg. A new management team was
installed at the Legal Aid Board in the same month, leading to hopes that the
improvements since Mohammed Navsa took over as chairman of the board would
continue. In October, the board announced a range of cooperative agreements
aimed at improving access to legal services among the poor.However, a backlog of
court cases continued to plague the system despite government initiatives to clear
it, contributing to the crisis of overcrowding in prisons. Following several strikes,
large increases in pay to prosecutors were awarded in July, backdated to January.
The office of the National Director for Public Prosecutions (NDPP) and its elite
crime fighting unit known as the Scorpions, carried out investigations of high priority
crimes; tensions between the Scorpions and the regular police were reported.
At the end of 2000, South Africa’s prisons held 160,003 people, a slight fall on the
previous year; approved prison accommodation grew from 99,834 to 101,991, and
four additional prisons were under construction. In March 2001, the minister of
correctional services signed a contract with a private company, the Ikwezi Consortium,
to design, build, and operate a maximum security prison in Bloemfontein,
the first such contract in South Africa.More than 55,000 of those being held were
awaiting trial, of whom almost 13,000 had been locked up for more than six
months.More than 4,000 were under eighteen years of age; legislation and practical
measures to improve the situation of children charged with violent crimes was
still not in place. By April 2001, the total prison population had risen again to
172,000, of whom 64,000 were awaiting trial, according to a report to parliament by
Inspecting Judge Johannes Fagan. Draft legislation aimed at improving the parole
system was tabled in Parliament in February 2001.Assaults on prisoners by warders
and other prisoners remained serious problems, including widespread prisoneron-
prisoner rape: a spokesperson for the inspecting judge estimated that 70 to 80
percent of all suspects were sodomized by fellow prisoners before they were even
officially charged. In October 2000, it was revealed that AIDS-related deaths in
South African prisons had increased by 300 percent from 1995 to 1999. The doctor
in charge of medical services for prisoners in Cape Town’s Pollsmoor prison stated
that conditions in the prison represented a health hazard for the Western Cape.
In November, legislation was approved by parliament to regulate South Africa’s
private security industry, long plagued with allegations of abuse.Vigilante violence
remained a serious problem, with groups such as People Against Gangsterism and
Drugs (PAGAD) and Mapogo a Mathamaga responsible for beatings and execution-
style murders. A witness due to testify in a trial of PAGAD members was shot
dead in April. “Taxi violence” between rival operators of minibus taxis continued;
reports implicated members of the police in this violence. In KwaZulu-Natal, long
standing tensions between the ANC and IFP broke out into violence at different
times. In May, a workshop organized by the Parliamentary Participation Unit in
rural KwaZulu-Natal was disrupted by a group of thirty-five IFP supporters who
claimed that the unit had not gained IFP consent to hold the meeting in their
area.
Violence against women and girls, including sexual violence, remained a very
serious problem. Human Rights Watch published a report in March concluding
that rape and other sexual violence were part of the normal environment for girls
in schools, as well as in the wider community. In September 2001, a report from the
Eastern Cape legislature’s standing committee on education detailed horrific abuse
by teachers at the province’s schools. In March, the ICD reported for the first time
to parliament on its duties to monitor the implementation by police of the Domestic
Violence Act, and noted serious deficiencies at many police stations. In August,
National Police Commissioner Jackie Selebi said that violence against women was a
priority crime for the police, but that the Domestic Violence Act was effectively not
enforceable. In August, the Constitutional Court handed down an important decision
ruling that the state’s duty to protect the security of women could form the
basis of a case for damages. The case considered involved a woman who had been
raped by a man out on bail on charges of attempting to rape another woman; it was
referred back to the High Court for rehearing on the facts.The Recognition of Customary
Marriages Act came into effect in November 2000, bringing the protection
of the law to people in such unions. In the same month,Molo Songololo, an NGO,
launched a report on the trafficking of children within South Africa for the purposes
of sexual exploitation, identifying this as a serious but unquantified problem
to which the state response was wholly inadequate.Another study,published in January
2001, suggested that child poverty was increasing, contributing to children’s
vulnerability to such exploitation. In August, the Pretoria High Court ruled that
sections of the Sexual Offences Act banning prostitution were unconstitutional.
Violence on commercial farms—documented in an August Human Rights
Watch report—remained a high profile issue. Commercial farmers, highly vulnerable
to violent crime, called for greater security force protection, while organizations
representing farm workers denounced assaults on farm workers. In October,
the government held a conference on rural safety, focusing on several aspects of
crime in commercial farming areas. In the same month, commercial farmers in the
Western Cape launched a code of conduct committing farmers to promoting
“decent livelihoods” for their workers.
Widespread xenophobia led to violence against foreigners on several occasions,
including attacks on Zimbabweans resident in a squatter camp in Gauteng in October,
in which seventy-four shacks were gutted by fire.Police were deployed to patrol
the settlement. In May, the Department of Home Affairs agreed to withdraw a
directive to immigration officers to refuse asylum to applicants who had transited
a “safe” third country before reaching South Africa, in a settlement following a
court application by the NGO Lawyers for Human Rights. In the same month, the
department began to issue new identity documents to refugees, in accordance with
the 1998 Refugees Act. In June, the department was defeated in court, when the
Constitutional Court upheld the High Court’s declaration that two sections of the
existing Aliens Control Act relating to applications for work permits for foreign
spouses of South African citizens were unconstitutional. In June, the department
tabled in parliament a new draft of a long-awaited Immigration Bill; but by November
it had yet to make any progress.
In April, the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’ Association of South Africa withdrew a case from the Pretoria High Court that it had brought against the government
to strike down legislative provisions that would allow the government to produce
or import anti-retroviral drugs at low cost.However, the government did not
go on to announce any plans to make such drugs available in public hospitals. The
government also opposed in court a legal challenge brought by the Treatment
Action Campaign (TAC) to require the government to supply in the public health
sector anti-retroviral drugs to prevent mother-to-child transmission. President
Mbeki continued to question the link between HIV and AIDS, but spoke less on the
subject than in previous years. In October, a report by the Medical Research Council
was published, indicating that in 2000, 40 percent of adult deaths and 25 percent
of total deaths in South Africa were HIV-related, thus contradicting a statement by
President Mbeki that violence was the main cause of death.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
South Africa’s vigorous human rights community continued to monitor adherence
to national and international standards. Occasional government hostility to
NGO criticism was counteracted by strong collaboration in government-NGO
partnerships elsewhere. The constitutionally mandated South African Human
Rights Commission (SAHRC) criticized the government for often ignoring its recommendations.
The commission took a high profile on issues related to racism,
including in programs related to the World Conference Against Racism, held in
Durban, in August and September. In July, it announced a major investigation into
human rights violations on commercial farms. In May, a new set of commissioners
joined the Commission on Gender Equality (CGE), also established by constitutional
mandate. In August, the CGE hosted a national gender summit.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
South Africa’s pivotal position in the continent was underlined during the year
by several high profile visits to South Africa by foreign leaders (including Japanese
Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori, during the first visit by a Japanese head of government
to sub-Saharan Africa), and President Mbeki’s involvement in a number of
key initiatives, including the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
launched at the OAU summit in July. In October, South Africa deployed seven hundred
soldiers to Burundi, as part of a peacekeeping force to protect the transitional
government. In August and September, South Africa hosted the World Conference
Against Racism.
United States
Outgoing Secretary of State Madeleine Albright visited South Africa in December
2000, as did her successor Colin Powell in May 2001. In June 2001 President
Mbeki visited the U.S., his second visit as head of state, and met with President Bush. The two leaders reaffirmed “excellent ties” between the two countries and
signed treaties related to the fight against international crime, including on extradition.
However, the U.S./South Africa bi-national commission set up under President
Clinton was scrapped. Following the September 11 attacks, South Africa
stated that it would cooperate with U.S. efforts to bring the culprits to justice, but
that any action taken should be based on “thorough investigation and incontrovertible
evidence.”
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) program for South
Africa funded projects worth U.S. $46.68 million to South Africa in 2000, and projected
spending $50 million in 2001. The critical areas for funding in 2001 identified
in a December 2000 declaration on development assistance included job
creation, the criminal justice system, HIV/AIDS, education, and small business
development.
European Union
Several European heads of government visited South Africa during the year. In
these and other discussions, E.U. member states indicated their commitment to
NEPAD, and reliance on South Africa as leader in the region.
The E.U. Foundation for Human Rights in South Africa continued funding
human rights projects, with funds from the European Commission’s Program for
Reconstruction and Development in South Africa. The E.U. remained South
Africa’s largest donor, having given an average 125 million euro per year for development
since 1994. Individual E.U. member states also made bilateral contributions
to human rights initiatives.
Britain in particular continued its close ties to South Africa. In June, President
Mbeki visited the U.K. for meetings with Prime Minister Tony Blair and other ministers,
including a meeting of the U.K.-South Africa bilateral forum. Blair and
Mbeki published a joint article committing resources to development in Africa.
The presence of the British Military Advisory and Training Team (BMATT) in
South Africa was extended to 2003.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Unequal Protection: The State Response to Violent Crime on South African Farms,
8/01
Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African Schools, 3/01
SUDAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Despite openings in the political arena, the human rights situation in Sudan was
grim. The government kept in force a state of emergency to suppress Islamist and
other opposition to the ruling Islamist party. It was increasingly aggressive in pursuing
the eighteen-year civil war, particularly in southern oil fields where its militias
and army forcibly displaced thousands of residents. The war reflected a failure
among Sudanese to agree on the role of religion in government, tolerance of diversity,
and sharing of resources between the marginalized majority and the politically
dominant Arab-Muslim minority. As Sudan comprised 35 million people divided
into nineteen major African and Arab ethnic groups, about 70 percent Muslim and
the rest Christian and traditional believers, lack of tolerance was an invitation to
strife.
President Omar El Bashir’s ruling National Congress (NC) party won the
December 2000 presidential and legislative elections, which were boycotted by all
the main opposition parties and excluded those living in rebel-held areas. That
month the government amended the National Security Act permitting suspects to
be detained indefinitely without charge and denied judicial review for up to six
months. It extended the state of emergency through a second year, until December
31, 2001.
In late December 2000, security forces arrested seven civilian members of the
opposition National Democratic Alliance (NDA) while they met with a U.S. diplomat.
The NDA had not registered a political party registration required an oath of
allegiance to the ruling party’s goals.The NDA civilians in Khartoum had ties to the
military wing of the NDA, operating from exile, but their presence and low-key
meetings in Khartoum were usually ignored by the authorities,who sought to woo
the entire organization and its component parties back from exile.Charges of treason
(carrying the death penalty) and threatening the existing government were
brought against the NDA members. Defense lawyers protested numerous violations
of fair trial rights.
Government opponents in the People’s National Congress (PNC), a NC splinter
party founded by Islamist political leader Hassan Turabi in 2000, were also
harassed and jailed, but not charged with any crime. In February 2001, Turabi
signed a memorandum of understanding with the rebel Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A), and called on Sudanese to rise against El Bashir. Security
forces arrested Turabi and at least twenty other PNC leaders. Turabi was
charged with crimes punishable by death or life imprisonment, and authorities
periodically rounded up PNC members.
After September 11, the Sudan government dismissed the charges against the
NDA members, Turabi, and other PNC members, and freed all but Turabi—who
remained under house arrest. Some thirty-five PNC activists were rearrested at
their post-release press conference.
Reports of torture and ill-treatment continued. A Sudatel employee fleeing the
July 2001 SPLA capture of Raga reportedly was beaten daily and was given little
food or water after his detention by government forces. Security forces reportedly
pulled out the fingernails of another man detained during the same exodus. Security
forces in Juba reportedly continued to use a large metal shipping container as a
detention cell, a years-long practice that subjected detainees to life-threatening
heat.
The two English-language newspapers in Khartoum, Khartoum Monitor and
Nile Courier, provided a political forum for southerners. The Khartoum Monitor
was periodically suspended by security forces or by the Press National Council,
however, and on April 12, 2001, security forces briefly detained its editor-in-chief
Alfred Taban at a church-called news conference. In February 2001, a Sudanese
court fined the independent Al Rai Al Akhar newspaper an astounding U.S.
$390,000, and fined the editor and a journalist another $5,800 or three months in
jail each, for libeling local government. A government censor was permanently
based in all newspaper offices. Censorship of English-language newspapers was
tightened during the visit of the ACP-EU mission, and papers were forbidden to
publish blank spaces indicating where censorship was imposed.
The government harassed and discriminated against Christians. In April 2001,
police injured and briefly detained Christians demonstrating against a government
order transferring an Easter service (convoked by a visiting German evangelist)
from Khartoum to a suburb. The following day police teargassed students protesting
these arrests outside All Saints’ Episcopal church, then stormed the protest
meeting inside the church, damaging windows and chairs, and tear-gassing the
interior; three were seriously injured and fifty-seven arrested on this second day of
disturbances. They had no legal representation at their trial the following day,
which lasted less than one hour. The six girls detained and several boys were
flogged; the rest were sentenced to twenty days in jail each.
Half of the Omdurman headquarters of the Episcopal Church of Sudan was illegally
occupied by the ministry of health of Khartoum State, which continued its
two-year battle to take over the other half of this church’s freehold plot. Churches
complained that Christian students undergoing obligatory military training in
camps near Khartoum were denied their right to worship, in contrast to Muslim
students. The law against apostasy—banning Muslims from conversion to another
religion—was enforced on several occasions. In June 2001, security arrested an
alleged convert to Christianity and held him incommunicado for three months,
while reportedly torturing him and demanding that he reconvert to Islam.
In the north, destitute southern women continued to brew and sell traditional
southern alcoholic drinks, for which they were arrested.More than nine hundred
women were held in the Women’s Prison in Omdurman (designed for two hundred)
as of December 2000 in grossly poor conditions. The prison also housed
southern women with twenty-year sentences for dealing in cannabis, and women
sentenced, sometimes for indeterminate periods, for financial crimes.
On June 23, 2001, the authorities raided a workshop on “Democracy and Gender
Issues” organized by the Gender Centre in Khartoum. Four speakers were
arrested and released the same night. All participants in the workshop were interrogated
about their political affiliations and their addresses were taken.
The most severe abuses occurred in the civil war fought in the south, the central
Nuba Mountains, and the east. The Sudan government and its ethnic militias continued
to displace, starve, abduct, rape, and kill civilians outright—while burning,
and bombing, villages, churches, hospitals, and schools.
The rebel-held Nuba Mountains were hit especially hard in 2001. In May 2001,
the government attacked the region, bombing extensively and burning down six
villages, resulting in the displacement of more than 15,000 people.According to the
Nuba relief office, an estimated 400,000 people were in SPLA-controlled territory
as of June 2001, cut off from rest of rebel-held Sudan, with the lives of more than
50,000 displaced and 30,000 others unable to harvest crops at risk because of government
attacks.The government persistently denied humanitarian access to civilians
in the SPLA-held Nuba Mountains, through flight denials and shelling of
airstrips used for unapproved relief deliveries.After years of negotiations, the U.N.
in October 2001 succeeded in making the first-ever delivery there of relief with government
permission.Another month of delivery was promised by the government,
with no guarantee of access on an as-needed basis.
Following the brief capture of Kassala in eastern Sudan by opposition NDA
forces (mostly SPLA) in November 2000, security forces arrested and reportedly
tortured hundreds of southerners living in Kassala, in some cases extrajudicially
executing them, according to the exiled Sudan Human Rights Organization.
Oil exploration and development in concession areas in Upper Nile exacerbated
the conflict, with continuing displacement of civilians. Some 40,000-55,000 Nuer
were displaced from the oilfields in the first half of 2001, according to two different
reports, by government and its Nuer militias which were fighting the SPLA and its
Nuer commanders. Often fighting resulted from government efforts to claim and
to clear the people from the land, using its Nuer militias to push fellow Nuer out of
the oilfields.More dependable government soldiers and mujaheeden then guarded
construction equipment for roads, pipelines, drilling, and other oil infrastructure.
Each oil facility was given a twenty-four hour guard of soldiers; up to four hundred
soldiers were at Timsa, a location attacked by the SPLA in early 2001. The government
imposed a long-term relief flight ban on most oil field areas in inaccessible
Western Upper Nile (except for garrison towns), making the situation for civilians
there even more acute.
Government use of new, heavier arms, including surface-to-surface missiles and
helicopter gunships, and high-altitude Antonov bombing of southern and Nuba
operations took a toll on the civilian population. Government aerial bombing
destroyed the Episcopal Cathedral in Lui, Eastern Equatoria on December 29, 2000.
Despite government pledges to stop bombing civilians and civilian structures,
more bombing raids occurred: Tali, a center for relief food distribution in Eastern
Equatoria, was bombed three times in December 2000, twice in January 2001, and
again in May 2001. In June 2001, government Antonovs bombed three towns in
Bahr El Ghazal, including one in which a World Food Program (WFP) relief operation
was underway. Such attacks targeting relief deliveries in progress were
increasing. Although bombing seemed to decline in September 2001, government
planes bombed the little civilian village of Mangayat, twenty-five miles outside of
rebel-held Raga in October on three different days, while WFP deliveries were in progress to aid an estimated 20,000 displaced people. The WFP gave up its attempt
to distribute food.
Although the government of Sudan signed the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, it did not
ratify it and had not begun to destroy its stockpiled antipersonnel land mines.
There were strong indications that both government and rebel forces in Sudan continued
to use antipersonnel mines, but the government denied its forces did so. In
October 2001, the SPLA signed an agreement at an NGO conference in Geneva
to ban the use, production, storage, or transfer of antipersonnel land mines in its
territory. Small arms and ammunition were produced by three new arms factories
near Khartoum in partnership with Chinese companies, using government oil
revenue.
Recruitment of boys aged sixteen and seventeen into the Popular Defence Force,
a government Islamist militia, proceeded as government policy, and occasional
press-gangs seized even younger children for this military service. The government-
backed ethnic militias also recruited child soldiers in the south, sometimes
forcibly, as did rebel groups. The SPLA admitted in 2000 it had about 10,000 child
soldiers. Following an agreement with the SPLA, in February 2001 UNICEF began
demobilizing some 3,000 SPLA child soldiers from northern Bahr El Ghazal. The
children were disarmed and given schooling in transition camps, and by late August
returned to their villages of origin. Some NGOs questioned the effectiveness of the
program because, with no real job or school opportunities, the demobilized boys
were likely to go back to the SPLA to survive. In late October, UNICEF said it was
ready for another phase of demobilization, involving 1,000 children.The SPLA said
it still had more than 7,000 child soldiers within its ranks.
Government army and militia forces continued to abduct women and children
during ongoing raids in the south, mostly in northern Bahr El Ghazal and often in
connection with the military train they accompanied to Wau, a garrison town. The
Committee to Eradicate the Abduction ofWomen and Children (CEAWC), created
by the government, was ineffective: the government admitted that abductors, even
from among their own forces, were seldom prosecuted, although it announced in
November 2001 its intention to set up a tribunal to try the abductors. UNICEF said
670 children were reunited with their families and 270 retrieved children were in
CEAWC transit facilities, but retrievals had stalled. The Geneva-based solidarity
organization Christian Solidarity International (CSI) claimed that between 1995
and 2001 it had “bought back” 56,000 enslaved Sudanese during sporadic CSI visits
to SPLA territory. CSI estimated that there were an additional 200,000 enslaved
in northern Sudan. (The CSI estimates doubled from 100,000 in 2000, without
explanation.)
The Sudan government stopped supplying the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), a
Ugandan rebel group with a horrendous human rights record, in 2001 pursuant to
an agreement with Uganda. The LRA subsequently began forcibly looting food
from southern Sudanese, thousands of whom took refuge in Nimele and in northern
Ugandan refugee camps. An LRA ambush on a relief agency vehicle traveling
from northern Uganda to southern Sudan killed six Sudanese.
The SPLA openly opposed a broadening of civil society when it prevented civilians
in its territory from attending two south-south peace and reconciliation conferences convened by the New Sudan Council of Churches (NSCC) in 2001. The
NSCC and others condemned the SPLA’s violations of freedom of movement, association,
and speech. The Africa-Caribbean-Pacific-European Union (ACP-E.U.)
mission noted that the SPLA’s record on human rights was “far from being acceptable.”
The U.N. special rapporteur also criticized the SPLA.
In late February 2001,Nuer SPLA commander Peter Gatdet attacked and set fire
to Nyal in Western Upper Nile, the base of the Riek Machar Nuer faction and a U.N.
relief hub. The SPLA sponsored the attack. The U.S. government forcefully condemned
the attack. Abuses proliferated as the forces of Nuer leader Riek Machar,
lacking material support, allied themselves alternatively with the government or
the SPLA, and sought to reestablish their control over their home territory.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The Sudan government persecuted human rights defenders. Ghazi Suleiman
and Ali Mahmoud Hassanein, well-known advocates and human rights activists,
were detained without charge by security forces from December 9, 2000 until February
17, 2001, after they condemned the arrests. Suleiman was reportedly tortured,
sustaining a head injury and being hospitalized twice during detention The
principal lawyer/advocate for the NDA defendants, Mustafa Abdel Gadir, was
arrested and interrogated on the eve of the trial which started in May.On March 11,
2001, security forces arrested director Dr.Nageed Nagmeldin el Toum and two staff
members from the Amal Centre, where free medical treatment and assistance to
victims of torture and other human rights violations was provided. The staffers
were released the same day but Dr. Nageed, former president of the banned Doctors’Union,
was not released until March 29, 2001, after an international campaign.
The confiscated office equipment was returned and the center reopened on June 27,
2001, the day before the ACP-EU visit. Another associate of Amal, Faisal el Bagir
Mohamed, a journalist and human rights advocate, was detained without charges
from June 13 to 26, 2001. On November 2, 2001, four lawyers/advocates and two
members of the Sudanese Communist Party (banned) were detained and released
within a few days and told to report daily to Security offices. All members of the
loose coalition National Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy, it was believed
that their detention was in connection with the upcoming bar association elections
in December 2001. The last such elections were held in 1997 and were reportedly
accompanied by widespread fraud on the part of the ruling party. One lawyer who
failed to report on time to the Security offices was beaten with hoses and knotted
wire when he arrived. Others were made to stand outside in the hot sun for two
hours, a common form of ill-treatment in Sudan.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The U.N. Security Council in late September 2001 lifted sanctions imposed in
1996 because of Sudan’s noncompliance with an Ethiopian extradition warrant for
three suspects sought for attempted assassination of the Egyptian president. The
United States abstained on the issue. The sanctions had required member states to
reduce the number of Sudanese diplomatic personnel and restrict the travel of
Sudanese government officials in their respective countries, though they were not
generally enforced.
Although Sudan was reelected to its seat on the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights in April 2001, reports by the special rapporteur on human rights in Sudan
to the commission in April and to the General Assembly in October warned that
human rights in Sudan were worsening in many respects, and that oil development
was exacerbating the conflict.
United States
Oil and religion combined to bring Sudan higher up on the agenda of the new
U.S. administration in 2001. It was the main African issue on which President Bush
expressed interest. and Secretary of State Colin Powell remarked that “There is perhaps
no greater tragedy on the face of the earth today than the tragedy unfolding in
the Sudan.”
Stringent prohibitions on U.S. citizens doing business with Sudan under a Clinton
administration executive order remained in place. The Bush administration in
May 2001 appointed Andrew Natsios, newly-named head of U.S.Agency for International
Development, as the president’s special envoy to Sudan for humanitarian
issues. In early September, the president named former senator John Danforth his
special envoy for peace in Sudan.
Natsios headed a U.S. delegation to Khartoum in July 2001 and announced U.S.
emergency relief for drought victims in western Sudan, the first such aid to government-
controlled areas for years.Total U.S.humanitarian assistance to Sudan for
the year October 2000-September 2001 was U.S. $161 million.
In mid-2001, the State Department contracted with a U.S.-based contractor,
Dyncorp, to assist the NDA (consisting of military and civilian wings) to set up
offices and improve its “negotiating skills.” The state department claimed none of
the funding allocated would be used for “nonlethal” aid to the SPLA (defining
“nonlethal aid” to include dual-use supplies such as boots, communications equipment,
and tents).
Before September 11, U.S. policy on Sudan was a contested domestic issue
between some members of Congress and conservative and religious rights
groups—who sought to isolate Khartoum and aid the SPLA—and moderates in the
administration, the business community, and elsewhere who argued that the isolation
policy had not worked.After September 11, the antiterrorism agenda trumped
this contest.
Following the September 11 attacks, the Sudan government opportunistically
announced its cooperation with the U.S. on terrorism. According to the U.S. government,
U.S. counterterrorism teams had been in Sudan for more than a year
already, and had been receiving “satisfactory” cooperation from the Sudan government.
In late September, the Sudan government reportedly deported several persons
sought by the U.S. for terrorist activities or associations, but the details were
not publicly released; Khartoum continued to deny any such cooperation to the
domestic and Arabic press.
The Bush administration maintained, however, that it would persist with its full
agenda of human rights issues requiring Sudan’s resolution before normalization
of relations. The U.S. strongly protested Sudan government’s three days’ bombings
of a relief operation in October 2001.
European Union
The European Union (E.U.) began a political dialogue in November 1999 with
the Sudan government, with regular meetings between E.U. ambassadors in Khartoum
and government officials. An ACP-E.U. Joint Parliamentary Assembly mission
to Sudan in June-July 2001, reported disappointment with the government’s
lack of cooperation in the dialogue since the end of 2000. It noted several areas of
human rights concerns that were discussed but not addressed by the government,
such as detention without charge, press freedom, abduction and forced labor, and
bombing.
The E.U. maintained its arms embargo on Sudan, but without any enforcement
mechanism. There were no E.U. restrictions on its members’ investments in the
Sudan oil industry. In June, however, the E.U. presidency stated concern at renewed
SPLA military activity in Bahr El Ghazal—the capture of Raga—and the Sudan
government’s resumption of aerial bombings in response. A group of nations, predominantly
European, formed the International Partners’ Forum Working Group
to provide funding and diplomatic support for the efforts of the east African Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD). IGAD peace negotiations
between the Sudan government and the SPLA foundered nevertheless.
In May 2001, a broad coalition of European NGOs formed the European Campaign
on Oil in Sudan to lobby European governments and companies in the oil
business in Sudan to pull out of Sudan, because of the Sudan government’s gross
human rights abuses.
Africa
The Sudan government used its new oil resources—and more than U.S. $ 400
million in extra revenue—to strengthen its position in the Horn of Africa. In June
2001, Sudan and Ethiopia announced a project to supply Ethiopia with Sudanese
gasoline and kerosene equivalent to 85 percent of the country’s needs for the year
2002. Ethiopia, previously supportive of Sudanese rebels, had already cut relations
with them.
Kenya was to import tax-free Sudanese oil through its port Mombasa until the Kenyan churches strongly protested. In July 2001,Kenyan authorities banned delivery
of Sudan oil shipments to Kenya, causing Sudan to threaten that it might stop
importing Kenyan tea and coffee. The situation remains unresolved.
South Africa’s state-owned oil company Soekor denied reports that it too
intended to explore for Sudanese oil, after South African churches denounced
reported Soekor meetings on the topic.
AMERICAS OVERVIEW
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Although the year was dominated by the human rights tragedy in Colombia,
other parts of Latin America experienced positive change.With presidential balloting
in April, Peru finally closed the door on the undemocratic and discredited
administration of former President Alberto Fujimori. Mexico, having just ended
seven decades of one-party rule, took several steps toward reform. And a number
of different countries made meaningful progress in the area of truth, justice, and
accountability. Still, all over Latin America and the Caribbean, chronic problems
such as police brutality, deplorable prison conditions, domestic violence, and labor
right abuses went largely unaddressed.
The human rights situation in Colombia deteriorated markedly over the course
of the year,with civilians bearing the brunt of the country’s violent armed conflict.
In the first ten months of 2001, the office of the Public Advocate recorded ninetytwo
massacres, defined as the killing of three or more people at the same place and
at the same time. Paramilitary groups linked to the security forces were responsible
for the bulk of the killings, followed by guerrillas. The country’s epidemic of kidnappings,
half committed by leftist guerrilla forces, showed no sign of abating.
Children, some as young as thirteen, were recruited into the irregular armed
forces—guerrillas and paramilitaries—that played a primary role in the conflict.
An estimated two million Colombians were internally displaced, with at least
300,000 reported displaced in 2001, the highest number ever in a single year.
Human rights defenders, trade unionists, journalists, government investigators,
and community leaders continued to be killed because of their work.
In Peru, the fall of the Fujimori government in late 2000 brought new hope for
democracy and human rights. Both the interim administration of Valentín Paniagua
and the new government of President Alejandro Toledo took important steps
to strengthen democratic institutions and the rule of law, while also taking aim at
long neglected human rights problems.
Haiti remained mired in political turmoil stemming from fraudulent elections
held in 2000. Despite the vigorous efforts of international negotiators to reach a
solution to the crisis, the lack of progress discouraged donor states, leaving hundreds
of millions of dollars in international aid frozen.
Chile’s indictment of Augusto Pinochet was an important landmark in Latin
America’s efforts to achieve accountability for past human rights violations, even
though the trial of the former military ruler was later terminated on the grounds of
poor health.Equally significant was the decision of Argentine Federal Judge Gabriel Cavallo to strike down the country’s amnesty laws, a ruling that was later affirmed
by a Buenos Aires appellate tribunal. In Peru, a truth commission was established
to investigate responsibility for the systematic human rights violations and guerrilla
abuses committed during the country’s twenty-two year internal armed conflict,
which began in 1980. The commission was mandated to investigate violations
of collective rights of Peru’s Andean and native communities as well as violations of
individual rights such as extrajudicial executions, torture, and “disappearances.”
The large number of Latin American governments having signed or ratified the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) was further encouraging
proof of the strength of the regional impetus toward justice.
In Mexico, as of this writing, President Vicente Fox had yet to establish a promised
truth commission to examine past human rights abuses. Fox did, however,
order his government to grant public access to files on “disappearances” that took
place in the 1970s and 1980s. In November, after the country’s National Human
Rights Commission presented him with a study documenting the military’s role in
the forced disappearance and torture of hundreds of suspected leftists in the 1970s,
Fox announced that he would name a special prosecutor to investigate the crimes.
The commission report represented the Mexican government’s first official
acknowledgment of responsibility for the abuses, but it did not name the estimated
seventy-four public officials said to be personally implicated in them.
Police violence, frequent in many Latin American countries, was of particular
concern in Venezuela and Argentina. According to the Buenos Aires-based Center
for Legal and Social Studies (Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales, CELS), police
in Argentina killed some 266 people in the last six months of 2000 and the first six
months of 2001. While most of these killings were officially attributed to shootouts
with suspected criminals, investigations by human rights groups suggested
that many deaths resulted from the excessive use of lethal force by the police, or
were deliberate executions. A disturbing recent development in Venezuela was the
emergence in some states of organized death squads with ties to the police.
Prisoners throughout the region frequently suffered inhumane treatment, with
particularly abusive prison and jail conditions found in Venezuela, Brazil, Haiti,
Panama, Colombia, and El Salvador. The continued growth of inmate populations
exacerbated overcrowding, at the root of a host of other problems. Yet, all over the
region, prisons and jails were not crammed with convicted prisoners, but instead
with pretrial detainees, turning the presumption of innocence on its head. In February,
a large-scale inmate riot at Brazil’s Carandirú prison ended bloodily, bringing
momentary public attention to the country’s chronic prison abuses. Fifteen
prisoners were killed during and after the rioting, most by riot police, and some in
circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions. In November, similarly, prisoners
in Haiti’s National Penitentiary claimed that prison officials deliberately killed
unarmed inmates in quelling prison unrest.
The use of capital punishment was of particular concern in the English-speaking
Caribbean, where countries such as Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica, and Barbados
retained the death penalty. In August, Trinidad and Tobago sentenced ten men
to hang for a single murder. One positive development occurred in April,when the
Eastern Caribbean Court of Appeal, which has jurisdiction over some Caribbean
countries, ruled that the mandatory death penalty was unconstitutional.
In May, Chilean President Ricardo Lagos signed a law that substituted life in
prison for the death penalty. Chile’s legal reform left Guatemala and Cuba as the
only Spanish-speaking countries in the region to fully apply the death penalty,
although several others reserved the right to execute persons convicted of treason
during wartime or of other extraordinary offenses. Guatemala not only retained
the death penalty, but by imposing it in cases of non-fatal kidnappings it contravened
the American Convention on Human Rights.
Chile also made important strides toward protecting freedom of expression by
repealing article 6b of the State Security Law, a repressive and antediluvian penal
statute that had protected public authorities from criticism. In Panama, in contrast,
the government had yet to reform the draconian press laws inherited from military
rule.More than fifty journalists reportedly faced criminal charges for defamation
or “contempt of authority,”with several being convicted of those offenses over the
course of the year. In May, for example, journalist Marcelino Rodríguez of El Siglo
was sentenced to sixteen months in prison, commutable to a fine of U.S. $1,000,
after being convicted of libel of a public employee.
Throughout Latin American and the Caribbean, workers continued to suffer
myriad violations of internationally recognized labor rights. Common abuses
included the worst forms of child labor, employment discrimination, and violations
of the right to freedom of association. In some cases, violations were perpetuated
by the government’s failure to enforce domestic labor legislation and, in other
cases, national labor laws fell short of international labor standards. The result was
the same, however: governmental omissions that allowed employers to violate
workers’ rights with impunity.
In Ecuador, children as young as eight labored for long hours on banana plantations
in unsafe and unhealthy working conditions. In Guatemala, women workers
in the maquila sector often faced pregnancy-based discrimination. And in Brazil,
according to a 2001 International Labor Organization report, the government’s
failure to apply effective sanctions, the slow judicial process, impunity for perpetrators,
and lack of intra-governmental coordination impeded the eradication of
“degrading working conditions and debt bondage” in the rural sector.
Workers’ right to organize—the internationally sanctioned tool for demanding
better working conditions and respect for labor rights—was obstructed or violated
throughout the region. In Mexico, legitimate organizing activity was frequently
hindered by collective bargaining agreements negotiated between management
and pro-business, non-independent unions. In other cases, workers were impeded
from organizing by employers’ hiring practices, including the use of subcontractors
and “permanent temporary”workers.Although employers benefited from subcontracted
workers’ labor and often even controlled their employment terms and conditions,
employers were not required to bargain collectively with the subcontracted
workers because, legally, the subcontractor was the employer. Similarly, employers
hired workers for months or years on end using consecutive temporary employment
contracts, creating a “permanent temporary”workforce without job stability
and too afraid to organize. Such tactics inhibited worker organization, for example,
in Ecuador’s banana sector, where the banana worker affiliation rate, at roughly 1
percent, was exceptionally low.
In other cases, workers’ right to organize was violated through direct anti-union discrimination, including the harassment, demotion, or dismissal of union members
and sympathizers. In the most serious cases, union leaders and their supporters
risked assassination. Colombia led the world in such assassinations, with 112 trade
unionists killed in 2000, and 125 killed in the first ten months of 2001, according to
Colombia’s largest trade union organization. In March 2001, the Governing Body of
the International Labor Organization (ILO) criticized the Colombian authorities’
failure to prosecute the perpetrators of such crimes and to implement adequate
security measures to protect trade union officials and members.
Many women in the region faced daily violence and discrimination,perpetuated
by their governments’ failure to take meaningful action to protect women from
abuse. Domestic violence remained a particularly salient issue in many countries,
with men beating their wives and other female family members with little fear of
criminal prosecution.
Some positive steps were taken to improve women’s legal status, but much
remained to be done. In August, the Brazilian Congress approved a new civil code
that recognized men’s and women’s equality before the law. The new code did away
with the expression “paternal power,” replacing it with the gender-neutral concept
of “the power of the family.”Under the reformed code, women were to have equal
authority with men in family affairs. In other countries, however, women still did
not enjoy full legal equality with men, despite constitutional provisions granting
both sexes equal rights. The Chilean civil code continued to grant husbands primary
control over household decisions and property. The civil codes of countries
such as Argentina,Mexico, and Colombia set lower marrying ages for girls than for
boys. Venezuelan women were barred from remarrying until ten months after a
divorce or annulment, unless they proved they were not pregnant.
Gays, lesbians, and transgender people were also particularly vulnerable to violations
of their human rights. In several countries,police singled out gay people and
transvestites for abuses. In Mexico, transvestites in Monterrey, the capital of Nuevo
Leon state, faced arbitrary arrest, extortion, and physical violence. Even more frequently
around the region, criminal justice authorities failed to respond to crimes
against gays and transvestites. A series of killings of gay men in Colima, Mexico,
went unpunished and inadequately investigated. “It’s as if [the gay community]
doesn’t enjoy the protection of the law,” commented Max Mejía, a Colima-based
gay rights activist.
Yet over the course of the year significant advances were made in the area of gay
rights. In an important legal victory, the Association of New Men and Women
Association of Panama (Asociación Hombres y Mujeres Nuevos de Panamá,
AHMNP) finally obtained legal recognition by the government. In other places,
laws were passed to protect the rights of sexual minorities or legislation was drafted
on the issue. The Brazilian state ofMinas Gerais passed a measure in October 2001
adding sexual orientation as a protected status to existing anti-discrimination legislation.
In November 2000, the city council of Niteroi, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
passed an ordinance barring discrimination based on sexual orientation. A similar
draft bill was presented to Mexican President Vicente Fox and the leaders of Mexico’s
political parties in November 2001, a first step toward passing federal legislation
on the topic.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The strength of the human rights movement in Latin America and the
Caribbean was evidenced by, among other things, the multitude of local and
regional nongovernmental organizations dedicated to the issue. Made up of talented
and committed lawyers, activists, community leaders, and others, these
groups worked to put human rights principles into practice locally. In some countries,
the work of nongovernmental groups was supplemented by that of permanent
national human right commissions, ad hoc parliamentary bodies, and other
government organs.
The public in many Latin American countries, having lived through repressive
military governments, recognized the importance of human rights principles.
Nonetheless, human rights defenders were frequently stigmatized for protecting
the rights of unpopular groups, particularly criminal suspects.
In several countries, including Colombia,Guatemala,Haiti,Mexico, and Brazil,
individual activists faced intimidation, assault, and sometimes death for their
advocacy of human rights. Colombia remained the most dangerous country for
human rights defenders. According to the Colombian Commission of Jurists,
eleven defenders were killed there in the first ten months of 2001. Government
investigators handling prosecutions of paramilitary leaders were also at risk, as
were witnesses in such cases.
The brutal murder of Mexican human rights lawyer Digna Ochoa in October
2001 further underscored the dangers that these frontline defenders of fundamental
rights endure. Next to Ochoa’s body was a note that warned members of the
human rights center where Ochoa had worked for several years that the same could
happen to them.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The United Nations did not have a particularly high profile on human rights
issues in Latin America and the Caribbean, although specific problems and situations
received attention. Colombia remained, appropriately, the primary recipient
of the U.N.’s efforts in the region. The country’s human rights and humanitarian
crisis was on the agenda of a number of U.N. bodies.
With the departure in February of the U.N. mission in Haiti, only Colombia and
Guatemala still hosted a long-term U.N. human rights field presence. In
Guatemala, the United Nations verification mission, known as MINUGUA, played
a central role in monitoring compliance with the country’s 1996 peace accords. In
Colombia, the U.N. maintained a field office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights,which did important work despite poor cooperation from Colombian government
officials. The U.N.High Commissioner for Refugees also had field offices
in Colombia, with an operational capacity in the Urabá and Middle Magdalena regions as well as the department of Putumayo. Jan Egeland, the special adviser on
Colombia to the U.N. Secretary-General, frequently visited Colombia to assist in
peace talks
Three Latin American countries—Colombia, Cuba, and Haiti—were on the
agenda at the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on Human Rights. The
result, with regard to Cuba, was a resolution criticizing the government’s continuing
human rights violations.Haiti was the subject of a chairperson’s statement that
focused on electoral issues and the political crisis. For Colombia, the subject of a
special segment of the Commission, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
presented her annual report on human rights conditions.
U.N. thematic mechanisms visiting the Americas region included the special
representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders, who visited
Colombia, and the special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers,
who visited Guatemala. In addition, the various U.N. treaty bodies examined the
human rights records of a number of Latin American and Caribbean states.
Organization of American States (OAS)
On the diplomatic front, the Organization of American States (OAS) was
extremely active in trying to negotiate a solution to the political crisis in Haiti. As
of November, however, these efforts had not borne fruit.
In September, the OAS Permanent Council approved the Inter-American
Democratic Charter, which was subsequently ratified by the foreign ministers of
OAS member states at a special general assembly in Lima. The charter attempts to
set out the essential elements of representative democracy, citing,among other features,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms; the rule of law; the
holding of periodic free and fair elections based on secret balloting and universal
suffrage; a multi-party system; the separation of powers; freedom of expression
and of the press; and the constitutional subordination of all state institutions to a
legally constituted civilian authority.Designed to protect democracy in the region,
the charter codifies the OAS’s power to suspend member states deemed undemocratic
and sets up mechanisms for responding to coups and other threats against
democracy.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights—both OAS human rights bodies—heard a number of
important cases in 2001. In addition to cases relating to the American Convention
on Human Rights, the two bodies had jurisdiction to consider violations of five
other regional conventions and protocols pertaining to forced disappearance, the
death penalty, violence against women, torture, and social and economic rights.At
a special session held in December 2000, the Commission approved new rules of
procedure, which took effect on May 1, 2001.
In April, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued its first decision
on the issue of violence against women. Ruling in a case brought by Maria da
Penha, a Brazilian woman who was repeatedly beaten by her husband and finally
left paraplegic, the Commission found Brazil to be responsible for numerous rights
violations. Besides recommending that the perpetrator be prosecuted and the victim
be adequately compensated, the commission concluded that Brazil should adopt measures to remedy the problem of state tolerance of domestic violence
against women.
In January, Peru’s Congress overturned an earlier resolution, made in 1999
under the Fujimori government, by which it had voted to remove Peru from the
jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. (The Court had
already declared the earlier resolution to be inadmissible.)
European Union
The European Union (E.U.) gave its continuing support to efforts to address the
region’s most pressing human rights and humanitarian problems, including, most
notably, the armed conflict in Colombia. The E.U. provided financial support for
the Colombian peace process and for the humanitarian assistance of displaced persons.
E.U. representatives expressed concern, however, regarding slowdowns in the
peace process,mounting violence, and the failure of parties to the conflict to respect
basic humanitarian law norms.
Cuba remained the only Latin American country that did not have a cooperation
agreement with the European Union. An E.U. visit to Cuba in late November
2001, however, appeared to promise improved E.U.-Cuba relations, possibly signaling
a future change in the E.U.’s “common position” on Cuba. Because of the
Haitian government’s failure to remedy the results of the country’s seriously flawed
2000 elections, E.U. economic cooperation with Haiti remained suspended as of
November.
Several Western European countries played a critical role in promoting accountability
in Latin American and the Caribbean. European courts, continuing the
“Pinochet precedent,” heard criminal cases against the perpetrators of past human
rights crimes, including the systematic abuses that took place in Argentina and
Chile in the 1970s. Through the mechanism of universal jurisdiction, by which a
country’s national courts are empowered to adjudicate human rights crimes committed
on another country’s territory—and also through the passive personality
principle, which recognizes a country’s legal interest in crimes committed against
its nationals—European courts adjudicated a number of criminal cases in which
Latin American high officials and former high officials were defendants.
Courts in Spain, Italy, France, and Germany continued to prosecute, or to seek
to prosecute, members of the Argentine armed forces implicated in “dirty war”
abuses. The Argentine government, however, did not cooperate in these efforts.
Asserting the principle of territoriality—that only Argentine courts had jurisdiction
over the crimes at issue—the government failed to comply with the European
extradition requests.This argument,which ignored the interest of all states in prosecuting
gross violations of human rights, was particularly unconvincing in light of
the impunity enjoyed for decades by the perpetrators of human rights crimes in
Argentina.
Most disappointingly,Argentina refused to extradite former navy officer Alfredo
Astiz, a notorious intelligence operative during military rule.Astiz was arrested and
detained for a few weeks in July until the Argentine Foreign Ministry denied extradition
requests made by Italian and French judges.
Another setback was the dismissal in December 2000 of a suit in Spain against Guatemala’s former military ruler, Gen. Efraín Ríos Montt, and several other military
officials. The case, filed a year previously, was thrown out of court on the
ground that the petitioners had not exhausted the possibility of prosecuting the
defendants in Guatemala.Yet, given Ríos Montt’s continuing power in Guatemala,
the ability of the Guatemala courts to manage such a case was questionable. (Facing
daunting obstacles, a group of indigenous Maya Indians sued Ríos Montt and
others in Guatemala in June for crimes committed during military rule.)
In an important and encouraging new trend, the Mexican government became
a strong regional voice in favor of accountability by ratifying the extradition to
Spain of Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, a former Argentine navy officer. Cavallo, a member
of a notorious naval task force implicated in numerous “disappearances,” had
been living and working in Mexico. In January, a Mexican district court ruled in
favor of Spain’s extradition request, and in February Mexican Foreign Minister
Jorge Castañeda authorized the extradition. As of November, Cavallo’s appeal
against the extradition order was pending.
In November, a French judge issued international arrest warrants for fifteen
Chileans implicated in the torture and “disappearance” of four French citizens in
Chile during the Pinochet era. The suspects included retired Gen.Manuel Contreras,
former head of Pinochet’s secret police, and four other former generals. Since
Chile and France did not have an extradition agreement, the targets of the arrest
warrants, all believed to be in Chile,would probably only face arrest if they were to
leave the country.
The Belgian courts, too, played a part in the trend toward foreign prosecutions.
In October, Cuban exiles filed suit in Brussels against President Fidel Castro and
other high Cuban officials. Their criminal complaint, which had not been ruled
upon at this writing, described torture and other abuses suffered by political prisoners,
as well as Cuba’s downing of two planes in 1996.
United States
The Latin America policies of the Bush administration, in its first year in office,
did not differ meaningfully from those of the previous administration. The United
States under President Bush took a selective interest in the region, focusing primarily
on trade and drug issues. The U.S. did not take the lead in promoting human
rights in Latin America, nor were U.S. representatives especially vocal on the topic.
In 2001, as in 2000,Colombia was the Latin American country that received the
greater part of the U.S. government’s attention and funding.The United States continued
to push a drug control strategy based on aerial eradication, providing the
funding for Colombian counter-narcotics military battalions. In January,President
Clinton, under a questionable reading of the relevant legislation, dispersed a second
tranche of the military aid passed the previous year. The Bush administration
sought an additional U.S. $400 million for Colombia for fiscal year 2002. But in a
clear improvement over the previous year’s legislation, the draft legislation before
Congress as of this writing did not contain presidential waiver authority for its
human rights conditions. In other words, Colombia would have to show concrete
progress in breaking military-paramilitary ties to be eligible to receive aid.
In early September, the United States named the Colombian paramilitary alliance—the United Self Defense Group of Colombia (Autodefensas Unidas de
Colombia, AUC)—as a “foreign terrorist organization” under U.S. law. Among
other legal consequences, the designation requires U.S. banks to block the group’s
funds.
Peru’s downing of a civilian aircraft during a U.S.-Peruvian surveillance operation
on April 20 caused the joint drug interdiction program to be suspended.
Although the plane’s pilot survived the crash of the small Cessna, two others were
killed in the incident: Veronica Bowers, a missionary, and her infant daughter. A
joint U.S.-Peruvian report released by the State Department in August put the
blame for the tragedy on lax procedures and the failure of the Peruvian pilot to give
proper warning.
By nominating Otto Reich, a Cuban-American anti-communist, to be assistant
secretary of state, President Bush signaled an apparent unwillingness to modify the
U.S. economic embargo against Cuba. In July,when Bush suspended certain provisions
under the Helms-Burton sanctions law, he publicly reaffirmed his administration’s
commitment to maintaining the embargo. Nonetheless, a milestone in
U.S.-Cuban economic relations was reached with the sale to Cuba of some $30 million
in food and medicine by U.S. companies in October.Made necessary after Hurricane
Michelle devastated the island, they were the first U.S. sales to Cuba since the
imposition of the embargo in 1962.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
The Americas division of Human Rights Watch kept abreast of human rights
developments around the region through frequent visits, close contact with local
activists, and intensive monitoring of the media and other information sources.
The division sought not only to identify the most pressing problems of the countries
in which it worked, but also to understand the root causes of violations and to
formulate strategies for addressing them. It campaigned vigorously to put a stop to
violations, relying on targeted advocacy with policy-makers, careful coordination
with like-minded groups, and outreach to the broader public via the media and the
internet.
While the Americas division responded quickly to fast-breaking events, it also
gave sustained attention to chronic, long-term problems. Among the issues the
division worked on in 2001 were military-paramilitary links and violations of
international humanitarian law in Colombia; the Pinochet prosecution and freedom
of expression in Chile; military abuses, violence against sexual minorities, and
labor rights in Mexico; political violence and impunity in Haiti; accountability in
Argentina; freedom of association and child labor in Ecuador; the treatment of
Haitian immigrants and Dominico-Haitians in the Dominican Republic; police
violence in Jamaica; accountability in Peru; the protection of NGOs and human
rights defenders in Guatemala; and overall human rights conditions in Cuba.
Over the course of the year, the Americas division fielded investigative and advocacy
missions to nearly a dozen countries. In addition to brief two- or three-day
advocacy visits, the division’s researchers conducted longer fact-finding investigations
in Argentina,Chile,Colombia, the Dominican Republic,Ecuador,Haiti,Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela, with the division sending, in some cases, more than one
mission to a single country.With the information collected during these trips, the
Americas division prepared detailed reports and other materials to document the
problems under review.
Besides disseminating information via written materials,Human Rights Watch
directly addressed high-level government officials and representatives of relevant
regional and international bodies, conveying our human rights concerns in a firm,
concise, and timely way. In several countries,Human Rights Watch representatives
held meetings with presidents and other top government officials. In meetings, as
well as in correspondence and written statements, the Americas division made specific
recommendations for improving human rights conditions.
As the region’s gravest human rights crisis,Colombia was the major focus of the
Americas division during 2001. The division’s work in support of human rights in
Colombia had three tracks: pressing for change within the country, working to
influence U.S. policy toward Colombia, and promoting U.N. and other international
efforts.
Because all parties to the conflict in Colombia were guilty of serious violations,
the division examined not only government abuses but also those committed by
non-state actors. In a twenty-page letter sent in July to Manuel Marulanda, the
commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s
Army (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, FARCEP),
the executive director of the Americas division assessed the FARC-EP’s actions
by the standards of international humanitarian law. The letter set out the FARCEP’s
responsibility for serious violations, including killings of civilians, cruel and
inhuman treatment of captured combatants, abductions of civilians, hostage-taking,
the use of child soldiers, grossly unfair trials, and forced displacement of civilians.
It also cited the FARC-EP’s continuing use of prohibited weapons, including
gas cylinder bombs, and its attacks against medical workers and facilities. The
FARC-EP’s public response to the letter did not counter the substance of these findings,
but only attacked Human Rights Watch’s integrity as an independent monitor.
Later in the year, the findings ofHuman Rights Watch’s letter were incorporated
into a report,Beyond Negotiation: International Humanitarian Law and its Application
to the Conduct of the FARC-EP.
In October, Human Rights Watch issued a report on another critical aspect of
the Colombia crisis.Titled The “Sixth Division”: Military-Paramilitary Ties and U.S.
Policy in Colombia, and launched at a press conference in Bogotá, the report documented
continuing close ties between Colombian military and police detachments,
and paramilitary groups. The report received extensive local and international
media coverage; the press conference was carried live on Colombian television.
Prior to the report’s release,Human Rights Watch representatives discussed human
rights concerns in meetings with top Colombian officials, including President
Andrés Pastrana. Because The “Sixth Division” also addressed U.S. policy, its findings
were influential with regard to U.S. aid to Colombia, and it was extensively
cited during Senate hearings on the issue.
Human Rights Watch celebrated a major victory a month after the release of its
March report on free expression in Chile, when repressive defamation legislation criticized in the report was repealed. The timing of Human Rights Watch’s report,
and the organization’s targeted advocacy—which included an hour-long meeting
with Chilean President Ricardo Lagos—were instrumental in creating momentum
for the law’s repeal. The report, Progress Stalled: Setbacks in Freedom of Expression
Reform, was a follow-up to a 1998 report on the same topic, illustrating the value of
sustained advocacy on a single issue.
The Americas division continued to draw attention to labor rights violations in
the region. In April, the division issued a comprehensive study showing how Mexico,
the United States, and Canada have failed to fulfill their obligations under the
labor side accord of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).Released
on the eve of the Summit of the Americas in Québec, the report called for the creation
of an independent oversight agency to spur remedial action for workers’
rights violations.
To facilitate the broad dissemination of its findings in Latin America, the Americas
division put a high priority on translating its materials into Spanish (and Portuguese,
in some instances) and posting them on the Human Rights Watch website.
With materials arranged chronologically by country and by issue, the Spanish-language
website, in particular, presented a detailed picture of human rights conditions
in the region.Visitor traffic to the Spanish-language pages expanded rapidly
over the course of the year, drawn by the comprehensive and timely selection of
materials. By year’s end, Spanish-language visitors constituted Human Rights
Watch’s largest non-English audience.
ARGENTINA
Preoccupied by a deep economic crisis, the government of President Fernando
de la Rúa did little to promote human rights.An escalation of police
abuses in the province of Buenos Aires came to public attention in October 2001,
leading to the immediate dismissal of Buenos Aires police and justice officials. The
courts made important strides toward bringing to justice those responsible for the
gross human rights violations committed during the period of military rule (1976-
1983). President de la Rúa scarcely commented on these developments. Instead of
supporting these efforts to break impunity, his ministry of defense backed
Argentina’s increasingly questioned amnesty laws and the government rejected
requests for the extradition of former human rights violators to stand trial in
Europe.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Police engaged in operations to combat urban crime committed serious human
rights violations. Evidence emerged during the year that the Buenos Aires police harassed and threatened minors for denouncing maltreatment and torture in
police stations. Some were later shot dead in suspicious incidents officially
described as firefights.
According to the nongovernmental Center for Legal and Social Studies (Centro
de Estudios Legales y Sociales, CELS), police killed some 266 people in the last six
months of 2000 and the first six months of 2001,many of them teenagers from poor
urban areas.The police attributed most civilian killings to exchanges of gunfire, but
investigations by human rights groups suggested that many deaths were the result
of excessive use of lethal force by the police, or deliberate executions. During the
first six months of 2001, fifteen minors were killed and eighteen wounded in shooting
incidents in Greater Buenos Aires, according to CELS. Some adolescents
appeared to have been deliberately killed in reprisal for denouncing that they had
been tortured or maltreated while previously in police custody. In October 2001,
the Buenos Aires provincial Supreme Court expressed concern about the death of
sixty young people in “alleged shootouts”in 1999 and 2000 after they had filed complaints
of torture. Many had received death threats before they were killed. The
provincial security minister, former police commissioner Ramón Verón, replied to
the allegations by saying that it was “almost a sport” for young people to denounce
torture. Provincial governor Carlos Ruckauf, who was elected in 1999 on a tough
anti-crime platform, immediately replaced him and the province’s minister of justice.
Verón’s successor, Juan José Alvarez, admitted that “one or two” cases of police
killings following complaints of torture had been recently confirmed.
A court was investigating the killing of fourteen-year-old Gastón Galván and
sixteen-year-old Miguel Burgos,whose bodies were found in April by a roadside on
the outskirts of Buenos Aires.Their hands and feet were tied, their bodies had multiple
bullet wounds, and one of them had a plastic bag tied over his head.The police
maintained that the deaths were the result of a gang dispute, but the youths’ relatives
said that police from the area had been constantly harassing the boys. A prosecutor
revealed that, before they were killed, the youths had told a judge that police
attached to a police station in Don Torcuato, Buenos Aires province, had tortured
them. At the end of October, five Don Torcuato policemen, who were suspected of
reprisal killings of minors who had denounced torture, were removed from their
posts.
Ill-treatment was common in police stations where young offenders were held
in overcrowded and squalid conditions. Methods of torture reported including
beatings, hooding with plastic bags almost to the point of suffocation, and the use
of electric shock batons on sensitive parts of the body, techniques in widespread use
when Argentina was under military rule. These practices were most frequently
reported in the populous greater Buenos Aires area. In July,Mario Coriolano, the
chief state defense attorney attached to the criminal appeals court in the province
of Buenos Aires, issued a report to the provincial Supreme Court giving details of
more than six hundred complaints of ill-treatment and torture made from March
2000 until July 2001.By late October the court had information on more than 1,000
cases. In August, four respected federal judges publicly expressed concern about the
prevalence of torture, asserting that the practice had become systematic in both
police stations and prisons.
Twenty-four-year-old Javier Villanueva, for example, was arrested on October
21, 2001, while driving a stolen car in Lomas de Zamora, Buenos Aires province.
After the prosecutor interviewing him noticed suspicious marks on his body he
ordered that Villanueva be examined by a doctor, who found that he had lesions
consistent with electric shock torture. The prosecutor ordered an immediate
inspection of the police station in which Villanueva had been held; where an electric
cable was found which Villaneuva alleged had been used to torture him. Six
officers attached to the Lomas de Zamora precinct, one of those most frequently
mentioned in complaints,were detained and charged with torture and obstructing
justice.
In July,President Fernando de la Rúa confirmed his intention to introduce in the
Chamber of Deputies a bill to reform the country’s criminal defamation law, an
undertaking he made in response to several cases under consideration by the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights. The bill, proposed by the nongovernmental
press freedom advocacy group Periodistas, aimed to eliminate criminal
defamation in the case of public figures, and to make “actual malice” the basic standard
for adjudicating defamation suits.At this writing, presentation of the bill was
still awaited. Provincial and municipal authorities and members of the Senate,
meanwhile, continued to use existing laws to crack down on press critics. In the
province of Santiago del Estero, whose government was controlled by the Peronist
Justicialista party, the El Liberal newspaper was the target of at least eleven civil suits
brought by 4,000 members of the party’s Women’s Branch, about which the newspaper
had published critical reports in 2000.As a result, a provincial court ordered
the seizure of more than 500,000 pesos (approximately U.S. $500,000) of the newspaper’s
assets, threatening its survival.The newspaper,with the largest print-run in
the province, also faced discrimination in the granting of government advertising,
and several of its journalists were harassed.
Public officials continued to file criminal suits to deter press reports of malfeasance,
but in several cases higher courts found in favor of the journalists, appealing
to constitutional principles protecting the publication of information in the public
interest. In July, the federal appeals court dismissed charges of violation of confidentiality
against journalist Marcelo Bonelli, of the newspaper Clarín, for
revealing details of the tax returns of a former manager of the state pensions fund.
In September, another chamber of the same court dismissed a criminal libel complaint
filed by the same official against Bartolomé Mitre, director of the newspaper
La Nación, for reporting on a criminal investigation in progress against him for a
questioned contract.
The Supreme Court, however, cited privacy norms to justify penalties against a
magazine for publishing information of clear public interest. In September, the
Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision awarding criminal damages against
the weekly news magazine Noticias for reporting in 1994 and 1995 that former president
Carlos Menem had an illegitimate son by a congresswoman with whom he
had an affair in the 1980s, and that he had used his office to advance her political
career. The court found the magazine to have violated Menem’s right to privacy,
even though neither he nor the courts questioned the truth of the allegations.
Federal and provincial judges continued to investigate “disappearances” and extrajudicial executions committed during the era of military rule (1976-1983), in
so-called “truth trials.”The hearings sought to establish the truth about the crimes
even though those responsible could not be prosecuted or convicted because of
amnesty laws passed in 1986 and 1987. Former chief of state Jorge Videla, junta
member Admiral Emilio Massera, and former commander of the First Army Corps
Carlos Guillermo Suárez Mason were among a dozen retired officers held under
house arrest on charges of ordering the theft of babies born to mothers in secret
detention and their handover for adoption to military families. These crimes had
been expressly excluded from the amnesty laws.
On June 20,Videla appeared in court to be questioned on charges of illicit association,
illegal arrest, and torture. He was accused of participating in Operation
Condor, a secret plan devised by Southern Cone military governments to kidnap,
exchange, or “disappear” political refugees from neighboring states. Two months
previously, investigating Judge Rodolfo Canicoba had issued an international warrant
for the arrest and extradition of former Paraguayan dictator Alfredo Stroessner,
now in exile in Brasilia, and of Manuel Contreras, the former chief of the
DINA, Pinochet’s secret police, in Chile. An early example of Operation Condor
was the car-bomb assassination of Chilean General Carlos Prats and his wife in
Buenos Aires in September 1974. In November 2000, the Sixth Federal Oral Court
in Buenos Aires sentenced former Chilean intelligence agent Enrique Arancibia
Clavel, a resident of Buenos Aires, to life imprisonment as an accomplice in the
crime. Investigating judge María Servini de Cubría was seeking the extradition
from Chile of former dictator Augusto Pinochet,Manuel Contreras, and five former
DINA officers, for planning and carrying out the assassinations. (See Chile.)
In a landmark decision in March, federal judge Gabriel Cavallo became the first
Argentine judge to declare the amnesty laws unconstitutional and null. Judge Cavallo
was investigating the theft of Claudia Poblete,who was eight months old when
she and her parents José Poblete Roa and Gertrudis Hlaczik, “disappeared” after a
military task force abducted them in November 1978. The 188-page ruling, solidly
based on international human rights law and precedents in Argentine jurisprudence,
argued that the “full-stop” and “due obedience” laws of 1986 and 1987 violated
articles 29 and 118 of the Argentine constitution, and conflicted with
Argentina’s obligation to bring to justice those responsible for crimes against
humanity. The two police agents accused of stealing Claudia Poblete and illegally
giving her in adoption were the first officers to be charged for “disappearances”
since 1987. On November 9, a three-judge panel of the Buenos Aires Federal Court
unanimously rejected the defendants’ appeal, confirming both the charges and the
nullity of the amnesty laws. The trial’s future depended on the Supreme Court ratifying
the Federal Court’s ruling,which would create a precedent for scores of other
cases to be opened.
While the government nominally supported the truth and baby theft trials, it
opposed any change in the status quo defined by the amnesty laws. In a speech in
March at a military ceremony in Córdoba, Defense Minister Jaunarena contended
that the prolongation of the trials was not beneficial for anyone, neither for the victims
nor for those who might be accused. Jaunarena’s predecessor as defense minister,
Ricardo López Murphy, supported the army when, in the same month, 663 officers in active service presented a habeas data demand against CELS, demanding
that it turn over information that might implicate the officers in human rights
abuse. The army’s chief of staff, Gen. Ricardo Brinzoni, who was believed to have
authorized the legal action, was himself the object of a criminal complaint filed by
CELS in May for his alleged involvement in a notorious massacre of twenty-two
political prisoners in Margarita Belén, Chaco province, on December 13, 1976. On
Army Day,May 29, President De la Rúa publicly defended Brinzoni in a ceremony
attended by members of the military juntas.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Lawyers and human rights activists continued to face death threats and harassment.
On November 7,Matilde Bruera, a human rights lawyer in Rosario, province
of Santa Fe, received an anonymous message with the words “Bruera, we are going
to kill you with a bullet through your head.” During June and October she had
received similar threats. Other human rights lawyers, including Juan Roberto
Coria, Lindolfo Bertinat,Vildor Garavelli,María Eugenia Caggiano, and Juan Lewis
suffered break-ins or received threats apparently connected to the opening of a
“truth trial” in Rosario.
In October 2000, Carlos Varela, Alejandro Acosta, and Diego Lavado, lawyers
representing relatives of the victim of a police killing, suffered a break-in at their
office in Mendoza.The desk computers were opened, the hard drives removed, and
a laptop computer was stolen. They reported another break-in at the end of the
year. The under-secretary for human rights at the Ministry of Justice arranged for
the three to be given police protection.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In November 2000, the Human Rights Committee issued its concluding observations
on Argentina’s report under article 40 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. The committee recommended that “gross violations of
civil and political rights during military rule should be prosecutable for as long as
necessary, with applicability as far back in time as necessary to bring their perpetrators
to justice.” In its concluding observations on Argentina’s report under article
9 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
expressed concern over reports of racist police brutality.
European Union
Courts in Spain, Italy, France, and Germany continued to try, or seek the extradition
of, members of the Argentine armed forces for the “disappearance” of their citizens during military rule. In July, Alfredo Astiz, a former agent attached to the
Navy Mechanics School (ESMA), gave himself up to Buenos Aires police after federal
judge María Servini de Cubría ordered his arrest at the request of Italian judge
Claudio Tortora, for the “disappearance” in 1976 of three Italian citizens. Italy filed
an extradition request, and while Astiz was in custody, France also requested his
extradition. A French court had sentenced Astiz to life imprisonment in absentia in
1990 for the “disappearance”of two French nuns,Alice Domon and Leonie Duquet,
a crime for which Astiz had been spared trial in Argentina under the due obedience
law.
In August, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs refused to extradite Astiz, claiming
that only Argentine courts had jurisdiction for crimes committed in Argentina.
While influential Argentine judges and jurists had assimilated the doctrine of international
jurisdiction for crimes against humanity, the government was unwilling to
allow the courts to decide such cases on their legal merits. Since there were no
charges pending against him in Argentina,Astiz was immediately released. In contrast
to its position on the Astiz case, Argentina took a positive step toward combating
impunity by ratifying the Rome Treaty for the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
In December 2000, Rome’s Second Criminal Court sentenced Gen. Carlos
Guillermo Suárez Mason, commander of the First Army Corps from 1976 until
1980, and Gen. Santiago Omar Riveros, to life imprisonment, in absentia, on
charges of kidnapping, torture, and premeditated murder. Five naval officers
received lesser sentences. In July, a court in Nuremberg, Germany, issued an international
warrant for Suárez’s arrest in connection with the murder of German sociologist
Elisabeth Kaesermann, who was the victim of an extrajudicial execution in
May 1977 in Argentina.
In January, Mexican Judge Jesús Guadalupe Luna Altamirano accepted a petition
from Spain for the extradition of Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, a member of the
notorious 3.3.2 task force that operated out of ESMA.Cavallo had been detained in
August 2000 at Cancún airport, after Spanish judge Baltazar Garzón issued an
international warrant for his arrest on charges of genocide, terrorism, and torture.
In February,Mexican Foreign Minister Jorge Castañeda authorized the extradition.
The decision was the first by a Latin American country to put into practice the principle
of universal jurisdiction. Again, Argentina expressed opposition: Defense
Minister Ricardo López Murphy asserted that no country “should be recognized as
having the capacity to be a court of appeals for decisions freely adopted by Argentines.”
As of October,Cavallo remained in custody in Mexico awaiting the results of
a judicial appeal against his extradition.
United States
In response to requests by Argentine human rights groups and judges in Europe
and Argentina, then-Secretary of State Madeleine Albright promised in November
2000 to declassify State Department documents on “disappearances,” the theft of
babies, and Operation Condor. It was understood that, unlike the celebrated Chile
revelations in 2000, the release would not include Central Intelligence Agency or Defense Department files. The documents were still awaited at the end of October
2001.
In August, Argentine Judge Rodolfo Canicoba sent a letter rogatory to the State
Department requesting a deposition by former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger
to aid the judge’s investigation of Operation Condor. In addition, French judge
Roger Le Loire requested Kissinger’s cooperation with judicial inquiries into the
“disappearance” in Argentina of French nationals. Although de-classified documents
showed that Kissinger was informed about Operation Condor, he did not
contribute any information to the French or Argentine courts. The Washington
Times on August 1 quoted an unnamed White House source as saying that the
courts’ demands were “unjust and ridiculous.”
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Reluctant Partner: The Argentine Government’s Failure to Back Trials of Human
Rights Violators, 12/01
BRAZIL
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Extrajudicial killings, ill-treatment, and torture continued to be Brazil’s most
serious human rights problems, with police and prison officials being the primary
perpetrators of these abuses. In addition, land reform activists and indigenous
people involved in land disputes were harassed, assaulted and killed in circumstances
that suggested the acquiescence of public authorities. From police stations
to prisons, and from urban centers to the vast territories of Brazil’s interior, those
responsible for abuses enjoyed widespread impunity. Efforts by the government to
address these problems consistently fell short of achieving significant change.
In a landmark ruling,Col.Ubiratan Guimarães—the first military police officer
of the rank of colonel or above to be criminally prosecuted in a civilian court—was
found responsible for a massacre that left 111 inmates dead after a 1992 prison riot.
On June 30,Colonel Guimarães received a 632-year sentence for his role in leading
a military police squad that quelled a riot at Carandirú, Brazil’s largest prison complex.
Police under his command had opened fire on prisoners,many of whom were
in their cells, using machine guns and semi-automatic weapons. Subsequent investigations
confirmed that the vast majority of the victims died as a result of gunshot
wounds, principally to the head and thorax regions. No police were killed in the
operation.
While the verdict represented a welcome departure from Brazil’s long-standing
tradition of impunity, the final outcome of the prosecution remained uncertain.
Guimarães was immediately freed after sentencing pending his appeal, which was likely to take at least another year, and he was allowed to continue in his post as
director of a private security firm. Another eighty-five military police implicated
in the killings were also to be tried, although no trial date had been set as of this
writing.
The case shone a spotlight on the brutality of the country’s prisons, still a pressing
concern. Just months before the trial, in February, another inmate riot at
Carandirú had turned bloody, leaving fifteen prisoners dead. Most were killed by
riot police, some in circumstances suggesting extrajudicial executions. The uprising
quickly spread to several other states, paralyzing the overburdened prison system
and grabbing headlines worldwide. Conditions remained subhuman in most
of the country’s prisons, jails, and police lockups, and riots and escape attempts
were frequent.
After the February rioting at Carandirú, officials from the Justice Ministry
promised to close the prison, although the closure date was later pushed back
repeatedly. Announced plans to build eleven new detention facilities around the
state of São Paulo would, according to state prison officials, create space for 8,256
prisoners, including some 7,200 to be transferred from Carandirú.Yet with the total
number of inmates growing by approximately nine hundred each year, the problem
of insufficient space appeared unlikely to be resolved.
On March 11, police allegedly fired rubber bullets on juvenile detainees after a
riot in Unit 30 of the São Paulo state juvenile detention facilities (Fundação Estadual
para o Bem-Estar do Menor,FEBEM),in Franco da Rocha.The uprising left one
prison guard dead, and thirty-three young inmates wounded.According to reports,
after the juveniles had been subdued, police poured powdered soap and pepper on
their open wounds. Angered by the death of their colleague, guards beat a priest
called in by the state to negotiate with the inmates.
Torture remained a “systematic and widespread” practice in detention facilities,
according to a report issued at the end ofMarch by Sir Nigel Rodley, the U.N. special
rapporteur on torture. The U.N. report, which corroborated years of research by
Brazilian and international human rights organizations, found that state agents
routinely commit acts of torture during all phases of detention, including police
investigations, short- and long-term imprisonment, and in centers for juvenile
offenders. In addition to describing the overcrowded and unhealthy conditions discovered
during the special rapporteur’s visit to five Brazilian states and the national
capital, the report included an appendix detailing 348 cases of torture in eighteen
Brazilian states.
Police abuse outside of the detention context also remained a serious concern.
Deaths resulting from the excessive use of force by police, or in circumstances suggesting
extrajudicial executions, continued throughout the country. Despite the
widespread nature of the abuses, only five of Brazil’s twenty-seven states had an
office of police ombudsman (ouvidoria) to receive complaints of police brutality
and monitor police actions. Low wages, poor training, and inadequate equipment
all contributed to the widespread corruption and violence of the police forces. In
July, a massive police strike to protest these problems in Bahia state resulted in a
rash of looting and killings,which were only halted when the army was called in to
restore control.
According to the São Paulo police ombudsman, military police in that state
killed 272 people in the first half of 2001, an average of three killings every two days.
While shocking, these numbers actually represented a decrease from comparable
figures from 2000. Most victims of police killings had no prior criminal record.
Notably, black and dark-skinned people were disproportionately subject to fatal
police shootings.
A particularly egregious case of police violence in Mato Grosso state involved a
minor, fifteen-year-old Nilson Pedro da Silva. According to reports, da Silva was
killed in the pre-dawn hours ofMarch 30, shot in the head and stomach by military
police. Da Silva was apparently unarmed and did not resist arrest. Another young
man, Ronilson Oliveira Ferreira, age nineteen, was shot in the leg, but managed to
escape. A camera crew from a local television station, TV Cidade, caught the incident
on film.The two soldiers involved in the incident, identified in news reports as
Macedo César Filho and Denis Coutinho, were dismissed from their posts but not
incarcerated. Rights groups urged Mato Grosso state authorities to prosecute the
officers and to offer Oliveira the security of the state’s witness protection program.
A hauntingly similar case from 1999 went unpunished. On August 27, 1999,
Daniel Silva Cartarino, age fifteen, Vando Almeida Araújo, age twenty, and a sixteen-
year-old now known as AAS were arrested by military police in the city of São
Bernardo do Campo, made to strip naked, and shot, execution style. AAS was able
to escape by pretending to be dead. He later identified the police officers and was
granted entry into the São Paulo state witness protection program. In July, police
officers Ivair Roberto de Souza, Isaías Mendonça Silva,Wagner Augusto Pinheiro,
and Emerson Roberto de Sisto were acquitted of the killings. Officials from the
Public Ministry in São Bernardo do Campo said that they would appeal the case to
the Supreme Court.
Justice in a case involving 149 military police accused of killing nineteen landless
peasants and wounding sixty-six others also remained elusive. The incident
occurred in April 1996, in Eldorado dos Carajás, during a protest roadblock organized
by members of the Landless Movement (Movimento dos Sem Terra, MST).
Charges against the three commanding officers were dropped by a jury in August
1999, a decision that was later reversed by the Pará state Justice Tribunal. A retrial
was originally set for May 2001, but was suspended after judge Eva Coelho de Amaral
barred the entry into evidence of a report thought to discredit police claims that
protesters fired the first shots. Under pressure from civil society and the human
rights community, the judge later ruled that the report was admissible in the proceedings,
but ordered a counter-investigation that was expected to delay the trial
even further.
Although the case of Eldorado dos Carajás was the most high profile example of
rural violence, killings and threats against rural workers were frequent throughout
the year.According to the Pastoral Land Commission (Comissão Pastoral da Terra,
CPT), 1,532 people were assassinated in rural areas from 1988 to September 2001,
among them workers, religious agents, lawyers, and labor leaders. In most of these
cases, those responsible were never brought to justice. In the state of Pará, where
many of the violations were concentrated, the CPT counted six people killed in the
four-month period from April to August, hundreds more imprisoned, and more than 1,500 families displaced in military police operations. The majority of displaced
families had been occupying areas of land for more than two years and had
registered to take legal title to the land.
In one of the many serious attacks against rural activists and landless peasants
in southern Pará state, José Pinheiro de Lima, his wife, and their fifteen-year-old
son were killed by gunmen in their home in Morada Nova,Marabá, on July 9. The
murders came just five days after another peasant worker,Manoel Messias Colono
de Souza, was shot dead on a nearby farm. Following the killings, federal police sent
a team to Marabá to help with the investigation, four months after they had themselves
alerted state authorities about death threats against Lima, a leader in the
movement to expropriate land on the Fazenda São Raimundo. Later that month,
the former owner of the Fazenda São Raimundo, who had lost title to his land due
to Lima’s efforts, was arrested for ordering the killing.
On August 25,Ademir Alfeu Federicci was murdered in his home in Altamira, in
western Pará state. Federicci, a coordinator for the Movement for the Development
of the Transamazon and the Xingu Area (Movimento pelo Desenvolvimento da
Transamazônica e do Xingu), worked to promote sustainable development in the
region.Although police called his killing the result of an armed robbery, Federicci’s
leadership in the fight against dam construction, illegal logging, and corruption,
made a political motive appear more likely.
Indigenous people were also a frequent target in land disputes, and they continued
to be moved off their land, threatened, and killed. According to a report
released by Guarani leaders, in November 2000 members of the Guarani community
were fired on by police allegedly hired by a cattle rancher who had taken over
their land. Among those injured was a baby, who was hit in the head by a rubber
bullet. In February, the then-president of the Human Rights Committee of the
Chamber of Representatives,Marcos Rolim, reported several cases of alleged sexual
abuse by army soldiers against Yanomami women in the Surucucus region of
the Amazon.
On August 23, indigenous leader Francisco de Assis Santana was murdered in
Pesqueira, Pernambuco, apparently in connection with his struggles for Xucuru
land rights in the territory, demarcated as an official reserve in April 2001.De Assis
Santana, known as “Chico Quelé,” was killed in an ambush as he made his way to a
meeting with an authority from the country’s indigenous rights organization (Fundaçao
Nacional do Indio, FUNAI).
Attacks against and harassment of lesbians and gays were also of concern. The
Gay Association of Bahia, a gay rights advocacy group, reported frequent murders
of gay men, claiming that less than 10 percent of such crimes were successfully prosecuted
in the courts. But in February, in an encouraging development, José Nilson
Pereira da Silva and Juliano Filipini Sabino were sentenced to twenty-one years in
prison for beating a gay man to death. José Edson Neris da Silva and his partner
Dario Pereira were attacked in downtown São Paulo in February 2000, apparently
because they were holding hands.Neris da Silva died as a result of the attack. A third
suspect was acquitted of the murder but convicted of assault, while a fourth was
sentenced to three years and four months in prison for attempted murder.
Freedom of expression was undermined by violence against journalists, censorship, exorbitantly high lawsuits against the press, and proposed gag laws. On August
16, the day before he was to testify in a defamation trial brought by two municipal
officials whom he had accused of misappropriating funds, journalist Mário Coelho
de Almeida Filho was murdered.According to reports, Coelho, who lived in Magé,
in the state of Rio de Janeiro, had been threatened because of his writing, and a
company linked to one of the municipal officials had recently tried to buy his
silence. In September, a retired military police officer was arrested for the crime; the
officer had previously served as a bodyguard for the daughter of one of the two
municipal officials.
On July 21, Judge Ana Paula Braga Alencastro ordered the confiscation of the
next day’s issue of the newspaper Tribuna Popular, published in São Lourenço do
Sul, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul. The confiscation was carried out at the
request of a local prefect whose administrative improprieties were described in an
article to be published that day. The Inter American Press Association condemned
the action as an act of “prior censorship.”
Efforts to extend the “Pinochet precedent” to Brazil were initiated, part of an
international movement to bring former dictators to justice. In December 2000, a
Paraguayan judge issued a detention order against former Paraguayan ruler Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner,whose thirty-five-year reign was characterized by human rights
abuses such as political killings and “disappearances.” As of this writing, however,
Stroessner continued to enjoy immunity in Brasília,where he was granted political
asylum and has lived since 1989.
Brazil’s aggressive efforts to combat the HIV/AIDS pandemic were one positive
element in its overall human rights picture, with the country’s national HIV/AIDS
program being rightly hailed as a model. Although the country had the highest
number of AIDS-affected persons in Latin America,mortality from AIDS declined
sharply over the past few years as the government ensured that persons with HIV
had access to a treatment regimen based on generic drugs.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The president of the Pastoral Land Commission (Commisão Pastoral da Terra,
CPT) in Paraná, Dinísio Vandressi, reportedly received several death threats over
the course of the year. On May 24, members of congress asked the Justice Ministry
to intervene to ensure the protection of Vandressi and his family.
Father Júlio Lancellotti of the Catholic Church’s Youth Pastoral was assaulted by
FEBEM guards during the March 11 rioting at the Franco da Rocha youth detention
facility. Although Lacellotti had been invited by the state to negotiate with
inmates, his arrival was greeted not by officials,but by a group of prison guards who
were angry over a colleague’s death in the uprising. The priest was hit in the face by
guards, and the cross he was wearing around his neck was ripped off.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
As described above, the report of the U.N. special rapporteur on torture was
comprehensive, forceful, and accurate. Following a recommendation contained in
the U.N. report, and under pressure from human rights organizations, the government
invited the U.N. special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, Dr. Asma
Jahangir, to visit Brazil. She was expected to begin research in the country in early
2002.
In May, the Committee against Torture reviewed Brazil’s record of implementing
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment. The committee noted the “remarkably frank and self-critical
character” of the Brazilian government’s report on implementation. Among other
things, the committee expressed concern over the frequency of torture and inhuman
treatment, and the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of such acts.
Organization of American States (OAS)
In 2001, the Brazilian government began directly negotiating with parties
involved in litigation before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. The initiative
was welcomed as a sign of increased government cooperation and as a means
to obtain faster results in remedying human rights violations. According to the
Brazil office of the nongovernmental Center for Justice and International Law
(CEJIL), Brazil conducted direct negotiations in six cases pending before the Inter-
American Court.
In April, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights decided the case of
Maria da Penha. It was the first case involving Brazil that the Inter-American Commission
had accepted based on violations of the Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women. Da Penha
had been repeatedly beaten by her husband,Marco Antônio Heredia Viveiros. The
beatings culminated, in 1983, in an attempted homicide that left her paraplegic. In
its ground-breaking decision, the commission found numerous rights violations
and recommended that Brazil adopt measures to remedy the problem of state tolerance
of domestic violence against women.
United States
The United States, Brazil’s main trade partner, remained the major source of
direct foreign investment, including investment by a number of major U.S. companies.
Brazil was not, however, a major recipient of direct U.S. foreign assistance.
The State Department’s chapter on Brazil in its Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices for 2000 fairly portrayed the country’s human rights situation.
Under pressure from pharmaceutical companies, the United States had initiated
a trade dispute with Brazil, complaining that the Brazilian authorities violated
patent protections in manufacturing and distributing generic anti-AIDS drugs. In late June, however, the U.S. government dropped its objections to Brazil’s successful
anti-AIDS effort.
European Union
Bilateral trade between Brazil and the members of the European Union
(E.U.) remained substantial, with Brazil being the E.U.’s principal market in Latin
America. The E.U. committed 150 million euros to cooperation projects in Brazil
in 2000.
CHILE
The landmark indictment of former dictator Gen.Augusto Pinochet and its
confirmation by the Santiago Appeals Court were the year’s signal human
rights achievements. Yet the suspension of criminal proceedings against Pinochet
in July, ostensibly for medical reasons, undermined hopes that all Chileans were
genuinely equal before the law.
Encouraging, but partial, progress was also made in the area of freedom of
expression.Congress repealed several objectionable provisions of the State Security
Law, and took steps toward ending film censorship.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
On December 1, 2001, Judge Juan Guzmán indicted Pinochet on eighteen counts
of aggravated kidnapping and fifty-seven counts of homicide. The former dictator
was accused of ordering killings committed by the “Caravan of Death,” a helicopter-
borne military squad that toured the country in October 1973, removing political
prisoners from their cells and secretly executing them. Pinochet’s lawyers
appealed the indictment, arguing that Judge Guzmán had failed to take a deposition
from Pinochet before charging him, as the law required. On December 20, the
Supreme Court upheld the appeal, annulled the indictment, and ordered Judge
Guzmán to question Pinochet within twenty days. The court did not make it a
requirement, as Pinochet’s lawyers had urged, that Pinochet undergo medical tests
before the deposition. Six days later, however, the Supreme Court issued a “clarification”
of its earlier ruling that said that the medical tests had to be conducted beforehand,
giving Pinochet’s defense another opportunity to fend off criminal charges.
Between January 10 and 13, a team of six psychiatrists and neurologists, with
one expert observer from either side, examined and tested Pinochet at the military
hospital. They found him to be suffering from “light to moderate” sub cortical
dementia caused by a series of mild strokes (in their final report, they termed the
dementia “moderate”).Reviewing the team’s report, Judge Guzmán concluded that Pinochet’s disability was not severe enough for him to be exempted from trial since
under Chilean law defendants must be found to be “mad” or “demented” before
trial proceedings are suspended for mental health reasons. On January 23 the judge
finally obtained Pinochet’s deposition at his Santiago residence. Five days later he
indicted Pinochet a second time, placing him under house arrest.
Chilean society, though it was divided over Pinochet’s legacy, absorbed this
momentous episode without violence or political instability. Nor did the political
branches of government put overt pressure on the courts. Nonetheless, it was no
secret that the government hoped to see Pinochet eventually exempted from trial
on humanitarian grounds.
On March 8, a Santiago Appeals Court panel confirmed Pinochet’s indictment,
but reduced the charges against him from kidnapping and murder to concealment
of the crimes. Both sides appealed. A week later, another panel of the court permitted
Pinochet to be released on bail. It also ordered Judge Guzmán to take Pinochet’s
fingerprints and photographs, a formal requirement in Chile following criminal
indictment. Pinochet’s defense lawyers insisted that even this brief procedure
would endanger the defendant’s health. They made strenuous efforts to delay the
procedure in the hope that the case would be closed on health grounds and fingerprinting
would be unnecessary. Eventually, they succeeded: on July 9, the Sixth
Chamber of the Santiago Appeals Court suspended the proceedings, ruling by two
votes to one that Pinochet was too infirm to stand trial.
The appellate court ruled that if the terms “madness” or “dementia” (grounds
for exemption from trial under the code of penal procedures in force) were interpreted
in the light of modern medical science (as the court believed they should be)
Pinochet’s condition should bar his trial.Moreover, the court held, to try Pinochet
in his condition would violate the due process guarantees of the Chilean constitution
and its new code of penal procedures.
The decision gave norms of due process precedence over written laws for the
first time in Chilean legal history. It also relied in part on a code of penal procedures
that had not yet entered into force in Santiago,where Pinochet’s trial was to be held.
(In December 2000, the new code of penal procedures entered into force in Chile’s
Fourth and Ninth regions, but it was not scheduled to become effective in Santiago
until 2004. The code allowed judges to suspend trials if the due process rights of a
defendant cannot be guaranteed). Prominent justice officials, including representatives
of the Council for the Defense of the State and the Public Defender (Defensor
Público Penal), declared that the application of the new code in Santiago was
illegal and unconstitutional.
Subsequent court rulings confirmed fears that the Sixth Chamber’s decision was
a special concession to Pinochet, and not would benefit other mentally challenged
defendants. In July, the Legal Assistance Corporation,which provides free legal representation
to poor defendants, asked a different panel of the Santiago Appeals
Court to grant the same rights to a hundred of its clients who were facing trial on a
variety of felony charges. The court rejected the petition on grounds that the new
penal procedures code was not in force. As of this writing the Supreme Court was
due to hear the petitioners’appeal, as well as an appeal alleging the Sixth Chamber’s
misapplication of the new code in the Pinochet case.
Continued progress was made in other prosecutions of Pinochet-era officials. In
August, Judge Sergio Muñoz charged sixteen army officers, most of them members
of the Army Intelligence Directorate (Dirección de Inteligencia del Ejército, DINE),
with the 1982 murder of trade unionist Tucapel Jiménez.Among the accused were
four retired army generals. The investigation, which had been thwarted for years,
progressed rapidly after Judge Muñoz took over the case in 2000 and several of the
soldiers confessed. Interior Ministry officials confirmed that judges and police officers
investigating human rights violations committed during the Pinochet era had
been followed and threatened by individuals believed to be former members of the
National Information Center (Central Nacional de Informaciones, CNI), a secret
police force that operated during the 1980s.
In January, the armed forces and uniformed police, whose representatives had
participated in a civil-military roundtable initiated in August 1999, acknowledged
for the first time that the bodies of 151 prisoners who “disappeared” after the September
1973 military coup had been thrown from aircraft into the sea, rivers, and
lakes of Chile. Unfortunately, the importance of the revelation was overshadowed
by numerous errors in the information provided by the military regarding two
hundred “disappearance” cases. The errors added to the trauma of relatives of the
“disappeared,” and confirmed the expectations of many relatives who had opposed
the civil-military dialogue from the outset.
Out of two hundred victims whose fate was revealed, the final resting place of
forty-nine was given with sufficient precision to make it possible, in theory, to find
their remains.Yet in more than fifty cases the dates given for the arrest and death of
the victim did not tally with the facts known to human rights organizations. The
body of trade unionist Juan Rivera Matus, described in the round table list as having
been thrown into the sea near the port of San Antonio, was found in April
buried in an army compound at Fort Arteaga. Some dental fragments and pieces of
bone found in a disused mineshaft near Santiago were believed to belong to Communist
Party leaders Horacio Cepeda and Fernando Ortíz, detained in December
1976, and whose bodies were listed in the armed forces document as having been
buried at the site.However, relatives still awaited conclusive identification in October.
After months of searching, investigators could not find the remains of four
other party members whose bodies, according to the Navy,were also thrown down
the shaft. The discovery only of small bone fragments suggested that the mine had
been visited at some subsequent date and skeletal remains removed to conceal the
crime.
After years of debate, Congress finally enacted reforms benefiting freedom of
expression, although many legal restraints remained in place. In April, it repealed
article 6b of the State Security Law, a 1958 statute that allowed top judges, military
chiefs and members of congress to bring charges of contempt of authority against
their press critics.
Other provisions of the State Security Law—including article 16,which allowed
the seizure of publications considered insulting by public officials—were also abolished.
Legislators refused to accept more sweeping reforms, including a government
proposal to repeal three articles of the criminal code that cover defamation
and libel of public officials in terms similar to article 6b.
Journalist Alejandra Matus,who left Chile to avoid arrest in April 1999 after her
book The Black Book of Chilean Justice was seized under article 16, returned to the
country for the first time in July. During her visit she petitioned the Santiago
Appeals Court to allow the distribution of her book, since the law under which it
had been confiscated was no longer in force. The court rejected her writ, and in
August the Supreme Court dismissed her appeal of the rejection. In October, however,
appeals court judge Rubén Ballesteros finally lifted the ban on the book and
ordered the confiscated copies returned to the publisher. He also suspended
Matus’s prosecution on other charges related to the book.
The State Security Law amendments were part of a comprehensive new law regulating
the press and protecting the rights of journalists, first proposed by the Aylwin
government in 1993. It shielded journalists from having to reveal their sources,
and stripped courts of the power to gag press reporting of controversial criminal
cases. It also stripped military courts of jurisdiction over cases involving criticism
of the military. However, the law was by no means a panacea ending all of Chile’s
freedom of expression restrictions, and in some areas it made matters worse. For
example, it discriminated against journalists without recognized university
degrees. And even with the reforms, Chile’s privacy laws failed to sufficiently protect
those responsible for disclosures in the public interest.
In July, Congress approved a constitutional amendment eliminating prior censorship
of the cinema. The reform was expected to come into force as soon as Congress
approved a bill changing the powers and composition of the film classification
council. That bill, introduced by President Lagos in March, restricted the council’s
powers to the certification of films for age-group suitability, and eliminated the
representation of the armed forces and the police on the council.
On May 20, twenty-six inmates died in a prison fire in the northern city of
Iquique. Prison officials were reported to have mistaken the fire for a riot and failed
to call the fire brigade in time to rescue the victims, while fire-fighting equipment
in the prison failed to work. The prison, constructed for a maximum of 1,000
inmates, held 1,700 at the time of the tragedy. Minister of Justice José Antonio
Gómez announced that the government was planning to build ten new prisons to
alleviate overcrowding.
On May 28,President Lagos signed into law the abolition of capital punishment.
The death penalty was replaced by life imprisonment, with a minimum forty-year
prison sentence for the most serious crimes. The new code of penal procedures
entered into force in two regions in December 2000, replacing written with oral
proceedings and strengthening the due process rights of defendants. The new code
was scheduled to enter force progressively across the country.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Attorneys representing relatives of the victims in the “Caravan of Death”case litigated
tirelessly to hold Pinochet accountable for the crimes committed by the military
death squad. The Council for the Defense of the State, an autonomous body
representing the interests of the state, made itself a party to this and several other
human rights cases.
Relatives of the “disappeared” and other human rights defenders did not report
any direct threats or harassment, in contrast to previous years.However, a website
believed to be linked to former members of the CNI, the military government’s
intelligence agency, carried spiteful attacks on the president of the Association of
Relatives of the “Disappeared,” Viviana Díaz, and publicized her private address
and telephone number.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Organization of American States (OAS)
In February, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights found that Chile had
violated article 13 of the American Convention on Human Rights by refusing to
allow the public exhibition of Martin Scorsese’s film The Last Temptation of Christ.
The court ruled that Chile must amend its domestic law to eliminate prior censorship
and allow the film to be screened.The decision,which was unanimous, was the
court’s first ruling in a contentious case involving freedom of expression, and its
first ruling against Chile.
United States
In November 2000 the Clinton administration fulfilled its promise to release
more than 16,000 secret documents on U.S.-Chilean relations before and after the
military coup that brought General Pinochet to power in September 1973. The
release included some seven hundred Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) records,
which the CIA’s Directorate of Operations agreed to release only after pressure
from the White House. These dealt with covert operations to prevent the election
of President Salvador Allende, to destabilize his government, and to bolster that of
Pinochet.
On the basis of new information from the declassified documents, in October
and December 2000, Judge Guzmán opened investigations into the “disappearance”
and murder of two North Americans, Boris Weisfeiler and Charles Horman.
Weisfeiler, a Russian-born mathematician, “disappeared” in January 1985 while
hiking in southern Chile.Horman was executed in the National Stadium days after
the military coup. In July, Judge Guzmán sent a letter rogatory to the State Department,
requesting depositions on the case from former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger and from officials of the U.S. embassy in Chile at the time of the coup.
Argentina
In October 2001,Manuel Contreras (former director of Pinochet’s secret police,
the DINA), and five former DINA agents were arrested in Chile at the request of
Argentine federal judge María Servini de Cubría, pending a hearing on their extradition
to Argentina.They had been charged in Argentina for the 1974 assassination
in Buenos Aires of former Gen. Carlos Prats and his wife Sofia Cuthbert, but the
Chilean Supreme Court had earlier denied their extradition on procedural grounds. In August, the Supreme Court had rejected Judge Servini’s request that
Pinochet be extradited for ordering the assassination.
In April,Argentine federal judge Rodolfo Canicoba issued another international
warrant for the arrest ofManuel Contreras with a view to his extradition for organizing
Operation Condor, a secret plan of South American military governments to
track, kidnap,murder, or illegally deport persons seeking refuge from repression in
neighboring countries. In July, Justice Alberto Chaigneau of the Chilean Supreme
Court ordered that Contreras be placed under house arrest. The following month
the Santiago Appeals Court denied Contreras’ bail request.Chilean Supreme Court
judge Domingo Kokisch denied a similar request by the Argentine judge for the
arrest, pending extradition, of General Pinochet. In both the Prats and Condor
cases the Chilean courts held that Pinochet still preserved his parliamentary
immunity from prosecution. Unless the Supreme Court lifted his immunity,
Pinochet could not be questioned or charged in either case, a necessary prerequisite
to his extradition.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Progress Stalled: Setbacks in Freedom of Expression Reform, 3/01
COLOMBIA
Negotiations between the government and leftist guerrillas reached an
impasse in 2001 as both sides traded accusations of bad faith and broken
promises. Political violence increased for the second consecutive year and became
increasingly urban, with clashes and selective killings occurring in cities. Colombians
continued to flee their homes and even their country in record numbers, facing
hunger, the elements, and disease in desperate efforts to save themselves and
their families.
In the first ten months of the year, the office of the Public Advocate (Defensoría
del Pueblo) recorded ninety-two massacres, which they defined as the killing of
three or more people at the same place and at the same time.Most were linked to
paramilitary groups, followed by guerrillas. Both paramilitaries and guerrillas
reportedly moved with ease throughout the country, including via helicopter.
One of the year’s worst massacres occurred on January 17, in Chengue, Sucre.
Witnesses told government investigators that several Colombian navy units looked
the other way as heavily armed paramilitaries traveled past them to the village.
Paramilitaries assembled villagers in two groups, the Washington Post later
reported.“Then, one by one, they killed the men by crushing their heads with heavy
stones and a sledgehammer.When it was over, twenty-four men lay dead in pools
of blood. Two more were found later in shallow graves. As the troops left, they set
fire to the village.”
The authorities subsequently arrested Navy Sergeant Rubén Darío Rojas and charged him with supplying weapons to paramilitaries and helping coordinate the
attack.Colombia’s Internal Affairs agency (Procuraduría) filed disciplinary charges
against Navy Brig. Gen. Rodrigo Quiñones and five other security force officers for
allegedly ignoring detailed information received in advance about paramilitary
movements near Chengue. At the time, Quiñones was the commander of the first
Naval Brigade.Despite the charges, he was later promoted to the post of navy chief
of staff.
As the Chengue case showed, certain military units and police detachments continued
to promote, work with, support, profit from, and tolerate paramilitary
groups, treating them as a force allied to and compatible with their own. At their
most brazen, these relationships involved active coordination during military operations
between government and paramilitary units; communication via radios, cellular
telephones, and beepers; the sharing of intelligence, including the names of
suspected guerrilla collaborators; the sharing of fighters, including active-duty soldiers
serving in paramilitary units and paramilitary commanders lodging on military
bases; the sharing of vehicles, including army trucks used to transport
paramilitary fighters; coordination of army roadblocks, which routinely let heavily-
armed paramilitary fighters pass; and payments made from paramilitaries to
military officers for their support.
Overall, President Andrés Pastrana and his defense ministers failed to take effective
action to establish control over the security forces and break their persistent ties
to paramilitary groups. Even as President Pastrana publicly deplored atrocities, the
high-ranking officers he commanded failed to take steps necessary to prevent
killings by suspending security force members suspected of abuses, ensuring that
their cases were handed over to civilian judicial authorities for investigation and
prosecution, and pursuing and arresting paramilitary leaders.
Paramilitaries allied under the umbrella United Self Defense Group of Colombia
(Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia,AUC) expanded their radius of action and
troop strength in 2001. In June, AUC commander Carlos Castaño announced that
he had relinquished military leadership and dedicated himself to organizing its
political wing. Since 1996, the group had grown by over 560 percent, according to
Castaño,who claimed a force of over 11,000 fighters. In some situations, as with the
temporary seizure of a community of displaced people in Esperanza en Dios and
Nueva Vida,Chocó, paramilitaries reportedly operated with as many as eight hundred
troops at a time. Large concentrations of paramilitaries were rarely challenged
by the Colombian security forces.
Over a period of a week in early July, in the town of Peque, Antioquia, over five
hundred armed and uniformed paramilitaries blockaded roads, occupied municipal
buildings, looted, cut all outside communication, and prevented food and medicines
from being shipped in, according to the Public Advocate’s office.Over 5,000
Colombians were forced to flee. When the paramilitaries left, church workers
counted at least nine dead and another ten people “disappeared,” several of them
children.As a local official said: “The state abandoned us.This was a massacre foretold.
We alerted the regional government the paramilitaries were coming and they
didn’t send help.”
During much of 2000, the AUC paid monthly salaries to local army and police
officials based on rank in the department of Putumayo, where U.S.-funded and trained counternarcotics battalions were deployed. In the state of Cauca, soldiers
moonlighting as paramilitaries earned up to $500 per month. These salaries far
exceeded the average Colombian’s monthly income.
Mayors,municipal officials, governors, human rights groups, the Public Advocate’s
office and even some police detachments regularly informed the appropriate
authorities about credible threats by paramilitaries or even massacres that were taking
place. An early warning system paid for by the United States and administered
by the office of the Public Advocate registered twenty separate warnings nationwide
between June, when the system began to function, and September. But rarely did
the government take effective action to prevent atrocities. Of the warnings that
were received, eleven incidents resulted either in killings being committed or the
continued, pronounced presence of armed groups that threatened civilians.
Paramilitaries were linked to the murders of Colombians working to foster
peace, among them three congressmen. On June 2, armed men believed to be paramilitaries
seized Kimy Pernia Domicó, a leader of the Emberá-Katío community in
the department of Córdoba, who remained “disappeared” at this writing. Three
weeks after he was abducted, another Emberá-Katío leader who had been active in
calls for Domicó’s release was abducted by presumed paramilitaries and later killed.
As these killings showed, certain groups faced special risks,among them indigenous
groups, trade unionists, journalists, human rights defenders, and peace advocates.
The security forces were also directly implicated in abuses. In May, it was
revealed that a combined police-army unit had illegally tapped over 2,000 telephone
lines in the city of Medellín, many belonging to nongovernmental and
human rights groups. The police officer who apparently helped place the taps was
killed in April in circumstances that remained unclear.
Prosecutors implicated a former Colombian army major and an active duty
police captain along with Carlos Castaño in the December 21, 2000, attack on trade
union leader Wilson Borja, who was seriously wounded. In the first ten months of
2001, 125 trade unionists were murdered according to the Central Workers Union
(Central Unitaria de Trabajadores, CUT), which represents most Colombian
unions.
With the stated goal of furthering peace talks, the government continued to
allow the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army (Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo,FARC-EP) to maintain
control over a Switzerland-sized area in southern Colombia. During the year, the
two sides agreed on a prisoner exchange that led to the release of 364 captured
members of the police and military forces, and fourteen imprisoned FARC-EP
members. Several freed officers reported that FARC-EP guerrillas abused them
during captivity. Colombian National Police (CNP) Col. Álvaro León Acosta, captured
on April 5, 2000, suffered from serious ailments and excruciating pain stemming
from an untreated back injury. Other captives reported jungle diseases,
including malaria, fungi, constant diarrhea because of contaminated water, and
leishmaniasis,which can be fatal if untreated.Guerrillas never allowed the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) or other independent groups to visit
captured combatants, dozens of whom remained in the group’s custody.
Criticism of the FARC-EP intensified as evidence mounted that the group used
its area of control not only to warehouse prisoners and kidnaped civilians, but also to plan and mount attacks, including assaults that caused civilian casualties. The
FARC-EP frequently used indiscriminate weapons, specifically gas cylinder bombs.
The FARC-EP continued to kill civilians throughout Colombia, with human
rights groups reporting 197 such killings in the first ten months of the year.Among
the victims was former culture minister Consuelo Araújo Noguera, abducted by the
FARC-EP on September 24. The wife of Colombia’s Internal Affairs director,
Araújo Noguera was apparently executed by guerrillas during a Colombian army
rescue attempt.Other victims included Paez leader Cristóbal Secué Escué, a former
president of the Cauca Indigenous Regional Council (Consejo Regional Indígena
del Cauca, CRIC), who was shot on June 25 near his home in Corinto, Cauca. The
FARC-EP accused Paez communities of forming “civic guards” that were like paramilitary
groups, a charge indigenous leaders denied. Secué was, at the time of the
killing, serving as a judge investigating several alleged murders by FARC-EP guerrillas.
Kidnaping remained a source of income and political pressure for the FARC-EP.
In July, the group carried out its first mass kidnaping from an apartment building,
seizing sixteen people after blowing the doors off a residence in Neiva, Huila.
Among those kidnaped were children as young as five years old. Six people were
later released.
After Human Rights Watch wrote to FARC-EP leader Manuel Marulanda to
protest these violations, he dismissed the letter as “Yankee interventionism, disguised
as a humanitarian action.”
For its part, the Camilist Union-National Liberation Army (Unión Camilista-
Ejército de Liberación Nacional, UC-ELN) violated international humanitarian
law by launching indiscriminate attacks and committing kidnapings.After the government
suspended talks with the group on August 7, the UC-ELN set off a series
of car and package bombs in the department of Antioquia, including the city of
Medellín, killing passers-by and destroying electrical towers and public buses. Two
weeks earlier, over fifteen UC-ELN guerrillas died when bombs they were placing
along a road exploded in the truck carrying them.
There were some advances on accountability, principally by the office of the
attorney general under the direction of Alfonso Gómez Méndez, who completed
his four-year term in July. On May 25, prosecutors seized valuable information
related to paramilitary financing networks and communications in the city of
Montería, Córdoba, long considered an AUC stronghold. During the raid, prosecutors
searched the home of Salvatore Mancuso, a Montería native who was said to
be the AUC’s military commander. In part, the investigation focused on how
landowners and business people in the region donated heavily to the AUC.
The attorney general’s office also pursued important cases involving laws of war
violations, among them the murder in December 29, 2000, of Congressman Diego
Turbay and six others outside Florencia, Caquetá. The massacre took place as Turbay,
chair of the Peace Commission in Colombia’s House of Representatives, and
his companions were headed toward a meeting with guerrilla leaders in Los Pozos.
The FARC-EP denied committing this massacre, but the attorney general opened a
formal investigation of alleged guerrillas based on testimonies of captured gunmen
and other evidence.
New Attorney General Luis Osorio set a disturbing precedent when he forced the resignation of the director of the Human Rights Unit, the former director of the
Human Rights Unit, and the former head of the Technical Investigations Unit
(Cuerpo Técnico de Investigaciones, CTI) during his first hours in office. This
change in leadership and the message it sent threatened to reverse or hamper
important investigations and led to a slowdown or suspension of important cases,
including the Chengue massacre.
Osorio objected to the unit’s decision to order the July 23 arrest of Gen. (ret.)
Rito Alejo del Río for his alleged support of paramilitary groups while in command
of the army’s Seventeenth Brigade in Carepa, Antioquia, between 1995 and 1997.
Del Río was among the officers dismissed from the army by President Pastrana
because of his poor human rights record. Also, the United States canceled his visa
to the United States because of his alleged involvement in acts of terrorism and drug
trafficking.
The Security and National Defense Law that President Pastrana signed on
August 13 threatened to reinforce impunity for human rights abuses. The law gave
the security forces judicial police powers under certain circumstances and severely
restricted the ability of civilian investigators to initiate disciplinary investigations
against security force personnel for human rights violations committed during
operations.Also, the law limited the obligation of the armed forces to inform judicial
authorities about the detention of suspects, increasing the risk of torture.
Since the president signed a new military penal code in 2000 that allowed military
commanders to dismiss subordinates implicated in a wide range of crime, the
Defense Ministry claimed that over five hundred people had been removed from
the service.However, the government provided no information indicating the reason
for the dismissals, which could range from incompetence to involvement in
human rights crimes. In addition, there was no evidence that any of these individuals
subsequently faced criminal investigations for human rights violations.Meanwhile,
officers charged with abuses remained on active duty and in charge of groups
in the field.
The Colombian government also argued that it arrested hundreds of paramilitaries
and dismissed their military supporters.However, arrests were mainly of lowranking
individuals, some of whom were speedily released.
Landmines were a threat to civilians throughout Colombia. According to the
Colombian army and independent landmine monitors, the total number of landmines
in Colombia was estimated at 130,000. Deaths and injuries resulting from
their use were up sharply. Through mid-July 2001, the Colombian Campaign
Against Land Mines recorded eighty-eight people killed or maimed by landmines,
mostly farmers and their children. Colombia has signed but not yet ratified the
1999 Ottawa Convention banning the use, stockpiling, and export of landmines.
Forced displacement continued to increase, with at least 300,000 Colombians
reported displaced in 2001, the highest number ever in a single year. Increasingly,
Colombians applied for exit visas to travel abroad and applied for political asylum
in other countries.
Kofi Asomani, the United Nations special coordinator on internal displacement
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, visited Colombia in
August and concluded that the conflict had “catastrophic consequences” for the
civilian population. Despite government programs meant to assist the displaced, Asomani found that they continued to suffer extreme hardship, living in overcrowded
and unsanitary conditions with limited access to basic services.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Colombia continued to be an extremely dangerous place for human rights
defenders as well as for government investigators handling human rights and international
humanitarian law investigations. In the first ten months of 2001, eleven
defenders were killed according to the CCJ.
Among the victims was lawyer Alma Rosa Jaramillo Lafourie,who worked with
the Middle Magdalena Development and Peace Program (Programa de Desarrollo
y Paz del Magdalena Medio, PDPMM). Seized by presumed paramilitaries in
Morales, in the department of Bolívar, on June 29, locals found her body two days
later dumped in a rural area.According to associates, Jaramillo was tortured before
being executed. Another PDPMM colleague, Eduardo Estrada, was murdered in
similar circumstances on July 18 in the town of San Pablo, Bolívar. Colombia’s
Pacific coast was also dangerous. On September 19, armed men shot and killed
Roman Catholic nun and human rights defender Yolanda Cerón Delgado in front
of a church in Tumaco,Nariño.
Paramilitaries intensified an announced campaign to murder prosecutors and
investigators of cases that implicated paramilitary leaders.During 2001, seven government
investigators were murdered by alleged paramilitary gunmen. Among
them were the three investigators who worked most closely on the investigation of
the Chengue massacre. Several key witnesses to important cases were also killed
while in government custody or while in the process of supplying information to
prosecutors. The office in Colombia of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human
Rights (UNHCHR) called these killings “a systematic campaign of retaliation and
intimidation” by those seeking “total impunity for the most serious crimes committed
in the country.”
Human rights defenders were among the main targets of the paramilitary
advance in Barrancabermeja that began in December 2000. Members of the
Regional Committee for the Defense of Human Rights and the Popular Women’s
Organization (Organización Femenina Popular, OFP) received multiple death
threats by telephone and in person, and paramilitaries destroyed a house they used
to hold events. “The paramilitaries are not just killing us physically, they are also
killing our ability to organize, to be community leaders,” said Yolanda Becerra,OFP
president.“We have been forced to shut down projects outside the city, because the
paramilitaries have banned us from traveling by river.”
Some government offices attempted to protect threatened defenders, supplying
bodyguards, bulletproof reinforcement for offices, and an emergency response network
operated by handheld radios. The CNP Human Rights office and the Interior
Ministry, in particular, took steps to protect defenders and to investigate specific
allegations of police collaboration with paramilitary groups. The Interior Ministry
provided protection or relocation assistance to 747 people between May and mid-
September of 2001.
In many instances, however, government response was slow, nonexistent, or abusive. For example, the commander of the Barrancabermeja-based CNP, Col.
José Miguel Villar Jiménez, attacked human rights groups by claiming that they had
their “origin in [guerrillas], which attempt to throw mud on the good work that is
done constantly with reports and information that also has an echo in the different
international Non-Governmental Organizations.”
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The international community played a prominent role in efforts to resolve
Colombia’s conflict. France, Switzerland,Cuba,Mexico,Venezuela,Norway, Spain,
Italy, Canada, and Sweden agreed to meet every two weeks with the FARC-EP and
act as “facilitator countries” for the peace process.
United Nations
The office of the UNHCHR continued to operate in Colombia, despite poor
cooperation from Colombian government officials. As High Commissioner Mary
Robinson noted in the office’s annual report, “the overwhelming majority of Governmental
responses to Office communications about specific cases and situations
(such as early warnings) have been unsatisfactory, inoperative and purely bureaucratic.”
The end result, she emphasized, was that “the potential of the Office has
been greatly underutilized by the Government.”
Before announcing his departure at year’s end, Jan Egeland, the special adviser
on Colombia to the United Nations Secretary-General, frequently visited Colombia
to assist in peace talks, but was prevented by the government from remaining in
the country for more than eight days at a time.
Special representative of the secretary-general on human rights defenders,Hina
Jilani, undertook a fact-finding mission to Colombia in October at the invitation of
the Colombian government. It ended bitterly, after Jilani raised questions about the
new Attorney General and his commitment to prosecuting cases involving highranking
military officers.
European Union
Political relations with the European Union were strengthened in 2001. In
March, E.U. Foreign Affairs Commissioner Chris Patten met with President Pastrana
in Colombia. Shortly after, Patten announced a 3 million euro aid package in
support of the displaced population and the launching of an Andean regional
human rights program.
In July, the European Union expressed deep concern at mounting violence, in
particular the holding up of a U.N. vehicle and the abduction of one it its Colombian
occupants, former Meta department governor Alan Jara, as well as three German
aid workers. The FARC-EP acknowledged abducting the workers in a
communiqué. The incidents, the E.U. stated, “seriously jeopardize the peace
process and openly flout elementary principles of international law.” In October, one of the German hostages escaped and the remaining two were later released. Jara
remained in FARC-EP custody as of this writing.
Spanish authorities detained Carlos Arturo Marulanda, the former Colombian
ambassador to the European Union, on charges that he supported paramilitary
groups that killed and threatened farmers in the department of Cesar.A Colombian
judge ordered the arrest after receiving information that allegedly linked the diplomat
directly to paramilitary support.Marulanda remained in Spain at this writing
awaiting the outcome of extradition hearings.
United States
The United States continued to focus on the aerial eradication of drug-producing
crops and was increasingly and publicly skeptical of the peace process.U.S. State
Department spokesman Philip Reeker charged in August that the FARC-EP was
“misusing the demilitarized zone to abuse prisoners, engage in narcotics trafficking
and, for example, reportedly receive training from the Irish Republican Army,”
referring to three Irish nationals charged in Colombia in August with helping train
guerrillas.At the same time,U.S.Ambassador Anne Patterson made several important
public statements in support of human rights.
Despite such concerns, the United States remained Colombia’s largest foreign
donor. It also increased military aid to Colombia’s neighbors, in an effort to
strengthen border controls against both armed groups and trafficking.
In March, Secretary of State Colin Powell announced to the U.S. Congress that
he would seek another $400 million for Colombia for fiscal year (FY) 2002, roughly
equivalent to the amount Colombia received in 2000 and in 2001. At this writing,
the legislation contained human rights conditions and no waiver authority, meaning
that Colombia would have to show concrete progress in breaking ties between
the security forces and paramilitaries in order to receive aid. A day before his
planned visit to Colombia, suspended after the September 11 attacks on the World
Trade Center and Pentagon, Secretary Powell also announced that the United States
had put the AUC on the administration’s list of terrorist groups, along with the
FARC-EP and UC-ELN, allowing U.S. officials to suspend the U.S.-based accounts
of people who contributed to the group.
Between 1998 and 2001, eleven Colombian Army units were vetted for human
rights problems and approved to receive U.S. security assistance. In addition, all
CNP counternarcotics units, the Colombian Air Force, the Colombian Navy, and
the Colombian Marines were cleared to receive U.S. assistance.
Although human rights continued to be cited as an important policy concern,
the U.S. violated the spirit of its own laws and in some cases downplayed evidence
of ties between the Colombian armed forces and paramilitary groups in order to
continue funding abusive units.Compelling evidence emerged, in particular,of ties
between paramilitaries and Colombian military units deployed in the U.S. antinarcotics
campaign in southern Colombia, showing that U.S.-vetted, -funded, and
-trained troops were mixing freely with units that maintained close ties with paramilitaries.
This occurred in the case of the First and Second Counternarcotics Battalions.
On their first joint deployment in December 2000, these battalions depended heavily
on the army’s Twenty-Fourth Brigade for support and logistical assistance, particularly
with regard to intelligence, civic-military outreach, and psychological
operations.Yet there was abundant and credible evidence to show that the Twenty-
Fourth Brigade regularly worked with and supported paramilitary groups in the
department of Putumayo. Indeed, the Twenty-Fourth Brigade hosted counternarcotics
battalion troops at its facilities in La Hormiga—a town where, according to
witnesses, paramilitaries and Colombian Army troops were indistinguishable.
The application of human rights conditions proved inconsistent if a unit was
considered key to U.S. strategy, with embassy officials openly acknowledging that
they applied conditions in a subjective manner. In certain cases, if a unit was considered
important enough to drug war objectives, the U.S. circumvented its own
human rights law to continue funding and training it.
One example was Combat Air Command No. 1 (Comando Aéreo de Combate
No. 1), part of the Colombian Air Force.The State Department did not suspend this
unit from receiving security assistance despite credible evidence that one of its helicopter
crews committed a serious violation in the village of Santo Domingo, near
Arauca, in 1998, by bombing a house where civilians had taken shelter.At the time
of this writing, almost three years after the incident, no military personnel had been
effectively investigated or disciplined for an attack that killed seven children and
eleven adults. Throughout, Combat Air Command No. 1 continued to be authorized
to receive U.S. security assistance and training.
A report prepared by the U.S. General Accounting Office concluded that farmers
displaced by the U.S.-funded anti-drug campaign received little assistance
beyond the first ninety days of their displacement.Under the U.S. aid plan,U.S. $37
million was set aside to deal with displaced persons, particularly those affected by
eradication efforts in the south of Colombia.
The United States took some positive steps with regard to human rights in
Colombia. The foreign aid bill approved by the U.S. Congress for FY 2002 contained
strong human rights conditions on security assistance with no waiver
authority, a clear improvement over previous legislation. The U.S. Agency for
International Development (USAID) made grants to seven human rights groups in
Colombia totaling over $575,000. USAID also contributed assistance to 176,000
people forcibly displaced by aerial eradication and political violence and supported
a $2.5 million program for ex-combatant children. However, proposed aid for the
attorney general’s Human Rights Unit was diverted to buy expensive equipment
that only marginally benefited this office,which continued to face serious problems
in getting prosecutors to the sites of crimes and providing them with even minimal
protection. In 2000 and the first three months of 2001—a fifteen-month period—
the attorney general’s Human Rights Unit and advisers from the Internal Affairs
agency received only U.S. $65,763 from USAID. That worked out to less than
the average amount of U.S. military assistance spent in Colombia in two hours of a
single day.
The annual country report on human rights issued by the State Department
accurately reflected the situation in Colombia, giving a detailed and grim picture of
abuses. As importantly, U.S. Amb. Anne Patterson began a long-overdue policy of
speaking out on the human rights situation and expressing concern over specific cases.Her timely telephone call to the army commander of a Barrancabermeja battalion
in December 2000 was a critical factor in spurring the Colombian authorities
to act to address the paramilitary advance. She also publicly supported the
UNHCHR in Colombia, speaking out on the importance of their work at critical
moments.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
The “Sixth Division”: Military-Paramilitary Ties and U.S. Policy in Colombia,
9/01
Beyond Negotiation: International Humanitarian Law and its Application to the
Conduct of the FARC-EP, 8/01
CUBA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The Cuban government’s intolerance of democracy and free expression
remained unique in the region.A one-party state,Cuba restricted nearly all avenues
of political dissent. Although dissidents occasionally faced criminal prosecution,
the government relied more frequently on short-term detentions, house arrest,
travel restrictions, threats, surveillance, politically-motivated dismissals from
employment, and other forms of harassment.
Cuba’s restrictions on human rights were undergirded by the country’s legal and
institutional structure. The rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly,
movement, and of the press were strictly limited under Cuban law. By criminalizing
enemy propaganda, the spreading of “unauthorized news,” and insult to patriotic
symbols, the government curbed freedom of speech under the guise of
protecting state security. The authorities also imprisoned or ordered the surveillance
of individuals who had committed no illegal act, relying upon laws penalizing
“dangerousness” (estado peligroso) and allowing for “official warning”
(advertencia oficial). The government-controlled courts undermined the right to
fair trial by restricting the right to a defense, and frequently failed to observe the few
due process rights available to defendants under domestic law.
In July, the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation
(Comisión Cubana de Derechos Humanos y Reconciliación Nacional), a respected
Havana-based nongovernmental group, released a partial list of political prisoners
that included 246 cases they considered to be reliably documented. Some of the
prisoners named on the list were serving extremely long sentences—twenty or
more years for crimes such as “rebellion” and “sabotage,” offenses broadly defined
by Cuban courts—while others were serving short sentences for “contempt of
authority” (desacato) or public disorder.
The government continued to prosecute people for “illegal exit” if they attempted to leave the island without first obtaining official permission to do so.
Such permission was sometimes denied arbitrarily, or made contingent on the purchase
of an expensive exit permit. In June, Pedro Riera Escalante, a former Cuban
consul and intelligence officer in Mexico City, was sentenced by a military court to
six years in prison for leaving Cuba illegally, using false documents, and bribing
officials to allow his departure. Riera Escalante had broken with his government
and sought political asylum in Mexico, but he was forcibly deported by the Mexican
authorities in October.
Even though his three co-defendants were released in May 2000, dissident leader
Vladimiro Roca Antúnez remained incarcerated as of November, serving his last
year of a five-year sentence. The four, then members of the Internal Dissidents
Working Group (Grupo de Trabajo de la Disidencia Interna, GTDI), were convicted
of “acts against the security of the state” in March 1999, after having been
detained since July 1997. Their detention followed the GTDI’s release of an analytical
paper on the Cuban economy, human rights, and democracy.
Another prominent activist who was still behind bars as of November was
thirty-nine-year-old Dr. Oscar Elías Biscet González. Biscet received a three-year
prison sentence in February 2000 for protests that included turning the Cuban flag
upside-down and carrying anti-abortion placards. The president of the Lawton
Human Rights Foundation, an independent organization, Biscet was convicted of
dishonoring patriotic symbols, public disorder, and instigating delinquency. In
detention since November 1999, he had reportedly been mistreated by prison
authorities and kept in poor conditions, causing weight loss and dental problems.
In April, Biscet was reportedly made to share a cell with a mentally disordered
inmate.
José Orlando González Bridon, leader of the Confederation of Democratic
Workers of Cuba, an unofficial union, was sentenced to two years of imprisonment
in May for “spreading false news.” The charges stemmed from an article he published
on an Internet site in August 2000 that criticized local police for negligence
in the death of another labor rights activist. In November 2000, shortly before he
was detained, González Bridon took part in a protest rally in which he and other
dissidents chanted “Down with Fidel!” as they symbolically buried the Cuban constitution
and penal code in small coffins. Prosecutors had originally requested a
seven-year sentence for González Bridon. Although they reduced their petition to
one year, the trial court added a year to the sentence after finding him guilty. Later,
on appeal, the sentence was cut back to a year. González Bridon was released on
conditional liberty on November 22, three weeks before the expiration of his sentence.
(Cuban law allows for conditional liberty contingent on good behavior after
half of a prisoner’s sentence has been served.)
Another person who left prison slightly early was Julia Cecilia Delgado, released
on October 19. Delgado, an independent librarian and president of a nongovernmental
group, had been serving a one-year sentence for “disrespect.”Delgado was
one of about two hundred people who were detained in early December 2000, in a
wave of arrests probably meant to discourage public gatherings on December 10,
International Human Rights Day. Pro-democracy activist Angel Moya Acosta,
prosecuted at the same time, was believed to be finishing his one-year sentence in
December.
Cecilio Monteagudo Sánchez, a member of the unofficial Democratic Solidarity
Party (Partido Solidaridad Democrática), was released from prison in June. He
had been convicted of “enemy propaganda” and sentenced to four years of imprisonment
in 1998. Cuban police originally detained him in September 1997, after
he had drafted, but not published, a document calling for abstention from local
elections.
Much more frequent than actual criminal prosecutions were arrests and shortterm
detentions. The most prominent case began on January 12, when Czech citizens
Jan Bubenik and Ivan Pilip were detained after meeting with independent
Cuban journalists in the province of Ciego de Avila. Bubenik, a former student
activist, and Pilip, a legislator and former Czech government finance minister,were
held for nearly four weeks, as the Cuban authorities considered prosecuting them
on charges of acting against state security. The two were released in early February
after intensive diplomatic efforts by European officials.
A blind dissident, Juan Carlos Gonzalez Leyva, was reportedly stopped and
roughed up by members of the Cuban secret police on January 16, along with two
of his colleagues.Over the course of the year, dozens of other dissidents and human
rights activists reported being arrested and detained for brief periods, such as a few
hours or overnight. On some occasions, detainees were threatened or insulted, or
their homes were searched.
Whether detained for political or common crimes, inmates were subjected to
abusive prison conditions. Prisoners frequently suffered malnourishment and languished
in overcrowded cells without appropriate medical attention. Some
endured physical and sexual abuse, typically by other inmates with the acquiescence
of guards, or long periods in punitive isolation cells. Prison authorities
insisted that all detainees participate in politically oriented “re-education” sessions
or face punishment. Political prisoners who denounced the poor conditions of
imprisonment were frequently punished with solitary confinement, restricted visits,
or denial of medical treatment.
Cuba maintained the death penalty for a large number of offences. In June, Justice
Minister Roberto Diaz Sotolongo said that “for humanitarian reasons” Cuba
preferred not to employ capital punishment, but that the penalty served as a warning
to drug traffickers. Penal code changes dating from the late 1990s had extended
capital punishment to cases of drug trafficking with aggravating circumstances.
In April, Elizardo Sánchez of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and
National Reconciliation announced that the death penalty had not been applied in
Cuba over the past year. “We are seeing a moratorium on the death penalty, but we
should move on to its abolition,” Sánchez reportedly explained. Two Salvadorans
convicted of taking part in a wave of bombings of tourist installations in Havana
were on death row, having been confined there since 1998. Some twenty other prisoners
were also reportedly on death row, although this could not be verified as the
authorities did not provide public information on death sentences and executions.
The authorities maintained strict controls on the press, barring local independent
news coverage and taking steps to limit foreign reporting. As of November,
independent journalist Bernardo Arévalo Padrón, director of the news agency
Linea Sur Press, remained behind bars, having been denied conditional release.He
was serving a six-year sentence for “insulting” President Castro, imposed in November 1997. In January, independent journalist Jesús Joel Díaz Hernández,
who had been serving a four-year sentence for “dangerousness,” was granted conditional
release.
The authorities routinely detained and questioned independent journalists,
monitored their telephone calls and visitors, restricted their travel, and put them
under house arrest to prevent coverage of certain events. In May, in recognition of
such tactics, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), a U.S.-based press freedom
group, named President Fidel Castro as one of the Ten Worst Enemies of the
Press for 2001.
To prevent negative foreign media coverage, Cuban authorities continued to
deny visas to certain disfavored foreign journalists. In January, President Castro
accused some reporters of “transmitting insults and lies,” suggesting that Cuba
might consider canceling their employers’ license to operate in Cuba.“We have tolerated
for years reporters who intentionally and deliberately insult the leaders of
the revolution and me,”Castro said.
The government maintained considerable control over religious expression, but
in general religious institutions and their leaders enjoyed a degree of autonomy not
permitted other bodies. Several religious-run groups distributed humanitarian aid
and carried out social programs.Yet the government continued to slow the entry of
foreign priests and nuns and to bar religious institutions from running schools
(although religious instruction was allowed). In contrast to the first decades after
the Cuban Revolution, discrimination against overtly religious persons was rare.
The government recognized only one labor union, the Worker’s Central of Cuba
(Central de Trabajadores de Cuba, CTC). Independent labor unions were denied
formal status and their members were harassed.Workers employed in businesses
backed by foreign investment remained under tight government control. Under
restrictive labor laws, the authorities had a prominent role in the selection, payment,
and dismissal of workers, effectively denying workers the right to bargain
directly with employers over benefits, promotions, and wages.Cuba also continued
to use prison labor for agricultural camps and ran clothing assembly and other factories
in its prisons. The authorities’ insistence that political prisoners work without
pay in poor conditions violated international labor standards.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights defenders were systematically harassed.The authorities routinely
used surveillance, phone tapping, and intimidation in its efforts to restrict independent
monitoring of the government’s human rights practices. In some
instances, they employed arbitrary searches, short-term arrests, evictions, travel
restrictions, politically-motivated dismissals from employment, threats and other
forms of harassment against local activists.
Although the U.N. special rapporteur on violence against women was permitted
to visit in 1999, the government generally barred international human rights and
humanitarian monitors from the country.The International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) has not been allowed to conduct prison visits in Cuba since 1989,
making Cuba the only country in the region to deny the organization such access.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
At its fifty-seventh session in April, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights
passed a resolution expressing concern about continuing human rights violations
in Cuba, the ninth such resolution passed since 1991, and urged the government to
invite the U.N. special rapporteurs on torture and on freedom of expression to visit
the country.
In the resolution, the Commission noted that Cuba had made “no satisfactory
improvements” in the area of human rights. It expressed particular concern at the
“continued repression of members of the political opposition,” as well as about the
“detention of dissidents and all other persons detained or imprisoned for peacefully
expressing their political, religious and social views and for exercising their
right to full and equal participation in public affairs.”An early draft of the resolution
criticized the U.S. economic embargo on Cuba, but that language was omitted
from the final version.
The resolution, which was sponsored by the Czech Republic, passed by a 22-20
vote, with a number of abstentions.
European Union
Cuba remained the only Latin American country that did not have a cooperation
agreement with the European Union. The E.U. “common position” on Cuba,
adopted in 1996 and extended in June 2001, made full economic cooperation conditional
on reforms toward greater democracy and human rights protection. A
number of E.U. members, however, were in favor of revisiting the common position
and establishing closer ties with Cuba free of any conditions. Already, European
countries accounted for almost half of Cuba’s foreign trade, and more than
180 European companies operated on the island.
Visiting Brussels in July, Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Pérez Roque appealed
for a review of E.U. policy toward Cuba. A few months later, E.U. officials
announced that the European Union favored resuming the political dialogue with
Cuba and permitting the island to join the Cotonou Agreement,which governs the
E.U.’s aid relationships with African, Caribbean, and Pacific states. Belgian Foreign
Minister Louis Michel, holding the rotating presidency of the E.U.Council, had visited
Havana in August, meeting with high Cuban officials as well as political dissidents.
On returning to Europe, he expressed support for strengthening contacts
with Cuba. Political talks between the European Union and Cuba were scheduled
to take place at the end of November.
In early October, Cuban exiles filed a lawsuit in Brussels against President Fidel
Castro and other high Cuban officials under a law that empowers Belgian courts to
hear cases of genocide and crimes against humanity, regardless of where the incidents
occurred. The lead plaintiff in the case was José Basulto, president of the
Miami-based group Brothers to the Rescue.Another plaintiff was Eugenio de Sosa
Chabau, a former newspaper editor who spent twenty years in prison after the
Cuban Revolution. The complaint described torture and other abuses suffered by political prisoners, including a 1960 incident in which a prisoner allegedly received
electric shocks to his head and testicles.
Latin America and
the Organization of American States (OAS)
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez remained Cuba’s most reliable ally in the
region,with his country being the only one in Latin American (besides Cuba itself)
to vote against the U.N. resolution on Cuba’s human rights conditions. Several
other countries in the region abstained from the vote, while four—Argentina,
Costa Rica, Guatemala, and Uruguay—voted in favor of the resolution.
Cuba reacted strongly to the U.N. vote, lashing out at the Latin American countries
that voted for the censure. In February, prior to the Geneva session, Cuba’s
official daily Granma accused Argentina of seeking U.S. economic assistance in
exchange for voting against Cuba at the United Nations. President Castro accused
Argentine President Fernando de la Rúa of “licking the Yankees’ boots,” leading
Argentina to temporarily withdraw its ambassador from Cuba. After the Geneva
vote, Castro again attacked Argentina and described Costa Rica as playing the role
of “a lackey—something more than a lackey—a servant” of the United States. He
also claimed that Guatemala only went along with the vote because of heavy U.S.
pressure.
The latter part of the year saw movement toward eliminating the last vestiges of
Cuba’s diplomatic isolation in the region. In September,Honduras opened an interests
section in Havana, a likely first step toward full diplomatic relations. The Honduran
move left El Salvador as the only Latin American country with no diplomatic
relations with the island.Cuba’s diplomatic estrangement from other Latin American
states dated from 1961, when the Organization of American States suspended
its membership. In August, in a speech before the OAS Permanent Council,
Venezuelan Foreign Minister Luis Alfonso Davila pointedly called for the “complete
integration” of the hemisphere, arguing that no country should be isolated.
United States
The devastation wrought by Hurricane Michelle opened a crack in the U.S. economic
embargo on Cuba, with U.S. companies selling food and medicine to
Havana in November 2001 to offset losses and replenish stocks used in the island’s
worst storm in half a century. The sales, valued by a U.S. official at about U.S. $30
million, represented the first commercial transactions between the two countries
since the embargo was put in place. Authorities in Washington had originally
offered to provide Cuba with disaster relief aid, but Cuban officials, declining the
aid offer, expressed interest in buying food, medicine, and other necessities.
A law enacted in 2000 allowed food sales to Cuba, and an earlier law allowed the
export of medicines. Yet, because the law on food sales barred U.S. government or
private financing of the sales, Cuban officials had previously criticized it, saying
that they would refrain from buying food until the embargo was lifted. This year’s
purchase represented a departure from that position, but one that Cuban officials insisted was exceptional. “We have no reason to see [the sales] as a policy shift,
rather as something that happened because of a hurricane that doesn’t happen
every month in Cuba,” explained Cuban Vice-President Carlos Lage.
In May, Senator Jesse Helms and Senator Joseph Lieberman introduced draft
legislation in Congress to allocate up to $100 million over four years to assist dissidents,
opposition groups, political prisoners, and other nongovernmental voices in
Cuba. The bill, known as the Cuban Solidarity Act of 2001, was criticized by some
of its potential beneficiaries, who feared that receiving U.S. government aid would
damage their credibility and help discredit their views. A parallel bill had been
introduced in the House in March. Both versions of the draft legislation were still
under review by congressional committees as of November.
A Cuban émigré, Eriberto Mederos, faced denaturalization proceedings in
Florida at the end of the year. Mederos could be stripped of his U.S. citizenship
because of allegations by another Cuban-American who accused Mederos of torturing
him when he was a political prisoner in Cuba in the 1960s.According to the
former prisoner,Mederos subjected him to painful electrical shock treatments that
lacked any medical justification.
GUATEMALA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Aside from the successful conclusion of one landmark trial,Guatemala made little
progress in addressing persistent human rights problems, with certain conditions
worsening. State agents were responsible for some abuses, while others were
carried out by non-state actors who were able to operate with impunity because
their crimes were not adequately investigated. There were increased reports of
threats and violence targeting human rights advocates, labor leaders, judges, prosecutors
and journalists.Meanwhile, the army’s continued influence over the civilian
government was evidenced by President Alfonso Portillo’s decision to postpone
the dismantling of the Presidential Guard (Estado Mayor Presidencial, EMP), an
elite army corps associated with past human rights violations. The 1996 peace
accords had called for the dismantling of the EMP.
One positive development was the successful prosecution of those responsible
for the murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi,who was bludgeoned to death in April 1998,
two days after he released the Catholic Church’s report on human rights abuses
during Guatemala’s internal conflict which ended in 1996. In June, a three-judge
tribunal found retired army Col. Byron Lima Estrada and his son, army Capt.
Byron Lima Oliva, guilty of murder. The two men were sentenced to thirty years in
prison. Also convicted were former presidential bodyguard José Obdulio Villanueva
and Roman Catholic priest Mario Orantes, who received sentences of
thirty years and twenty years respectively.
A major obstacle to investigating and prosecuting human rights violations committed
by the army was the intimidation of prosecutors, judges and witnesses
through terror tactics. In this, the Gerardi trial was no exception. From the outset,
key participants in the case were subjected to “systematic” and “planned” harassment
that “intensified in the key procedural moments”of the trial, according to the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (Misión de Verificación de las
Naciones Unidas en Guatemala,MINUGUA). One judge, one prosecutor, and several
witnesses fled the country before the trial got underway after receiving death
threats. In January, Luis García Pontaza, a potential defense witness with links to
organized crime, was found dead in a Guatemala City jail.Prior to his death, he told
MINUGUA that he had resisted pressure from the EMP to testify that certain individuals
linked to the Catholic Church had been involved in the Bishop’s murder.
One of the trial judges, Yasmín Barrios Aguilar, reported that two strangers
attempted to break into her home a week before the trial and on March 21, the day
before the oral debate was scheduled to begin, grenades were exploded at the back
of her home.The special prosecutor for the case, Leopoldo Zeissig, reported receiving
anonymous telephoned threats and being tailed by strangers.After the trial concluded,
he fled the country, as did another witness.
While the trial’s outcome represented an enormous advance for the country,
there was little or no progress made in several of the other high-profile human
rights cases before the Guatemalan courts. The prosecution of soldiers implicated
in the 1995 massacre in Xamán, department of Alta Verapaz, remained in its preliminary
stages six years after the crime, and there were no advances in the prosecution,
begun in 1994, of soldiers accused of perpetrating the 1982 massacre in Dos
Erres, department of Petén.After years of delay the trial of military officers accused
of ordering the 1990 assassination of anthropologist Myrna Mack was set to begin
in October 2001.
Impunity also remained a serious problem in less prominent cases.MINUGUA
documented hundreds of human rights abuses during the year, the majority of
which it attributed to the failure of government authorities to investigate and punish
the perpetrators adequately. One case that exemplified this pattern of failure
involved the family of retired Gen.Otto Pérez Molina,who had helped to negotiate
the 1996 peace accords and was preparing to launch a new political party. In
November 2000, unknown assailants in an automobile shot and wounded his
daughter-in-law. Then, in February 2001, assailants attacked and wounded his
daughter and,moments later, shot and killed the driver of a car traveling next to one
his wife was driving.Yet, the authorities mounted no serious investigation into the
case, failing even to take testimony from an army officer who witnessed the fatal
attack. The general’s family left the country for their own safety. Francisco Arnoldo
Aguilar,whose wife was the driver killed in the February attack, pressed for an official
investigation and urged the creation of a citizens’ group to combat impunity. In
May, however, he was assassinated in front of his home in circumstances that,
MINUGUA said, ruled out robbery as a motive. The authorities nonetheless
insisted that it was a common crime.
The authorities also failed to take strong action against anti-union violence that
undermined workers’ right to freedom of association. In March, twenty-four men were tried for a 1999 incident in which five leaders of the Union of Banana Workers
of Izabal (Sindicato de Trabajadores Bananeros de Izabal, SITRABI) were held
at gunpoint, ordered to quit the union and their jobs, and call off a planned work
stoppage in protest against the firing of 918 banana workers in violation of a collective
bargaining agreement. They were indicted on lesser charges of false imprisonment
and coercion, however, rather than for kidnapping or other crimes that
carry a mandatory prison sentence.All but two were convicted; they received threeand-
a-half year prison sentences but these were immediately commuted upon payment
of fines.With these men again at large, the five SITRABI leaders feared for
their safety and that of their families, and fled the country.
The absence of effective law enforcement and the high incidence of common
crime contributed to a climate of insecurity, and the continued use of lynching as a
form of vigilante justice. MINUGUA documented eighty-eight lynchings between
July 2000 and June 2001, resulting in thirty-seven deaths. Local authorities often
played a role in inciting and perpetrating lynchings.
Officers of the National Civilian Police (Policía Nacional Civil, PNC) were
responsible for numerous human rights violations, including extrajudicial executions
and torture, and for obstructing justice. In October 2000, Rolando Barillas
Herrera was detained by two PNC agents in Gualán, Zacapa, brought to a station,
and put in cell at midnight. At 5:00 a.m., Barillas was found dead from asphyxiation.
A forensic exam found signs of beating and ruled out suicide.Yet, a year later,
government investigators still had not identified those responsible for the killing.
In April 2001, the PNC detained Julio Alberto Casasola and William Cotom Rodas
in Quetzaltenango, having allegedly caught them in the process of stealing a car.
The two were tortured and then transferred to a prison. The next day,Casasola was
brought to a hospital where he died as a result of the blows he had received from the
police.
There was a marked increase in threats made against people who challenged the
actions of public authorities. In March, the president of the Constitutional Court,
Judge Conchita Mazariegos, reported that she had received threatening phone calls
and that shots had been fired at her house. Earlier that month, the Constitutional
Court had lifted the immunity of members of Congress, including Gen. Efraín Ríos
Montt, so that they could face prosecution for illegally altering the text of a law after
it had been voted on by Congress. Three days before the attack on Judge Mazariegos’s
home, the court had ruled unconstitutional a decree passed by General Ríos
Montt’s party that would allow him and his colleagues to retain their congressional
seats during their prosecution.
Also in March, several members of Congress who defected from the ruling
Guatemalan Republican Front party (Frente Republicana Guatemalteca, FRG),
reported being subject to threats and acts of intimidation. These politicians had
joined the opposition National Unity of Hope party (Unidad Nacional de la Esperanza,
UNE). The UNE’s offices had previously been raided in August 2000 by
people who stole documents and left threatening messages behind.
One journalist was killed; others harassed and threatened, apparently to influence
their reporting. Radio journalist Jorge Mynor Alegría was assassinated by
unknown assailants in September in the port city of Puerto Barrios, department of Izabal. A colleague said that before his killing Alegría had rejected an attempt by
local municipal authorities to bribe him to stop criticizing local corruption in his
broadcasts. Other journalists received threats, including Claudia Méndez Villaseñor
of El Periódico, who reported receiving telephone threats from two government
officials in January when she was investigating alleged government
corruption. In March, Silvia Gereda and Martín Juárez, two other El Períodico journalists
reported receiving death threats and being assaulted. Juárez told MINUGUA
that a car followed him for two hours before he was intercepted and forced to stop
by another car, whose occupants then got out and pointed a gun at his head and
threatened to kill him. The same month, Gustavo Soberanis of Siglo XXI, was
threatened with a firearm by the comptroller of the president’s office (Contralor
General de Cuentas) when he tried to interview him about its expenses. Journalists
in the departments of Zacapa, Quetzaltenango, and Chiqimula also reported
receiving death threats. In June, the Public Ministry created a Special Prosecutor’s
Office for the Protection of Journalists and Unionized Workers (Fiscalía Especial
para la Protección a Periodistas y Sindicalistas).
Union leaders also continued to be subject to threats. In February, union leaders
who organized a work stoppage in the Puerto Barrios harbor received threats and
were later fired. In May and June, union leaders in two Izabal banana plantations
were also subject to firings and death threats.And during the year, union members
were threatened and subject to discriminatory firing by municipal mayors in several
towns throughout the country.
Discrimination remained a problem for indigenous people who made up
roughly half the country’s population.They faced unequal access to education, justice,
health and other government services. According to MINUGUA, the government’s
record with regard to implementing the 1996 peace accords was particularly
poor in the area of indigenous people’s rights.
Guatemala continued to violate its international treaty obligations in its
application of the death penalty. In November 2001, twenty-eight prisoners were
on death row. Thirteen of them had been sentenced for kidnappings that did not
result in death, a crime that was not a capital offense when the American Convention
on Human Rights entered into force. Because the American Convention
prohibited extending the death penalty to cover additional crimes, Guatemala’s
Constitutional Court ruled in October 2000 that the laws extending the death
penalty to non-fatal kidnappings violated Guatemala’s obligations under the
Convention. In June, however, a newly constituted court overturned that earlier
ruling.
In October 2000, Guatemala ratified the Additional Protocol to the American
Convention on Human Rights in the Area of Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In 2001, Guatemala experienced an alarming rise in the number of threats and
incidents of harassment and targeted violence against human rights advocates.
MINUGUA documented 171 such cases between July 2000 and June 2001 and concluded
that they were the result of “systematic action.”
In November 2000, the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation received threats in the
days leading up to a ruling by Spain’s highest court (the Audiencia Nacional de
España) on a genocide case that the foundation had brought before it. In May, two
members of the organization Relatives of the Detained-Disappeared of Guatemala
(Familiares de Detenidos-Desaparecidos de Guatemala, FAMDEGUA) were
assaulted outside their Guatemala City office.Two armed men forced their way into
their car and interrogated them about the organization’s work while driving them
around the city, before releasing the two FAMDEGUA activists and escaping in
their car. The Center for Studies, Information and Basis for Social Action (Centro
de Estudios, Investigación y Bases para la Acción Social, CEIBAS) reported that its
office was repeatedly burgled between February and May, and the Association for
Justice and Reconciliation (Asociación Justicia y Reconciliación, AJR) reported that
its president was attacked and wounded by a man with a knife,who threatened him
and other witnesses in a criminal complaint that the organization had brought
against General Ríos Montt and other former military commanders for genocide
and crimes against humanity. In June, an Amnesty International representative
undertaking research on human rights in Guatemala was the victim of an apparent
abduction attempt by unidentified assailants in her Guatemala City hotel.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The international community continued to play a prominent role in monitoring
the Guatemalan government’s compliance with the 1996 peace accords and
with international human rights norms. The United Nations and the Organization
of American States provided mechanisms to which Guatemalans could denounce
human rights abuses by the government. The United States also monitored
Guatemala’s human rights record, though its responses to this record varied, with
the Senate penalizing its shortcomings while the United States Trade Representative
rewarded its perceived gains.
United Nations and
the Organization of American States (OAS)
The United Nations verification mission,MINUGUA, continued its institutionbuilding
activities as well as playing a central role in monitoring compliance with
the peace accords. MINUGUA’s reports contained detailed human rights analyses
and indicated that significant aspects of the accords remained unimplemented. In
September, MINUGUA issued a human rights report for the period July 2000 to
June 2001, and at other times it issued communiqués on specific human rights
abuses.
The U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, Param
Cumaraswamy, visited Guatemala in May and found that the climate of insecurity
for members of the legal community continued to undermine the rule of law. He noted that recommendations he made after a 1999 visit had been largely ignored by
government authorities.
In November 2000, the Committee against Torture expressed concern about a
“deterioration” of the human-rights situation in Guatemala, and recommended,
among other things, that independent commissions be established to monitor the
performance of the police and to investigate cases of kidnapping and “disappearances.”
In May, the Committee on the Rights of the Child met with the Guatemalan government
to discuss its implementation of the Rights of the Child. The committee
expressed concern that violence against children was increasing in Guatemala and
urged the government to adopt legislation that would protect the children’s rights.
In July, the Human Rights Committee, responding to a report submitted by the
Guatemala government, commended Guatemala for providing resources for
human rights institutions, yet expressed concern at ongoing “glaring and systematic
violations.” It recommended that the Guatemalan government give priority to
investigating and bringing to justice the perpetrators of human rights violations.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued four case reports on
Guatemala. In one, it urged the government to reform provisions of the civil code
that imposed unequal spousal and familial obligations on women and men. In the
other three, it called for the government to investigate and punish extrajudicial executions,
forced disappearances and other serious human rights violations committed
by the security forces during the 1980s and 1990s, and to compensate victims’
families.
United States
In July, the United States Senate voted to maintain a ban on regular military
training and funding for Guatemala’s military. The report that accompanied the
Senate foreign operations bill cited the Guatemalan government’s failure to dismantle
the EMP and to address the deteriorating human rights situation.
In October 2000, the United States Trade Representative (USTR) took the
unprecedented step of initiating a review of Guatemala’s status as a beneficiary of
the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) largely in response to the failure
of government authorities to adequately punish anti-union violence. A review
examines a country’s compliance with certain internationally-recognized workers’
rights to determine its eligibility for GSP tariff benefits. In May 2001, the Bush
administration’s new USTR lifted the review of Guatemala’s beneficiary status, citing
as positive government steps the reinstatement of illegally dismissed banana
workers, and the conviction of the twenty-two gunmen involved in the October 13,
1999 incident. In fact, the banana workers’ reinstatement was the result of a
negotiated settlement between the workers and management not governmental
intervention.
HAITI
Worsening human rights conditions, mounting political turmoil, and a
declining economy marked President Jean-Bertrand’s Aristide first year
back in office. The investigation into the murder of crusading journalist Jean
Dominique reached a standstill, with the judge assigned to the case receiving little
cooperation from the police and other government bodies. The work of human
rights defenders became increasingly dangerous, as several received serious death
threats.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Aristide won the presidency in November 2000, in an election that was boycotted
by credible opposition candidates because of the government’s failure to
remedy the deeply flawed results of the May 2000 legislative and local elections.The
Organization of American States (OAS) and other international observers refused
to monitor the November balloting, in which Aristide faced no serious challengers.
During meetings with U.S. Special Envoy Tony Lake in December 2000,Aristide
committed to undertaking a series of steps to address the country’s serious problems.
The reforms he promised—which included remedying the results of the May
2000 elections,professionalizing the police and judiciary, and strengthening democratic
institutions—were urgently needed. Unfortunately, over the course of the
year,Aristide showed little inclination to follow through on his promises.
Despite many millions in international aid hanging in the balance, progress
toward resolving Haiti’s political crisis was painfully slow.As of late November, no
agreement had yet been reached between Fanmi Lavalas, the party of President
Aristide, and the Democratic Convergence, the main opposition coalition. Talks in
October brokered by OAS envoy Luigi Einaudi, the latest in a long series of negotiations,
broke down almost immediately. Although the two sides had tentatively
agreed to hold new legislative elections in November 2002, they were unable to
resolve other areas of disagreement.
The country’s polarization raised the spectre of political violence. In early January,
a month before Aristide’s inauguration, leaders of so-called popular organizations
that supported Fanmi Lavalas made violent threats against a number of
opposition figures. Speaking at a press conference at the church of Saint Jean Bosco,
Aristide’s former parish, Paul Raymond and René Civil referred to a list of opposition
leaders, religious figures, journalists, and others who they said were opposed
to Aristide’s inauguration. They warned the people on the list to change their position
within three days or face violent retaliation.
With Aristide’s inauguration and the opposition’s declaration of a “parallel government,”
political instability continued. There were several outbreaks of violent
unrest over the course of the year. In mid-March, angry mobs staged street demonstrations and erected burning barricades in parts of Port-au-Prince to protest
opposition claims that the government lacked legitimacy. The office of the main
opposition coalition was firebombed, as pro-government demonstrators called for
the arrest of the opposition’s self-styled “president,” Gerard Gourgue.
At the end of the March wave of violence,which spread to other Haitian cities as
well, at least four people had been killed and many more injured. Police inaction in
the face of violent demonstrations by armed gangs raised doubts about the government’s
interest in quelling the unrest.
A chain of attacks on police stations on July 28, characterized by the government
as a coup attempt, led to a crackdown on the opposition.Although the motives and
circumstances of the attacks were unclear, it was undisputed that armed men clad
in the uniform of Haiti’s disbanded army seized the national police academy for
several hours and later tried to take over several police stations in central Haiti.
Seven people were killed, including five police. At least forty people were arrested
in the wake of the attacks, including many members of the Democratic Convergence.
A number of the arrests were made without a judicial warrant, leading a
coalition of local human rights groups to complain that the arrestees’ prolonged
detention was “arbitrary and illegal.”
Earlier in the year, several hundred former army officers had held demonstrations
to demand the restoration of the army,which was dissolved by President Aristide
in 1995. Many believed that the July attacks were carried out by such former
officers.
In mid-November, large scale rioting broke out in Cap Haitien, Haiti’s second
largest city, following a call by the main opposition coalition for a two-day general
strike to pressure President Aristide and his political allies to relinquish power. The
previous week, smaller demonstrations were held in Petit-Goave and Gonaives,
coastal towns west of the capital.
Although in the first half of the year there were encouraging signs of progress in
the investigation into the April 2000 killings of journalist Jean Dominique and
security guard Jean Claude Louissant, by November the case appeared stalled.
Investigating Judge Claudy Gassant, citing safety concerns, announced that he
would not accept the renewal of his appointment to the case, set to expire in January
2002. Earlier, in June, Judge Gassant had resigned from the case because of security
threats and a lack of government protection.He fled to the United States at that
time but returned after a few weeks, when the minister of justice promised to provide
armed bodyguards and other security guarantees. Gassant faced death threats
and intimidation because of his work.
Stymied by a lack of cooperation from police and other officials, Gassant was
unable even to question some of his top suspects. Arrest warrants issued against
Paul Raymond, René Civil, Richard Solomon, and Franck Joseph had no effect,
with the suspects moving freely about the capital.Another leading suspect, Senator
Dany Toussaint, benefited from parliamentary immunity. As of November, more
than three months after receiving Judge Gassant’s request that Toussaint’s immunity
be lifted, the Senate had yet to make any decision on the question. Indeed, the
parliamentary commission charged with examining the request did not even meet
until five weeks after the request was made.
In early November, one of Dominique’s suspected killers was lynched by an
angry mob in Léogane, a town southwest of the capital.He was the second suspect
in the case to die before being questioned. The killing, which police apparently
allowed to take place, further hindered the investigation of the case. Judge Gassant,
who witnessed the murder, announced two days later his decision to leave the case.
Ivorian journalist Abdoulaye Guedeouengue—who was abducted, beaten, and
robbed in May—had been investigating the Dominique murder at the time of his
capture.He was reportedly warned by the kidnappers to stop looking into the case.
As the Guedeouengue case indicated, the media came under increasing pressure
to limit its reporting. On October 12, Jean Robert Delciné, a journalist with Radio
Haiti Inter, was hit by police while investigating a police killing in Cite Soleil.Other
Radio Haiti Inter journalists also reported threats and harassment over the course
of the year, in some instances by men believed to be police. On October 2,members
of a so-called popular organization close to Fanmi Lavalas threatened radio journalist
Jean-Marie Mayard, telling him that he would be a “dead man” if his reporting
did not favor the Aristide government.According to Reporters without Borders,
a France-based international press freedom organization, ten journalists were
threatened or attacked by people connected to Fanmi Lavalas during the first ten
months of the year.
The justice system remained largely dysfunctional, with many crimes going
unpunished. In June, in a speech to police, President Aristide announced a “zero
tolerance”crime policy, stating that it was not necessary to bring criminals to court.
His words were widely interpreted by Haitians as an invitation to vigilante justice
and police violence. Human rights groups reported that in the months following
the speech, dozens of suspected thieves were killed by mobs.
The increasing politicization of the Haitian National Police (HNP) raised additional
concerns. The reluctance of police to intervene in certain situations to prevent
political violence, typically when opposition supporters were in danger, was
frequently in evidence. In an open letter to the police leadership sent in October, the
nongovernmental National Coalition for Haitian Rights (NCHR) deplored the
HNP’s lack of political neutrality. The letter drew attention to the failure of the
police to arrest certain criminal suspects pursuant to valid arrest orders and, in contrast,
the willingness of the police to arbitrarily arrest others. It also claimed that
several police officers, previously dismissed for involvement in serious human
rights violations, had been reintegrated into the force.
Accountability for past abuses remained elusive. Although the success of the
Raboteau trial in 2000 raised hopes of further such prosecutions, the prospect of
achieving justice for many other notorious crimes seemed remote. In a letter sent
on August 28, the seventh anniversary of the assassination of Father Jean Marie
Vincent, NCHR criticized what it called the “systematisation of impunity.”
Former Gen. Prosper Avril,who headed the country’s government for two years
after a 1988 coup, was arrested on May 28 on charges of assault, torture and illegal
arrest. Avril’s rule was characterized by egregious human rights abuses. Although
efforts to prosecute such crimes were all too rare in Haiti, the circumstances and
timing of Avril’s arrest suggested that it was politically motivated. The arrest was
made on the basis of a 1996 warrant that had been ignored for years; it was acted upon only after Avril attended a highly-publicized meeting of the main opposition
coalition. A number of political figures who were tortured under Avril’s government,
but had since joined the current opposition,were unwilling to testify against
Avril regarding past abuses. In June, a court of appeals judge ordered that Avril be
freed, but the head of the public prosecutor’s office refused to sign the release form,
blocking the defendant’s release.
Prison conditions remained dire, with the country’s desperately overcrowded
prisons and jails being largely filled with pretrial detainees. Detention facilities
lacked the necessary infrastructure and many failed to provide medical care, sufficient
food,or even potable water. A study of the prison system published by the Vera
Institute for Justice found “a serious problem of malnutrition.” In mid-November,
five prisoners were killed by police who were putting down a riot at the National
Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince.
Of all Latin American and Caribbean countries, Haiti continued to have the
highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS, although treatment was largely unavailable.
According to UNICEF, some 74,000 Haitian children were orphaned because of the
AIDS pandemic.Many of the orphans were themselves HIV-positive.
Determined to escape Haiti’s dire conditions, thousands of Haitians tried to
leave the country in overcrowded and rickety boats.Many of them, hoping to reach
the United States, were intercepted by U.S. coast guard cutters and immediately
repatriated, while an unknown number died at sea.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights defenders came under increasing pressure in 2001, with several
receiving death threats. In October, both NCHR and the Platform for Haitian
Human Rights Organizations (POHDH) were threatened following the publication
of a strongly-worded letter from NCHR to the police leadership.
Pierre Espérance, the director of NCHR in Haiti, also received several menacing
calls in August. The different callers warned him that if NCHR continued to press
for justice in the Jean Dominique case, he would be eliminated. Espérance had reason
to take such threats seriously, having suffered an assassination attempt in 1999.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
At this writing, some U.S. $500 million in international aid remained frozen,
reflecting donor governments’ impatience with Haiti’s inability to resolve the political
crisis.
United Nations
In November 2000, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan recommended against
renewing the mandate of the United Nations International Civilian Support Mission
in Haiti (MICAH). In an usually critical report to the General Assembly, he noted that over the previous several months, “Haiti’s political and electoral crisis
has deepened, polarising its political class and civil society.” In light of such conditions
he concluded that MICAH’s ability to function successfully was limited.
MICAH’s mandate ended on February 6, the day before President Aristide entered
office.
In July, Secretary-General Annan reiterated that the resolution of the political
crisis was a prerequisite for the resumption of aid to Haiti.
Adama Dieng, the United Nations independent expert on the human rights situation
in Haiti, issued his last report on conditions in Haiti in January. In it, he drew
attention to the deterioration of the system of justice, noting the “politicization of
the police, arbitrary arrests, prolonged detention without trial, the climate of violence
and also the deplorable health conditions in the prisons.”Dieng,who resigned
from his post to work for the Rwanda war crimes tribunal, had not been replaced
as of November.
The U.N. Commission on Human Rights, issuing a chairperson’s statement in
April, called upon the Haitian government to thoroughly investigate politically
motivated crimes, including the murder of journalist Jean Dominique; to prosecute
the perpetrators of such crimes; to institute legal proceedings against perpetrators
of human rights violations identified by the National Commission for Truth
and Justice; and to ensure the neutrality of the police.
Organization of American States (OAS)
As in 1999, Luigi Einaudi, assistant secretary-general of the Organization of
American States (OAS), carried out intensive efforts to break Haiti’s political deadlock.
He made a number of trips to Haiti, including in February, April,May, June,
and October. In May and June, Einaudi visited Haiti in the company of OAS Secretary
General Cesar Gaviria.Their efforts to mediate the crisis did not,however, bear
fruit.
In early October, the OAS established a new “Group of Friends on Haiti”—made
up of Canada, Argentina, the Bahamas, Belize, Chile, Guatemala, Mexico, the
Dominican Republic, United States, and Venezuela—in hopes of restarting the
stalled negotiations.
United States
In September, on the tenth anniversary of the military coup that drove him from
power, President Aristide announced that the United States had returned thousands
of pages of documents gathered from the offices of the Haitian military and
the paramilitary Revolutionary Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti
(FRAPH).The documents,which detailed paramilitary abuses after the 1991 coup,
had been seized by U.S. forces in September 1994. It was believed, however, that the
names of U.S. citizens had been excised from the returned documents, a condition
that previous Haitian administrations had publicly rejected.
The failure of the United States to extradite Emmanuel “Toto”Constant, former
FRAPH leader, continued to thwart Haitians’hopes for justice for past abuses.Constant, previously an informer for the Central Intelligence Agency, remained in
Queens, New York, having been extended protection from deportation. Other
members of the coup-era high command were also resident in the United States.
European Union
Finding that “respect for democratic principles has not yet been re-established
in Haiti,” in January the European Union (E.U.) terminated consultations with
Haiti that had been initiated under the Cotonou Agreement, an aid pact linking the
E.U. with African, Caribbean, and Pacific states. As a result, all direct budget aid to
Haiti was suspended.
MEXICO
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
By ending seven decades of one-party rule in Mexico, the election of President
Vicente Fox in 2000 created an historic opportunity to tackle the country’s longstanding
human rights problems. In his inaugural address, President Fox promised
to seize this opportunity and, in the following months, his administration took
encouraging steps toward that end. However, by November, significant progress
was still needed in a variety of areas.
President Fox appointed several people known for their promotion of human
rights to his cabinet, including Foreign Minister Jorge G. Castañeda and National
Security Adviser Adolfo Aguilar Zínser. He also created a new post, the special
ambassador for human rights and democracy, to which he appointed Mariclaire
Acosta, for years one of the country’s most outspoken human rights advocates. (In
September, the position was reconfigured as deputy minister for Human Rights
and Democracy within the Ministry of Foreign Relations.)
The Fox administration made a crucial break with Mexico’s past by opening the
country to international scrutiny by human rights monitors. In December, Fox
announced that he would eliminate visa restrictions that had made it difficult for
foreign monitors to gain access to the country on short notice. In March, addressing
the U.N.Commission on Human Rights, Foreign Minister Castañeda extended
“a permanent invitation to the representatives of international human rights
mechanisms to visit Mexico.” In May, the Foreign Ministry co-sponsored a seminar
with the office of the United Nations High Commissioner on Human Rights on
procedures for investigating torture. In July, it invited the president of the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights to visit Mexico to examine the government’s
compliance with past commission recommendations.
Under Fox’s leadership,Mexico became more active in promoting the concept
of the universality of human rights principles, a notion that was anathema to previous Mexican governments. In February, the foreign minister authorized the
extradition of former Argentine navy officer Ricardo Miguel Cavallo to face charges
in Spain for atrocities committed during Argentina’s “dirty war.” Cavallo filed a
judicial appeal challenging the constitutionality of the foreign minister’s ruling,
and at this writing a ruling on the appeal was pending.
In October, the Foreign Ministry began working with congressional leaders to
secure the ratification of the Rome Statute for the International Criminal Court,
together with a reform of the Mexican constitution that would allow international
tribunals, in some instances, to exercise jurisdiction over Mexican citizens. The
Foreign Ministry also sought the ratification of several other international human
rights treaties, including the Inter-American Convention on Forced Disappearance
of Persons; the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to
War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity; the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution, and child
pornography; and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts. Finally, the ministry
sought ratification of a treaty recognizing the competence of the U.N. Human
Rights Committee to hear individual communications.
In addition to assuming new international human rights obligations, the government
promised to promote respect for human rights abroad—in particular, the
rights of Mexican citizens residing in the United States. President Fox’s February
meeting with U.S. President George W. Bush led to the creation of a working group
consisting of top officials of both governments with the aim of achieving safe, legal,
and humane migration. In October, the Presidential Office for Mexicans Abroad
announced that it had reached an agreement with municipal health authorities in
U.S. cities to ensure that Mexicans would receive medical attention regardless of
their residency status. The National Human Rights Commission (Comisión
Nacional de Derechos Humanos, CNDH), the government’s autonomous human
rights ombudsman, also made migrants’ rights a priority.
Unfortunately, the strides made in Mexican foreign policy were not matched on
the domestic front,where President Fox promised to intervene in several high profile
human rights cases. One was that of General José Francisco Gallardo, who was
jailed in 1993 after he openly called for the creation of a military human rights
ombudsman’s office. In 1997, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) called for Gallardo’s immediate release; yet, as of late 2001, Gallardo
remained in jail. In February, his family petitioned the Supreme Court to order the
president to comply with the IACHR’s recommendation. A court ruling was pending
at this writing.
A second case involved peasant environmentalists Teodoro Cabrera García and
Rodolfo Montiel Flores,who were illegally detained and apparently tortured by soldiers
in May 1999 and then convicted of drug and weapons crimes in August 2000
on the basis of evidence that was planted on them at the time of their detention. In
January, President Fox promised that his government would conduct a thorough
investigation of the case.The Foreign Ministry’s human rights office provided legal
advice to the lawyers handling a judicial appeal on behalf of Montiel and Cabrera.
In July, a federal appeals court upheld the conviction of Cabrera and Montiel and they remained in prison until November, when President Fox issued an order for
their release as a demonstration of his government’s commitment to human rights
norms. The investigation of the torture allegations was left to the military prosecutor’s
office, which had an extremely poor record of probing abuses by the military.
Little progress was made in addressing the underlying problems of the justice
system that gave rise to cases like these. Judicial oversight of police practices was
seriously inadequate. Judges cited legal precedents that vitiated human rights guarantees
by accepting the use of evidence obtained through violations. The lenient
sentences given to convicted torturers served to reinforce the climate of impunity.
Soldiers involved in counternarcotics operations also committed abuses against
civilians. In January, soldiers on patrol near the town of Lindavista in Guerrero state
shot at two unarmed civilians, killing fourteen-year-old Esteban Martínez Nazario.
In August, the Baja California state human rights prosecutor’s office reported that
soldiers had been caught carrying out illegal detentions without arrest warrants. In
October, the Center for Border Studies and Promotion of Human Rights reported
complaints of illegal detentions carried out by soldiers in the Tamaulipas.
Under Mexican law, cases involving army abuses were subject to military rather
than civilian jurisdiction. The military justice system, however, did not adequately
investigate and prosecute alleged abuses by the army. Its operations generally lacked
transparency and accountability. Following the January killing in Lindavista, however,
military authorities did arrest and begin proceedings against five soldiers and
an army officer.But this was exceptional and it occurred only after local people took
the extraordinary measure of surrounding the army camp and refusing to allow
anyone to leave until the killing was investigated. After a day-long siege, army and
state government officials arrived and signed an agreement to investigate the shooting
and punish those responsible. According to Lindavista residents, the boy who
died was the seventh member of the community to be killed by soldiers in recent
years, but his was the first case to be investigated.However, residents who organized
the protest afterwards reported receiving threats from military personnel.
There was considerable debate within the Fox government over how to address
past human rights violations, such as the 1968 massacre of student protestors in
Mexico City, and the 1997 massacre of villagers in Acteal,Chiapas. In his inaugural
address in December 2000, the president promised to establish a truth commission
to investigate violations committed under previous governments. In the months
that followed, however, his administration sent mixed signals about whether it
would pursue the plan, with Secretary of Government Santiago Creel Miranda
openly opposing the idea.
Another area requiring attention was the protection of labor rights. Mexico
failed to guarantee free and fair union elections, despite the previous government’s
May 2000 pledge “to promote the use of eligible voter lists and secret ballot elections”
as a step toward this. For example, at the Duro Bag Manufacturing Corporation
in Río Bravo, union elections in March were conducted by open ballot, with
workers required to vote aloud in front of company management and representatives
of the company-favored Revolutionary Confederation of Workers and Peasants
(CROC).
Legitimate labor organizing activity continued to be obstructed by collective bargaining agreements negotiated between management and pro-business, nonindependent
unions. These agreements frequently failed to provide worker benefits
beyond the minimum standards mandated by Mexican legislation, and workers
often only learned of the agreements when they grew discontented and attempted
to organize independent unions. However, when workers sought to displace nonindependent
unions, they often suffered anti-union discrimination. In early January
2001, for example, five workers at the Kukdong International México S.A. de
C.V. (“Kukdong”) apparel factory in Puebla were discharged, allegedly for asserting
workplace grievances and attempting to organize an independent union to replace
the CROC. A week later, a majority of the Kukdong workforce began a work stoppage
in solidarity with the fired workers.When the stoppage ended, many of the
workers who had participated were denied reinstatement by Kukdong and CROC
representatives. A concerted campaign on behalf of the workers was mounted by
labor and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in the United States and Mexico,
and largely in response to this effort,multinational corporate buyers began to
exert pressure on Kukdong management to address the situation. From mid-February,
most workers were allowed to return to the factory, and by September,workers
had established an independent union and signed a collective agreement with
the company (which had changed its name to Mex Mode).
Certain sections of the population were more vulnerable to rights violations.
Among the most vulnerable groups, according to CNDH President José Luis Soberanes,
were migrants and indigenous people. Gays and lesbians were also targeted
for abuse. In August, for instance, gay activist César Salazar Gongora was kidnapped
in the city of Merida, Yucatan, by three young men who raped him, beat
him with a stone, cut his ear with a knife and then abandoned him in a nearby village.
Salazar Gongora submitted a complaint to local prosecutors. In the days that
followed he received dozens of phone calls threatening him with death for reporting
the crime. An investigation was launched, but according to local rights advocates,
it made no headway until Salazar Gongora, his lawyer and two gay rights
advocates met with the state’s attorney general and obtained from him a promise to
replace the investigator attached to the case.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In October 2001, human rights lawyer Digna Ochoa was found shot to death in
her Mexico City office. A note left by her side warned members of the Miguel
Agustín Pro Juarez Human Rights Center, where Ochoa had worked for several
years, that the same could happen to them. Ochoa had been subject to repeated
threats in recent years because of her work on high profile human rights cases.
(Among the people she had defended were alleged guerrillas jailed during the
1990s, and environmental activists Rodolfo Montiel and Teodoro Cabrera Garcia.)
She was abducted twice in 1999 and, on the second occasion, interrogated by her
assailants. The Zedillo government had failed to conduct thorough investigations
of these incidents.
In 1999, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights had ordered the Mexican government to take special measures to protect the lives of Ochoa and her colleagues.
Ochoa received police protection until she left the country in 2000 to work
in the United States, but the protection lapsed upon her return to Mexico in April
2001. The Fox government promised to take all possible steps to bring those
responsible to justice.
In addition to showing increased openness to international human rights monitors,
the Fox government was more willing than its predecessors to consult its critics
at home. In March, the Foreign Ministry’s human rights office arranged a
meeting between the commission that coordinates the human rights agendas of
distinct government ministries and a wide range of human rights organizations. It
then developed a proposal, based largely on the recommendations of the NGOs, for
a “Dialogue Mechanism” that would allow NGOs to contribute to the design and
implementation of Mexican human rights policy.At this writing, the proposal had
not been implemented.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In May, U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers
Param Cumaraswamy visited Mexico to assess the justice system.He met the attorney
general, the presidents of the CNDH and the Supreme Court, and other senior
officials, as well as NGO representatives. He reported that impunity remained a
serious problem within the Mexican judicial system.
Organization of American States (OAS)
In July, the IACHR president Claudio Grossman visited Mexico to assess the new
government’s compliance with past commission recommendations.Working with
the Foreign Ministry’s human rights office, the IACHR obtained amicable resolutions
in several pending cases. It also issued two new case reports on Mexico and
accepted a further case for consideration.
United States
In January, in its annual human rights report, the U.S.Department of State criticized
“widespread impunity” that “continues to be a serious problem among the
security forces” and noted that the government’s efforts to improve human rights
“continued to meet with limited success.” Despite these criticisms, however, in its
relations with Mexico, the U.S. focused less on strong bilateral action to promote
human rights than on issues such as economic relations, immigration control, and
narcotics.
In April, the U.S. National Administrative Office (NAO)—one of the three
national agencies established under the labor side agreement of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) to investigate charges of labor rights violation in member countries—released a report in which it confirmed allegations made by
workers in two auto parts factories in Tamaulipas of chemical exposure and injuries
from poor ergonomic conditions. The report found that the Mexican government
had failed to fulfill its obligations under NAFTA’s labor side accord to ensure safe
working conditions. Specifically, the Mexican authorities had failed to conduct
meaningful workplace inspections, to respond to workers who filed complaints
with government agencies, and to provide proper compensation to workers for
work-related injuries and illnesses. The NAO recommended ministerial consultations
between the U.S and Mexican governments to discuss Mexico’s failure to meet
its obligations. If these consultations failed to resolve the matter, a panel could be
convened to determine appropriate actions, including economic sanctions against
the Mexican government. Under the labor side accord, economic sanctions could
only be applied if a government was found to have persistently failed to enforce its
domestic labor laws in three areas: occupational safety and health, child labor, and
minimum wage.
Most of the other twenty-three cases submitted since NAFTA went into effect
involved primarily the right to freedom of association, which can lead, at most, to
an NAO request for intergovernmental consultation. In the absence of a more effective
enforcement mechanism, the labor side accord had a limited impact on workers
rights in Mexico.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Military Injustice: Mexico’s Failure to Punish Army Abuses, 12/01
Trading Away Rights: The Unfulfilled Promise of NAFTA’s Labor Side Agreement,
4/01
PERU
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In a series of dramatic developments in late 2000, the repressive and discredited
government of President Alberto Fujimori disintegrated, generating new hope for
democracy and human rights.Although Peru was faced with the legacy of a decade
of authoritarian rule, both the interim administration ofValentín Paniagua and the
new government of President Alejandro Toledo took important steps in 2001 to
strengthen democratic institutions and the rule of law, while starting to address
long neglected human rights problems.
In November 2000, after Fujimori had gained a third consecutive term of office
in widely discredited elections held the previous May, his government collapsed in
the midst of a major political corruption scandal. Fujimori fled to Japan, his parents’
native country, from where he submitted his resignation by fax. The Peruvian Congress declared Fujimori morally unfit for office and appointed its president,
Valentín Paniagua, to head a caretaker government. Paniagua’s eight-month transitional
government achieved notable advances for human rights. It leveled the
playing field for new presidential elections, held in April 2001. A special prosecutor,
whom Fujimori had appointed in his final month in office, began to unravel a vast
web of corruption spun by Fujimori’s former advisor Vladimiro Montesinos. Paniagua
formed a truth commission to investigate responsibility for the systematic
human rights violations and guerrilla abuses committed during Peru’s twenty-year
counter-insurgency war, beginning in 1980. His government also took steps to
improve prison conditions, and speeded up the release of people falsely convicted
or charged with crimes of terrorism by Fujimori’s widely condemned anti-terrorism
courts.
On July 28, 2001, President Alejandro Toledo was sworn in after narrowly
defeating Alán García’s bid for a second mandate in a run-off vote in June (García
had been president from 1985-1990). Toledo, who had led the opposition against
Fujimori for two years, said that his government was committed to fully reestablishing
human rights, accountability, and the rule of law, and he appointed former
members of Peru’s nongovernmental human rights community to his cabinet.
Both the interim administration and the Toledo government took important
steps to bring members of the Fujimori government to justice for human rights
violations and corruption. On June 23, Vladimiro Montesinos, the disgraced former
de facto chief of the National Intelligence Service (Servicio de Inteligencia
Nacional, SIN) and virtual co-ruler of Peru with President Fujimori, was arrested
in Caracas,Venezuela, after eight months on the run.After an unsuccessful attempt
to obtain asylum in Panama in September 2000,Montesinos had returned clandestinely
to Peru in October, evaded capture, and escaped by yacht to Venezuela.
Venezuela deported Montesinos to Peru,where he was imprisoned pending trial on
charges of corruption and human rights violations.
In May, special prosecutor José Ugaz reported that seventy-four former government
officials, judges, legislators and businessmen were being held on a wide range
of corruption charges, and that U.S. $153 million held in foreign bank accounts by
Montesinos and his cronies had been frozen.By November,more than 1,000 people
were under investigation for corruption, according to a senior judicial official.
Many were exposed by the discovery and exhibition in Congress of secret videos
filmed by Montesinos at the SIN’s Lima headquarters, showing them accepting
bribes from the former intelligence chief. Those detained included former army
commanders Gen.Nicolás de Bari Hermoza Ríos and Gen. José Villanueva Ruesta,
during whose command the army had come under Montesinos’ indirect control.
Altogether, more than thirty senior military officers were accused of corruption,
drug trafficking, wiretapping of government opponents, extrajudicial executions,
and other crimes. Nineteen of them were in detention or under house arrest in
October 2001.
On August 27, Congress voted unanimously to remove Fujimori’s immunity
from prosecution as head of state. On September 5, Attorney General Nelly
Calderón filed charges against him of murder, causing grave injuries, and “disappearances.”
Fujimori was accused of being co-author, along with Montesinos,of the extrajudicial execution in 1991 of fifteen people, including an eight-year-old child,
at a fund-raising party in a poor tenement in Lima’s Barrios Altos district, and the
“disappearance” in 1992 of nine students and a professor from La Cantuta University.
Both crimes were attributed to the Colina Group, a paramilitary death squad
answering to Montesinos as de facto head of the SIN, for which Fujimori exercised
ultimate responsibility. By June, nineteen alleged Colina Group members were
already facing charges for the Barrios Altos massacre, including several who had
been released in 1995 under two sweeping amnesty laws approved by the Fujimoricontrolled
Congress. On September 13, Supreme Court justice José Luis Lecaros
issued an international warrant to Interpol for Fujimori’s arrest, pending the submission
to Japan of a formal extradition request. The Japanese government, which
had swiftly recognized Fujimori’s claim to Japanese nationality, stated repeatedly
that its laws prohibited the extradition of its citizens.
The truth commission established by interim President Paniagua in June got off
to a slow start due to initial disagreements over its composition. Human rights
groups criticized the Paniagua cabinet’s decision to include a former pro-Fujimori
congresswoman,Beatriz Alva Hart, in the seven-person commission, headed by the
rector of the Catholic University, Salomón Lerner. After taking office, President
Toledo finally confirmed Hart in her post, and he himself appointed five extra
members, including a retired army general. The commission was mandated to
investigate violations of the collective rights of Peru’s Andean and native communities
as well as violations of individual rights such as extrajudicial executions, torture,
and “disappearances.” It was also empowered to hold public hearings, and to
name those it found responsible for abuses and human rights violations.. Although
government officials were required by law to provide support to and cooperate with
the commission, it was not given powers to subpoena them to testify. The commission
had plans to establish regional offices to collect information in the rural zones
most affected by the armed conflict.
Abuses by guerrilla groups continued. Although states of emergency were no
longer in force in any part of the country, isolated pockets of armed guerrilla activity
were still reported. In the Alta Huallaga region in Huánuco and San Martín
departments, Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas murdered fourteen
civilian non-combatants in separate incidents in March. The victims were alleged
to have been former guerrillas or sympathizers who their captors accused of collaborating
with the government. Remnants of the Shining Path also continued to
operate, reportedly in alliance with cocaine traffickers, in the jungle regions of
Junín and Ucayali.Concerns continued that Asháninka Indians were being forcibly
recruited and forced to work for the guerrillas. On August 7, four policemen on a
mission to intercept a Shining Path column were killed after being ambushed by
guerrillas in the jungle near Satipo. The Shining Path was reported to have kidnapped
fifteen Asháninkas, whose names were not given for fear of reprisals. Incidents
like these confronted the new government with the challenge of mounting an
effective response to terrorism while avoiding the human rights abuses of earlier
years.
There was steady progress in securing the release of scores of prisoners falsely
accused or unjustly convicted of terrorism under the anti-terrorism laws introduced by the Fujimori government in 1992.Between November 2000 and mid-July,
the government issued 144 pardons and commuted fifty-two sentences on the recommendations
of an ad-hoc commission appointed by Fujimori to vet petitions
for a presidential pardon. Nongovernmental human rights groups, which had
themselves forwarded applications for pardons, however, urged the government to
approve releases more quickly. By early August, more than one hundred cases presented
by human rights organizations and the churches still awaited government
approval. The situation of hundreds of peasants still affected by terrorism arrest
warrants dating back for years was somewhat eased by a law passed in June permitting
judges to suspend the investigation, or to allow prisoners to testify voluntarily
without being detained.
By October, the government had not announced any plans to review the s
entences and trials of more than 2,000 prisoners who had been convicted of terrorism
or treason by anti-terrorism courts.These courts’procedures systematically
violated due process and had been internationally condemned. In May, however,
the Supreme Council of Military Justice, Peru’s highest military court, announced
that four Chilean members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement
(Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru, MRTA), who had been sentenced to
life imprisonment for treason in 1994 by a “faceless” military court, would receive
a new trial in a civilian court. The decision promised to put into effect a 1999 ruling
by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which Fujimori had cited as a
pretext for withdrawing Peru from the court’s jurisdiction. In June, a civilian antiterrorism
court presided over by Judge Marcos Ibazeta re-tried U.S. citizen Lori
Berenson, who had been sentenced in 1996 by a faceless military court to life
imprisonment for treason. Berenson had been found guilty of participating in a
foiled plot to take members of Congress hostage in order to obtain the release of
MRTA prisoners. After a three-month trial in open court, at which her defense
counsel was permitted to cross-examine witnesses, Berenson received a twentyyear
sentence for collaborating with the group.
Some positive measures were taken to tackle Peru’s inhumane prison conditions,
another legacy of years of neglect of basic human rights. Overcrowding was
severe, with more than 27,000 prisoners occupying facilities built for a maximum
of 20,000. Long sentences and the habit of incarcerating offenders before trial contributed
to the problem. The problem of overcrowding was compounded by insufficient
food, poor hygiene, and inadequate medical services. More than half the
prisons had seriously inadequate infrastructure and facilities. At the beginning of
the year, two-thirds of the prisons were controlled by the police rather than by
trained prison officers. Extortion and violence by guards was common.
Inmates convicted on serious charges, such as drug trafficking and terrorism,
were not entitled to any remission for good conduct.Moreover, for years prisoners
convicted of acts of terrorism had been kept locked up all day with minimal access
to recreation areas and rights to family visits. In March, the Ministry of Justice
introduced new rules allowing prisoners out of their cells between 6:00 am and 6:00
pm, more frequent and longer visits by relatives, and access to defense lawyers in
private. Regulations were expected to enter force in September 2001 establishing
this as a uniform regime for all inmates. Despite these advances, no action was
taken to close down the isolated high-security prison of Challapalca, located at 14,000 feet in the Andes near Puno, whose oxygen-thin air and freezing temperatures
made it a serious health hazard.Although some inmates were moved to other
facilities, fifty continued to be held there.
Press freedom benefited almost immediately from the collapse of the Fujimori
government and the dismantling of the SIN in September 2000. In December 2000,
for example, Baruch Ivcher, owner of Channel 2-Frecuencia Latina, who was
stripped of his Peruvian nationality in 1997 and deprived of his controlling shares
in the station because of its reporting of abuses committed by the SIN, returned
from exile and a court later restored his ownership of the company. Several media
owners were facing charges, however, for accepting bribes from Montesinos in
exchange for favoring the Fujimori government.
In the provinces, journalists continued to face threats and legal action in retaliation
for critical coverage of local authorities and politicians. Local radio was particularly
vulnerable. Of thirty complaints monitored from January to July by the
Press and Society Institute (Instituto Prensa y Sociedad, IPYS), a non-governmental
press freedom advocacy group, twenty-eight were received from outside Lima,
and twenty-two affected radio stations. In February, the Human Rights Ombudsman
presented to Congress a bill to repeal article 374 of the Criminal Code that
penalizes defamation of public authorities.The bill was still under consideration at
the time of writing.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Both the Paniagua and Toledo governments expressed support and appreciation
for the work of human rights monitors. Human rights organizations made a vital
contribution to the public debate in the transitional months before Toledo’s election.
Both governments appointed human rights advocates with long experience in
nongovernmental organizations to their cabinets. The organizations grouped
together in the widely respected National Human Rights Coordinating Group
(Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, CNDDHH) successfully advocated
that a truth commission be appointed before the elected president took office
in July, and it obtained the agreement of both candidates to support the initiative.
In September, President Toledo appointed CNDDHH’s executive director, Sofía
Macher, as a member of the commission.
The Human Rights Ombudsman’s office published in November 2000 a comprehensive
report on “disappearances” between 1980 and 1996. Basing its data
mainly on files from the Attorney General’s office, the report documented 4,022
cases of “disappearance” in which the fate of the victims was still unknown. In an
update published in November 2001, the ombudsman put the total number at
6,362, including cases recorded by human rights groups but not officially reported.
In November 2000, the offices of two CNDDHH member organizations, Peace
and Hope (Paz y Esperanza) and the Human Rights Commission (Comisión de
Derechos Humanos, COMISEDH), suffered break-ins and the theft of data storage
equipment. The burglaries occurred soon after the CNDDHH filed a criminal
complaint against those responsible for the Barrios Altos and La Cantuta massacres.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The Human Rights Committee (HRC) criticized abuses in the administration of
justice. In its concluding observations on Peru’s report under article 40 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, published in November 2000, the
HRC called for the government to “review and repeal the 1995 amnesty laws,which
help create an atmosphere of impunity.” The committee also recommended that
Peru “establish an effective mechanism for the review of all sentences imposed by
the military courts for the offences of terrorism and treason,” and expressed concern
about prison conditions.
Organization of American States (OAS)
The human rights bodies of the Organization of American States (OAS) helped
redress some of the abuses of the Fujimori era and promote justice for the victims,
while Peru demonstrated a new commitment to comply with the OAS’s recommendations.
On January 18, Peru’s Congress overturned a July 1999 resolution not
to recognize the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, a resolution
that the court had declared to be inadmissible. In February, the court
ordered Peru to facilitate the return to Baruch Ivcher of his majority shares in the
Channel 2-Frecuencia Latina television network, and pay him damages and compensation
totaling U.S. $70,000. In compliance with recommendations made by the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in December 1998, Peru reinstated
three members of the Constitutional Court who had been dismissed in 1997 for
opposing Fujimori’s re-election plans.
In a landmark decision in March, the Inter-American Court ruled unanimously
that the application of the 1995 amnesty laws to the Barrios Altos case was incompatible
with the American Convention on Human Rights and therefore without
legal effect. It urged Peru to hold accountable those responsible and to compensate
the victims.Within days of the decision, Peruvian police detained several alleged
former members of the Colina death squad on murder charges, including two former
generals. In September, the Inter-American Court responded to a request by
the Peruvian government for clarification of the scope of the Barrios Altos decision,
by affirming that application of the amnesty laws to any other case of human rights
violation would also violate the American Convention. In October, the Supreme
Council ofMilitary Justice annulled its 1995 decision applying the amnesty laws to
the Barrios Altos and La Cantuta cases.
European Union
E.U. financial assistance to Peru was suspended in 1999-2000 under the Fujimori
government. In 2001, aid programs were reestablished, primarily focusing on
institutional and judicial reform, and the fight against poverty.
United States
Amid scandalous revelations about the criminal activities of Vladimiro Montesinos,
the U.S. press published details about Montesinos’ long association with
the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and his pivotal role in U.S. anti-drug
efforts in Peru. In September 2000, the Washington Post reported that the CIA
defended Montesinos in inter-agency reviews and dismissed as “unproven and
irrelevant” reports that he had “orchestrated” human rights violations in the early
1990s. The United States maintained its association with Montesinos well into
2000, according to the newspaper, until evidence emerged that Fujimori’s advisor
had been involved in the illegal sale of assault rifles to left-wing guerrillas in Colombia.
In June, the National Security Archive (NSA), a U.S. non-governmental freedom
of information advocacy group, published documents declassified under the
Freedom of Information Act about the U.S.’s early links with Montesinos in the
1970s. Other documents showed that the U.S. received reports of Montesinos’
growing influence over Fujimori as early as 1990. Apparently following a top-level
decision finally to break off ties with Montesinos, the Federal Bureau of Investigations
gave Peruvian police vital assistance in apprehending him in Caracas in June.
In July,Human Rights Watch wrote to President George W.Bush to express concern
about the shooting down of a plane during a joint U.S.-Peruvian drug surveillance
operation on April 20, causing the deaths of Veronica Bowers, a missionary,
and her infant daughter. Human Rights Watch urged that surveillance pilots be
issued with clear instructions not to use lethal force in the absence of an imminent
threat of violence. A joint U.S.-Peruvian report released by the State Department in
August put the blame for the tragedy on lax procedures and the failure of the Peruvian
pilot to give proper warning.VENEZUELA
As in the past, the most pressing human rights issues facing the government
of President Hugo Chávez involved crime and the criminal justice
system.High levels of violent crime placed great stress on public institutions,whose
level of professionalism was often low.Corruption and violence in the police forces
and the prison system remained endemic, while the judiciary—under-funded,
inefficient, and often corrupt—was incapable of dispensing justice in an efficient
manner.
The extrajudicial execution of criminal suspects by police continued to be a
major human rights problem.A disturbing recent development was the emergence
in some states of organized death squads, acting with impunity and even publishing
their hit lists in local newspapers.
President Chávez’s frequent outbursts against his political and media critics, coupled with his authoritarian style of governance, raised fears of encroachments
on civil liberties and free expression.However, as in previous years, Chávez’s rhetoric
was generally more aggressive than his actions.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In the state of Portuguesa, a death squad composed of off-duty members of the
state police and National Guard was believed responsible for up to one hundred
killings of criminal suspects over the last two years, mainly in the cities of Acarigua
and Araure.Calling itself the “extermination group,”it selected its victims from lists
of wanted criminals openly published in the press. Given the apparent indifference
of the state government, police, and judges to the incidents, the killers reportedly
took to operating in broad daylight aboard police patrol cars. According to press
reports, they extorted large sums of money from those on their hit list and killed
them if they were unable to pay up.
In October 2000, members of the group murdered twenty-three-year-old
Jimmy Rodríguez, a third year law student, and his friend César Agray Meléndez.
Both were well known locally and neither was believed to have criminal connections.
In May,Rodríguez’ father, José Ramón Rodríguez,who had campaigned publicly
to bring his son’s killers to justice, was himself gunned down. A few days later,
Belmiro Gutiérrez, one of the principal witnesses in the Rodríguez-Agray killings,
was also murdered. In July, the government sent two prosecutors and large contingent
of police from Caracas to investigate these incidents.Many witnesses received
death threats.
Human rights groups accused Rodrigo Pérez Pérez, the chief of public security
of the Portuguesa state government, and the former chief of the State Police, Carlos
Navarro, of complicity in the activities of the death squad, but neither had been
charged by October.At least six state police officers, however,were arrested in connection
with the killings. On September 25 a large National Guard and police contingent,
acting on the orders of the attorney general, Isaías Rodríguez, raided the
state police headquarters. According to the press, they found that four of the six
detained officers were not in their cells, which contained liquor and cell phones.
The police also reportedly found illegal weapons, drugs, and the registration documents
of stolen cars in the building.
In June,Attorney General Isaías Rodríguez announced that the government was
also investigating death squad activity in the states of Yaracuy, Miranda,
Anzoátegui, and in metropolitan Caracas. The nongovernmental human rights
group Venezuelan Program for Education and Action on Human Rights (Programa
Venezolano de Educación-Acción en Derechos Humanos, PROVEA) denounced a
pattern of extrajudicial killings in the states of Barinas (with thirty-two such deaths
between January 2000 and June 2001), and Zulia, where ninety-eight people died
in “clashes” with police in 2000, and forty-three in the first four months of 2001.
Police often attempted to disguise deliberate killings by claiming that the victims
were killed in firefights.
In July, the Supreme Court granted a habeas corpus writ filed on behalf of Roberto Javier Hernández Paz,who “disappeared”after intelligence agents arrested
him in his home in the state of Vargas in December 1999. The court ordered the
prosecutor to renew investigations into Hernández’ “disappearance” and bring to
justice those responsible. Hernández was one of four people who “disappeared”
when intelligence agents and army paratroopers committed serious abuses during
efforts to control looting during flooding in Vargas state. In September the public
prosecutor brought charges of enforced disappearance against Jose Yañez Casimiro,
a DISIP officer implicated in the “disappearance” of Oscar Blanco Romero, and
against Justiniano Martínez Carreño for covering up Blanco’s illegal arrest.
The progressive new code of penal procedures, introduced in 1999 under the
government of Rafael Caldera, came under fire as the public security crisis worsened.
With the code being scapegoated for the weaknesses of law enforcement, calls
multiplied for its reform, in particular, to tighten its provisions on parole and pretrial
release, and to eliminate jury trials.
Prison conditions remained inhumane and, because of inter-prisoner violence,
often life-threatening. Despite a significant reduction in the numbers of prisoners
awaiting trial, levels of inmate violence were extremely high, abetted by insufficient
staffing and equipment,widespread corruption among guards, and the unchecked
entry into prisons of narcotics and firearms. In March, two prisoners died and
forty-one were wounded in a gun battle between rival gangs in the El Rodeo prison
in Miranda state. One of the dead, Edgard Alexander Bazán, was killed when he
picked up a hand grenade another prisoner had thrown toward him. The prison
with the worst record of inmate violence was Yare I, in Miranda state,where at least
twenty inmates died in separate incidents from April to August, as gangs competed
to control the market in drugs and weapons.
Venezuela’s treatment of refugees from neighboring Colombia raised serious
concerns. In October 2000, Venezuelan authorities forcibly returned at least
seven asylum seekers who had fled paramilitary violence in their villages, having
barred access to the group by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). In February human rights and church groups expressed
concern about the plight of hundreds of Colombians who had crossed into Zulia
state to escape political violence in Colombia. The refugees, whose presence both
the Venezuelan and Colombian governments initially denied,were reported to be
undocumented and suffering from malnutrition and disease. In March, the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights issued an urgent appeal to the
Venezuelan government not to return the 287 refugees and to guarantee their
safety, provide them with humanitarian assistance, and consider their applications
for refugee status.
In August, the National Assembly approved an Organic Law on Refugees and
Asylum Seekers, drafted with the participation of nongovernmental human rights
groups. The new law prohibited the forcible return of asylum seekers and established
a National Commission for Refugees to consider asylum applications.
According to PROVEA,more than one hundred such applications had been awaiting
consideration since July 1999.
President Chávez’s authoritarian tendencies continued to reveal themselves in
efforts to undermine civil society institutions such as labor unions and the press.
Yet, even as Chávez threatened severe measures—as in May when he proposed
declaring a state of emergency—his actions were rarely as drastic as his more
alarmist critics expected.
On December 3, 2000, at Chávez’s behest, the government held, and won, a
national referendum to remove the leadership of the country’s discredited trade
union federations.The proposal was in breach of treaty obligations mandating that
the government respect the autonomy of labor organizations.After repeated postponements,
new union elections held under the auspices of the National Electoral
Council, a state body, were scheduled for October.
Although press freedom was generally respected, Chávez continued to deliver
blistering attacks on his press critics in his weekly television show and other public
appearances, as well as in calls placed by him to radio and television networks.
Chávez’s aversion to criticism was also evident in his June announcement that “foreigners
who come here to slander Venezuela will be expelled.” His words were
believed to be a reaction to comments made during a visit to Venezuela by Peruvian
presidential candidate Lourdes Flores,who had compared Chávez’s government to
that of deposed President Alberto Fujimori of Peru.
Also in June, the Supreme Court issued a decision interpreting a controversial
clause in Venezuela’s new constitution, a document drafted under Chávez’ direction.
In a much-criticized ruling, the court found that article 58 of the constitution
guaranteeing the right to “timely, truthful, and impartial information” imposed
enforceable obligations on the media.The court held that media outlets must avoid
“publishing false news or news that is manipulated with half truths; disinformation
that denies the opportunity to know the reality of the news; and speculation or
biased information to obtain a goal with regard to someone or something.” The
court also concluded that article 58 required publications to be ideologically pluralistic
unless their editorial line was made explicit.
The Supreme Court ruling raised fears that article 58 would be used to gag press
critics of the government. Indeed, in October, the National Commission of
Telecommunications (Comisión Nacional de Telecomunicaciones, CONATEL)
began an investigation into the conduct of the Venezuelan television network
Globovisión, for allegedly having broadcast “false, misleading or tendentious information,”
an offense under Venezuela’s Radiocommunications Regulations. In September,
the network aired the statement of a taxi driver who claimed that nine
colleagues had been killed by criminals, when in fact only one had died. President
Chavez urged the station to “reflect before it is too late,” and threatened to “apply
mechanisms for the defense of the national interest, the truth, and public order.”
For its error,which it promptly corrected, the station was potentially liable to a fine
or the suspension of its broadcasting license.
On January 7,members of the Directorate ofMilitary Intelligence (Dirección de
Inteligencia Militar, DIM) detained lawyer and academic Pablo Aure Sánchez in
response to a letter he wrote ridiculing the army that was published in a national
newspaper. Aure was stripped of his clothes and spent the night in a cramped cell
without access to a toilet. Although he was released for health reasons three days
later, Aure faced charges under an article 505 of the code of military justice, which
mandates a three- to five-year sentence for anyone who “insults, offends or disparages the armed forces.”Disregarding objections made by the attorney general and
the human rights ombudsman,who argued that military jurisdiction over civilians
was unconstitutional, the military prosecutor refused to turn the case over to the
civilian courts.
On June 24, Venezuelan military intelligence agents arrested Vladimiro Montesinos,
the shadowy head of Peru’s National Intelligence Service and the power
behind the throne of deposed President Alberto Fujimori, in Caracas.Montesinos
was promptly deported to Peru,where he was imprisoned on charges of corruption
and human rights abuse. Since Montesinos fled Peru amidst a bribery scandal in
October 2000, persistent rumors had circulated that he was hiding in Venezuela
with the protection of government officials. The strongest suspicions centered on
members of the Directorate of Intelligence and Prevention Services (Dirección de
los Servicios de Inteligencia y Prevención, DISIP) and on its director, Eliecer Otaiza,
who was fired by Chávez days before Montesinos’ arrest.However, investigations by
the Attorney General’s Office and two parliamentary commissions of inquiry failed
to clarify questions regarding the government’s involvement.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The year began with positive overtures by the Chávez government toward
human rights groups,but little real cooperation resulted. In January,Human Rights
Watch was present as an observer at a meeting on public security convened by Minister
of the Interior and Justice Luis Alfonso Dávila with representatives of the
Venezuelan human rights community, and attended by cabinet ministers, the attorney
general, the president of the Supreme Court, and the human rights ombudsman.
The participants agreed to form a permanent advisory commission to ensure
an ongoing dialogue between the government and human rights groups, particularly
on crime control policy. However, by October the proposal had not been
implemented.
In January, the press reported that Liliana Ortega, executive director of the
respected Committee of Relatives ofVictims of the Events of February-March 1989
(Comité de Familiares de los Víctimas de los Sucesos de Febrero-Marzo de 1989,
COFAVIC), was on a list of persons under investigation by DISIP for “plotting
against the government.” The following month, however, DISIP’s director denied
the allegations.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In March the Human Rights Committee reviewed Venezuela’s record of compliance
with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In its concluding
observations, the committee expressed grave concern at reports of
“disappearances”and extrajudicial executions, and regarding the failure of the state authorities to investigate them and bring those responsible to justice. It also urged
Venezuela to pass a law codifying torture as a crime, and expressed concern that the
extended reform of the judiciary could threaten its independence. In May, the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights called on Venezuela to ratify
the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees and to issue asylum applicants with
appropriate documentation. It considered that Venezuela’s failure to do so “seriously
hinders their enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, including the
rights to work, health and education.”
Organization of American States (OAS)
In its annual report for the year 2000, the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights expressed concern about restrictions on freedom of expression in
Venezuela. The special rapporteur on freedom of expression raised the case of
Pablo Aure as an example of the continuing problems posed by contempt of
authority laws.
In February the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued an
urgent appeal to the Venezuelan government with regard to criminal defamation
proceedings targeting journalist Pablo López Ulacio. The proceedings, brought by
a prominent businessman whom Ulacio had accused of corrupt business practices,
were flawed by the evident partiality of the judges.Yet the government failed to take
the measures requested by the commission, and in July a Caracas judge issued
another order for López’ arrest.
Venezuela also continued to flout a 1996 ruling of the Inter-American Court on
Human Rights. The court had ordered Venezuela to compensate the relatives of
fourteen fishermen extrajudicially executed at El Amparo in Apure state in October
1988, and to bring to justice those responsible.
United States
Neither the Clinton nor Bush administrations commented publicly on human
rights. The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000
highlighted the problem of extrajudicial executions and “disappearances,” noting
that the perpetrators acted with “near impunity.” High-level Venezuelan officials,
including Defense Minister José Vicente Rangel and Foreign Minister Luis Alfonso
Dávila, criticized the report.
ASIA OVERVIEW
The entire Asian region suffered a political earthquake in the aftermath of
the September 11 attacks on the United States. Afghanistan was the epicenter,
but the aftershocks threw domestic politics and international relations into
upheaval.
All countries in the region condemned the September 11 attacks, and in
response to the Bush administration’s challenge, “Are you with us or against us?”
most governments, including North Korea, lined up cautiously on the U.S. side.
Governments from India to China found, in measures to counteract terrorism, new
justifications for longstanding repression. Real enthusiasm, however, was only evident
in the Philippines,Malaysia,Taiwan, and South Korea, and by November,most
Asian leaders were finding that a pro-U.S. position had political costs at home.
Indonesian and Malaysian leaders found that support from important domestic
constituencies could be jeopardized if they seemed to be unconditionally supportive
of the U.S. bombing of a fellow Muslim-majority nation. By November,
Indonesian President Megawati was pleading with President Bush to end the
bombing before Ramadan, the Muslim fasting month, began. In South Asia, India
was clearly worried about the U.S. embrace of Pakistan and the implications for
Pakistani mischief in Kashmir,while Pakistan’s President Musharraf worried about
how he could use alliance with the U.S. to achieve political and economic goals
(halting the U.S. embrace of India, securing the lifting of economic sanctions
against Pakistan) while keeping Islamist forces at bay. For China, the question was
how a war on terrorism could be used to intensify a campaign against splittists in
Xinjiang without the U.S. threatening Chinese interests in Central Asia. China and
the Koreas, mindful of Japanese atrocities against their peoples in World War II,
were concerned about how Japan’s offer of logistical support for U.S. forces might
strengthen forces on Japan’s pro-military right.
But these were all government reactions. The popular reactions across the
region were if anything more important, given the increasing importance of civil
society in most Asian countries. In general, there were widespread expressions of
sympathy both for victims of the September 11 attacks as well as for Afghan civilians.
Large demonstrations against the U.S. airstrikes erupted in October across
Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka,Malaysia, Indonesia, and elsewhere. (Anti-U.S. sentiment
in China after September 11 was actively suppressed by the Chinese government
through controls on the media and the Internet.) In some cases, these protests
reflected the successful portrayal by conservative Muslims of the U.S. effort as an
attack on Islam, but they also expressed a broader discomfort within civil society
about the perceived disproportionate use of power by the U.S. in a devastated country. Intellectuals throughout the region also raised the issue of how U.S. policies,
particularly in the Middle East, had alienated important segments of the Muslim
community.
FRAGILE DEMOCRATIC TRANSITIONS
The September 11 attacks eclipsed many of the human rights issues that had
dominated the first nine months of the year. These included the fragility of democratic
transitions in the region and the dilemmas posed by partial democratization
in the absence of strong political institutions—or in the presence of strong militaries.
Fair elections produced disastrous leaders in Southeast Asia: Joseph Estrada, a
corrupt ex-movie star, ousted from the Philippines presidency in January by Gloria
Macapagal Arroyo, and Abdurrahman Wahid, a nearly blind cleric, ousted from
the Indonesian presidency in July. Estrada remained highly popular among the
country’s poor, and his ouster after military-backed protests from the elite and
middle class in Manila was semi-legal at best. The question arose, which was the
greater danger to Philippine democracy, a shady president with underworld connections
who systematically looted the national treasury but who was nevertheless
the choice of the people, or his less than constitutional ouster? The crisis showed
Philippine political leaders and institutions at their worst: a malleable parliament,
a weak judiciary, and new president whose first instinct in May, in the face of
protests from pro-Estrada forces, was to declare a state of rebellion to arrest political
opponents.
In Thailand the dilemma was similar but less stark. In January, the Thai Rak Thai
party, led by Thaksin Shinawatra,won a majority of parliamentary seats in the January
6 national election, making Thaksin prime minister. But ten days before the
vote, Thaksin, a telecommunications tycoon, was indicted by the National
Counter-Corruption Committee (NCCC) on charges of failing to fully declare his
financial assets as required by law when he held a previous government post. If the
Constitutional Court upheld the indictment, banning Thaksin from public office
for five years, the Thai political system could have been thrown into serious crisis.
If it did not, despite apparently strong evidence of unrevealed wealth, the independence
of the court and Thailand’s battle against high-level graft and corruption
would be undermined. Which was worse? The court voted eight to seven not to
uphold the indictment, to the disappointment of political reformers and yet to the
relief of many who feared that democracy would be poorly served by a prolonged
period of uncertainty and instability.
President Abdurrahman Wahid, Indonesia’s great hope for furthering democratization,
proved to be entirely unsuited for the job. He listened to no one, ignored
major crises, and in the end, tried unsuccessfully to use the military against the parliament
that was trying to impeach him on corruption grounds. But the alternative
was either a return to former President Soeharto’s party, Golkar, or support for
Vice-President Megawati Sukarnoputri, whose party had the most seats in the
Indonesian parliament and who had extensive army backing. On human rights issues, the choice came down to one of incompetence versus lack of political will.
Which was worse, a president who could not make the justice system work or one
who would not even try? Much of the human rights and reformist community preferred
the former, but when that same inability and inattention to political and economic
problems began to lead to a nostalgia in some circles for authoritarianism,
Indonesia’s democratic experiment was in trouble.
In Cambodia, targeted political assassinations, while few in number, continued
to discourage many grassroots candidates from running in Cambodia’s longdelayed
commune elections, scheduled for early 2002.
Nepal’s shaky transition to democracy, begun in 1990, underwent its most
severe test with the assassination of almost the entire royal family by the crown
prince in June 2001. The prince later shot himself. Like Thailand and Cambodia,
the monarchy in Nepal has been an anchor for the transition, and the murdered
King Birendra had helped hold the country together through the collapse of ten
governments in ten years combined with a growing Maoist insurgency.The unpopularity
of the new king, an economic crisis in an already desperately poor country,
and the growing clout of the rebels all suggested that Nepal’s democratic transition
would face further trials in 2002.
In Pakistan, the problem was somewhat different. President Pervez Musharraf
had abruptly halted Pakistan’s flailing attempts at democratization when he overthrew
the corrupt Nawaz Sharif in a military coup in October 1999. Some Pakistanis
at the time saw a temporary loss of civil liberties as an acceptable price to pay for
getting rid of politicians whose desire for power seemed motivated primarily by
greed. But human rights defenders and reformers accurately predicted that once
taken away, these liberties were going to be hard to restore. By September 11,
Musharraf, despite international condemnation of the coup, had shown no hurry
to hold elections. Human rights activists and political reformers pointed out that
the political vacuum was only encouraging the growth of religious extremism, all
the more so after the U.S. war against the Taliban provided a potent rallying point
for the Islamic right. The U.S. and British embrace of Musharraf in their anti-terrorism
coalition effectively ended any international pressure for the restoration of
democracy in Pakistan.
While nothing could be further from democratic transition than North Korea,
the importance of that country’s slight opening to the outside world in late 2000
and 2001, apparently driven by the need to earn foreign exchange, should not be
underestimated. In February, during a visit by a European Union delegation,North
Korean officials agreed to a human rights dialogue with the E.U.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
International justice for war crimes and crimes against humanity was an issue
throughout Asia during the year, but it was often a case of local NGOs, foreign governments,
and international rights organizations trying to force unwilling governments
to act.The Cambodian parliament passed a law in August to set up a tribunal
to try former Khmer Rouge leaders, and the same month in Indonesia, all legal hurdles blocking the establishment of an ad hoc tribunal on East Timor were cleared,
but neither court was functioning by the end of November. Political will to proceed
with indictments was noticeably absent. In East Timor, local NGOs by September
2001 were demanding an international tribunal to try Indonesian officers and the
militia commanders they had created and armed, but it was not just Indonesian
leaders who showed little interest in justice. East Timorese leaders also made clear
that punishing past abuses was not for them a priority.
The issue of war crimes by Japan during World War II continued to fester.China
and Korea, whose populations suffered terribly under Japanese occupation, were
outraged in August by Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi’s visit to a shrine honoring
Japanese war heroes.The issue of “comfort women”—women forced to provide
sexual services to Japanese soldiers—returned to center stage with a people’s tribunal
convened in Tokyo in December 2000.
Accountability for past abuses was becoming an issue in Afghanistan by late
2001, with respect to crimes not only by the Taliban but by individual commanders
in the Northern Alliance (United Front) and by mujahideen outside that
alliance, and by Soviet commanders during their decade-long occupation of the
country. Efforts were underway to being a war crimes case against a former Afghan
commander living in London.
By mid-November,Cambodia was close to becoming the first country in East or
South Asia to ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
VIOLENCE, REFUGEES, AND
THE INTERNALLY DISPLACED
Asia continued to be wracked by outbreaks of war and ethnic and communal
strife,producing widespread human rights violations and massive new populations
of refugees and the displaced.As all eyes were focused on the humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan in November 2001, with estimates of the displaced in the hundreds of
thousands as winter approached, it was also important to remember the 850,000 to
one million internally displaced in Indonesia; more than 800,000 in Sri Lanka;
some 600,000 to one million in Burma, and an estimated half million displaced in
India. In most cases, access to humanitarian aid and protection for the displaced
was difficult, either because of government obstruction or security concerns.
Refugee populations were also large, with an estimated 200,000 Burmese in
Thailand, 120,000 Burmese in Bangladesh, and about 100,000 refugees from
Bhutan in Nepal.An estimated 135,000 new refugees from Afghanistan had arrived
in Pakistan after September 11. In West Timor, an estimated 60,000 to 80,000 East
Timorese remained after the forcible expulsions of 1999, but the rate of voluntary
return picked up sharply after the peaceful elections in East Timor in August.
If would-be refugees managed to cross into another country, access to aid was
usually easier, but some governments deliberately closed their borders to asylumseekers.
By the time the American bombing campaign in Afghanistan began, for
examples, all of Afghanistan’s neighbors had shut their borders, citing security concerns,
inability to handle a new influx, and in some cases,U.S. pressure. By November, Pakistan, already host to some two and a half million Afghan refugees, had
relented somewhat and was allowing fifteen new camps to be built inside its borders,
but under conditions that raised serious protection concerns for the new
arrivals.
The other country in the region that closed its borders to asylum-seekers was
Australia. In August, when his political popularity was at an all-time low, Prime
Minister John Howard decided to capitalize on anti-immigrant sentiment by very
noisily denying asylum to more than four hundred mostly Afghan refugees who
had nearly drowned in Indonesian waters and had been picked up by a Norwegian
freighter and brought to Australian waters near Christmas Island.Howard refused
to let them land and reversed his political fortunes, winning a third term in mid-
November on the basis of hardline policies and new legislation that violated Australia’s
obligations under international refugee law.
Asylum-seekers also had a difficult time in Japan. Only twenty-two asylumseekers
were granted refugee status in Japan in 2000, and the figures for 2001, to be
published in 2002, were not expected to be any greater.
In addition to violence, repression and discrimination were factors leading
Asians to flee their own countries. China’s Uighurs fled to Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan,
from which they were occasionally sent back, and even to Pakistan; some
Tibetans continued to try and reach Nepal.
Beginning in February, more than 1,000 ethnic highlanders from Vietnam,
known collectively as Montagnards, fled to Cambodia after Vietnamese police
crushed a public protest over land-grabbing and controls on freedom of religion.
While Cambodia agreed to provide temporary asylum to the Montagnards at two
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) sites, Cambodian
officials violated the principle of non-refoulement several times during the year
when they forcibly returned large groups of Montagnards back to Vietnam, where
many were arrested and beaten.
North Koreans fled to China largely to look for food and work. They could face
severe punishment in North Korea on charges of illegal departure if returned.Chinese
authorities reportedly sent many back to unclear fates. Estimates of the number
of North Koreans in China ranged from South Korean government figures of
ten to thirty thousand to estimates ten times higher from nongovernmental
sources. The problem drew international attention in June when a family of seven
North Koreans sought refuge in the UNHCR office in Beijing. They were eventually
allowed to leave for South Korea via the Philippines.
Bhutanese refugees spent a tenth year in exile in camps in southeast Nepal,
deprived of their right to return home. Despite the start in early 2001 of a joint
verification program by the governments of Nepal and Bhutan to ascertain the
status of these refugees, progress was slow, and no refugees had returned as of late
November.
INTERNAL SECURITY LAWS 
Even before September 11, internal security legislation was being widely abused in many Asian countries. In China, several academics and business people based in
the West were detained under laws preventing the disclosure of state secrets. In
Malaysia, Prime Minister Mahathir made increasing use of the draconian Internal
Security Act to arrest members of the political opposition. In Indonesia, laws once
used to detain critics of former President Soeharto made an unwelcome comeback,
particularly clauses of the Criminal Code punishing spreading hatred toward government
officials. In South Korea, little progress was made toward amending the
hated National Security Law. In August, seven activists of a pro-reunification organization
were arrested in Seoul for having illicitly contacted members of the North
Korean Youth League before attending a meeting of the League in Pyongyang.
In India, government officials used the post-September focus on terrorism to
push for a new Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance, that would give police sweeping
powers of arrest and detention. It would reinstate a modified version of the
hated Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act or TADA which was
repealed in 1995 after years of abuse against suspected rebels and anti-government
activists.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Asian human rights activists continued to play a high-profile international role,
and in some cases, paid a high price for doing so.At least nine human rights defenders
in the region were killed between November 2000 and November 2001, seven of
them from Aceh, Indonesia.Many more faced intimidation or arrest, and the trial
ofMalaysian human rights defender Irene Fernandez entered its sixth year in Kuala
Lumpur.
At the World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR),Asian activists succeeded in getting international
attention to the issue of caste discrimination, not just in Asia but around the world.
Human rights in Singapore took a step forward with the approval in October
2001 of the Think Centre, an independent organization committed to the expansion
of civil liberties, as a fully registered society under Singaporean law. Founder
James Gomez had faced pressure during the year for holding rallies without permits,
but no legal action was taken against him.
Long established regional nongovernmental organizations such as Forum Asia
and the Asian Commission on Human Rights campaigned actively for Asian ratification
of the treaty establishing an International Criminal Court and for the repeal
of the Internal Security Act in Malaysia. They also worked with other groups in the
region to promote better protection of human rights defenders.The Asian Migrant
Centre based in Hong Kong had a campaign in seven Asian countries for the ratification
of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families.The Asia Monitor Resource Centre
took a leading role in documenting labor practices and implementation of corporate
codes of conduct throughout East and Southeast Asia. The Bangkok-based
South East Asia Press Alliance (SEAPA) was an effective advocate for journalists in
the region, helping raise the profile of the beleaguered malaysiakini.com, an electronic news service that the Malaysian government shut down; assist the new East
Timorese journalists association in getting started; and protest threats against the
daily newspaper in Banda Aceh by rebels unhappy with the paper’s content.
In November 2001, three hundred activists from Bangladesh, India,Nepal, Pakistan,
and Sri Lanka formed a new group called South Asians for Human Rights.
National human rights commissions in the region had their ups and downs.
SUHAKAM in Malaysia took a stronger position than many expected in criticizing
government abuses against demonstrators and Internal Security Act arrests; Komnas
HAM in Indonesia came more and more under the control of obstructionists
anxious to prevent serious human rights investigations.
On April 30, the Korean National Assembly passed a law establishing a national
human rights commission, scheduled to begin work in November 2001. The body
was empowered to investigate a broad range of human rights violations and provide
compensation to victims. Its mandate covered discrimination, including sexual,
racial, religious, and against the mentally or physically handicapped. The bill
also included provisions dealing with cases of unlawful arrest, torture, intimidation,
punishment, and detention of citizens by public service personnel, including
employees of psychiatric hospitals.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The stance of the international community toward Asia shifted dramatically
after September 11. It was not just terrorism that was suddenly front and center on
the international agenda; the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan, all but forgotten
before mid-September, suddenly became an issue as television screens across the
world focused on the plight of refugees, the displaced, and the near-starving.
With that attention came new questions about mixing military and humanitarian
missions, exemplified by U.S. food drops inside Afghanistan; tradeoffs between
security and refugee protection as Afghanistan’s neighbors closed their borders;
and the extent to which failure to address humanitarian issues in the past might
have contributed to the rise of religious extremism.These questions had a relevance
not just for Afghanistan but for conflict-ridden areas of Asia more generally.
The crisis in Afghanistan highlighted once again the lack of regional institutions
in Asia that have any capacity for dispute resolution, peacekeeping, human rights
monitoring, or administration of justice. The Association of South East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) remained weakened by Indonesia’s ongoing internal troubles,
and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) never functioned
effectively, largely because of hostility between India and Pakistan.
That left, as always, the United Nations. Just as the U.N. began to wind down its
operations in East Timor, it appeared poised to take on a major new role in Afghanistan,
although exactly what that role would be was not clear as of late November.
In general, the large, amorphous organizations set up to discuss trade issues
(Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation or APEC for Asia and North America and the
Asia Europe Meeting or ASEM for Asia and the European Union) were useful
largely as a setting for informal high-level bilateral meetings and symbolic shows of solidarity.The APEC summit in October in Shanghai, for example,became a forum
for building alliances against terrorism.
In September 2001, the European Commission adopted a new strategy for
enhanced partnership with Asia that focused on six areas, including peace and
security, and the promotion of democracy, governance, and the rule of law. The
strategy called for the European Union (E.U.) to play a more active role in conflict
prevention in Asia and strengthen an E.U.-Asia dialogue on issues such as asylum
and immigration. It also cited the much-criticized E.U.-China human rights dialogue
as a model of constructive exchanges.
Japan was eager to contribute to the counter-terrorism effort.Despite worries in
East Asia about Japan’s expanded military role, the Koizumi government pushed
through the Diet a bill to allow Japanese self-defense forces to supply logistical support
in Afghanistan in non-combat areas. Japan also provided humanitarian assistance
for refugees in Pakistan and planned to co-host with the U.S. an international
conference on Afghanistan’s reconstruction. On human rights concerns in Asia,
Japan was most active diplomatically in Indonesia, and least willing to push rights
concerns with China and Malaysia.
Some donor meetings convened by the World Bank were useful forums to raise
human rights concerns, such as the donor conferences on Cambodia and Sri Lanka.
Donors at the annual meeting of the Consultative Group on Indonesia in November
2001 were frank about unhappiness with Indonesia’s lack of progress fighting
corruption. In general, views of civil society organizations were increasingly
solicited prior to these meetings.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Throughout the year, the Asia Division focused in particular on five countries:
Afghanistan, Cambodia, China, India, and Indonesia, with additional monitoring
of human rights developments across the region.
The human rights situation in Afghanistan had been a priority all year, with a
major effort having gone into documenting massacres by the Taliban in the Hazarajat
region in January and again in June. Following the September 11 attacks,
Human Rights Watch launched a major emergency project to monitor violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in Afghanistan, using the model
employed earlier in Chechnya and Kosovo.A Human Rights Watch team arrived in
Pakistan in October.
Work on Indonesia focused on Aceh and Papua, with reports and numerous
updates produced on both. In both areas,Human Rights Watch worked closely with
local rights organizations. Staff conducted two training sessions, in May and
August, in human rights documentation for some three dozen human rights
activists from Aceh.
The WCAR provided a focal point for work in India where an international campaign
against caste violence and discrimination continued to gather strength.
Despite hard lobbying by the Indian government to keep caste off the agenda of the
conference, the Dalit (untouchable) delegation succeeded in getting international media coverage and direct acknowledgment from U.N. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan.
The flight to Cambodia of Montagnard refugees from Vietnam led to intensive
advocacy work by Human Rights Watch to persuade both the Cambodian government
and the UNHCR to protect the refugees from refoulement. Without that
advocacy, there would have been no protection; even with it, Cambodian authorities
forcibly deported several hundred Montagnards. Human Rights Watch later
received first-hand reports that some of those who had been deported were subsequently
detained and tortured.
In the U.S., Human Rights Watch focused on the development of strategies to
effectively engage the incoming Bush administration on human rights in Asia. The
administration tended to be far more preoccupied with security and economic
relations than with human rights, especially in South and East Asia, and to emphasize
religious freedom over other concerns.Human Rights Watch also met regularly
with corporations in the U.S. and Japan, to explore ways in which corporate leverage
might be used to address concerns in Indonesia and China. Advocacy work on
China was particularly challenging, given the decline in effectiveness of the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights in Geneva as a vehicle for raising concerns about
the country’s human rights practices, and as Beijing’s “dialogue” strategy deflected
pressure from the E.U., Canada, Australia, and other key countries. Research on
China focused on the arrest and detention of Falungong supporters and on repression
in Tibet and Xinjiang.
AFGHANISTAN
Events in Afghanistan were changing daily as this report went to press.
Before the September 11 terror attacks on the United States (U.S.), the
main human rights concerns in Afghanistan were collective punishment by Taliban
forces of civilians in areas that the opposition Northern Alliance (United Front)
had briefly occupied or attempted to capture; systematic discrimination against
women; harassment of international aid agency staff and other abuses; and continued
arms supplies to parties responsible for human rights violations. After September
11, concerns focused on violations of the laws of war, including summary
executions of prisoners by the Northern Alliance and use of cluster bombs by the
U.S.; protection of millions of refugees and internally displaced; ensuring accountability
for human rights violations; and instituting human rights safeguards for the
future, including to protect women’s rights.
Beginning on October 7 Taliban-held territory in Afghanistan became the focus
of a U.S.-led military campaign to destroy the al-Qaeda network of Osama bin
Laden, whom the U.S. accused of planning the September 11 attacks, and remove
from power the core Taliban leadership that had sheltered bin Laden since 1997.
By late November, the Northern Alliance (United Front), backed by a U.S.
bombing campaign, had recaptured virtually all of northern Afghanistan, and Taliban
rule was rapidly collapsing in the south. The demise of the Taliban brought
with it the immediate prospect of greater personal freedoms and opportunities for
women. It also portended a return to the political fragmentation that marked the
country before the Taliban’s rise, and the reemergence of many of the same warlords
whose fighting and disregard for international humanitarian law devastated
Kabul between 1992 and 1996.Against this backdrop, the United Nations was seeking
to broker negotiations among different Afghan factions for the creation of a
viable transitional government.
The U.S. airstrikes against Taliban military targets entailed an undetermined
number of civilian casualties, at least some of which resulted from mistargeting.
The airstrikes also contributed to the humanitarian crisis, with thousands of
Afghans fleeing their homes. Their flight swelled the ranks of hundreds of thousands
who were already internally displaced because of drought, war, and conflictrelated
violence.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Systematic human rights abuses were committed by both Taliban and anti-Taliban
forces.By late October, questions had also arisen as to whether any of the civilian
casualties caused by the U.S. bombing campaign were possible violations of
international humanitarian law, although there were no clear answers at the time
this report went to press.
Reprisal Killings by the Taliban
In several areas of northern and central Afghanistan, Taliban forces subjected
local civilians to a ruthless and systematic policy of collective punishment. Summary
executions, the deliberate destruction of homes, and confiscation of farmland
were recurrent practices in these campaigns.The Taliban’s victims overwhelmingly
belonged to ethnic minority groups predominating in those areas, including
Aymaqs, Hazaras, and Uzbeks. The groups were suspected of supporting forces
linked to the Northern Alliance in the Afghan civil war.
After retaking Yakaolang district in the central highland region of Hazarajat
from Hizb-i Wahdat and Harakat-i Islami, two Shi’a Muslim parties in the Northern
Alliance, on January 8, Taliban troops detained and then massacred at least 170
male residents of the town, all of them noncombatants. The men were herded to
assembly points in the center of the district and several outlying areas, and then
shot by firing squad in public view. The two Shi’a parties regained control of
Yakaolang at the end of January, permitting human rights investigators to independently
document the killings that had taken place. The Taliban retook the district
in early May and carried out isolated killings of civilians; most of Yakaolang’s
civilian population, however, fled in advance to the surrounding hills.
On June 5, Hizb-i Wahdat recaptured Yakaolang but it fell again to the Taliban
on June 10. Mullah Dadaullah, a Kabul-based Taliban commander implicated in previous abuses against civilians, was in charge of what the Taliban’s official news
agency termed a “mopping up operation.” Over a two-day period, his troops
burned over 4,000 houses, shops, and public buildings in central and eastern
Yakaolang, including a medical clinic, twelve mosques and prayer halls, and the
main madrassa, or Islamic seminary. As the Taliban troops retreated, they continued
to burn villages and to detain and kill civilians. Some civilians were killed while
trying to escape, and a number of detainees were held for a period of forced labor.
A number of villages around the town of Khwajaghar in Takhar province also
changed hands several times. Taliban forces occupied the area from January 13 to
23. After Northern Alliance forces had taken control of the area, they discovered
mass graves of civilians who had apparently been shot with their hands bound.
Human rights investigators reported that at least thirty-four ethnic Uzbek civilians
had been summarily executed and that forty-five others had been detained and
were unaccounted for.
To the north of Bamiyan, in Zari district, Balkh province, similar reprisals were
carried out by Taliban forces against ethnic Uzbek civilians in late May 2001.While
most civilians fled to the hills, many of those who remained or who returned were
reported to have been killed by Taliban forces reoccupying the district. There were
also credible reports from Ghowr of summary executions, looting, and the largescale
burning of villages by Taliban forces between late June and mid-October.
Discrimination Against Women
Taliban decrees continued to restrict women’s movement, behavior, and dress.
In public, women were required under threat of severe punishment to wear the
chadari, an all-enveloping garment, and to be accompanied by a close male relative
at all times. Violations of the dress code, in particular, could result in public beatings
and lashing by the Religious Police,who wielded leather batons reinforced with
metal studs.Women were not permitted to work outside the home except in the
area of health care, and girls over eight years old were not permitted to attend
school. The decrees contributed to an illiteracy level for women of over 90 percent,
while the restrictions on mobility meant that women did not enjoy satisfactory
access to health care.
International relief agencies grappled with more rigorous enforcement of Taliban
prohibitions on women working outside the home as well as heightened surveillance
of the personal conduct of their employees. In May, an impasse between
the Taliban and the U.N.’s World Food Program (WFP) over employing Afghan
women to conduct household surveys threatened to close down bakeries feeding
300,000 vulnerable households in Kabul. On several occasions during the same
month, police from the Ministry for the Prevention of Vice and Promotion of
Virtue raided hospitals, beating several staff members and forcing the facilities to
suspend surgical operations because male and female staff allegedly mixed in the
dining area and operating wards. The Taliban also prohibited all female aid workers
from driving cars.
As the Northern Alliance established control over areas once under the Taliban,
Afghan women became able to move about freely in public. In Kabul,women were able to register to return to medical school for the first time in five years.At the same
time, however, the Northern Alliance’s interior minister, Younis Qanooni, citing
security concerns, ordered the cancellation of a planned women’s freedom march
through the streets of Kabul. (See Women’s Human Rights.)
Other Taliban Violations
The Taliban’s increasingly confrontational posture toward the international
community included moves that appeared calculated to provoke an international
outcry. These included attacks on the country’s architectural heritage as well as the
proposal of laws discriminating against religious minorities.
On March 11, Taliban forces in Bamiyan destroyed two enormous statues of the
Buddha, thirty-eight to fifty-three meters high, that had been carved into sandstone
cliffs overlooking the city in the second and fifth centuries, A.D. A BBC report on
the destruction, which included an interview with a prominent Afghan living outside
the country, led to the expulsion of the BBC reporter from Taliban-controlled
Afghanistan in April.
In May, the Kabul-based Council of the Ulema promulgated a new order requiring
Afghan Hindus to wear distinctive clothing. Taliban representatives stated that
the measure was intended to protect Hindus from being stopped by the religious
police, although most local Hindus who interacted with the authorities already carried
documentation attesting to their religious identity. The order met with widespread
international condemnation, and subsequently appeared to have been
withdrawn.
Also in May, the Taliban imposed new restrictions on foreign workers, placing
them under the jurisdiction of the religious police of the Ministry for the Prevention
of Vice and Promotion of Virtue, and requiring that they sign a letter undertaking
not to violate prohibitions on adultery, consuming pork and alcohol, and
proselytizing. Those found in violation could be imprisoned or deported. Twentyfour
staff members of the German relief agency Shelter Now, including eight foreigners,
were arrested by the Taliban on August 6, on charges of proselytising. They
were brought to trial in September. The foreign detainees were freed on November
15, when Northern Alliance forces took control of Ghazni, where they were then
being held.
Security conditions for humanitarian aid agencies worsened sharply after September
11. On October 16, Taliban soldiers seized WFP food warehouses in Kabul
and Kandahar, taking control of some 7,000 tons of food.Human Rights Watch also
received credible reports of other incidents involving looting of vehicles and office
equipment, as well as assaults on aid agency staff, from the Taliban-controlled cities
of Kandahar, Kabul, Jalalabad, and Mazar-i-Sharif.While most of those responsible
for the attacks appeared to be Taliban fighters, non-Afghan fighters (known in
Afghanistan as “foreign guests”) and rogue armed elements also appeared to have
been involved.
On October 26,Taliban forces captured and executed Abdul Haq, a veteran commander
from eastern Afghanistan who had returned to build opposition to the Taliban
among local ethnic Pashtun commanders. Also executed were his nephew, Izzatullah and another companion, Commander Haji Dauran. The fate of eight
others who were arrested by the Taliban following a confrontation between Abdul
Haq and the Taliban was unknown.
Violations by Anti-Taliban Forces
There were several reported rights abuses by Northern Alliance forces in the
wake of the Taliban retreat from Mazar-i-Sharif, Herat, Kunduz, and Kabul in
November 2001. Scattered reports from aid agencies, refugees, and news correspondents
indicated that Northern Alliance forces in newly captured areas summarily
executed a significant number of Taliban troops who had surrendered or
were captured, and engaged in looting of humanitarian aid compounds and commercial
stores. In Mazar-i-Sharif, in early November, the siege of a school compound
in which several hundred Pakistani Taliban fighters had taken refuge ended
with the entire school being repeatedly shelled, killing the entire force inside.There
were conflicting reports about whether some of the Pakistani Taliban forces
attempted to surrender before the compound was shelled. In addition, there were
outstanding questions about the events surrounding a prison riot in Mazar-i-Sharif
which began on November 25. All of the prisoners, at least 120 and perhaps twice
that many, were reportedly killed in the suppression of the riot, which entailed the
use of Northern Alliance artillery and tank fire, and bombardment of parts of the
prison by U.S. air support. In southern Afghanistan, a Northern Alliance commander
claimed to have executed 160 captured Taliban fighters, according to a
November 28 Reuters report.
United States Bombing Campaign
The US-led military campaign in Afghanistan began on October 7. In two separate
incidents investigated by Human Rights Watch researchers, civilians were
killed by bombs that had either been mistargeted or went astray. On October 21, at
least twenty-three civilians, the majority of them young children,were killed when
U.S. bombs hit a remote Afghan village located near a Taliban military base in
Thori, Urozgan province. The following day, at least twenty-five, and possibly as
many as thirty-five, Afghan civilians were killed when U.S. airplanes first bombed
and then strafed the village of Chowkar-Karez, near Kandahar.
On October 22, nine people died in the village of Shakar Qala near Herat after
U.S. warplanes dropped cluster munitions in the area. Eight died instantly and a
ninth was killed after picking up one of the bombs, according to a U.N. demining
team which visited the village after the attack. Human Rights Watch called for a
global moratorium on use of cluster bombs, which have a wide dispersal pattern
and cannot be targeted precisely, urging the U.S. to desist from using them in
Afghanistan.Cluster bombs also have a high initial failure rate, resulting in numerous
explosive “duds” that pose the same post-conflict problem as antipersonnel
landmines.
Other bombing raids hit facilities belonging to U.N. agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). On October 9,U.S. bombs hit an office of a U.N.-backed demining agency in Kabul, killing four security guards.On October
16,U.S. bombs also struck the ICRC warehouses in Kabul, destroying supplies
and injuring at least one worker. The ICRC said that it had provided the U.S. the
locations of its facilities in Afghanistan before the bombing campaign began.
Despite further consultations between the ICRC and U.S., the same compound
was struck again by U.S. forces on October 26. According to the ICRC, food and
non-food items meant for 55,000 people in Kabul were destroyed in the second
attack.
Internal Displacement
Hundreds of thousands of Afghans were displaced during the year from their
homes within Afghanistan, adding to the ranks of the millions displaced in previous
years. Before September 11, the leading causes of displacement were food and
water shortages, localized persecution by Taliban or Northern Alliance authorities,
security concerns stemming from fighting between the Taliban and the Northern
Alliance, and systematic destruction of homes and farmland by Taliban forces.
Most displaced families moved toward urban areas, especially Herat, Mazar-i-
Sharif, Kunduz, and Kabul in Taliban-held areas, and Faizabad in the Northern
Alliance held areas. In many parts of the north and west, displaced persons ultimately
settled in unorganized and unsanitary camps without adequate shelter.
Scores of these spontaneous camps sprung up outside Mazar-i-Sharif,Kunduz, and
Pul-e-Khumri.Most of the displaced were forced to beg food and even water from
other Afghan families, many of whom were themselves struggling to survive. Several
independent reports from the north indicated that some families resorted to
marrying off their daughters at young ages (between six and twelve years) for
reduced dowries, essentially selling their children to survive. Other reports indicated
that Taliban soldiers occasionally abducted young women from camps for
the displaced. (See Refugees, Asylum Seekers, Migrants, and Internally Displaced
Persons.)
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
A number of Afghan human rights groups operated from Pakistan and issued
reports on rights violations inside Afghanistan and against Afghan refugees in Pakistan.
In October a new group,Citizen’s Against War Criminals,which included relatives
and survivors of various civilian massacres, formed and issued statements
calling for a war crimes tribunal for Afghanistan.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The U.N.’s peacemaking efforts—which had previously been thwarted by Taliban
opposition to power-sharing—were revitalized after the rapid collapse of Taliban rule throughout most of Afghanistan in November 2001. The U.N. secretarygeneral’s
special representative to Afghanistan, Lakhdar Brahimi, who was
appointed in October to oversee the U.N.’s political and humanitarian work in the
country, convened a meeting in Bonn, Germany on November 27 of the Northern
Alliance and three Afghan exile political groupings.As this report went to press, the
meeting had made progress on a formula to establish an interim ruling council, to
be followed by the convening of a loya jirga or Grand National Assembly that would
elect a transitional government.The Northern Alliance, however, had rejected proposals
to deploy an international peacekeeping force in Afghanistan.
The Taliban’s collapse also enabled officers from the Civil Affairs Unit of the
U.N. Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) to resume work in some areas of
the country. Following the Security Council-mandated closure of the Taliban’s
diplomatic offices abroad, in February the Taliban ordered the UNSMA to close its
offices in territory under its control. After negotiations with the Taliban, UNSMA
closed most of its offices in May, thereby curtailing much of the monitoring capacity
of its Civil Affairs Unit.
A sanctions monitoring team was appointed on September 18, pursuant to U.N.
Security Council Resolution 1333 in December 2000 which imposed an arms
embargo on the Taliban, banned travel outside Afghanistan by Taliban officials of
deputy ministerial rank, and ordered the closing of Taliban offices abroad.An earlier
resolution had imposed an international flight ban on the Afghan airline Ariana
and frozen overseas assets of the Taliban. After September 11, the Security
Council issued resolutions calling on states to cooperate in preventing and suppressing
terrorism (resolution 1373); supporting the establishment of a transitional
administration that would lead in turn to the formation of a “broad-based,
multi-ethnic and fully representative”Afghan government (resolution 1378). Resolution
1378 also said that the transitional administration should respect the
human rights of all Afghans and called on all Afghan armed forces to refrain from
reprisals.
Various U.N. human rights mechanisms directed greater attention toward civilian
massacres in Afghanistan and the flow of arms to the warring parties. Early in
2001, the U.N.Commission on Human Rights, in resolution 2000/13, noted reports
about the January 2001 mass killings of ethnic Hazaras in Yakaolang and urged an
immediate end to the supply of arms and other military support, including providing
foreign military personnel, to all parties to the conflict. The Commission’s
special rapporteur on Afghanistan, Kamal Hossain, included in his sixth report
extensive details of both the January 2001 massacre and the Taliban’s subsequent
destruction of villages in Yakaolang and western Bamiyan in June 2001.He also recommended
a comprehensive arms embargo on Afghanistan.
In November,U.N.High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson seconded
a full-time human rights officer to a task force in New York that was meant
to facilitate a coordinated U.N. response to the crisis in Afghanistan. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was also actively engaged
with the Afghanistan crisis. (See Refugees, Asylum Seekers, Migrants, and Internally
Displaced Persons.) 
Military Assistance
At a meeting in Tehran on December 28, 2000, Russia and Iran agreed to launch
a new long-term program of political and military co-operation, including closer
ties over Central Asia and in Afghanistan, where both sides had supplied arms and
other assistance to factions opposing the Taliban. Such supplies increased after September
11. Beginning in October, the U.S. also began to supply Northern Alliance
factions with food, ammunition, and air support.
The Taliban’s principal supporter, Pakistan, continued to provide military
support throughout the first half of the year. In direct violation of U.N. sanctions,
in April and May 2001 as many as thirty trucks a day were crossing the Pakistan
border, Human Rights Watch sources reported; sources inside Afghanistan
reported that some of these convoys were carrying artillery shells, tank rounds,
and rocket-propelled grenades. Shipments of fuel and other military supplies
reportedly continued through September. (See Arms.) After joining the U.S.-led
anti-terrorism coalition in early October, President Pervez Musharraf reshuffled
Pakistan’s army corps command, marginalizing several officers with close ties to
the Taliban.
Donor Countries
The increasingly bitter confrontation between humanitarian organizations and
the Taliban led many donors to exert pressure on the Taliban to ease its restrictions.
At a meeting in Islamabad in June, the Afghanistan Support Group (ASG), a joint
funding group made up of various donor governments and U.N. agencies, issued a
statement urging the Taliban to co-operate with aid agencies working in the
country or risk having vital humanitarian projects come to a halt.
International aid to Afghanistan in 2001 before September 11 amounted to
approximately U.S. $300 million. These funds were devoted primarily to shortterm
humanitarian projects and demining programs and to a lesser extent to development
programs in agriculture, health, education, and income generation.
Following September 11, several countries have pledged additional emergency
funds for humanitarian projects in Afghanistan. Two main funding conferences
met to discuss future long-term funding plans for Afghanistan. A joint development
conference hosted by the World Bank, the United Nations Development Program,
and the Asia Development Bank, geared toward long-term economic
development, commenced on November 27.The ASG convened a meeting that was
geared toward humanitarian assistance but which also provided a forum for discussing
long-term development strategies.
Detailed planning during both meetings was made difficult by uncertainty over
the future Afghan government; and questions about how long current military
activities in Afghanistan would continue.Nevertheless, participants noted in position
papers the need for a comprehensive funding program going beyond the
immediate humanitarian needs of the country. Donors at an ASG meeting in
August were told by several U.N. and nongovernmental agencies of the need for
increased funding in development areas not previously funded in Afghanistan, including programs for rebuilding civil society and civil infrastructure, among
them rule of law mechanisms and educational, health, and banking systems.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Humanity Denied: Systematic Violations ofWomen’s Rights in Afghanistan, 10/01
The Crisis of Impunity: The Role of Pakistan, Russia, and Iran in Fueling the Civil
War, 7/01
Massacres of Hazaras in Afghanistan, 2/01
BURMA
There were signs of a political thaw early in the year and, for the first time in
years, hopes that the government might lift some of its stifling controls on
civil and political rights.By November, however, the only progress had been limited
political prisoner releases and easing of pressures on some opposition politicians in
Rangoon. There was no sign of fundamental changes in law or policy, and grave
human rights violations remained unaddressed.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Upon his return from a January visit to Rangoon, new United Nations Special
Representative for Myanmar Razali Ismail revealed that Lieutenant General Khin
Nyunt, one of the top three leaders of the ruling State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC), and Aung San Suu Kyi, the head of the opposition National
League for Democracy (NLD), had been engaged in talks about a political settlement
since October 2000. The talks, the first since 1994, were largely attributed to
the efforts of Ismail, who had worked behind the scenes to promote dialogue. The
talks continued throughout much of 2001, though representatives of minority
groups were not invited to participate.
In an apparent goodwill gesture connected to the talks, the SPDC periodically
released small groups of political prisoners, 182 of whom had been freed by
November. They included NLD chairman Aung Shwe and vice-chairman Tin Oo;
fifty-four NLD members who had been elected to parliament in the aborted 1990
elections; journalist San San Nweh; and members of a comedy troupe, The Moustache
Brothers, who had been held since January 1996 for political satire.
Even with these releases, over 1,000 prisoners remained in prison for their political
beliefs, including 1988 student leader Min Ko Naing and NLD political strategist
Win Tin. More than fifty had completed their sentences but continued to be
detained by the SPDC using article 10a of the penal code, which gives authorities
broad discretion to extend incarceration. Four political prisoners—Mya Shwe, Maung Maung Aye, Sithu, and Khin Maung Myint—died in prison during the year,
and the Emergency Provisions Act, the security law most frequently used to charge
and imprison political prisoners, remained in use.
The SPDC continued to stringently restrict freedom of association and assembly
nationwide, but initiated some limited confidence-building measures in conjunction
with the political talks that eased conditions slightly. In June, authorities
permitted the NLD to reopen its headquarters and eighteen of forty-two Rangoon
ward-level offices; another three ward-level offices were allowed to reopen later in
the year. On June 19, some four hundred supporters of Aung San Suu Kyi were permitted
to gather to celebrate her birthday and on September 27 around five hundred
NLD sympathizers were able to gather to celebrate the anniversary of its
founding, though on both occasions NLD Secretary General Aung San Sui Kyi
remained confined to her home. Burmese intelligence continued to monitor NLD
leaders, however, and to attend many NLD meetings in Rangoon.
Outside Rangoon, there was no relaxation and hundreds of NLD local offices
remained closed by the authorities, as were those of other political parties that had
secured seats in the 1990 election, such as the Shan Nationalities League for Democracy,
the National Democratic Party for Human Rights, and the Mon National
Democratic Front, which were effectively unable to function.
The press was largely state run and strictly censored. The government did not
renew the license of the Burmese language magazine Thintbawa in December 2000
after one of its editors, Tin Maung Than, was accused of copying and circulating a
speech by Deputy Minister for National Planning and Development Brigadier General
Zaw Tun. The speech was sharply critical of the SPDC’s economic policy.
Detained on August 13, 2000, Tin Maung Than was held for four days, questioned,
and forced to sign a document acknowledging that he would be prosecuted if circulation
of the speech turned out to be “a political plot.” Fearing that he could be
imprisoned, he fled to Thailand in December 2000.
Some 140,000 Burmese displaced by decades of conflict and ongoing political
repression continued to live in refugee camps in Bangladesh and Thailand, and
hundreds of thousands more lived as internally displaced people within Burma or
outside camps in Bangladesh, India, and Thailand.
Life in conflict affected areas, where the Burmese army sought to deny ethnic
minority insurgents all sources of support, remained particularly grim. Villagers
continued to be forcibly relocated, and those suspected of aiding guerrillas were
tortured and sometimes killed. In January, government soldiers extrajudicially executed
three ethnic minority Palaung men in Ho Ha village in Shan State after a
search for weapons turned up an old carbine rifle that villagers used for hunting. In
another case in early 2001, soldiers deployed in Shan State tortured and interrogated
one man by setting light to his mustache and burning his mouth and another
by holding a flame to his eye.
The army forbade villagers whom they forcibly relocated in Shan, Kayah
(Karenni), and Karen State from returning to their fields.Villagers were required to
obtain a pass to move between major towns under government control and curfews
were enforced in many areas. The army continued to uproot villagers and consolidate
them in larger, government-controlled towns, though on a reduced scale compared to the mid-1990s. In January, the army reportedly displaced some 30,000 villagers
in Karen State when it burned villages in its dry season offensive against the
insurgent Karen National Union. In Shan State, hundreds of people were forced to
move during Burmese army attacks on the Shan State Army-South in February and
March.Many joined the estimated hundreds of thousands of internally displaced
villagers in ethnic minority states while others fled to Thailand.
The SPDC continued to deny full citizenship rights to ethnic and religious
minority Rohingya villagers, leaving many of them stateless and subject to severe
restrictions on their freedom of movement, right to own land, and access to education.
In February, violence between Buddhist and Muslim communities in the
Arakan State capital Sittwe reportedly resulted in over a dozen deaths, and led to
further regulation of movement by Rohingya and other Muslims within and out of
Arakan, impeding their access to markets and health care. In Prome (Pyi), Pegu
town, and Hanthada, night curfews were introduced following communal clashes
in October.
The authorities continued to use forced labor. On October 27, 2000, following
the visit of a technical mission from the International Labour Organization (ILO),
the SPDC issued an order banning all government officers from requisitioning
labor, and circulated it to local level authorities. Even so, refugees told Human
Rights Watch that they had no knowledge of it, indicating that the policy was not
being aggressively implemented.At its November 2000 meeting, the ILO’s governing
body, concluding that the new order was insufficient and that the SPDC had still
not taken adequate steps to end forced labor, recommended penalties to force compliance.
One called on other governments, United Nations agencies, and corporations
to scrutinize their relationships with the SPDC to ensure that none of their
activities contributed to the perpetuation of forced labor. In response, several
member states submitted reports on this to the ILO in March 2001.
In February 2001, refugees from Shan State arriving in Thailand reported that
they were continuing to face demands from the Burmese army to construct roads
and military bases, clear and plant fields for local battalions, and porter for troops
on patrol.Reports of forced labor were also received from other states and divisions
throughout the year. In November, ILO experts submitted a report on their visit a
month earlier, concluding that though the government had widely circulated its
order banning forced labor, implementation and enforcement remained weak.The
ILO governing body in its November meeting recommended an ILO presence in
Burma to work with the SPDC to address those weaknesses.
As of mid-November,Human Rights Watch knew of no cases in which the government
had prosecuted anyone for violating the ban on forced labor.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The SPDC did not permit local human rights groups to operate in Burma and
those human rights and democracy organizations that did function had to do so
from abroad.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The talks between Aung San Suu Kyi and the government and release of political
prisoners were welcomed by the international community. Some governments
moved towards resuming or offering to provide aid to Burma in order to encourage
further progress, while others maintained sanctions.
The United Nations was particularly active. Special Representative Razali Ismail
visited the country in January, June, and August to facilitate the dialogue between
the SPDC and the NLD, and for the first time since 1995, the government permitted
a visit by the United Nations special rapporteur on Myanmar. The new rapporteur,
Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, made a brief visit in April and met with SPDC
representatives,Aung San Suu Kyi, and local aid workers. In a report to the U.N. in
August, he welcomed the talks and prisoner releases but pointed to the need to
address other important rights issues, including the need for a humanitarian space
to relieve villagers affected by conflict. He made a second visit Burma in October
and presented his conclusions to the U.N. General Assembly (Third Committee) in
early November.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) maintained a
presence in northern Arakan State to protect and reintegrate hundreds of thousands
of Rohingya returnees. UNHCR requested access to eastern parts of Burma,
but received no reply from the SPDC.
Japan stepped up its policy of engagement with a decision to offer major new aid
to Burma. Though officially justified on humanitarian grounds, the move was
widely seen as a political gesture to reward the SPDC for the dialogue. In April,
Japanese officials promised approximately U.S. $29 million to upgrade Baluchaung
no. 2 hydroelectric power plant in Kayah (Karenni state). A survey mission went to
Burma in August; by November, the cabinet had not yet approved disbursement of
the funds. The aid decision was widely criticized as premature in view of Burmese
government failure to end forced labor and other major abuses.
In May, Japan’s Federation of Economic Organizations (Keidanren) held two
days of discussions with the SPDC on ways to improve trade and investment
between the two countries, though most Japanese companies remained reluctant to
invest.
Japanese officials publicly praised Burma’s release of political prisoners at several
points during the year. In July, Foreign Minister Makiko Tanaka, during an
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) conference in Vietnam, said
Burma “should develop as quickly as possible into a country with which we can
cooperate,” hinting that more aid might be forthcoming if the dialogue led to substantive
progress. In October she said it was important that the SPDC “take steps to
allow freedom of activities for political parties beginning with the NLD.”
Australia welcomed the release of political prisoners and continued its engagement
policy. On May 25, John Howard’s government announced that it would
renew its Human Rights Initiative,providing training for Burmese officials with the
ultimate goal of establishing a national human rights commission. Australia
planned to allocate approximately Au $140,000 to hold four training sessions, one of which was to be held in Mandalay. Former Australian human rights commissioner
and director of the program, Chris Sidoti, stated that Aung San Suu Kyi had
expressed support for the training.
The E.U. held to its basic sanctions policy on Burma,while offering the carrot of
humanitarian aid.An E.U.“troika”mission visited Burma in January and described
the dialogue between the SPDC and Aung San Sui Kyi as “the most interesting
development since 1990.”E.U.External Affairs Commissioner Chris Patten told the
July ASEAN meeting in Hanoi that the SPDC would have to make more “significant
progress” before the E.U. would consider lifting sanctions. In October, when
reviewing its common position on Burma, the E.U. symbolically eased its sanctions
by agreeing that Burma’s foreign minister could attend an E.U.-ASEAN meeting in
2002, and stressed its “readiness to accompany the deepening of the reconciliation
process with humanitarian assistance.”
Speculation that the Bush administration would lift sanctions on Burma had
not proved correct by November 2001. The U.S. welcomed the talks but renewed
regulations that ban travel to the U.S. by top Burmese officials, prohibited new U.S.
investment in Burma, and continued to block lending to Burma by the World Bank
and other international financial institutions.
In December 2000, the U.S. Defense Department ordered an immediate halt to
the import of clothing made in Burma after a news report disclosed that in October
2000 alone nearly $140,000 of apparel was purchased from Burma for sale to
U.S. military personnel, dependents, and U.S. government employees overseas. In
May 2001, a bill was introduced in the U.S. Senate to ban private retailers from
importing apparel from Burma, but the legislation was never voted on.
In February,Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Ralph Boyce visited Burma and
met with Aung San Suu Kyi and Lt. Gen.Khin Nyunt to discuss the Razali-initiated
dialogue, which he called a “welcome development.” Secretary of State Colin Powell
met with Razali in September and expressed his support for Razali’s mission,
while emphasizing the need for results.
Various ASEAN members expressed support for the talks between the SPDC
and Aung San Suu Kyi.Malaysia deepened its political and economic. Prime Minister
Mahathir Mohammed visited Burma in January and Malaysian economic delegations
followed, while Senior General Than Shwe and Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt paid
a return visit to Malaysia in September to discuss bilateral trade and other issues.
The new Thai government of Thaksin Shinawatra also sought to improve relations.
However Thai efforts to do this suffered a six-month setback when the Thai
and Burmese armies engaged in skirmishes in February and March after a Burmese
military unit entered Thai territory. The Thai government also blamed Burma for
one of its main national security concerns, the flood of methamphetamines entering
Thailand, an illegal trade involving both the Burmese military and its aligned
militia, the United Wa State Army, allegedly the top narcotics producer in Burma’s
portion of the Golden Triangle. The armed confrontation led to high level official
exchanges, including a visit to Burma in June by Prime Minister Thaksin, and in
early September, a trip to Bangkok by Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt. By October, relations
had apparently improved, with talks shifting to trade and improving communication
links between the two countries.
CAMBODIA
Cambodia’s human rights record during 2001 included progress on some
issues as well as several disappointing setbacks. By mid-November, Cambodia
was close to becoming the first Southeast Asian country to ratify the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), but the government continued
its efforts to dilute the power of a tribunal to bring the Khmer Rouge to justice.
While advocacy organizations benefited from relaxed policies on freedom of association,
political violence increased. The government risked angering its long-time
ally Vietnam by affording temporary asylum to ethnic minority asylum seekers
from Vietnam, thereby meeting its obligations as a signatory to the 1951 Refugee
Convention. At the same time, provincial Cambodian officials periodically
deported dozens of asylum seekers back to Vietnam, violating the fundamental
principle of non-refoulement. Prison conditions remained poor and torture continued
to be used by police and prison officials with impunity. Social and environmental
rights increasingly emerged as an issue.Hundreds of villagers organized to
protect community fisheries, forests, and other natural resources from abusive
exploitation by government agencies or officially sanctioned companies.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Political violence increased and preparations began for long overdue local elections,
scheduled for February 2002 in Cambodia’s 1,600 communes,or subdistricts.
In the elections, existing commune chiefs, mostly appointed by the ruling Cambodian
People’s Party (CPP), were to be replaced with popularly elected commune
councils. In September, the Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee, a coalition
of eighteen nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), documented eighty-two
cases of political threats and violence since the beginning of the year, most of them
directed at the opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP).
By November, at least four likely commune candidates had been shot dead and
two others wounded. SRP commune candidate Uch Horn was killed on June 30 in
Kompong Speu.He had previously complained to two local human rights organizations
and the U.N. that he had received death threats. On July 1, Soeung Sem, a
commune candidate for the royalist Funcinpec Party, survived a shooting in Pursat,
but Funcinpec candidate Meas Soy was shot and killed on July 17 in Kompong
Chhnang. SRP activist Toch Savoeun was shot and killed on August 23 by two
unidentified gunmen at his home in Siem Reap. On November 5, SRP candidate
Sam Sophear was beaten to death by five unknown assailants in Battambang.While
Cambodian human rights groups and the Cambodia Office of the U.N.High Commissioner
for Human Rights (COHCHR) determined that at least three of the
killings were politically motivated, local officials attributed the murders to personal
disputes.
In August, after a barrage of criticism from donor countries, human rights
groups and the U.N., the government established a Central Security Office comprising
representatives from the interior and defense ministries, national police,
military, and the National Election Commission (NEC), to address electoral violence.
By mid-November, the office was still inactive.
There were reports of vote buying as early as August. The Committee for Free
and Fair Elections (Comfrel), a Cambodian NGO, reported that CPP activists in
Takeo and Banteay Meanchey provinces were promising gifts to voters in exchange
for pledges of loyalty to the CPP. In September, Comfrel reported widespread confiscation
of voter registration cards by CPP officials and accused the CPP of pressuring
people in many provinces to sign documents pledging to vote for the CPP.
Local authorities and in some cases uniformed police officers carried out voter
opinion surveys on behalf of the CPP, distributing forms with lists of names and
photographs of possible candidates. Election monitoring NGOs charged that this
was in violation of the Commune Election Law, which calls for government institutions
to be politically neutral.
Moves Toward a Khmer Rouge Tribunal
Progress toward establishing a tribunal to bring former members of the Khmer
Rouge to justice was slow. In July 2000, the government had agreed on legislation
with the U.N. that would establish a “mixed tribunal” presided over by both Cambodian
and international judges and co-prosecutors.However, the legislation sent
to the Cambodian National Assembly in January 2001 differed markedly from what
had been agreed on, most notably deleting the provision that prior amnesties
would not be a bar to prosecution. This had been designed to ensure that key
people, such as former Khmer Rouge Foreign Minister Ieng Sary, granted a royal
pardon in 1996, could still be brought to justice.
The U.N.’s Office of Legal Affairs sent a strongly worded letter to the Cambodian
government in January, calling for clarifications or changes to seventeen of the
forty-eight articles in the draft law. In June, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan
stressed that the Cambodian law should accord with the previous agreements, but
Prime Minister Hun Sen’s response was that Cambodia would conduct its own tribunal
if the U.N. refused to participate.
In August, the National Assembly passed the tribunal legislation as proposed by
the government.By October, the U.N. had still to agree and sign a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Cambodian government, one of the final steps toward
actually establishing the court. It was clear, however, that former members of the
Khmer Rouge were becoming apprehensive. In August, the Democratic National
Union Movement (DNUM), a group loyal to Ieng Sary, urged the government not
to prosecute their leader, and former Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan issued
a seven-page public letter in which he offered an unusual apology to the Cambodian
people.
Cambodia’s judicial system remained weak and far from independent, with
numerous court decisions influenced by corruption or apparent political influence.
The high-profile trials in June and October of sixty alleged members of the Cambodian Freedom Fighters (CFF) fell short of international standards for fairness.
Most of the defendants were arrested without warrants and had little or no access
to their lawyers while in pre-trial detention, which exceeded the legal limit of six
months. After the first day of the trial of the first thirty-two defendants in June,
most of the lawyers for the accused boycotted the proceedings, citing breaches of
proper procedures. Five lawyers subsequently received anonymous threats of violence
against them if they did not return to the courtroom. The judge appointed
two new lawyers to act for all of the accused, and refused to delay the hearing, leaving
these lawyers with no opportunity to meet their clients or prepare an adequate
defense. On June 22, all but two of the first group of accused were convicted of terrorism
and membership in an illegal armed group, and given sentences ranging
from three years to life in prison.Another twenty-six defendants were convicted in
the October trial.
In September 2001,more than fifty additional CFF suspects were arrested in the
provinces and Phnom Penh.Human rights groups expressed concern that the government’s
response to the CFF’s November 2000 attack in Phnom Penh could be
used as a pretext to intimidate opposition party members, particularly as the commune
election campaign began to get underway.
Two political killings resulted in trials. On March 15, the Kampot provincial
court found commune chief Im Nan, a CPP member, and three accomplices guilty
of the murder of Funcinpec commune candidate Pak Choeun in June 2000. On
October 12, a former soldier, Sang Rin, and another accused were convicted of the
murder of SRP member Uch Horn at a trial in the Kompong Speu provincial court.
In both cases rights groups held that the murders were politically motivated; the
courts, however, attributed both murders to retaliation for the victims’ alleged use
of “black magic.”
Refugee Influx
Beginning in March, a slow but steady stream of refugees from Vietnam entered
Cambodia’s eastern Mondolkiri and Ratanakiri provinces. They were indigenous
minority people from Vietnam’s Central Highlands, known collectively as Montagnards,
who were displaced by a Vietnamese government crackdown in February.
(See Vietnam.) On March 23, Cambodian police arrested twenty-four
Montagnards in Mondolkiri and took them to the municipal Gendarmerie headquarters
in Phnom Penh,where they detained them for several weeks. Prime Minister
Hun Sen initially threatened to deport the group, saying he did not want
Cambodia to become a haven for other countries’ political opponents. After considerable
international pressure, Cambodia agreed to allow United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) representatives to interview the Montagnards
on March 31, and by April, thirty-eight Montagnards were resettled in the
United States.
In the following months, more than 1,000 Montagnards crossed the border to
Cambodia. Provincial officials forcibly returned several hundred back to Vietnam
and in May attempted to arrest and deport several refugees under UNHCR protection.
After negotiations between UNHCR and the government, and pressure from several foreign embassies,Cambodia agreed to provide temporary asylum to Montagnards
fleeing Vietnam at two sites operated by UNHCR.As of October, the number
of Montagnards asylum seekers in Cambodia had swelled to more than seven
hundred.
Unlike in neighboring Laos and Vietnam, recent years have seen the development
of a thriving civil society in Cambodia and the emergence of hundreds of
local NGOs.The government generally does not obstruct public meetings. In June,
however, the Council of Ministers banned a public forum on the country’s border
disputes, organized by the Students Movement for Democracy, on grounds that it
could confuse the public by raising disagreements with the government’s National
Committee on Border Disputes.
For the most part, rallies and demonstrations were allowed, although demonstrators
were sometimes dispersed by police or by counter-demonstrators organized
by the government. As in previous years, hundreds of farmers from the
countryside periodically gathered in front of the National Assembly to demand resolution
of land or fishing conflicts or appeal for flood and food relief. In February,
scuffles broke out in Siem Reap at the SRP’s annual congress, when counterdemonstrators
were trucked in to disrupt the proceedings. Police used water cannons
to disperse a Buddhist ceremony organized to mark the end of the SRP’s
congress, reportedly because the SRP lacked proper authorization to hold the ceremony.
In May, more than seven hundred market vendors in Siem Reap demonstrated
against a provincial decision to evict them from the provincial market and construct
a new market where vendors would be charged higher rents. Cambodian
human rights groups urged the provincial authorities to organize a public forum to
resolve the dispute. Instead, on July 9, police and soldiers surrounded the market,
firing in the air and forcibly removed the vendors, at least fourteen of whom were
beaten, handcuffed and temporarily detained by provincial military police. Several
SRP parliamentarians observing the process were also assaulted. In August, Hun
Sen supported a proposal for negotiations to resume between the vendors and representatives
of the market developers.
Cambodian television stations were still owned fully or partly by the government,
which continued to deny a broadcast license to the opposition SRP on the
grounds that no frequencies were available. In February, Sam Rainsy announced
plans to start broadcasting a one-hour radio program from an un-named Asian
country. Only one independent radio station, Sambok Kmum (Beehive), broadcast
during the year. The NEC’s media monitoring subcommittee primarily focused on
the political content of voter education materials produced by election NGOs,
rather than the denial of access to the airwaves by opposition parties during the
election campaign. NGO leaders were occasionally featured on radio and television
programs to discuss social issues.
More than two dozen privately owned newspapers were published, including
some affiliated with opposition groups. Foreign Minister Hor Nam Hong sued
three journalists from the English-language Cambodia Daily for defamation after
they published an article in January that examined his alleged role in the Khmer
Rouge regime. In September, the Phnom Penh municipal court ordered the journalists to pay U.S. $6,500 in compensation to Hor Nam Hong and a $1,280 fine to
the government.Both sides appealed the decision. In August, the Ministry of Information
banned a Khmer-language book written by Sam Rainsy entitled “Light of
Justice,” saying that it made false allegations about the government. In response,
Rainsy filed a complaint against the banning in the Phnom Penh municipal court
in September.
The Ministry of Information revived a media subdecree, in the works since
1996. It included provisions for the licensing of newspapers and defined vague
terms used in the 1994 Press Law, including national security and political stability.
As a result of pressure from journalist associations and human rights groups, several
provisions were dropped from the original draft subdecree, including requirements
that publishers certify that they have 2.5 million riel (about U.S. $640) in the
bank and health certificates showing they have no mental problems.
Freedom of expression came under threat in September, when the Ministry of
Cults and Religion issued a decision forbidding political discussions in the
country’s mosques following the September 11 attacks in the United States as well
as a controversial leadership split in a mosque near Phnom Penh. In October,Hun
Sen reversed the ministry’s decision.
Prison conditions continued to be poor, with many facilities seriously overcrowded
and lacking adequate medical care, food, and water. At least six prisoners
died within a two-month period in Prey Sar prison in Phnom Penh because of
insufficient food and medication, according to a report by a Cambodian human
rights organization. The use of shackles was reported in prisons in Kompong Som
and Kompong Cham. Pre-trial detention beyond the legal limit of six months was
common.
Torture continued to be used with impunity, particularly by police officers
attempting to extract confessions from suspects in custody. Police also failed to
intervene to stop violence against women either in the home,where domestic abuse
was considered a family matter, or in the sex industry,which is often supported and
protected by members of the military, police or other government officials.
Cambodian human rights organizations increasingly gave attention to social
and environmental rights.Villagers filed complaints protesting the confiscation by
military officers and local officials of natural resources that rural communities
depend on for their livelihoods - such as bamboo, tree resin, and rattan. They also
protested the government’s granting of concessions to exploit such resources.Environmental
and human rights advocates worked to draft a Community Forest Subdecree
that would protect community user rights to forests that villagers rely upon
for collection of forest products. In April, the Department of Forestry issued an
instruction calling for the temporary suspension, in all forest concessions, of cutting
of all trees from which people collect resin.
Positive steps were taken during the year to protect community fisheries, on
which a huge percentage of Cambodians depend. In late 2000 Hun Sen announced
that fishing lots would be taken away from large concessionaires and returned to
local people. He subsequently dismissed the director of the Department of Fisheries
for not implementing the decision.The department involved local communities
in developing legislation to protect community fisheries, setting a positive
precedent for local participation in natural resource management. Despite these efforts, poor implementation of policies at the local level, reflected in the confiscation
of community fishing lots by fishery department officials, continued to pose a
problem in some areas.
Land conflicts also remained a major issue throughout the country. Legal Aid of
Cambodia (LAC), a local NGO, reported that its land-related caseload involved
7,000 families, or 35,000 people, with the vast majority of the conflicts involving
military commanders or provincial and local officials. In one high-profile case,
indigenous minority villagers in Ratanakiri province filed a lawsuit seeking to protect
their rights to 1,250 hectares of village land that they said had been fraudulently
obtained by a representative of a military general.Villagers were given bags of salt
and promises of development in return for their thumbprints on documents
that—without their knowledge—transferred ownership of their ancestral lands to
the general. In a decision in March, the Ratanakiri provincial court ruled against the
villagers’ civil complaint.With the help of LAC the villagers then took the case to
the Appeals Court in Phnom Penh, but it had not been heard by November. In July,
the National Assembly passed a new land law, drafted with the input of NGOs and
local communities, designed to stem the widespread practice of land grabbing.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Several dozen Cambodian human rights organizations were active throughout
the country investigating violations, monitoring prison conditions, observing trials,
and conducting human rights education. In addition, three large NGOs specializing
in election observation monitored voter registration and the commune
election process. Overall, the atmosphere for NGOs was less threatening than in
previous years. Several times during the year, however, public officials issued
strongly worded warnings to NGOs. In the months following the November 2000
CFF attack in Phnom Penh, human rights groups and their leaders came under
strong criticism from officials when the groups called for due process to be followed
in the arrests and trial of alleged CFF members. In several speeches Prime Minister
Hun Sen charged that NGOs were hiding terrorists “under their logos” and threatened
them with arrest.
Global Witness, which has served as an independent monitor within the government’s
Forest Crime Monitoring and Reporting project since 1999, came under
fire in January when it released a report critical of illegal logging and resource rights
abuses just prior to an international donor meeting. Government officials said
Global Witness should have given them the opportunity to review and comment on
the report before it was publicized.Prime Minister Hun Sen threatened to expel the
group from Cambodia but relented after pressure from donors. In June, Global
Witness signed an agreement with the government on new reporting procedures
shortly before the annual donor meeting.
In July, Hun Sen criticized the Human Rights Action Committee for its statements
deploring the rise in political violence. He said the burden of proof was on
the NGOs to show that the killings of commune candidates were politically motivated.
In October, the acting director of the Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (Licadho), a local human rights group, faced criminal
charges when a court accepted a complaint by the adoptive parents of a seven-yearold
girl whom Licadho was housing. Licadho previously had sought child abuse
charges against the adoptive parents and had been granted temporarily lawful custody
of the child. Cambodian and international rights groups expressed concern
that the initiation of criminal proceedings appeared to be without foundation and
aimed at intimidating Licadho.As of November, the case had not yet been heard.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The Cambodia Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(COHCHR) maintained a field operation in Phnom Penh and several provinces.
The U.N. Secretary General’s Special Representative for Human Rights in Cambodia,
Peter Leuprecht,made several visits to Cambodia during the year, and called for
increased foreign aid while urging the government to address broad issues of
poverty, violence, corruption, and lawlessness. During Leuprecht’s June trip, he
expressed reservations about the Khmer Rouge tribunal bill that had been passed
by the National Assembly. In August he condemned mounting political violence
against commune candidates and urged the government to cease its involvement in
election-related opinion surveys.He constantly pressed the government to formalize
its memorandum of understanding with COHCHR so as to extend its mandate,
last renewed in March 2000, and to address the security concerns of COHCHR’s
Cambodian staff.
Relations between the government and the UNHCR were strained at times,
particularly over the issue of refoulement of Montagnard asylum seekers to
Vietnam.
Major Donors
Donors pledged U.S. $560 million at the World Bank chaired Consultative
Group meeting, hosted by Japan in June.Most donors praised the Cambodian government’s
efforts to improve political stability and the economy, although some
raised human rights concerns as well. A study on key governance issues prepared
for the Asian Development Bank, released in May, criticized corruption, lack of
government transparency and weaknesses in the judiciary, and called for concrete
reforms as a precondition for assistance. In August, the World Bank approved a U.S.
$18.4 million loan to demobilize 30,000 soldiers and reintegrate them to civilian
life.
China increasingly became a key player in Cambodia. In May, visiting Chinese
Prime Minister Li Peng told Hun Sen that China would consider aid requests totaling
U.S. $60 million to assist road construction and demobilization.
Several donors, including Japan,Australia, and the European Union (E.U.),were
expected to help meet the costs of the commune elections. In July, an E.U. delegation
called for an intimidation-free environment before and during the election. In
a meeting with Deputy Prime Minister Sarkheng in September, the U.S., U.K., Canadian, Swedish and other ambassadors expressed concern over the low rate of
voter registration and pressed for extension of the registration period. On September
6, the European Parliament passed a resolution deploring political violence and
calling for E.U. observers to monitor the commune elections.
A number of donor countries expressed interest in funding the Khmer Rouge
Tribunal or nominating judges to participate in the proceedings once a final agreement
is reached. Japan was expected to contribute an estimated U.S. $60 million.
Judges from Australia, France, India, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom and the
United States were considered candidates to preside over the trials, along with
Cambodia judges.China,which was one of the Khmer rouge’s main financial backers,
was not expected to participate.
The U.S. took a strong stand on the Montagnard refugee issue, swiftly resettling
thirty-eight Montagnards in the U.S. in April and consistently pressing for protection
of asylum seekers by both UNHCR and Cambodian authorities. In August, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a strongly worded response after the U.S. ambassador
criticized government corruption at a public forum, charging that “inflammatory
words inciting revolt against the royal government of Cambodia” had been
used.
Cambodia’s relations with Vietnam were tense at times over the Montagnard
issue. During a visit to Cambodia in July, Vietnamese Public Security Minister Le
Minh Huong signed a bilateral agreement with Deputy Prime Minister Sar Kheng
on cooperation to stem illegal immigration, drug smuggling and organized crime.
In November, Vietnamese and Cambodian officials were slated to sign several
agreements, including one on border and immigration issues, during a visit to
Phnom Penh by Vietnamese President Tan Duc Luong.
CHINA AND TIBET
The Chinese leadership’s preoccupation with stability in the face of continued
economic and social upheaval fueled an increase in human rights violations.
China’s increasingly prominent international profile, symbolized in 2001
by its entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) and by Beijing’s successful
bid to host the 2008 Olympics, was accompanied by tightened controls on fundamental
freedoms.The leadership turned to trusted tools, limiting free expression by
arresting academics, closing newspapers and magazines, strictly controlling Internet
content, and utilizing a refurbished Strike Hard campaign to circumvent legal
safeguards for criminal suspects and alleged separatists, terrorists, and so-called
religious extremists. In its campaign to eradicate Falungong, Chinese officials
imprisoned thousands of practitioners and used torture and psychological pressure
to force recantations. Legal experts continued the work of professionalizing
the legal system but authorities in too many cases invoked “rule of law” to justify
repressive politics.After the September 11 attacks in the United States,Chinese officials used concern with global terrorism as justification for crackdowns in Tibet
and Xinjiang.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Starting in late 2000, authorities began tightening existing restrictions on the
circulation of information, limiting the space available to academics, journalists
and Internet users. Attacks on academic researchers may have been partly a
response to the January 2001 publication of the Tiananmen Papers, a collection of
government documents spirited out of China which described in detail the role
played by Chinese leaders at the time of the historic June 1989 crackdown.
In December 2000,Guangdong’s publicity bureau told newspapers and journals
not to publish articles by eleven prominent scholars. In June 2001, one of those
named, economist He Qinglian, fearing imminent arrest, fled China.Although her
1998 book, China’s Pitfalls, had been widely praised by the Communist leadership
for its exposé of corruption, she later angered authorities when she publicized the
widening income gap in the country.
Between February and September, four Chinese academics who were either naturalized
U.S. citizens or permanent U.S. residents were arrested, tried on charges of
spying for Taiwan, and then deported. The four were Dr. Gao Zhan, a scholar at
American University in Washington; journalist and writer Wu Jianmin; Qin
Guangguang, a former editor and scholar; and Dr. Li Shaomin, a naturalized U.S.
citizen teaching in Hong Kong. Sichuan native Xu Zerong, a Hong Kong resident
since 1987, detained in June 2000, was still in custody in November 2001.
Scholars were also affected when the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
rescinded invitations to foreign and Taiwan scholars to participate in an August
2001 conference on income disparities. In November 2000, authorities cancelled an
officially sponsored poets’meeting in Guangxi province after it became known that
dissident poets, some of whom helped underground colleagues publish, were
expected to attend. Three organizers were detained. In May, police in Hunan
province raided a political reading club that had attracted teachers and intellectuals,
and detained several participants including the founder.
Restrictions on information flows also affected HIV-AIDS research and reporting.
In May, Beijing prohibited Dr. Gao Yaojie,who had helped publicize the role of
unsanitary blood collection stations in the spread of the disease, from traveling to
the U.S. to receive an award. Earlier,Henan health officials had accused her of being
used by “anti-Chinese forces;” local officials, who often profited from the sale of
blood, had warned her not to speak out. In July, village cadres refused to allow her
to enter their AIDS-ridden villages.
Media regulations were also tightened. In November, the Communist Party’s top
publicity official signaled a new policy when he told a meeting of journalists that
“the broad masses of journalists must be in strict agreement with the central committee
with President Jiang Zemin at its core,” a warning repeated in January by
Jiang himself. The same month, a Party Central Propaganda Department internal
circular warned that any newspaper, television channel, or radio station would be
closed if it acted independently to publish stories on sensitive or taboo topics such as domestic politics, national unity, or social stability. The regulations instituted a
new warning system; after three citations, a media outlet was subject to closure.
By June, the Party had instituted a stricter regime.A decree expanded taboo content
to include speculation on leadership changes, calls for political reforms, criticism
of Party policies including those related to ethnic minorities or religion, and
rejection of the guiding role ofMarxism-Leninism and Mao-Deng theories,among
many other categories. The decree forbade independent reporting on major corruption
scandals, major criminal cases, and human and natural disasters and
threatened immediate shutdown for violators. The government also ordered a
nationwide campaign to educate journalists in “Marxist news ideology.”
In the immediate aftermath of the September 11 attacks in New York and Washington,
the Chinese Communist Party’s Central Committee Propaganda Department
ordered news media to refrain from playing up the incident, relaying foreign
news photos or reports, holding forums, or publishing news commentaries without
permission. Chinese youth had welcomed the attacks on Internet postings
and officials said the restrictions were needed to prevent damage to U.S.-China
relations.
Authorities routinely prohibited the domestic press from reporting on incidents
it considered damaging to China’s image.After a military truck blew up in Xinjiang
in November 2000, three journalists were sanctioned for “violat[ing] news discipline
and reveal[ing] a lot of detailed information”before Xinhua, the official news
agency, printed the official line on the incident.News media in China are required
to use Xinhua reports on any stories that local or central propaganda authorities
deem sensitive. In June, Yao Xiaohong, head of news for Dushi Consumer Daily in
Jiangxi province, was dismissed after reporting an illegal kidney transplant from an
executed prisoner. In October, under pressure from central government publicity
authorities, he was fired from his new job at the Yangcheng Evening News in Guangdong
province. Jiang Weiping, a Dalian, Liaoning province journalist who had
exposed corruption, received a nine-year prison sentence in September 2001 for
“leaking state secrets.”
Chinese authorities moved against publications as well as individual journalists.
In May, Today’s Celebrities was peremptorily closed for printing articles about corruption
and the Cultural Revolution (1966-76). In June, authorities replaced the
acting editor and other editorial staff at Southern Weekend (Nanfang Zhoumuo),
China’s most outspoken news publication after the magazine published a series of
articles blaming the government for problems in rural areas. Officials also closed
the Guangxi Business Daily, which had operated for two years as an independent,
privately-owned paper,when it refused to merge with the Guanxi Daily. In Jiangsu
province, officials ordered the immediate suspension of the Business Morning Daily
after it suggested that President Jiang’s policies had advanced Shanghai’s development
at the expense of other cities.
In August, party leaders associated with Jiang used publishing regulations to
shutter an opposition party faction, suspending the theoretical journal Seeking
Truth, (Zhenli de Zhuiqui) which had opposed Jiang’s proposal to allow private
entrepreneurs to become party members, and tightening control over Mainstream
(Zhongliu) and Contemporary Thoughts, also affiliated with opposition factions.
That same month, the State Council announced revised “Regulations on Printing,” which included a sweeping provision forbidding publication of reactionary,
erotic, or superstitious materials or “any other” material forbidden by the state. In
early November 2000, courts sentenced ten people to prison terms ranging from
five years to life for illegally printing and selling books about such topics as the Chinese
intelligence community and the film community. In September, tens of thousands
of Falungong publications were among some 500,000 documents confiscated
in Anhui province.
The foreign press was also muzzled. In early March, after Time ran a story on
Falungong, Beijing banned future newsstand sales of the magazine. In June, five
security officers beat an Agence France Presse reporter after he photographed a protestor
outside a “Three Tenors” concert held to support Beijing’s Olympic bid. In
July, government officials in Beijing prohibited the U.S. CBS television network
from transmitting video footage for a story about Falungong. Chinese authorities
banned the October 29 issue of Newsweek when it ran a cover story on corruption.
China Central Television also reneged on a July agreement to air in full U.S. Secretary
of State Colin Powell’s Beijing interview. It cut one-fifth of his remarks,
including those defending U.S. criticism of Beijing’s human rights record.
Other moves to tighten information flows and increase government control
included the construction of new jamming facilities aimed at preventing ethnic
groups in Tibet and Xinjiang from receiving news from overseas “hostile radio stations.”
In May, the State Administration of Radio, Film, and Television ordered all
cable TV networks folded into provincial or municipal broadcasting networks. In
July and August, the State Press and Publications Administration announced plans
to set up publishing conglomerates to consolidate control of magazines and newspapers.
Stringent regulations on rapidly growing Internet use came into effect in
November 2000. New regulations required general portal sites to get their news
solely from state-controlled media, required that bulletin board services and chatrooms
limit postings to approved topics, and made monitoring of postings routine.
A month later,Chinese authorities increased the number of Internet police to more
than 300,000. In January 2001, a new regulation made it a capital crime to send
“secret”or “reactionary”information over the Internet. In February, software called
Internet Police 100, capable of “capturing” computer screens and “casting” them
onto screens at local public security bureaus, was released in versions that could be
installed in homes, cafés, and schools. But even with some sixty sets of regulations
in force, President Jiang in July decried the spread of “pernicious information”over
the Web and called the existing legal framework inadequate.
Chinese regulations limited news postings on the websites of U.S.-based companies
operating in China. The English chatroom of SOHU.com, partly owned by
Dow Jones, posted a list of issues prohibited on the Internet by Chinese law, including
criticism of the Chinese constitution, topics which damage China’s reputation,
discussion that undermines China’s religious policy, and “any discussion and promotion
of content which PRC laws prohibit.” The posting continues: “If you are a
Chinese national and willingly choose to break these laws, SOHU.com is legally
obligated to report you to the Public Security Bureau.”An internal AOL memo recommended
that if AOL were asked what it would do if the Chinese government demanded records relating to political dissidents, AOL staff should respond “It is
our policy to abide by the laws of the country in which we offer services.”
Chinese officials stopped licensing new Internet cafes beginning in April while
public security departments checked more than 55,000 cafes. In October, officials
announced that more than 17,000 had been closed. Internet bulletin boards, chat
rooms, and online magazines, including university-based sites and those catering
to journalists, were also closed. Sites that were normally blocked, such as those of
U.S. newspapers, were unblocked during the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) summit in Shanghai in mid-October, but blocked again as soon as the conference
was over.
At least sixteen people were arrested or sentenced in 2001 for using the Internet
to send information or express views that the leadership disliked. Four others were
tried at the end of September on charges of subversion for organizing a new youth
organization and publishing articles about political reform. As of mid-November,
there was still no information available on the outcome of Huang Qi’s secret trial in
August 2001.Huang was charged with subversion for featuring articles about democracy
on his website.
Political dissidents continued to be persecuted, including members of the
banned China Democracy Party.Activists associated with the Southern Mongolian
Democratic Alliance, which seeks to promote Mongolian traditions and cultural
values, and farmers in the Three Gorges dam area protesting corruption associated
with resettlement in the dam basin were also monitored and in some cases arrested
and sentenced on spurious charges.
On April 3, 2001, President Jiang initiated a three-month Strike Hard (yan da)
campaign. Stressing the need to safeguard social stability and the reform process,
he asked that improvements in fighting crime be made with “two tough hands.”The
campaign featured hastily processed cases, denial of due process rights, summary
trials, harsh sentences, mass sentencing rallies, and an upsurge in executions.
Although the use of torture to elicit confessions was illegal, such confessions,
admissible in court,were officially acknowledged. Li Kuisheng, a prominent lawyer
in Zhengzhou, Henan, was finally cleared of all charges and released in January
2001.He had been arrested in November 1998 after defending a client fighting corruption
charges, and under torture had “confessed” to fabricating evidence.
Provinces and municipalities, in a kind of bizarre competition, reported regularly
on their compliance with the campaign. Their accounts included totals of
those apprehended, sentenced, and executed, and information on the kinds of
crimes committed. Capital sentences were imposed for some sixty offenses including,
in addition to violent acts, economic crimes, drug trafficking, smuggling, arms
dealing, racketeering, counterfeiting, poaching, pimping, robbery, and theft. During
the first month of Strike Hard, some 10,000 people were arrested and at least
five hundred executed. By the end of October, at least 1,800 people had been executed,
at least double that number had received death sentences, and officials had
announced they would continue the campaign at least through June 2002 with
increased “intensity.”
Despite the Strike Hard campaign, officials in some areas implicitly acknowledged
unfairness in the criminal justice system. In November 2000, Liaoning officials announced that prosecutions in some cities would be based on proof rather
than confessions, thus guaranteeing suspects’ right to remain silent during criminal
interrogation. In January, the vice-president of the Supreme People’s Court
admitted to corruption within the legal system, including intentional errors of
judgment, forged court papers, and bribe taking. In June, the Supreme People’s
Procuratorate issued six new regulations to prevent violations in the handling of
cases and acknowledged Communist Party interference in sensitive cases.However,
in August, in Luoyang,Henan province, judges who heard the cases of twenty-three
defendants charged in a fire that killed 309 people said they would not release their
findings until they had talked to provincial leaders.
China continued to crack down on groups it labeled cults and on independent
religious organizations. Falungong continued to experience the harshest repression,
with thousands of practitioners assigned to “reeducation through labor”
camps and more than 350 imprisoned, many for nothing more than printing
leaflets or recruiting followers for protests . On June 11, the Supreme People’s Court
and the Supreme People’s Procuratorate issued a new interpretation of cult provisions
in the Criminal Law to make it easier to punish practitioners on a wide variety
of charges. Authorities also targeted other so-called cults, among them
Zhonggong, Xiang Gong, Guanyin Famin, and Kuangmin Zhaimen, sentencing
their leaders, closing down their offices, and seizing their publications.
A few weeks before Christmas 2000, hundreds of “illegal” Protestant and
Catholic churches and Buddhist and Taoist temples and shrines in Wenzhou were
demolished. In March and April, several dozen house church leaders in Hubei
province were detained; in May, twelve others were administratively sentenced in
Inner Mongolia. Beijing also instituted a special study group to bring Christianity
“into line with socialism” through reinterpretation of basic beliefs. The continuing
government-ordered merger of Catholic dioceses, a move that went unrecognized
by Rome, also signaled Beijing’s determination to run the church in accord with its
own needs. In October, after Pope John Paul expressed regrets for Catholic Church
errors committed during the “colonial period” and expressed hope of normalized
relations, Chinese religious officials responded by demanding that the Vatican first
sever its ties with Taiwan, refrain from “using the pretext of religious issues to meddle
in Chinese internal affairs,” and apologize for last year’s canonization of “foreign
missionaries and their followers who committed notorious crimes in China.”
Detentions in 2001 included those of several elderly influential bishops and priests.
One priest, Father Lu, was sentenced administratively in April to three years’ reeducation
through labor for refusing to join the official Catholic Patriotic Association
and continuing to preach the gospel and celebrate Mass. In May, the Chinese government
leveled the grave of Bishop Fan Xueyan, a prominent “underground”
bishop who died in 1992, to prevent Catholics from paying their respects.
Reports of clashes between police and workers and farmers protesting layoffs,
unpaid wages and benefits, corruption, and relocation problems continued
throughout the year. In April, police in Yuntang, Jiangxi arrested five villagers who
had been leading a three-year protest against new taxes, then stormed the village
killing two unarmed protestors and injuring some thirty-eight others. In October,
police in Qingdao, Shandong detained protestors demonstrating against the city’s failure to honor its commitment to provide appropriate housing for residents displaced
by a real estate project.
Labor activists also continued to be targeted. In one prominent case, Li
Wangyang,imprisoned from 1989 to 2000 for labor activism, was sentenced in September
to a new ten-year prison term after petitioning for compensation for mistreatment
suffered while serving the prior term. Li’s sister received a three-year
administrative sentence on June 7 for publicizing her brother’s case.
In October 2001, authorities passed a new Trade Union Law requiring enterprises
with more than twenty-five workers to establish a union and prohibiting
management personnel from holding important union positions, but only government-
affiliated unions were mentioned in the law and the right to strike was not
guaranteed. Also in October, authorities revised residential regulations to allow
rural residents to apply for residence in some small cities and towns so long as they
could first find jobs and homes. In most cities, however, continuance of the existing
permit system left migrants open to abuses by their employers, the police, and
private security guards.Most migrant parents, even if legally registered, could not
afford school fees for regular city schools, forcing them to send their children back
to the countryside, keep them out of school, or send them to inferior “migrant”
schools. Before the start of classes in September, officials closed fifty migrant
schools in one Beijing district.
Tibet
China revised its overall Tibetan policy in June 2001, the fourth such change
since it took command of the region in 1950. Goals for 2001-2006 included accelerated
economic development and tightened control over alleged “secessionist”
activities. During a July visit,Vice-President Hu Jintao stated that it was “essential
to fight unequivocally against separatist activities by the Dalai clique and anti-
China forces in the world.”
Efforts to engage the Chinese leadership in a dialogue with representatives of the
Dalai Lama were unsuccessful in 2001. Following the Dalai Lama’s criticism of Chinese
policy during a speech to the European Parliament general assembly on October
24, Chinese officials reiterated their position that talks could take place only if
the Dalai Lama renounced his “separatist stand” and openly acknowledged that
Tibet was an inalienable part of China, Taiwan merely a province, and “the government
of the People’s Republic of China the sole legitimate government representing
the whole of China.”
At the beginning of the Tibetan New Year in February, government workers,
cadres, and school children were banned from attending prayer festivals at monasteries
or from contributing to temples and monasteries. During Monlam Chemo,
formerly a festival of great religious significance, monks at Lhasa’s major monasteries
were not permitted to leave their respective complexes, and government
authorities banned certain rites.
The Strike Hard campaign in Tibet had a decidedly political focus. At a May
meeting in Lhasa, capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR), courts were
ordered to carry out the campaign forcefully against “those whose crimes endanger state security,” and “those who guide people illegally across borders,” in other
words, against those who help Tibetans reach Nepal or Dharamsala, India, the Dalai
Lama’s home in exile. During the first month of the campaign, 254 people were
caught trying to leave or reenter the TAR, many allegedly carrying “reactionary
propaganda materials.” In June, police in the Lhasa region detained hundreds of
Tibetans who burned incense, said prayers, or threw tsampa (roasted barley) into
the air in defiance of an order banning celebration of the Dalai Lama’s birthday.
Some twenty Tibetans were arrested or sentenced in 2001 for “splittist”activities. In
October, at least three foreign tourists and three Tibetans were detained in Lhasa in
October for displaying the banned Tibetan flag and shouting pro-independence
slogans.
Authorities cut back the number of nuns and monks from 8,000 to 1,400 at the
Buddhist Study Center Larung Gar near Serthar in Sichuan province, destroying
their housing as they left. A similar order was put into effect at Yachen, another
encampment in Sichuan. Authorities continued to deny access to the Panchen
Lama,the second most important figure in Tibetan Buddhism.The boy,now twelve
years old, disappeared from public view in 1995 after Beijing chose another child as
the reincarnation. Chadrel Rinpoche, the senior lama who led the search, was still
in prison. He was last seen in mid-May 1995 shortly before he was sentenced to a
six-year prison term.
Xinjiang
Even before September 18, when the Chinese government publicly equated
Uighur calls for autonomy or independence with global terrorism, Beijing had
instituted strict measures to crush “separatism” and “religious extremism” in Xinjiang.
In April, at the beginning of the nationwide Strike Hard campaign, Ablat
Abdureshit, chairman of the region, was explicit as to targets in Xinjiang: “national
splittists,”“violent terrorists,” and “religious extremists.”At the same time, the leadership
reiterated its determination to develop the region economically. Both campaigns
were entrusted to patriotic Party cadres working at the grassroots, kept in
check by a local law passed in May threatening punishment should they sympathize
with Uighur aims. In June, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (formerly the
Shanghai Five), composed of China,Russia and four republics in Central Asia, reiterated
its pledge of cooperation to combat “terrorism, separatism and extremists”
and to establish “a regular anti-terrorist structure.”
Efforts to bring religious practices under the aegis of the state included the April
formation of a China Islamic Affairs Steering Committee under the administration
of the Islamic Association of China. The members, sixteen senior China-based
experts on Islam, interpreted religious doctrines in accordance with Chinese law,
drafted sermon pamphlets, and worked to bring Islam into conformity with Chinese
political ideology. An imam “patriotic reeducation” campaign, begun in
March, assigned some 8,000 religious leaders to twenty-day sessions stressing patriotism,
upholding Party leadership, combating separatism, and the like. In a number
of cases, mosques were leveled, clerics arrested, and “illegal” books and audio
cassettes confiscated.
Although there were credible reports of violence by Uighur separatists in Xinjiang,
strict Chinese controls on information coming from the region often made it
impossible to know whether particular individuals had indeed committed criminal
acts or whether they were being punished for exercising their rights to free political
expression, association, or assembly. Typical charges included “splittism,” subverting
state power, setting up an organization to establish Islamic rule, stockpiling
weapons, endangering social order, and printing anti-government literature.There
were also new reports of torture, forced confessions, unfair trial procedures, and
collective punishment. In November 2000,Abdulelil Abdumejit died while serving
a sentence for the anti-Chinese riots in Yining in 1997. Supporters claim he died
from beatings and torture; the state claims he died from his refusal to follow an
appropriate medical regime.
The Strike Hard campaign exacerbated the rate of arrests and sentencing.
Within three months of the campaign’s start in April,Xinjiang police reported that
they had arrested 605 suspects, destroyed six separatist and terrorist organizations,
and, in conjunction with the procuracy, held more than one hundred rallies before
300,000 spectators to parade “criminals” and announce sentences before a public
expected to signify approval.Rebiya Kadeer, a Uighur businesswoman sentenced to
an eight-year prison term in March 2000 for sending local newspapers to her husband
in the U.S., continued to be limited to one family visit every three months.
Rebiya’s four sons, one of whom was released from a “reeducation through labor”
camp in February, continued to be subjected to harassment and surveillance.
Hong Kong
Hong Kong authorities continued to defer to Beijing on a range of important
questions. In July,Hong Kong’s legislature, of which elected members are a minority,
passed legislation acknowledging Beijing’s power to remove Hong Kong’s chief
executive, even though the Basic Law, which governs Hong Kong-mainland relations,
is silent on the question.Although many observers noted a continuing trend
toward media self-censorship and other pressures on civil liberties, the year was
also significant for what did not happen. Despite surveillance and escalating rhetoric,
the Hong Kong government did not ban Falungong or enact an anti-cult law.
After losing a “right of abode” case in Hong Kong’s high court, authorities did not
seek reinterpretation from Beijing as they had in May 1999. Finally, government
and university officials did not block Li Shaomin, convicted in July on the mainland
of spying for Taiwan and subsequently deported, from returning and resuming his
teaching duties at the City University of Hong Kong.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
No independent watchdog organizations were permitted in China; in Hong
Kong there was a vibrant NGO community functioning without any apparent government
interference.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
On February 28,China ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights but took a reservation on the right to freely organize and join
trade unions. In May, the International Labor Organization signed an agreement to
provide assistance with social security, job retraining, and worker health and safety
concerns, but did not address the right of free association. China still had not ratified
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which it signed in
1998.
Mary Robinson, the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, visited
Beijing in February and November for workshops on punishment of minor crimes
and human rights education, respectively. In her November visit, Robinson also
met with Jiang Zemin, pressed for access for the U.N. special rapporteur on torture,
warned China not to use the war on terrorism to justify its crackdown in Xinjiang,
and signed a Memorandum of Understanding for expanded technical
cooperation. In August, the U.N. held a workshop in Beijing on human rights and
the police.
On April 19, the U.N.Commission on Human Rights adopted China’s no-action
motion, twenty-three to seventeen with twelve abstentions and one absence, blocking
debate of a U.S.-sponsored resolution critical of China’s rights record.No other
governments co-sponsored the resolution.
In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
issued “concluding observations” following review of China’s report on its implementation
of the convention. The committee expressed concern about restrictions
on freedom of religion for national minorities in Tibet and Xinjiang, and discrimination
in education, particularly in Tibet. In May, the Committee reviewed Hong
Kong’s record under the Convention, noting the SAR’s failure to enact an anti-racial
discrimination law.
Olympics
China waged an aggressive campaign on behalf of Beijing’s bid to host the
Olympics in 2008.Human rights were raised in the international debate leading up
to the July 17 decision in Moscow to award the games to Beijing, but the IOC set no
human rights preconditions and ignored appeals from Human Rights Watch and
others to set up an independent monitoring committee. Chinese officials publicly
pledged to allow foreign journalists covering the games unrestricted access to the
country.
United States
The Bush administration’s policy towards China shifted from a confrontational
posture early on, to cordial by mid-year, to cooperative in the post-September 11
climate. Bush put a heavy emphasis on religious freedom. But after September 11, it was unclear how effectively the administration would balance human rights concerns,
trade, and cooperation with China on anti-terrorism initiatives.
The early months of the Bush administration were marked by tensions over
arms sales to Taiwan and detentions of China scholars.When Vice Premier Qian
Qichen visited Washington to meet Bush in March to smooth relations,Bush raised
specific cases of detained academics.A low point came in April when Chinese forces
captured a U.S.Navy spy plane and its crew.
The administration embraced expanded trade with China, and supported
China’s formal entry into membership of the World Trade Organization on
November 10 at the Doha, Qatar ministerial meeting.The National People’s Congress
had not ratified the accession agreement by mid-November.
A Congressional-Executive Commission on China was established mid-year; it
was required under legislation enacted in October 2000 giving China permanent
normal trade relations (PNTR). It had nine members each from the House and
Senate, and representatives from the departments of State, Commerce, and Labor.
The commission was charged with monitoring human rights, rule of law, labor
rights, and religious freedom in China and with making U.S. policy recommendations.
But its first report, due in October 2001, was delayed until 2002, and the
Commission held no meetings or hearings during the year.
The administration and Congress were active in pressing for consular access to
detained China scholars and for their prompt release and return to the U.S. The
high profile cases of Gao Zhan and Li Shaomin were resolved just days before Secretary
Powell’s Beijing visit in July.
During his visit, Powell announced resumption of a U.S.-China human rights
dialogue,which China had suspended following the NATO bombing of its Belgrade
embassy in 1999. A dialogue meeting held from October 9-11 in Washington, DC
produced no immediate results.
In late October, Bush met Jiang Zemin for the first time for bilateral talks at the
Shanghai APEC summit. Bush reportedly raised human rights issues, urged dialogue
with the Dalai Lama, and publicly said that no government should use the
anti-terrorism campaign “as an excuse to persecute minorities within their borders.”
When U.S. military strikes began against Afghanistan, China had appealed
for international support for its crackdown in Xinjiang.
Canada, European Union, and Japan
During trade meetings in China in February, Canadian Prime Minister Jean
Chretien raised human rights concerns in Tibet and the crackdown on Falungong,
and the two countries held a human rights dialogue in July.
The European Union, under public pressure to show more progress from its
human rights dialogues with China—nine had taken place since 1997—made public
in January a set of objectives including China’s ratification of U.N. covenants,
cooperation with U.N. human rights mechanisms, restrictions on the use of the
death penalty, and international access to prisoners in Tibet and Xinjiang. In February,
the Swedish presidency presided over an E.U.-China rights dialogue and the
E.U. held a seminar on the death penalty in Beijing in May.
In late May, in advance of the Asia-Europe Meeting of E.U. and Asian foreign
ministers in Beijing, the E.U. Council published a revised policy statement on
China, declaring that the E.U. must increase its engagement. Chris Patten, E.U.
Commissioner for External Affairs, argued that expanded contacts would “support
China’s transition to an open society based upon the rule of law and respect for
human rights.”
A China-E.U. summit took place in Brussels on September 5, led by Belgian
Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt and Premier Zhu Rongji.Talks focused on China’s
prospective WTO membership, illegal immigration and trafficking of Chinese to
Europe, and the treatment of North Korean refugees in China. The two sides
affirmed their interest in continuing the human rights dialogue, although Zhu
insisted that China’s human rights record was the best it had ever been.
Japanese policy towards China was marked by tensions over a decision to allow
the former Taiwanese president permission to come to Japan for medical treatment
in April, Chinese outrage over official approval of Japanese history textbooks that
sanitized Japan’s record during World War II, and a visit to a war shrine by new
Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi in August. The prime minister went to
China in early October, in advance of the APEC summit, to apologize to the Chinese
“victims of aggression” and to explain new legislation allowing Japan’s Self
Defense Forces to give logistical support for U.S. attacks in Afghanistan. Another
session in Japan’s bilateral human rights dialogue with China was agreed to in principle,
but as of November, no meeting had taken place.
World Bank
In fiscal year 2001, the World Bank gave over U.S. $787 million in loans to China,
mainly for environmental and infrastructure projects. In fiscal year 2002, which
began in July, it estimated that approximately $950 million in new projects would
be approved. The Bank also continued to fund transportation projects in Xinjiang
and gave small grants to government-sponsored “NGOs,” including groups working
on HIV-AIDS and environmental initiatives. It made some efforts to expand its
consultation process with local communities and international NGOs in designing
new projects, but did not provide new financial support for legal and judicial
reform or use its policy dialogue with China to promote anti-corruption initiatives.
EAST TIMOR
East Timor made steady progress toward self-government, with full independence
scheduled for May 20, 2002.Under the auspices of the U.N.Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), it held a peaceful election in
August for a constituent assembly whose delegates then proceeded to discuss and
debate the nature of the new state: how it would be structured, how power would be shared,what fundamental rights would be guaranteed. In September, an all-East
Timorese Council ofMinisters was appointed as the effective cabinet.The guerrilla
force, Falintil, was transformed during the year into a component of the new East
Timorese Defence Force.Policing was increasingly turned over to local graduates of
the East Timorese police academy. In October, an East Timorese replaced a Tanzanian
expatriate as general prosecutor.
The slow pace of justice continued to be a source of frustration for East Timorese
jurists, human rights advocates, and victims alike, with much of the blame
focused on UNTAET’s Serious Crimes Unit.Nevertheless, prosecutions for serious
crimes committed in 1999 did take place, with the first conviction in November
2001 of a former militia leader for crimes against humanity.
East Timorese who fled or were forcibly expelled to West Timor in 1999 began
to return home in greater numbers. In May, a fifteen-year-old East Timorese girl
was rescued and returned to East Timor from West Timor where she had been held
in sexual slavery in a militia-controlled camp. Following the August election, the
rate of return increased, with more than 3,000 people returning in October.
Although reports continued of militia leaders in the West Timor camps intimidating
refugees and spreading disinformation to discourage them from returning,
their hold over the camps seemed to be steadily declining.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
East Timor took a giant step toward independence with a widely praised election
on August 30, 2001, the second anniversary of the referendum that produced
a vote to separate from Indonesia—and devastating violence. The election for a
constituent assembly involved sixteen parties competing for eighty-eight seats.
Nearly the entire eligible voting population registered and participated, with
almost none of the political violence that had been widely predicted. Prior to the
elections, in June, the National Council of East Timorese Resistance (CNRT), the
pro-independence coalition that had dominated East Timor’s political life for the
last two years, quietly dissolved itself to make way for a more competitive political
system.
Justice for the 1999 violence in East Timor continued to be elusive. By late
November, the office of the general prosecutor in Dili, the capital, had filed thirtythree
indictments for serious crimes, four of which involved crimes against
humanity. But many of the more than seventy suspects named in the indictments
were militia members or Indonesian army officers living in Indonesia, and unlikely
to be prosecuted there, let alone extradited to East Timor.
The sentences handed down by the panel of East Timorese and international
judges in the Dili District Court reflected the seriousness of the crimes. On January
25, Joao Fernandes became the first person convicted ofmurder in connection with
the 1999 violence.He received a sentence of twelve years.(He then escaped, but was
eventually recaptured.) Augostino da Costa, who was convicted in July of killing a
local employee of the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) on August
31, 1999, received a fifteen-year prison sentence. Defendants who cooperated fully with the court and were shown to have themselves been under threat of death from
their commanders when they killed were given similarly heavy sentences.
While such terms for serious crimes would ordinarily have occasioned little
comment, some senior East Timorese officials, including Xanana Gusmao, former
resistance leader and East Timor’s president-in-waiting, questioned whether prosecuting
East Timorese served the interests of justice when the Indonesian architects
of the 1999 violence were not even indicted.
The Serious Crimes Unit’s need to clear the backlog of cases, involving longdetained
suspects, also meant that investigators and prosecutors had no time to
prepare cases against top militia commanders believed to have been responsible for
crimes against humanity—cases which should have been prepared as a top priority
when UNTAET first arrived in Dili. This meant that some commanders, such as
Cancio de Carvalho and his brother,Nemencio, could negotiate their return to East
Timor from West Timor on the understanding they would face trial, yet without
any serious prospect of prosecution.
Criticism of the Serious Crimes Unit surfaced repeatedly during the year,
notably poor administration and weakness of its senior staff, and several good
prosecutors and investigators left in frustration.
Problems also continued with the Dili court due to its lack of good interpreters,
poor or nonexistent translations of dossiers, inadequate court reporters, and inexperienced
defense counsel and other court personnel. In Baucau, East Timor’s second
largest city, the district court was briefly closed in May after assaults on a judge
and prosecutor.Court personnel complained that the U.N. police had failed to provide
adequate security in the face of threats, apparently from people unhappy with
court decisions.
On October 4, a U.S. Federal Court judge ruled in response to a lawsuit based on
the Alien Torts Claim Act that Indonesian General Johny Lumintang should pay
damages of U.S. $66 million for his role in the human rights violations committed
by the Indonesian army following the August 30, 1999, referendum in East Timor.
On October 16, during a seminar in Dili on “Justice and Accountability in East
Timor,” East Timorese nongovernmental organizations called for an international
ad hoc tribunal to be set up to prosecute war crimes and crimes against humanity
in East Timor occurring after Indonesia’s 1975 invasion of the country. One week
later, on October 23, Jakarta’s chief justice of the Supreme Court promised that the
long-delayed ad hoc human rights court to try the East Timor cases would be up
and running in Jakarta by December.
In April East Timor’s provisional legislature, the National Council, approved the
establishment of a Truth, Reception, and Reconciliation. It was designed both to
facilitate the return of former militia members from West Timor and to ease the
burden on the formal judicial system by allowing those responsible for less serious
crimes, such as arson, to confess their crimes before a commission panel and receive
a punishment of community service.
There were some instances of attacks on Muslims during the year, but they were
quickly condemned by East Timorese and UNTAET officials. On January 1 and 2,
2001, stones were thrown at Muslims living in the An-Nur mosque in Dili, and on
March 7, the mosque in Baucau was destroyed.
A long-awaited labor law was finally passed by the National Council in July.
Drafted with the help of the International Labor Organization, it established a system
of labor relations in accordance with ILO standards.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
East Timor’s human rights defenders operated freely and played an active role in
lobbying UNTAET and transitional government institutions. In July, the country’s
premier human rights organization, Yayasan Hak, led an effort to challenge
UNTAET regulations that it felt compromised the independence of the judiciary in
East Timor; the regulations were changed as a result. There were no attacks on
human rights defenders. UNTAET’s Human Rights Unit provided human rights
training programs for East Timorese NGOs.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Australia continued to play a particularly significant role in the reconstruction
of East Timor given its proximity to the new country, and Japan was the largest single
donor. East Timor in general, however, enjoyed strong support from the international
donor community.
In November 2000 and June 2001, international donor conferences were held in
Dili with the specific aim of providing assistance to the East Timorese Defence
Force. Australia was expected to provide major aid to the new force; lusophone
countries were prominently represented at the conference, including Portugal,
Angola, and Mozambique.
The E.U., U.S., Canada, and Australia were among the most active donors with
regard to supporting justice projects.
Portugal and the lusophone countries, notably Brazil, continued to provide
important assistance to East Timor, particularly in the field of education and culture.
Some three hundred students from East Timor went to Portugal for post-high
school studies, and some 150 Portuguese schoolteachers arrived in East Timor.
United Nations
The United Nations administered East Timor for a second year, and despite criticism
within East Timor of some aspects of its role there, it continued to be seen as
a major peace-keeping success story. Given the enormity of the task at hand,
UNTAET, the U.N. Security Council, the international donor community, and
above all, the East Timorese themselves deserved credit for the enormous progress
made in institution- and capacity-building. One question outstanding at the end of
the year, however, was what human rights role the United Nations would have postindependence;
it appeared by November that the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights had secured agreement for a team of human rights monitors to
be assigned to East Timor after UNTAET formally comes to an end.
The Security Council continued to take an active interest in East Timor. In
November 2000, in the aftermath of the killings of three workers from the U.N.
High Commissioner for Refugees office in Atambua,West Timor, a Security Council
delegation visited Indonesia and East Timor. In January 2001, through resolution
1338, the Security Council voted to extend UNTAET’s mandate through
January 2002. On November 1, the Council endorsed May 20, 2002, as the date for
East Timor’s independence and agreed to keep peacekeepers, some civilian staff,
and police trainers in East Timor for up to two years after independence.
United States
In February, legislation was introduced in both houses of the U.S. Congress to
facilitate East Timor’s transition to independence through assistance for democracy
building, support for reconciliation programs, steps to enhance trade and
investment, and training of self defense forces. The bill was incorporated into the
State Department authorization legislation for fiscal year (FY) 2002; final adoption,
which was expected, was pending in late November. In the FY 2002 foreign operations
appropriations bill, the U.S. Congress renewed and strengthened human
rights conditions on International Military Education and Training (IMET) and
government military sales to Indonesia. One condition was progress on accountability
for abuses committed in East Timor.
Xanana Gusmao visited Washington, D.C. in May and met U.S. Secretary of
State Colin Powell. In August, James Kelly, U.S. assistant secretary of state for East
Asia and the Pacific, visited East Timor. He used the opportunity to criticize the
Indonesian government for its lack of progress on accountability for abuses committed
in East Timor in 1999.
European Union
The European Commission remained one of East Timor’s major donors. In
addition to providing significant humanitarian and development aid during the
year, the European Union also fielded the largest delegation of observers—thirty
members in all—for the constituent assembly elections in August.
Japan
Japan supported the creation in Indonesia of an ad hoc human rights court for
East Timor. In August and September, it sent monitors to East Timor and provided
$ 1.19 million in emergency grants to the United Nations Development Program
(UNDP) to assist with monitoring and training of local election administrators in
Indonesia. In November 2001, it decided to dispatch seven hundred members of
Japan’s Self-Defense Forces to East Timor as peacekeepers, mainly for operations in
areas bordering West Timor; an assessment mission was due to visit East Timor
later in the month to finalize plans for the deployment. East Timorese NGOs
opposed the deployment on the grounds that Japan had never compensated East
Timorese victims of atrocities during World War II.
World Bank
The World Bank continued to play an instrumental role in financing development
and reconstruction projects through the Trust Fund for East Timor (TFET).
TFET is administered jointly by World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
World Bank personnel have also been active in working with East Timorese leaders
on setting benchmarks for political and economic goals, for the transition to independence
and beyond. UNDP was active in supporting programs to assist the electoral
process and to aid the administration of justice.
INDIA
In 2001, India held steadfast to its distinction as the region’s most stable and
vibrant democracy even as its neighbors underwent dramatic and often
violent shifts in power.With the onset of the war in Afghanistan, and as relations
with Pakistan deteriorated and violence in Kashmir and elsewhere escalated, the
Indian government faced heightened national security concerns. Some measures
taken in response, including the cabinet approval of the Prevention of Terrorism
Ordinance, came under sharp attack by various sectors of Indian civil society for
opportunistically curtailing civil liberties in the name of fighting terrorism.
Increased violence in the state of Uttar Pradesh, where the Hindu nationalist
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) hopes to achieve a comeback election victory early in
2002, highlighted the dangerous results of exploiting communal and caste tensions
for political ends.
Police violence, attacks on the country’s minority communities including Muslims,
Christians, Dalits and tribals, and violence against women continued to be
serious problems, though some positive steps were taken to help better ensure
women’s and children’s rights. Human rights defenders came under legislative
assault through changes to laws and procedures aimed at restricting their ability to
travel, hold conferences, and receive foreign funds. The U.N. World Conference
Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance
(WCAR), held in South Africa from August 31 to September 8, paved the way for
unprecedented international as well as national scrutiny of the problem of caste
discrimination.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
On January 26, a devastating earthquake rocked the northwest state of Gujarat,
the country’s worst natural disaster in recent history.Within days at least 30,000
were declared dead and over one million were left homeless.While the government
allocated equal amounts of monetary compensation and food supplies to members of all communities, Dalit (so-called untouchable) and Muslim populations did not
have the same access to adequate shelter, electricity, running water, and other supplies
available to others.Upper-caste families in Kutch refused to live alongside Dalits
in temporary settlements built by Rapid Action Forces. As a result, hundreds of
tents lay empty while Dalits were required to live in makeshift shelters. Even relief
kitchens for the two communities had to be kept separate as the higher castes
refused to share resources with those they considered “diseased.”According to local
NGOs, several thousand Dalit homes were also left out of government reconstruction
surveys. In October, Gujarat Chief Minister Keshubhai Patel resigned, in part
because of criticism about the slow pace of relief and rehabilitation following the
earthquake.
Dalit communities continued to suffer systemic discrimination and violence. In
a number of cases, police were complicit in the attacks or used excessive force
against Dalits when they organized to respond to the attacks, rendering legal protections
meaningless. Violence was particularly acute in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar,
and those responsible were rarely brought to justice by the authorities.
On February 19, a group of Thakurs (an upper-caste community) in Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh, assaulted a Dalit laborer following a wage dispute. The perpetrators
entered the victim’s home and pinned him down while the employer urinated in his
mouth. On June 12, assailants beat a Dalit man and then pushed his wife into a fire,
burning her to death. The incident was quickly followed by a spate of violence,
including a June 14 rampage led by seven Thakurs who killed five members of a
Dalit family, including three women and a ten year-old girl. In Aligarh, Uttar
Pradesh in June a Dalit woman and her five children were burnt alive, allegedly by
the staff of a brick kiln operating unit which had employed the woman and her husband
as bonded laborers.
Conditions in Bihar continued to be marred by a caste war involving rival leftist
factions and upper-caste private militias. In January, fifty houses were set ablaze
and four Dalits were killed in a gun battle. On February 3, rival gangs gunned down
twelve Dalit youths, killing nine of them, and subsequently set their homes on fire;
on April 18, militants belonging to the Maoist Communist Center killed fourteen
Dalits. In August, a village in Patna was attacked, killing six Dalit women and children.
Dalits also continued to face considerable opposition in exercising their political
rights. On October 16 in Dharmapuri district, Tamil Nadu, an entire Dalit village
was razed after Dalits dared to nominate their own candidate to the post of
village council president.More than 140 houses were destroyed by members of the
upper-caste community in the area, rendering eight hundred Dalits homeless.
Many were also physically assaulted during the attacks. One pregnant woman was
kicked in the stomach, aborted her child, and died later that day. Police charged
protesting Dalit villagers with batons and arrested more than twenty-two Dalits
while the upper-caste attackers remained at-large.
Social prohibitions on marriages between higher and lower-caste community
members remained in place and were often reinforced through the threat of social
ostracism and punitive violence. On August 6, 2001, an upper-caste Brahmin boy
and a lower-caste Jat girl in Uttar Pradesh were dragged to the roof of a house and
publicly hanged by members of their own families as hundreds of spectators looked on. The public lynching was punishment for refusing to end an inter-caste relationship.
Also in August, a forty-year-old Dalit woman was paraded naked in Bellary,
Karnataka after being accused of helping a fifteen-year-old upper-caste girl
elope with her lower-caste fiancé.
Dalits were often beaten or fined for participating in religious ceremonies. On
April 3 in Bargarh,Orissa, for example, a Dalit was fined Rs. 4,000 (U.S. $83.42) and
beaten for entering a Hindu temple. On June 2 in Bhadkiyan, Rajasthan, an uppercaste
man beat to death a sixty-five-year-old Dalit man with an iron bar for daring
to pray outside the temple of the village deity.
Attacks on churches and members of the Christian clergy by members of right
wing Hindu groups including the Bajrang Dal, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP),
and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), collectively known as the sangh parivar
continued, peaking in July and August.Christians in Orissa,Gujarat,Rajasthan,
Maharastra,Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh were hardest hit.
On November 26, 2000, four hundred VHP activists in Gujarat desecrated and
took over a church, replacing the church’s cross with Hindu idols and hoisting their
signature saffron flag. The mob also drove out eighty Christian families from the
area, confining them to a nearby forest until they embraced Hinduism.
At St.Anna High School in Bokaro district, Bihar, a dozen armed men assaulted
the principal and three nuns, and raped the school cook on December 3, 2000. In
Tamil Nadu a nun was murdered on January 21, 2001, in the state’s Salem district.
On January 23, in Rampur district,Uttar Pradesh, a nun was hospitalized after sustaining
serious head injuries. Two simultaneous attacks on Christian missionaries
on August 6 in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra drew sharp condemnation from
the All India Christian Council and the Catholic Bishops’Conference of India.
From March 16-18,Muslim youth in Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh clashed with state
police during protests over the burning of a Koran in New Delhi by Hindu radicals.
When protesters began to burn an effigy of Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee,
police responded with tear gas and the crowd turned violent. Police then opened
fire as rioters began burning shops and hurling crude bombs. By the end of three
days of riots, fourteen people were dead, dozens injured, and eighty-nine arrested.
Six mosques were damaged, Muslim homes were looted, and the authorities had
imposed a round-the-clock curfew. In the wake of the violence, human rights
groups charged the police with using excessive force against Muslim demonstrators
and looting and plundering Muslim shops and homes.
In the hopes of achieving a comeback victory in assembly elections scheduled
for early 2002 in Uttar Pradesh, India’s most populous state, the BJP and its allies
amplified calls to build a temple to the Hindu god Ram at the site of the Babri
Masjid, a mosque in the city of Ayodhya whose demolition sparked the infamous
1992-1993 Bombay riots in which thousands of people, most notably Muslims,
were killed. In 2001, many feared that the re-energized Ram temple campaign
would lead to more violence and bloodshed between the state’s Hindu and Muslim
communities.
In July, a crowd of three hundred people demolished a sixteenth century mosque
at Asind near Bhilwara, Rajasthan and built a makeshift Hindu temple in its place.
The mob was encouraged by VHP and RSS activists.
The government took some positive steps to prosecute perpetrators of violence against members of minority religious communities. In May, the Jhabua district
court in Madhya Pradesh sentenced ten men to life in prison for the September
1998 gang-rape of four Christian nuns. Prosecution of Dara Singh, accused in the
1999 murder of Australian missionary Graham Staines and his two sons in Orissa,
also continued,with several witnesses testifying that Singh played a key role in instigating
the murder.
There was little progress, however, in many other cases, including those of individuals
indicted by the Srikrishna Commission for their role in the 1992-93 Bombay
riots. One exception occurred in August, however, when a special task force
filed charges against former police commissioner R.D. Tyagi and seventeen policemen
for their role in 1993 riots in the city.
Control over natural resources continued to be the source of violence against
tribal communities in Orissa. On December 16, 2000, three tribals were killed in
Maikanch village, Rayagada district, in clashes with the police over the villagers’
opposition to a proposed private aluminum plant in the area. A fact-finding team,
which included retired Chief Justice D.S. Tewatia, claimed that the attack was preplanned
and demanded a judicial probe, alleging that an administrative inquiry
ordered by the state government was a “cover-up operation.” On October 30, 2001,
in Rangabhatti village, three tribals were killed and over fifty were injured when
police reportedly opened fire on a gathering of four hundred tribals. The tribals
were protesting against the June 24 killing of two people by an armed mob of 3,000
in Jambodora, a Dalit village. Two more people were killed by police in Raigarhar,
Nabrangpur district on November 11, when over 8,000 women held a rally to
protest the October 30 incident.
Violence against women, including rape, kidnapping, dowry deaths, domestic
violence, female foeticide, sexual harassment, and trafficking continued unabated,
though authorities did take some positive steps in response.
In April, the Supreme Court directed prosecutors to enforce existing laws banning
the use of prenatal diagnostic techniques to determine the sex of the fetus and
authorities warned doctors that their names would be removed from the register of
the Medical Council of India if they were found to be practicing female foeticide.
In June, authorities announced new legislative measures to safeguard women’s
rights, including a new Domestic Violence Prevention Bill.
There were also positive developments for children’s rights. In September, the
government announced that a seven-member national commission for children,
headed by a retired Supreme Court judge,would be established to implement protections
for children enshrined in the Indian constitution. A meeting between
Indian and Bangladeshi border guards in October resulted in agreements to
strengthen cooperation to stop the trafficking of women and children across the
border.According to human rights groups, about 20,000 women and children were
trafficked to India from Bangladesh annually. Also in October, the state government
of Rajasthan, in an attempt to make child marriage illegal, approved legislation
requiring all couples to register marriages with authorities.
In mid-November, the government was considering enacting a modified version
of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA), notorious
for facilitating tens of thousands of politically motivated detentions, torture, and other human rights violations against Muslims, Sikhs, Dalits, trade union
activists, and political opponents in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The new proposed
Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance (POTO) set forth a broad definition of
terrorism that included acts of violence or disruption of essential services carried
out with “intent to threaten the unity and integrity of India or to strike terror in
any part of the people.” It also made it a crime not to provide authorities with
“information relating to any terrorist activity,” and allowed for up to three months
of preventive detention without charge. The ordinance came under sharp attack
from civil rights groups, academics, lawyers, opposition parties, media organizations,
and both religious and secular institutions. The National Human Rights
Commission also maintained that existing laws were sufficient to fight the threat
of terrorism.
Freedom of assembly nationwide suffered following the beginning of U.S.-led
air strikes in Afghanistan on October 7, with student groups and organizations
protesting India’s backing of the U.S.-led campaign facing increased harassment
from the police. On October 28, seven anti-U.S. protestors were killed when police
opened fire on demonstrators in Malegaon,Maharashtra. Local police reportedly
had tried to prevent a small group of Muslim protestors from distributing leaflets
calling on people to boycott U.S.-made goods and to oppose air strikes in Afghanistan.
Authorities claimed that protestors began throwing stones, leading first to a
police baton-charge and then police shooting. Three more people were killed the
following night when protestors tried to block the main road connecting Malegaon
to the capital,Delhi. Police said they used baton charges and tear gas to disperse the
crowd and only fired at protestors when that failed.
The government drew sharp criticism from numerous minority groups for
selectively banning the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) as part of its
post-September 11 actions to counter terrorism while ignoring the “anti-national”
activities of right-wing Hindu groups.At least four people were killed when police
opened fire on a protest in Lucknow on September 27 following the arrest of some
SIMI activists.
Insurgency and increased ethnic violence took a heavy toll in Assam and other
northeastern states. In January, the United Liberation Front (ULFA) of Assam that
advocates the establishment of a “sovereign socialist Assam” by armed force was
blamed for a number of killings and bombings to disrupt elections and protest
Republic Day celebrations. The group was also believed responsible for killing a
ruling party leader, ten activists, and six political leaders in the run-up to elections
in May. Indian federal troops killed at least five ULFA militants in response. In June,
protestors opposed to any concessions to Naga rebels in Manipur burned the state
legislature building and a former chief minister’s home after the government
extended a truce with the rebels.
The conflict in Kashmir remained a flashpoint for violence, as all parties failed
to protect civilian non-combatants. On November 19, 2000, Prime Minister Vajpayee
declared a unilateral ceasefire, but, shortly thereafter, Jammu and Kashmir
police chief A.K. Suri announced that the ceasefire would not affect police counterinsurgency
operations. Indian security personnel continued to target Muslim
citizens suspected of supporting guerrillas. Arbitrary arrests, torture, and staged “encounter killings” were reported throughout the year, both when the ceasefire
was in effect and after it was lifted on May 23, 2001.
India, like Pakistan, continued to deny political rights and to restrict freedoms
of expression and assembly in Jammu and Kashmir. At least six people were killed
when security personnel opened fire on demonstrators in Haigam and Maisuma in
February. On February 15 in Haigam, forty kilometers north of Srinagar, five
people were killed when Indian troops opened fire on demonstrators protesting the
alleged killing of pro-independence activist Jalil Ahmed Shah in police custody the
day before. In Maisuma, Srinagar on February 16, one person was killed in a similar
incident. In both cases the police maintained that they were firing in selfdefense.
On May 10, seventeen journalists were beaten by troops of the Indian Border
Security Force (BSF) in Magam. The assault took place while the journalists were
covering a suicide bomb attack against a BSF camp. The officers implicated were
subsequently recalled from Kashmir but as of mid-November no disciplinary
action had been taken against them.
July also witnessed a dramatic upsurge in violence in Kashmir with almost two
hundred reported deaths in the week following the failed Agra summit between
Prime Minister Vajpayee and Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf. On July 22, fifteen
Hindu villagers were killed by suspected Islamic militants in Doda district.The
attacks came a day after thirteen Hindus were killed while on pilgrimage.
Tensions flared up again after the September 11 attacks on the United States.On
October 1, at least thirty-eight people were killed when a suicide attacker drove a
hijacked government jeep to the main entrance of the state assembly in Srinagar
and detonated explosives loaded in the car.The Pakistan-based Jaish-e Mohammad
militant group claimed responsibility for the attack but then retracted the following
day.
In the weeks that followed, numerous militants and security personnel were
killed in tit-for-tat attacks while tensions heated up along the Line of Control
between the Indian and Pakistan-controlled portions of the territory.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The brutal killings of two members of the Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee
(APCLC) within a period of four months sent shock waves throughout the
human rights community. In November 2000, T. Puroshottam, Joint Secretary of
APCLC was stabbed to death by a group of unidentified men. Puroshottam had
been a leading monitor of police abuses. In February 2001, Azam Ali, the district
secretary of the Nalgonda branch of APCLC, was hacked to death by two swordwielding
youth.Despite demands from human rights organizations and allegations
that police hired former members of armed groups to carry out the attacks, by
November 2001 the government had yet to conduct any judicial inquiry.
On July 7 police raided the offices of Bharosa Trust and the Naz Foundation
International in Lucknow, organizations that work on HIV/AIDS prevention,
arresting several staff members. Although subsequently released on bail, the staff members were charged under article 377 of the Indian Penal Code, a provision that
prohibits “carnal intercourse against the order of nature.”Article 377 has been used
repeatedly to justify discrimination and police brutality against gay, lesbian, and
bisexual individuals.
The Narmada Bachao Andolan (NBA), one of India’s largest peoples’ movements,
continued to protest the construction of large dams on the Narmada river
in central India. Protesters highlighting the impact of the project on millions of
river valley residents and the government’s failure to adequately rehabilitate
affected families continued to face harassment,police abuse, and contempt charges.
The work of rights activists was also hindered by restrictive laws and regulations.
In July, the Supreme Court upheld the validity of a Union Home Ministry order
requiring that organizations obtain clearance from the ministry before holding
international conferences, seminars or workshops if the subject matter was “political,
semi-political, communal or religious in nature or is related to human rights.”
On October 23, President K.R. Narayanan signed an ordinance empowering both
central and state governments to suspend the passports and travel documents of
any suspected terrorist, militant or “anti-national element,” or any person suspected
of having links with terrorist organizations.At this writing, a bill amending
the Indian Passports Act, 1967 to reflect these changes was being considered during
Indian parliament’s winter session.Many human rights activists have been labeled
by authorities as “anti-national elements.”
The National Human Rights Commission continued to highlight the need for
more effective implementation of laws on bonded labor and manual scavenging
and issued several directives to state governments to compensate the victims of
police and military atrocities. In total, the commission received 71,685 complaints
alleging human rights violations in 2000-2001, 41,984 of which were from Uttar
Pradesh. State human rights commissions were also set up in Maharashtra and
Chattisgarh.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The year saw a much-heightened international focus on the plight of India’s 160
million Dalits. In August 2001, U.N. Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection
ofHuman Rights expert R.K.W.Goonesekere presented a working paper on
work and descent-based discrimination, or caste discrimination, to the subcommission’s
fifty-third session. The presentation of the paper, and the ensuing debate
amongst subcommission experts that followed, marked the first time that caste discrimination
worldwide was treated as a serious rights violation by a U.N. human
rights body.
The WCAR held in Durban, South Africa in September, was a watershed for the
Dalit movement and for the rights of “untouchables” and other so-called lowercaste
communities worldwide. The Dalit contingent of more than 160 activists, led
by India’s National Campaign for Dalit Human Rights, was one of the largest at the conference and drew strong international support from governments, India’s
National Human Rights Commission, and U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
Dalit NGO efforts met with considerable resistance from the Indian government,
which maintained that caste discrimination was an internal matter and used its
political and economic leverage to censor any mention of caste in WCAR documents.
In the run up to the conference, journalists, anthropologists, political parties,
and others in India joined an increasingly mainstream debate on caste
discrimination as an issue of international concern. The conference also highlighted
caste discrimination as a global phenomenon affecting many Asian and
African countries.
United States
The U.S. walked a tightrope in its relations with India and Pakistan following the
September 11 attacks. India lobbied hard to ensure that the U.S.’ campaign against
terrorism would include militants in Kashmir.
After September 11, the Bush White House accelerated the Clinton administration’s
moves towards closer political and economic relations with India. On September
22, the U.S. lifted the sanctions imposed against India and Pakistan in the
wake of nuclear testing by both nations in May 1998, allowing resumption of military
equipment sales. The administration planned to increase funding for international
military education and training (IMET) of Indian officers from $500,000 to
$650,000 in the fiscal year 2002. It also planned a boost in bilateral economic assistance
from $5 million to $7 million.
On November 9 President Bush met with Prime Minister Vajpayee. The U.S.
renewed its offer to facilitate talks between India and Pakistan on Kashmir but
made no public comments on the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance.
The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom urged the Indian
government in May 2001 to more swiftly and explicitly condemn and counteract
increasing violence directed towards Christian populations. The panel voiced concern
that the government’s lack of decisive action created an atmosphere that
invited inter-religious violence.
European Union
The E.U.welcomed the July Agra summit between India and Pakistan.Although
the summit did not reach any resolution, the E.U. urged both countries to continue
their dialogue—a dialogue that seemed far out of reach by mid-November.
In its annual Human Rights Report, the European Parliament called upon the
E.U. to investigate the extent to which its policies “contribute to the abolition of
caste discrimination and the practice of untouchability in India” and “to formulate
strategies to counter the widespread practice [of caste discrimination].” A subsequent
parliamentary resolution expressed regret that the final declaration of the
World Conference Against Racism failed to highlight caste discrimination.
At this writing, the E.U. and India were preparing for a second annual summit
to be held in New Delhi on November 23.
Japan
On October 26 Japan announced that it too would lift sanctions against India
and Pakistan imposed after the 1998 nuclear tests, citing both countries’“efforts to
contribute to strengthening the international coalition against terrorism” and
increased instability in the region as a result of U.S.-led military strikes in Afghanistan.
World Bank
India continued to be the World Bank’s largest borrower. In June 2001 the
World Bank sanctioned four loans and credits to the government of India totaling
U.S. $913.8 million, for a total lending of U.S. $2.5 billion for the fiscal year (FY)
2001.
The U.S. Foreign Aid Bill for the FY 2002 instructed the United States executive
director at the World Bank to vote against any water or sewage project in India that
did not prohibit the use of scavenger labor. Though prohibited by law, the government
of India employs a majority of the country’s estimated one million Dalit
manual scavengers for the cleaning of non-flush public latrines.
In an August meeting in Delhi, Indian groups joined trade union leaders from
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Nepal to formulate a regional stance against
IMF and World Bank policies that reduce jobs and increase layoffs.Over 160 delegates
took part in the four-day seminar that also focused on the impact of the World
Trade Organization on the developing world.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Caste Discrimination: A Global Concern, 8/01
INDONESIA
Indonesia had another turbulent year, marked by a power struggle in Jakarta
and an escalation in regional conflicts. The war in Aceh and an outbreak of
communal violence in West Kalimantan produced the most civilian casualties, but
conflicts in the Moluccas, Central Sulawesi, and Papua continued to simmer. By
October, the number of displaced persons remained well over one million, half of
them from the Moluccas.
The government made no serious efforts to address past or current abuses, new
human rights legislation notwithstanding. The number of political prisoners rose
steadily during the year, with many peaceful political activists charged with
“spreading hatred toward the government,” an offense associated with the government
of former president Soeharto. The justice system remained a shambles.
Defending human rights remained a dangerous occupation, particularly in
Aceh, where at least seven rights workers were killed.
Indonesia’s bilateral donors showed concern over the regional conflicts, but
their main focus was the long drawn-out struggle in Jakarta between the parliament
and President Abdurrahman Wahid. That conflict ended peacefully in late
July with Wahid’s impeachment and the accession to the presidency of Megawati
Sukarnoputri. A combination of relief over the transition, delight over some key
cabinet appointees, and strategic and economic interests led many donors to rush
to support the new administration.
In late 2001, widespread protests in Indonesian cities against the U.S. bombing
of Afghanistan, accompanied by some intimidation ofWesterners,underscored the
difficulties President Megawati faced in balancing domestic political constituencies
with external pressures.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The power struggle between President Abdurrahman Wahid and the Indonesian
parliament consumed so much energy of the political elite that all of the country’s
major problems were left to fester.The Indonesian parliament, following decidedly
unclear constitutional guidelines, formally censured Wahid on February 1 and
again on April 30 over two financial scandals.At the end of May, the attorney-general
ruled there was no evidence of presidential involvement in the scandals, but the
parliament continued the de facto impeachment process on grounds of presidential
incompetence. On July 23, the People’s Consultative Assembly, Indonesia’s
highest legislative body, ignored a decree from Wahid disbanding parliament and
convened a special session during which those present voted unanimously to
remove Wahid and replace him with Megawati.
Megawati’s first cabinet had some strengths, but her choice of attorney-general
was poor. The new minister, M.A. Rahman, was a career prosecutor known for
obstructing human rights cases, particularly with regard to East Timor.
The appointment continued a pattern of one step forward, two steps back that
marked successive governments’ approach to accountability. In November 2000,
the parliament passed Law No. 26 setting up new courts to try cases of serious
human rights violations. For the first time, crimes against humanity, war crimes,
and other crimes of a “widespread or systematic” nature were incorporated into
Indonesian law. The law established new courts to try such cases prospectively and
provided for the establishment of “ad hoc” courts to prosecute serious human
rights abuses that had occurred before the law took effect, including the 1999 East
Timor cases.
But President Wahid’s attorney-general, Marzuki Darusman, dithered and by
the time the Wahid government fell, had failed to set up the courts or proceed with
a single prosecution. His accomplice in procrastination was M.A. Rahman, appointed
by Megawati to succeed him. As of October 2001, prosecutors for the new
courts had been named, as had some but not all of the judges. Indictments were
promised for December.
Other problems with accountability surfaced. The Indonesian National
Human Rights Commission, known as Komnas-HAM, had been one of the most
courageous defenders of human rights during the late Soeharto years. Ironically,
it began to lose its critical edge under the democratically-elected Abdurrahman
Wahid. Law No. 26 gave Komnas-HAM, rather than the police, responsibility for
initial investigations into cases of serious human rights violations, but leading
obstructionists within Komnas-HAM itself increasingly blocked action on key
cases. A bill in the parliament to set up a national truth and reconciliation commission
along the lines of the South African model remained undiscussed as of
late 2001.With no interest in prosecutions on the part of the president, the attorney
general, or the minister of justice, let alone the military, prospects for accountability
looked bleaker than ever.
Aceh
The situation in Aceh deteriorated sharply during the year, and a six-hour visit
in September by Megawati to the area made little difference.The 2001 death toll had
topped 1,300 by September, and while most of the deaths were civilians killed in the
course of military operations, the rebel Free Aceh Movement (Gerakan Aceh
Merdeka or GAM) was also responsible for serious abuses.
In early November 2000, Indonesian security forces tried to prevent a rally
organized by the Information Center for a Referendum on Aceh (Sentral Informasi
Referendum Aceh or SIRA) in the provincial capital, Banda Aceh. They blocked
people from reaching the city, including by shooting at sea and land transport;
arrested and beat up members of the organizing committee; and raided offices of
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in the lead-up to the rally. On November
20, the head of SIRA, Muhammad Nazar, was arrested on charges of “spreading
hatred” for having hung banners in favor of a referendum and against the Indonesian
military during a campus rally the previous August.He was convicted in March
2001 and sentenced to ten months in prison.With time served, he was released in
October.
On December 6, 2000, four workers for an organization called Rehabilitation
Action for Torture Victims of Aceh or RATA, were stopped outside Lhokseumawe,
North Aceh, and abducted by a group of armed soldiers and civilians.Two men and
a woman were executed; a fourth escaped and gave testimony identifying several of
the killers. Later that month, four civilians and four military men were arrested.
The civilians “escaped”—they were almost certainly let go with official connivance—
from a police barracks in Medan, North Sumatra on March 22, 2001.
One of them was back in Aceh in June, terrorizing local activists. The soldiers
reportedly remained in the military police detention center in Medan as of October.
Efforts by some within Komnas-HAM to have the RATA murders treated as
serious enough to warrant prosecution by the new human rights courts were
blocked by some of their own colleagues, and the prosecutor in Banda Aceh maintained
in May that he lacked enough evidence to proceed with a trial.
On March 29, a human rights lawyer, Suprin Sulaiman, together with his client,
Teungku Kamal, and a driver, Amiruddin, were shot dead shortly after leaving the South Aceh district police station where Tgk. Kamal had been summoned as a suspect
in criminal defamation of the police. In February, he had allegedly helped
NGOs rescue five women that they believed were victims of sexual assault by the
paramilitary police, Brimob. The women were brought to Banda Aceh where their
case was widely covered by the local press.As they were returning home, the police
took them into custody, whereupon they changed their stories, saying they had
been forced by GAM to accuse the police. The police began targeting all NGO
workers and journalists involved in the initial rescue and publicity efforts and formally
named several as suspects. They did not proceed with any investigation into
the deaths of the three men in South Aceh.
On April 11, President Wahid issued President Instruction (Inpres) No. 4,which
effectively authorized increased police-military operations in Aceh. The instruction
was issued following the closure of Exxon-Mobil gasfields in North Aceh
because of security threats.The decree was roundly denounced in Aceh and the call
for its revocation became a rallying cry for political activists province-wide.
Even before Inpres No.4 was issued, the security forces made a practice of retaliatory
burnings of houses and shops to punish GAM attacks. On February 28, 2001,
GAM took control briefly of the town of Idi Rayeuk in East Aceh. After military
forces retook the town of 15,000, they burned it to the ground, causing massive displacement.
Similar arson attacks took place throughout the year, despite the fact
that on May 22, Brig. Gen. Zamroni, the commander of military operations in
Aceh, formally forbade the practice.
In June, an eruption of violence in central Aceh led to hundreds of civilian
deaths. It started with a GAM attack on the night of June 5-6 on Javanese settlers,
killing more than forty. The next days and weeks saw a ferocious counterattack by
the military working in collaboration with a local militia. By early July some 150
people had been confirmed dead by the Indonesian Red Cross and more than eight
hundred houses had been burned to the ground.
On August 9, a massacre of thirty-one Acehnese workers took place on the Bumi
Flora palm oil plantation in Julok, East Aceh.While both sides blamed each other
for the killing, the evidence accumulated by late September suggested that Indonesian
security forces were responsible and were intimidating potential witnesses.
Reports by fact-finding teams sent by the district government and Komnas-HAM
had not been made public by late 2001.
In addition to the killings noted above, several high-profile murders took place
that remained unsolved by the end of November. On May 10, 2001,Major General
(ret.) Haji Djohan, local leader of Golkar, the former ruling party, was gunned
down outside his home in Banda Aceh. On September 1, Zaini Sulaiman, a member
of the provincial parliament representing the United Development Party
(known as PPP) was slain in front of his home by unidentified armed men. On September
6, Dayan Dawood, the rector of Banda Aceh’s Syiah Kuala University, was
killed as he was driving home from work in an official car. Neither side acknowledged
responsibility for the killings.
Local parliamentarians faced threats from both sides. A legislator from East
Aceh, Ghazali Usman, was abducted by GAM after having been named a member
of the government fact-finding team looking into the Julok massacre. He had not been released by early November. Schoolteachers were also targeted. The Indonesian
teachers’ association noted in September that 135 of its members had been victims
of violence in Aceh over the previous two years.Dozens of elementary schools
were burned down during the year.
Banda Aceh’s main newspaper, Serambi Indonesia, was forced to close twice during
the year because of GAM threats, once in June and once in August.
Efforts at dialogue proved fruitless. Negotiations between the Indonesian government
and GAM, facilitated by the Geneva-based Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue,
foundered on mutual lack of trust and effectively broke down in early July
when. Indonesia unilaterally withdrew from a security monitoring team. Later that
month, police in Banda Aceh arrested six GAM negotiators despite government
guarantees of their security. Five of the negotiators were conditionally released on
August 29 but the charges against them were not dropped; one continued to be held
as of October on the grounds that he held a false passport. New talks were scheduled
for early November, but GAM refused to participate unless the Indonesian
government dropped its case against the negotiators.
President Megawati signed a law giving autonomy to Aceh on August 11 and
made that implementation of that law the centerpiece of her Aceh policy. But the
law, changing the name of the province to Nanggroe Aceh Daroessalam (NAD), did
not appear to have widespread support, especially as there was little consultation in
Aceh before it was passed.
Papua
Conditions in Papua also continued to worsen. Although the Indonesian government
made important political overtures, including a promise of substantial
autonomy, to Papuan leaders in response to an all-Papua congress in June 2000, it
also returned to a hardline approach.
In late 2000 and throughout 2001, Indonesian security forces intimidated and at
times attacked civilians in areas where rebels of the Free Papua Movement (Organisasi
Papua Merdeka or OPM) were believed to be active. They at times used indiscriminate
or excessive force against pro-independence demonstrators: two
Papuans were killed in Fakfak on December 1, 2000, eight in Merauke on December
2, and four in the highland town of Tiom on December 16, all during clashes
between pro-independence demonstrators and security forces. Authorities also
increased surveillance and harassment of prominent civil society leaders and
banned peaceful pro-independence expression. Several activists were put on trial in
Wamena, Jayapura, and Jakarta, many of them under the same “spreading hatred”
laws used in Aceh.
One of the most highly publicized incidents took place in Abepura, near the
provincial capital, on December 7, 2000. After two police officers and a security
guard were killed in an early morning raid apparently carried out by pro-independence
Papuan highlanders, police retaliated by rounding up scores of sleeping
students (mostly highlanders) and other Papuans, beating and torturing many of
them for much of the next thirty-six hours. One student was shot and killed, two
more died as a result of beatings, and dozens sustained serious injuries. The case became the subject of a high profile investigation that led investigators to issue a
hard-hitting report naming twenty-six police officers as suspects, but no charges
were filed and the future of the prosecution remained in doubt as of mid-November
2001.
The worst violence occurred in the Wasior area ofManokwari district, triggered
by the murder on April 6 of three plantation workers. Plantation officials claimed
the perpetrators were rebels. Security forces responded by launching violent
“sweeps” or raids in nearby villages which, according to local rights monitors, left
six civilians dead by mid-May. On June 13, five police officers and a logging company
employee were killed in an attack police blamed on the rebels, prompting
renewed sweeps. By mid-November, there had been dozens of new arrests, several
reports of torture, and thousands of people in the region had fled their homes fearing
retaliation. Local monitors in November also reported security crackdowns in
Ilaga and near Timika following clashes between rebels and security forces.
The Indonesian parliament passed the Papuan autonomy bill on October 23,
giving Papuans a greater say in provincial government and allowing provincial
authorities to retain 80 percent of local forestry and fishery revenues and 70 percent
of oil, gas, and mining revenues. Papuan political leaders, however, continued
to demand independence. On November 10, Theys Eluay, a leading Papuan independence
leader was abducted and killed outside Jayapura; his family blamed security
forces, as international and domestic organizations called for an independent
inquiry.
Central Kalimantan
An eruption of violence in Central Kalimantan in February 2001 around the
logging port of Sampit, Kotawaringin Timur district, led to indigenous Dayaks
killing some five hundred immigrants from the island of Madura, off the coast of
East Java, and displacing more than 150,000 people.Many of the killings involved
decapitation, and little distinction was made between men, women, and children.
The outbreak had complex roots but appeared to be linked to longstanding economic
and social grievances of the Dayaks, competition over local resources, and
new opportunities for political mobilization along ethnic lines.Muhamad Usop, a
Dayak leader who sought the Central Kalimantan governorship, was arrested on
May 4 and held briefly on incitement charges.
As elsewhere in Indonesia, police proved incapable of halting the violence, and
the army was sent in, further poisoning relations between the police and army.
Maluku
Christian-Muslim violence continued to erupt sporadically in the Moluccas.
The government made no effort to remove Laskar Jihad, the Java-based Muslim
militia that arrived in the province by the thousands in 2000. Its members continued
to be responsible for human rights violations. In early 2001, evidence emerged
of Laskar Jihad forcing several hundred Christians from Teor,Ceram and the island
of Kesui to convert to Islam and circumcising men and women alike.On May 4, the Wahid government finally took action against the head of Laskar Jihad, Jafar Umar
Thalib, but not for any of his actions as commander of a private army. Instead, he
was charged with murder for sentencing one of his followers to execution by stoning
and having a crowd proceed to kill the confessed adulterer. The arrest appeared
to prompt a new wave of violence that killed eighteen Christians by the end ofMay.
On June 14, a botched raid by an army battalion on a Laskar Jihad post left twentytwo
Muslims dead. On August 8,Megawati’s vice-president, Hamzah Haz, made a
point of meeting with Jafar Umar Thalib and Laskar Jihad members. While he
urged them to abide by the constitution, the meeting gave the group new legitimacy.
In June, Alex Manuputty, the Christian militia leader and founder of the Front
for Maluku Sovereignty, was arrested on charges of rebellion.He was sentenced to
four months in November.
East and West Timor
No one was brought to justice by November for the 1999 crimes in East Timor.
Half-hearted efforts by the attorney general’s office during the year to set up an ad
hoc tribunal to try people originally named in September 2000 as suspected perpetrators
of serious crimes came to nothing. The tribunal needed a recommendation
from the parliament to the president and then a presidential instruction. When
President Wahid finally issued the instruction in April, it only allowed for prosecution
of crimes occurring after the August 30, 1999 referendum. After protests, the
instruction was returned to the Ministry of Justice for rewriting. The reworded
decree was issued in August by President Megawati in one of her first acts after taking
office, but it remained flawed, as it only allowed for prosecution of two cases
from before August 30, 1999, that the attorney general’s office had deemed a priority.
It thus weakened the possibility of examining the whole pattern of state policy
that would be critical to establishing a crimes against humanity case.
In the meantime, the six alleged killers of the three United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) workers,murdered in Atambua,West Timor, on
September 6, 2000 were brought to trial in January 2001. On May 4, they were sentenced
to prison terms ranging from ten to twenty months. They had only been
accused of assault, apparently at the direction of the man who became Megawati’s
attorney general, M.A. Rahman, but even that charge could have resulted in a
twelve-year sentence. The leniency of the sentences was widely condemned internationally.
Eurico Gutteres, the East Timorese militia leader responsible for much of the
1999 violence in the city of Dili, was charged in relation to another incident in
Atambua that took place on September 24, 2000 shortly after the UNHCR killings.
Accused of incitement for resisting efforts of authorities to disarm the militias, he
was sentenced to six months in prison by the North Jakarta district court on April
30, 2001, but, credited with time spent under house arrest, he served only twentythree
days before being released.
Little progress was made toward addressing the 1999 violence in East Timor.As
of September, some 50,000 East Timorese remained in West Timor. A June 6, 2001 registration of that population conducted by the Indonesian government found
that 98.2 percent wished to stay in Indonesia, but it was unclear to what extent the
refugees had access to relevant information and felt able to answer freely. Only the
views of “heads of households”—usually men—were surveyed. Many refugees
were expected to return in the aftermath of the peaceful election in East Timor on
August 30.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
At least seven human rights defenders were killed in Aceh between November
2000 and October 2001, including the three RATA workers mentioned above.
Muhamad Efendi Malikon, thirty-five, secretary of a human rights organization
called Care Forum for Human Rights—East Aceh (Forum Peduli HAM-Aceh
Timur) was killed on February 28 in Peukan Langsa village, Langsa Timur subdistrict,
East Aceh.His body was found shortly after the vehicle in which he was riding
was stopped at a checkpoint by the paramilitary police, Brimob.At the time, he was
carrying a substantial amount of money to turn over to widows whose husbands
had been the victims of human rights violations in 1991.
Suprin Sulaiman, a lawyer with Koalisi-HAM in South Aceh, was killed on
March 29 after accompanying his client to an interrogation session by police. (See
above.)
Yusuf Usman, another member of Forum-Peduli HAM-Aceh Timor, was killed
on September 8. Jafar Syehdo, fifty-seven, a volunteer with the Indonesian Red
Cross (Palang Merah Indonesia, PMI) was found shot to death on October 3 in
Bireun. The PMI is the only humanitarian organization with a province-wide field
operation; among its tasks is the recovery of bodies of victims of the conflict.
No progress was made in the investigation of the death of Jafar Siddiq Hamzah,
human rights lawyer and founder of the International Forum on Aceh, whose
stabbed body was found north of Medan,North Sumatra in September 2000.
Acehnese human rights monitors trying to investigate abuses were routinely
hampered by the security forces, sometimes through short-term detention.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
International attention focused largely on the power struggle over the presidency,
the economy, the transition to democracy, and regional conflicts. Donors
continued to express frustration, often publicly, at Indonesia’s failure to make
headway in bringing human rights abusers to justice, particularly in relation to the
1999 violence in East Timor and the September 2000 killing of the three UNHCR
workers.
The resumption of military aid to Indonesia was a major issue for many donors
and their respective publics. In August, the Jakarta Post announced that the United
Kingdom (U.K.) would resume arms sales to Indonesia, quoting U.K. Foreign
Office Minister Ben Bradshaw as saying Britain had accepted Indonesian army assurances that the arms would not be used for internal repression. The U.S. also
decided to “re-engage” the army, without, however, resuming sales of lethal
weapons.
United Nations
The U.N. Security Council continued to be concerned about Indonesia’s failure
to make any progress toward accountability for the 1999 violence in East Timor and
the situation of East Timorese refugees in West Timor. In a visit to Jakarta in mid-
November 2000, a Security Council delegation stressed the need for speedy resolution
of the refugee problem and progress in bringing human rights abusers to trial.
On May 4, Secretary-General Kofi Annan took the unusual step of issuing a statement
expressing outrage at the light sentences handed down by a Jakarta court
against the killers of the UNHCR workers.
The U.N.’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
continued to be active in Indonesia. On February 27, it sent two missions to Kalimantan
to look into the impact of the Dayak-Madurese violence, particularly as
it related to the internally displaced. In late August, OCHA opened a small office
in Aceh to coordinate humanitarian aid, and it continued to be active in the
Moluccas.
In late 2000, the United Nations Development Program launched a program
called “Partnership for Governance Reform” through which it coordinated aid programs
from several donors in efforts to strengthen democracy and civil society.
Program areas included strengthening of parliamentary institutions; electoral
reform; civil society participation; legal and judicial reform; anti-corruption
efforts; decentralization and civil society reform; and police reform. The Asian
Development Bank,World Bank, and several bilateral donors including the Netherlands
and Nordic countries were among the initial donors.
On November 22, 2000, five U.N. human rights experts issued a joint statement
of concern about the deteriorating situation in Aceh. Francis Deng, the U.N. special
rapporteur for internally displaced persons, visited Indonesia during the last week
in September.
Indonesia presented its first report to the Committee against Torture in November
2001; in doing so, it announced that it would ratify the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social,
and Cultural Rights by the end of the year.
European Union
The E.U. continued actively to strengthen relations with Indonesia, while also
exploring ways to resolve regional conflicts. On December 13, 2000, in response to
a proposal from the European Commission to develop closer relations with
Indonesia, the European Parliament expressed concern about factors undermining
democratization in Indonesia, including lack of accountability for human rights
abuses, the continued role of the armed forces in government, and the ongoing
conflicts in the Moluccas, Aceh, and Papua. It supported further aid for Indonesia as long as attempts were made to resolve those conflicts, human rights were substantially
improved, and the corruption problem was addressed.
In May, the E.U. echoed Kofi Annan’s protest over the light sentences given
the six men found guilty of the deaths of the UNHCR workers. In a statement
issued on May 10, the E.U. welcomed the Indonesian attorney-general’s declared
intent to appeal the sentences and pointedly recalled Indonesia’s earlier commitment
to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights that the trials of the
suspects be conducted in conformity with international standards of justice and
fairness.”
The E.U. repeatedly called on Indonesia during the year to implement Security
Council Resolution 1319 with regard to disarming the militias in West Timor and
facilitating the return of East Timorese there.
United States
Both Congress and the Clinton administration condemned the murders of the
UNHCR workers in West Timor, and urged the indictment of senior military officials
responsible for the violence in 1999. Accountability in general remained high
on the agenda of the U.S. embassy in Jakarta.
The U.S. was actively engaged in supporting dialogue and strengthening civil
society in Aceh. In March, the State Department denied reports in the Indonesian
press that the U.S. was backing an Indonesian military offensive in order to secure
the Exxon-Mobil gasfields, saying that it was instead urging restraint and a “comprehensive
political solution.” U.S. diplomats repeatedly reiterated their support
for Indonesia’s territorial integrity.
Megawati Sukarnoputri became the first head of state to visit the U.S. in the
aftermath of the September 11 attacks in New York and Washington. Rather than
cancel the long-planned visit, the Bush administration used it to secure Indonesia’s
cooperation in opposing global terrorism. The administration had earlier decided
to expand contacts with the TNI, lifting some of the sanctions that had been in
place since the East Timor violence in 1999, including a ban on non-lethal commercial
arms sales, and used the visit to announce this.Restrictions on foreign military
sales (FMS),U.S.-government financed arms sales, and international military
education and training (IMET) programs remained in place in accordance with
provisions of the so-called Leahy Amendment.
The U.S. also promised bilateral assistance for judicial reform and carried out
some limited police training in areas such as crowd control and counternarcotics
efforts.The U.S. Export-Import bank gave a U.S. $3.2 million credit to Indonesia in
May for police equipment for forensics work.
Indonesia’s failure to curb threats against Americans by radical Islamic groups
following September 11 led to U.S. protests that its citizens and interests were not
being sufficiently protected.
Japan
Japan quietly urged President Wahid to move forward with setting up the ad hoc tribunal on East Timor.While not objecting to military operations in Aceh, Japanese
officials urged both Indonesian security forces and GAM to exercise restraint.
Japan continued to be Indonesia’s largest donor. Its aid programs included some
training in community-based policing.
President Megawati visited Japan in September and met with Prime Minister
Junichiro Koizumi. The two leaders expressed opposition to terrorism. Megawati
asked for Japanese aid and private investment; she also sought rescheduling of
Indonesia’s debt (more than $2.7 billion) to Japan. Koizumi agreed to consider her
requests in advance of the donor conference in November.
Australia
Relations with Indonesia, seriously strained by Australia’s role in the East Timor
crisis in 1999, improved somewhat with the visit to Canberra by President Wahid
in late June 2001—the first visit by an Indonesian president in twenty-six years.
According to press reports, he assured Prime Minister John Howard that prosecutions
would take place for serious crimes committed in East Timor in 1999.
Prime Minister Howard became the first head of state to visit President
Megawati after her accession to the presidency in July. On his return to Australia,
Howard declared that the two countries had put their differences over East Timor
behind them.
Relations quickly became strained again in August, however, over the issue of
asylum-seekers and undocumented migrants seeking to enter Australia from
Indonesian waters. Indonesia is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention.
International Financial Institutions
In February, the World Bank launched a new three-year country assistance strategy
for Indonesia, criticizing the high level of debt and corruption. It announced
that it would lend only $492.7 million for fiscal year 2001, down from the average
of $1.3 billion annually from 1990-1997.The bank also urged adoption of an agreement
with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) that would allow disbursement
of a $400 million loan held up since late 2000. The loan was eventually disbursed
on September 10, 2001.
President Megawati met with World Bank President James Wolfensohn in September;
he stressed the need for progress on legal and judicial reform before the
bank could consider increasing its lending.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
The War in Aceh, 8/01
Violence and Political Impasse in Papua, 7/01
MALAYSIA
The government of Mahathir Mohamed, beginning his third decade as
prime minister, continued to crack down hard on potential political challengers,
arresting key opposition leaders, banning political rallies, and breaking up
public gatherings with force.
The year began with the prime minister’s popularity in decline. In November
2000, the ruling coalition suffered a by-election defeat in Mahathir’s home district
in Kedah state and the government faced increasingly vocal opposition protests. In
response, it turned the draconian Internal Security Act (ISA) against its political
opponents.Among those targeted under the ISA,which allows detainees to be held
indefinitely without charge or public airing of the evidence against them, were
minority Shi’a Muslims, supporters of jailed former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar
Ibrahim, and youth leaders in the opposition PAS (Partai Islam Se-Malaysia) party,
although individuals linked to specific violent acts were also among those detained.
In the wake of the September 11 attacks in the United States, authorities used global
concern with terrorism to justify their actions.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The government detained six Shi’a Muslims under the ISA between October
2000 and January 2001, three of whom reportedly were still being held in November.
Other ISA detentions of Shi’a Muslims in previous years were said by government
officials to be necessary to prevent “religious disharmony” that could damage
the nation’s political and economic development.
On November 5, 2000, police punched and kicked participants at a peaceful
demonstration outside the city of Klang, fired tear gas and water cannons, and
arrested 126 people demonstrating in support of Anwar Ibrahim.The National Justice
Party (Partai Keadilan Nasional or Keadilan), founded by Anwar’s wife,Wan
Azizah, had applied for but been denied a permit to hold the demonstration.
In January, nine government opponents were arrested and charged with rioting
in the run-up to the November 2000 by-election in Kedah. The nine were accused
of trying to prevent busloads of supporters of the ruling coalition (Barisan
Nasional), whom they believed were traveling to the area to vote illegally, from
reaching the polls.
In January,police also forcibly prevented political speeches and stopped cultural
displays at a multi-cultural festival organized by the opposition, despite having
issued a permit for the festival. Police also stopped a book launch party at a restaurant
attended by more than 1,000 former Labour Party members. The book was a
historical account of the leftist party disbanded three decades ago.
In February, police arrested four protestors, including Keadilan Vice-President
Tian Chua and columnist/filmmaker Hishammuddin Rais, at a demonstration calling for former Attorney General Mohtar Abdullah to be for abuse of power in
conducting the prosecution of Anwar. On February 14, police used tear gas and
water cannons to disperse 15,000 to 20,000 people at a Keadilan political rally in
Kampung Lahar, held on private property. Police had refused to grant a permit for
the rally.
On February 9, Marina Yusoff, former vice president of Keadilan, was fined
5,000 ringgit (approximately U.S. $1,315) for asserting in a speech in September
2000 that the ruling coalition had sparked anti-Chinese riots in 1969 following a
local election defeat. On March 5, Keadilan youth leader Mohamed Ezam
Mohamed Nor was arrested and subsequently charged with sedition for remarks
published in Mingguan Malaysia newspaper in which he reportedly stated that he
would continue leading street demonstrations until the government was brought
down.On March 6, police arrested nine people who held a candlelight vigil for him
outside a police station. Ezam was released on bail on March 13, but, as described
below, was subsequently rearrested less than a month later under the ISA.
Ethnic violence broke out on March 9 when ethnic Indians and Malays clashed
in Kampung Medan, a poor quarter of Kuala Lumpur. Police reported that six
people, including five of Indian origin, were killed and over fifty injured.Most of
the wounded were also ethnic Indians. Four opposition party leaders jointly challenged
the official casualty figures, suggesting the actual figures were higher: in
response, the government threatened to charge them with sedition, though no
charges were ultimately brought. Indian community representatives continued to
demand further investigation.
On April 10-11, just days before public protests planned to mark the second
anniversary of the sentencing of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim,
the authorities detained seven opposition leaders under the ISA, then three other
people in the following days. Most of the ten, who were all held incommunicado
until May 4,were members of Keadilan.The authorities alleged that they were plotting
to overthrow the government but produced no evidence to substantiate this.
On May 30, in an unusual and courageous ruling Judge Hishamuddin Yunus
ordered the release of two ISA detainees on a writ of habeas corpus, and suggested
that the parliament should review and either scrap or amend the ISA to reduce its
potential for abuse. By mid-November, authorities had released three more
detainees, but five had been served with two-year detention orders and were being
held at the Kamunting Detention Centre. The five are: Tian Chua, Ezam Mohamed
Noor,Hishammuddin Rais, Saari Sungib, and Lokman Nor.
In July, the authorities detained two student activists, Khairul Anuar Ahmad
Zainuddin and Mohamad Fuad Mohamad Ikhwan, under the ISA, the former for
twenty three days and the latter for ten days.
Also in July, the government banned all political rallies stating that they would
undermine the country’s security. When PAS subsequently planned a series of
meetings to protest the policy, police refused to grant permits and dispersed those
who attempted to attend. On August 2-4, police arrested an additional ten people
under the ISA, all of whom were affiliated with or supporters of PAS, including four
prominent youth leaders. The authorities said the ten belonged to a group that
planned to overthrow the government, sometimes labeling the group the Malaysian Militant Group and sometimes the Malaysian Mojahedin Group. One of those
detained, Nik Adli Nik Aziz, was the son of a leading PAS official. The authorities
alleged he had received military training in Afghanistan and had learned bomb
making from Muslim rebels in the Philippines, but he denied this and PAS leaders
emphasized that they used only peaceful, democratic means in their struggle
against the ruling coalition.As of mid-November, nine of the ten remained in custody
after being served two-year detention orders.
Four days after the September 11 attacks in the United States, Deputy Prime
Minister Abdullah Ahman Badawi sought to justify the ISA as providing “an initial
preventive measure before threats get beyond control,” and on October 10 two
other alleged members of the Malaysian Mojahedin Group were detained under the
act. PAS leaders, however, dismissed the detentions as a “political ploy” and challenged
the government to bring charges and produce the detainees in open court.
The government maintained important restrictions on press freedom. Under
the Printing Presses and Publications Act, newspapers were required annually to
obtain licenses to publish from the government and those held to have breached the
terms of their license could be restricted or shut down. The PAS organ Harakah,
formerly a biweekly publication, continued to be restricted to two issues per month
for allegedly breaching the terms of its license in 2000 by selling to non-PAS members.
In March, editions of both Far Eastern Economic Review and Asiaweek, which
had been chronicling the growing opposition to Mahathir and signs of political
unrest, were held back by government censors.Mahathir had complained that the
photo of him on the cover of an earlier edition of Asiaweek had made him look like
“an idiot.”
Authorities also appeared to be struggling for a way to rein in independent Internet
daily malaysiakini.com, winner of an International Press Institute 2001 Press
Freedom Award. As part of its effort to promote Malaysia’s multimedia corridor,
the government had promised there would be no Internet censorship, and Internet
sites were exempt from media licensing provisions. Early in the year, ministers
accused malaysiakini.com of receiving funds via a Bangkok press group from financier
George Soros, long pilloried in the government-controlled Malaysian press
as personally responsible for the Asian economic crisis in 1997. On February 11, an
information ministry official said that malaysiakini.com would be barred from
covering government press conferences “because their credibility is doubtful.” On
May 23, the deputy home affairs minister told parliament that the government was
monitoring “every article” published by malaysiakini.com to ensure that its writings
did not upset public order.
The threat of multimillion dollar libel awards against journalists and media
publications, said to be the highest such awards among the fifty-four countries of
the Commonwealth, also continued to limit press freedom.A Bar Council publication
in March noted that, since businessman and one-time Mahathir insider Vincent
Tan won a 10 million Ringgit (approximately U.S. $2.2 million) judgment
against a group of media defendants in 1994,more than seventy libel cases had been
filed against journalists and media defendants, many seeking millions of dollars in
damages.
Serious questions remained about the independence of the judiciary. In March, the Kuala Lumpur Bar Committee issued a memorandum concluding that “the
administration of justice in Malaysia is in its darkest hour since independence.”By
early November, however, a number of developments suggested that the appointment
in December 2000 of respected jurist Dzaiddin Abdullah as chief justice was
beginning to have a positive impact. On March 15, former police chief Abdul
Rahim Noor was sentenced for the prison beating of Anwar Ibrahim, though only
to a two-month term. In June, a federal court dismissed contempt charges that had
been laid against Anwar’s lawyer, Zainur Zakaria, when he petitioned for the
removal of two of the prosecutors during Anwar’s trial. The May 30 decision of
Judge Hishamuddin Yunus to order the release of two ISA detainees was also a powerful
reassertion of judicial independence.
In another important decision on June 8, high court judge Muhammad Kamil
Awang overturned the results of the March 1999 state elections in Likas (Sabah)
after finding that the electoral roll included nonexistent voters. (Sabah’s three million
population includes an estimated 500,000 immigrants, mostly from neighboring
Indonesia and the Philippines). The judge also sparked a police investigation
into improper judicial interference when he disclosed that one of his superiors had
ordered him in 1999 to dismiss the case.
On October 16, prominent human rights lawyer Karpal Singh was put on trial
for sedition for comments he had made in January 2000 while lead defense counsel
for Anwar Ibrahim. Following reports that increased levels of arsenic had been
found in Anwar’s blood, Singh had suggested in court that “people in high places”
were trying to poison his client.He faced up to three years in jail if convicted.
It was a difficult year for migrant workers. In May, the government announced
plans to expel 100,000 illegal migrant workers. Government figures showed that
50,953 illegal immigrants were detained in nationwide operations between January
and the end of June. In August, the government announced plans to amend the
Immigration Act to punish illegal migrant workers and employers who engage
them with imprisonment and caning. Officials justified the measures as necessary
to stem the influx of illegal migrants, who they blamed for an increase in serious
crime.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights groups continued to play a critical role in investigating and publicizing
abuses. In response to the increased use of the ISA, rights groups such as
Aliran,Hakam, and Suaram (Suara Rakyat Malaysia) helped form a new umbrella
organization called AIM (Abolish ISA Movement), which campaigned actively on
behalf of detainees’ rights and for repeal of the law. Some human rights workers
were among those detained: Badaruddin Ismail (also known as Pak Din), a member
of Suaram’s secretariat, was among those detained under the ISA. He was
released on June 5.
With the government still exerting substantial control over major media outlets,
Malaysia’s alternative media and rights groups were also important sources of independent
information about human rights and related developments.
Malaysia’s national human rights commission (Suhakam), established by the
government in late 1999, also began to speak out more forcefully, though its performance
was uneven. It called for review of the ISA and urged the government,
unsuccessfully, to allow Anwar to travel to Germany for surgery for back injuries
that he apparently sustained as a result of being beaten in custody. In early August,
Suhakam criticized the police in a report on freedom of assembly.The commission
said police had refused to grant permits for public gatherings without adequate justification,
and had given protestors insufficient time to disperse and used excessive
force against them. It called for amendment of the Police Act to remove the police
permit system and require only that police be given advance notice of an assembly,
to provide that any conditions should not restrict free expression, and to require the
police to exercise restraint in dispersing demonstrators. The commission also recommended
amendment of the Public Order (Preservation) Act 1958,which it said
unduly restricted freedom of assembly. Later in August, Suhakam published the
results of its five-month inquiry into police conduct in connection with the
November 2000 Keadilan-sponsored rally near Klang.The commission accused the
police of using excessive force in crowd control and in the arrest and treatment of
detainees. The government said it would study Suhakam’s findings and recommendations.
The trial of Irene Fernandez, head of Tenaganita (Women’s Force), already the
longest trial in Malaysian history, entered its sixth year. Fernandez faced three years
in prison if convicted on charges of malicious publishing for her July 1995 memorandum
on abuses in immigration detention centers. Several former detainees testified
in 2001, corroborating allegations in the report of the existence of torture and
sexual abuse in the camps.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The continuing crackdown in Malaysia evoked little international response
either in the region, including from Japan, the country’s largest bilateral aid donor
and one of its most important investors, or from Western governments.
In April 2001, Foreign Minister Syed Hamid complained when a dozen foreign
Malaysia-based diplomats attended a private briefing by Wan Azizah on the health
of her husband, Anwar Ibrahim. The minister said he would summon the diplomats
and explain to them “the actual political situation” in Malaysia.
The Bush administration shifted its position on Malaysia following the September
11 attacks. In late June, Wan Azizah visited Washington and met senior U.S.
State Department officials and members of Congress. A few weeks later, Syed met
with U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell and was reportedly told that a meeting
between President Bush and Prime Minister Mahathir could take place only if there
were progress on Anwar’s case and in the treatment of political dissidents.However,
when Mahathir and Bush met at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
summit in Shanghai in late October, Bush reportedly made no public comment on
Malaysia’s human rights record.
PAKISTAN
General Pervez Musharraf took steps that further consolidated the army’s
authority and all but ensured that any future government would operate under military
tutelage.With media attention focused on internal unrest following Pakistan’s
break with the Taliban and its public support for the United States-led intervention
there, Musharraf ’s movement toward establishing a controlled democracy faced
little international opposition. Musharraf arguably emerged from the political
realignment that occurred following the September 11 attacks on the U.S. in a
stronger position. He reshuffled the military corps command so as to marginalize
key Taliban backers; arrested leaders of religious parties who challenged his authority;
and secured a critical rescheduling of Pakistan’s debt, donor commitments of
new loans, and the lifting of existing sanctions.Nevertheless, the potential domestic
fallout from a prolonged U.S. presence in Afghanistan and the possibility of a
Northern Alliance-dominated government emerging in Afghanistan left Musharraf
clearly discomfited by November.
Mainstream political parties continued to operate under tight constraints.A ban
on rallies remained in force, and the authorities detained thousands of political
party members and activists to forestall planned demonstrations against government
policies and continued military rule. The government used a draconian
accountability law that it introduced shortly after the October 1999 coup as leverage
in a largely unsuccessful attempt to fashion a pliant party leadership.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The formation of the multiparty Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy
(ARD) on December 3, 2000, posed the first major challenge to military rule and
remained a principal target of the Musharraf administration during the first
months of the year.The alliance brought together by the country’s two largest political
organizations—the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) of deposed Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif and the Pakistan People’s Party (PPP), led by the self-exiled former
prime minister Benazir Bhutto—with the avowed aim of restoring parliamentary
government through immediate elections. In an apparent effort to forestall the
alliance from pursuing its objectives and to control any restoration of parliamentary
government, the Musharraf administration lent tacit support to a group of dissidents
within the PML who had broken with Sharif after the coup and who
opposed the formation of the alliance.
The National Accountability Ordinance was a key instrument in this effort. The
ordinance, enacted in November 1999 ostensibly to facilitate prosecution of officials
and other leaders for corruption and other illegal acts, combined unchecked
powers of arrest, investigation, and prosecution in a single institution, the National
Accountability Bureau (NAB). The ordinance provided for detention of suspects
for up to ninety days without charge, abolished bail, and established special accountability courts. Additional provisions required that trials be conducted
within thirty days of charges being filed, effectively limiting defendants’ ability to
arrange an adequate defense, and automatically barred those convicted under the
ordinance from holding public office for twenty-one years.
Although linkages could not conclusively be drawn, events suggested that the
government withdrew accountability cases against PML leaders or improved conditions
of detention in exchange for obtaining their support for the dissident faction
or their resignation from party posts. Syed Ghous Ali Shah,who had been held
by NAB since his April 2000 acquittal in a plane hijacking conspiracy case against
Sharif and his senior aides, resigned as the PML president for Sindh province on
March 2, 2001; the move was followed by Shah’s transfer from NAB custody to a
hospital. On March 8, before new elections for a party president were held, about
two hundred pro-dissident activists of the Sindh PML youth wing forcibly occupied
the PML office in Karachi. Police were subsequently deployed in the area, but
did not interfere with the takeover.Within days of the occupation, an accountability
case was withdrawn against the Sindh PML youth wing leader.
In April, the Pakistan Supreme Court ordered the government to modify the
ordinance to restore the right to bail and reduce pretrial detention to fifteen days.
However, the court order did little to limit the potential for selective application of
the law; detention periods could be extended at the court’s discretion, and the burden
of proof remained on the accused.
The other major devices employed by the government to limit opposition political
activity were the Maintenance of Public Order (MPO) ordinance, which
broadly prohibited any speech deemed “likely to cause fear or alarm to the public”
or “likely to further any activity prejudicial to public safety or the maintenance of
public order,” and a ban on “political meetings at public places, strikes and processions”
that was imposed in March 2000. Officials announced in August that they
would lift the ban ninety days before the general elections scheduled to take place
in October 2002.
On two separate occasions, authorities arrested hundreds of ARD leaders and
activists to forestall planned protests. On March 20, police in Punjab carried out
mass arrests to prevent the ARD from holding a rally that had been planned for
March 23; ARD leaders said that about two hundred party members were detained
in Lahore alone and some 2,500 throughout Punjab. A second rally, planned for
May 1 in Karachi, was similarly suppressed.According to the Sindh home secretary,
Mukhtar Ahmed, about 850 ARD members had been taken into “protective custody”
throughout the province as of April 30. On May 1, protesters clashed with
police across Karachi, chanting, waving placards, and throwing stones. Police
responded with baton charges and tear gas, arresting three hundred people.
Regional parties were also prevented from holding planned protests. On April 9,
police in Karachi used batons, fired tear gas, and arrested about ninety people,
many of them women, who were protesting against water shortages in Sindh
province. Two days later, police arrested thirty activists of the Muttahida Qaumi
Movement (MQM) and Jeay Sindh Qaumi Mahaz (JSQM) after they arrived outside
the Karachi Press Club to begin a fast to protest the shortages.
For much of the year, the authorities enforced the ban on political meetings selectively. They prevented mainstream political parties from holding meetings,
but allowed religious parties to hold regular meetings and processions in most parts
of the country. This changed after September 11, however, when Musharraf
announced his administration’s support for the U.S.-led anti-terrorism coalition.
Religious parties that continued to mobilize protesters in support of the Taliban, or
who explicitly challenged Musharraf ’s authority, faced arrest.
On October 7, North West Frontier Province (NWFP) authorities placed
Maulana Fazlur Rehman, leader of the Jamiat Ulema-i Islam (JUI), and Maulana
Samiul Haq, leader of a JUI splinter party,under house arrest.On October 22,more
than one hundred members of the JUL and the Jamiat-e Islami (JI) were arrested
in Sindh, reportedly to thwart plans by the parties to stage a sit-in at Jacobabad, site
of a Pakistani air base used by U.S. military personnel. On November 3, authorities
placed JI head Qazi Hussain Ahmed under house arrest to prevent him from participating
in an anti-U.S. rally in the Bajaur tribal agency bordering Afghanistan.
Two days later, the government filed sedition charges against Ahmed; although
details of the charges were not specified,Ahmed had two weeks earlier accused the
government of working against national interests in a speech in Rawalpindi, near
the federal capital.
The withdrawal of government support from the Taliban starting in September
and the government’s decision to back U.S.-led military action in Afghanistan also
triggered public protests in Quetta, the capital of Baluchistan province. On October
8, police clashed with protesters at rallies in Quetta involving some seven to
eight thousand demonstrators,many of them Afghan refugees. On October 9, three
Afghan refugees were shot dead by police in Kuchlak, a small town close to Quetta,
with police reportedly failing to give warnings or use teargas or other means to control
the mob before opening fire.
The militarization of civilian institutions, a trend already observable during
Nawaz Sharif ’s second term in office, continued under Musharraf. According to
official records cited by the respected Lahore-based weekly Friday Times, at the
beginning of the year about 175 serving and retired military officers held high-level
civilian posts. In addition, Musharraf had established a countrywide network of
army monitoring teams to supervise and assist in the functioning of the civilian
bureaucracy. The teams were constituted at the provincial, regional, and district
levels and consisted of army personnel, Directorate of Military Intelligence personnel,
and members of the Inter-Services Intelligence Agency’s field units. In practice,
local observers claimed, the teams interfered with the autonomy of the civilian
bureaucracy and frequently disregarded civil procedure laws.
At the executive level,Musharraf initiated moves that institutionalized his personal
authority and formalized the military’s role in governance. On June 20, he
amended his 1999 Proclamation of Emergency Order, formally dissolving the suspended
national and provincial assemblies, and issued a President’s Succession
Order enabling him to assume the presidency the following day.How long his term
of office would last was not clear.Musharraf justified his actions as being necessary
to ensure political and economic stability. On July 4, Musharraf issued an order
reconstituting the National Security Council (NSC) that he had established immediately
after the coup.Under the new guidelines, it would aid and advise the president on “Islamic ideology, national security, sovereignty, integrity, and solidarity of
Pakistan.”The revamped NSC was to be chaired by the president and consist of the
chairmen of the joint chiefs of staff committee; the naval, army, and air force chiefs;
provincial governors; and “such other members as may be appointed by the president
in his discretion.”The government also announced on August 14 that it would
promulgate new constitutional amendments in 2002 aimed at introducing checks
and balances in government. Officials said that the proposed amendments would
be opened for public debate but would be finalized by June 30, 2002 without a public
referendum.
In July, the government barred twenty-five candidates from the Jammu and
Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) from contesting assembly elections in the Pakistan-
held portion of Kashmir, known in Pakistan as Azaad Kashmir, after they
refused to sign a declaration pledging their support for the accession of Kashmir to
Pakistan. Several dozen JKLF supporters were also arrested during protests over the
elections.
Candidates associated with the mainstream political parties took the lion’s share
of the seats in the non-party local government elections, dealing a setback to government
ambitions of establishing local bodies that were not bound to provincial
political interests and were directly accountable to the federal government.While
accepting the need for accountable government at the local level, Pakistani human
rights activists faulted the design and implementation of the administration’s plan.
Election planners had reserved 33 percent of the seats for women in an affirmative
effort to increase women’s participation in the political process. But during local
government elections held on March 21 and July 2 in parts of the North-West Frontier
Province,women voters were reportedly threatened and intimidated from voting
and running for office by conservative religious activists.The election results in
these areas were nevertheless upheld.
Many voters belonging to religious minorities boycotted the local government
elections after federal authorities disregarded demands by minority nongovernmental
organizations and community leaders to hold the elections on the basis of
a joint electorate. Introduced at the national and provincial levels by Pakistan’s last
military ruler, General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, the separate electoral system
reserved a limited number of seats for each minority community and limited the
franchise of non-Muslim citizens to the seats that had been allotted to their respective
communities. The system was widely criticized by minority activists as having
contributed to their communities’ political marginalization.
Under the Musharraf administration’s local government plan, seats were
reserved for minorities in districts and sub-divisions of districts where they form
10 percent or more of the population. Of the 210 seats reserved for minorities in
Sindh’s Larkana division, which had a large Hindu population, only fifty-six
declared candidates during the first phase of the local government elections, in
December 2000; of those, fifty-two ran unopposed. A similar pattern was observable
in several districts of Punjab with significant Christian minorities.
The government promptly condemned an October 28 attack on a Christian congregation
in the southern Punjab town of Bahawalpur, and ordered an investigation
into the incident. Eighteen people were killed when masked gunmen entered St. Dominic’s Church, locked the doors, and fired at the assembled worshippers.
Although Bahawalpur has been scarred by sectarian violence between Sunni and
Shi’a Muslims in recent years, human rights investigators said it was the first attack
directed at Christians in the area.
In September 2000, the government established the Commission on the Status
ofWomen.Despite its directive to safeguard and promote women’s rights, the commission
had few powers to implement its mandate and in 2001 made little progress
in the way of setting forth concrete recommendations. Human rights activists
decried continued impunity and lenient sentences for so-called honor crimes
against women, the practice of punishing women said to have brought dishonor to
their families.
The government officially closed Pakistan’s border with Afghanistan in November
2000, citing an inability to absorb additional refugees. The border remained
formally closed throughout 2001, though refugees continued to make their way to
Pakistan, with about 200,000 entering the country between September 2000 and
September 2001, and a further 150,000 arriving after the start of U.S.-led bombing
on October 7. The government attempted at the beginning of the year to prevent
the registration of new arrivals, deported thousands of undocumented Afghans
who were already living in the country, and sought to uproot a large, established
refugee community at Nasir Bagh, near Peshawar. A screening agreement reached
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in August,
after protracted negotiations with the government, was shelved after the September
11 attacks on the U.S. a temporary relocation of UNHCR’s international staff.
The government subsequently identified a number of sites near the border where it
proposed relocating new arrivals from Afghanistan as well as residents from two
camps near Peshawar and the transit camp at the Chaman border crossing.
In a welcomed move affecting labor rights,Pakistan,on August 15, ratified International
Labor Organization (ILO) Convention No. 182,which called for immediate
and effective measures to secure prohibition of the worst forms of child labor,
as well as ILO Convention No. 100, concerning equal remuneration for men and
women.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Pakistani human rights groups played a vital role in challenging the government’s
policies toward refugees and, especially in the case of minority NGOs, its
retention of the separate electorate.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The international community almost unanimously eased diplomatic and economic
sanctions when Pakistan backed the U.S.-led anti-terrorism coalition. Pressure
for elections and a return to constitutional rule in 2002 was eased, while key donors made commitments of huge aid packages for Afghan refugee relief and
basic economic assistance. Some donors resumed arms sales.
United States
On September 22, the Bush administration,with strong Congressional backing,
waived economic sanctions imposed on Pakistan after its 1998 nuclear tests, allowing
the U.S. to approve loans at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
World Bank. On October 30, President Bush signed legislation giving him authority
to waive “democracy sanctions” on Pakistan, imposed following the October
1999 coup, opening the door for the sale and licensing of military equipment
through September 30, 2003. However, the administration refused a request from
Pakistan to transfer twenty-eight F-16 fighter planes that Pakistan had purchased
in the 1980s.
On November 10, President Bush announced more than U.S. $1 billion in
U.S. support to Pakistan, including direct budgetary assistance, funds for control of
its borders, anti-terrorism assistance, Afghan refugee relief, financial support
through the IMF,debt relief, and trade assistance. In September,Washington agreed
to reschedule U.S. $379 million of Pakistan’s $3 billion debt obligation to the U.S.
President Bush met with President Musharraf at the United Nations in
earlyNovember.Musharraf repeated his pledge to hold national elections by October
2002. A visit to Pakistan by Secretary of State Colin Powell in mid-October was
largely overshadowed by renewed fighting in Kashmir, which ended a ten-month
cease-fire.
European Union
On October 17, the U.K. announced a 15 million pound debt relief package to
Pakistan to help cope with the Afghan refugee crisis and internal reforms. On
November 24, Pakistan signed a new Co-operation Agreement with the European
Community, replacing the 1986 agreement. The signing of the agreement had initially
been postponed following the October 1999 coup. In a joint declaration, the
European Union and Pakistan “reconfirmed their commitment to the respect, protection
and promotion of human rights and democratic principles.” Pakistan also
reiterated “its firm commitment to return to democratic government in accordance
with the roadmap announced by President Musharraf on August 14, 2001.” Ongoing
European Commission development cooperation projects in Pakistan totalled
195 million euros, and were primarily focused on social sector development.
Commonwealth of Nations
In its concluding statement of March 20, 2001, the Commonwealth Ministerial
Action Group criticized the restrictions imposed by the Musharraf administration
on political parties, including their formal exclusion from the local government
elections, and pressed the regime to shorten its electoral timetable and to restore full democratic rule. The ministers agreed that Pakistan should remain suspended
from the councils of the Commonwealth pending the restoration of democracy.
On August 21, Commonwealth Secretary General Don McKinnon met
with President Musharraf in Islamabad to discuss plans to restore democracy by
October 2002.He also met with politicians from the disbanded parliament.
Japan
On October 26, Japan joined the E.U., the U.S., and Canada, and lifted economic
sanctions against Pakistan. Japan had frozen new grants and loans, except for
humanitarian aid, to Pakistan since the country conducted nuclear tests in 1998.
In September, Tokyo announced it would consider rescheduling some of Pakistan’s
$500 million debt and offeredU.S. $40 million in emergency aid for Pakistan
including assistance for refugees. Prior to September 11, Japan had decided to give
more than U.S. $70 million in Official Development Assistance (ODA) in the form
of grants and soft loans for various health, education, and communication projects.
Foreign Minister Makiko Tanaka met President Musharraf in Islamabad in late
November to express support for Pakistan’s counter-terrorism efforts and invited
him to Tokyo for the ministerial conference on Afghanistan’s reconstruction scheduled
for early 2002.Tanaka also pledged an additional U.S. $300 million in grant aid
to Pakistan over the next two years.
International Financial Institutions
The World Bank on October 24 approved a U.S. $300 million loan to promote
privatized banking, and planned to provide additional assistance bringing the
total for fiscal year 2002 to about $600 million. The Asian Development Bank
announced plans to give Pakistan a total of U.S. $950 million in 2001, increased
from $626 million planned prior to September 11. In late October, the U.S.
was negotiating with the International Monetary Fund for a line of credit for Pakistan
of up to U.S. $1 billion. On October 24, the Islamic Development Bank
approved U.S. $25 million to help finance imports of energy products.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
The Crisis of Impunity: The Role of Pakistan, Russia, and Iran in Fueling the Civil
War, 7/01
SRI LANKA
The year was marked by prolonged political infighting in Colombo, renewed
clashes between Sri Lankan military forces and the armed separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (the “Tamil Tigers” or LTTE), and stalled peace initiatives.
By early November,with the political fate of the People’s Alliance government
in question and new parliamentary elections called for December 5, pressing
human rights problems had again been pushed off the top of the government’s
agenda.
Renewed fighting in the war, which since 1983 has claimed more than 60,000
lives, left hundreds of civilians dead, many more injured, and thousands newly displaced
from their homes.Both the government and LTTE were responsible for serious
abuses, including indiscriminate suicide bombings by the LTTE and torture
and “disappearances” by government security forces and affiliated paramilitaries.
Norway’s efforts to bring the two sides to the negotiating table continued until June
when the process appeared to stall; no formal talks took place during 2001.
Although the government appeared more ready than in previous years to acknowledge
past abuses and there was progress in a few specific cases, impunity remained
the norm. Draconian security laws continued to facilitate arbitrary arrest, lengthy
detention of suspects without trial, and attendant abuses. Restrictions in the north
and east, disproportionately affecting Tamil civilians, prevented many displaced
persons from reaching work sites to earn a living, attend schools, or seek urgent
medical care.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
On April 24, LTTE leader Velupillai Prabhakaran announced the end of a fivemonth
unilateral cease-fire, saying that the government had not reciprocated.
Within hours of the cease-fire’s end, the Sri Lanka army launched Operation Agni
Khiela (“fire ball”) seeking to extend its control over the Jaffna peninsula.The army
sustained heavy losses.Civilians, caught in the middle of the conflict, faced renewed
hardships.
Increased fighting meant renewed displacement. At the end of April, for example,
government aerial attacks on the Jaffna peninsula caused some 5,000 civilians
to flee from their homes in Pooneryn north, adding to the estimated 800,000 internally
displaced people (IDPs) island-wide. Reports of “disappearances” continued
to emerge, including one in July that two youths had “disappeared” after being
questioned by members of the People’s Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam
(PLOTE), which is paid and armed by the government.
New cases of torture were also reported. In January, Sri Lankan Human Rights
Commission (HRC) officials reported that anti-terrorism police held Jaffna-based
journalist Nadarajah Thiruchelvam in incommunicado detention, beat him with
metal pipes, and kept him handcuffed in solitary confinement for twelve days
before HRC officials were permitted to visit him. In October, the Hong Kong-based
Asian Human Rights Commission reported the torture ofNamal Fernando, a social
worker, who had been threatened and pistol-whipped by police after being taken
from his home near Colombo on October 6.He was reportedly forced to sign a confession,
but then was released without charge the following day. His arrest was
apparently a case of mistaken identity.
Although fighting was heaviest in the north, civilians were also reported killed
and wounded in military operations against LTTE positions in the east, although
most accounts were insufficiently detailed to determine if the deaths were avoidable
or due to violations of international humanitarian law.Most deaths and injuries in
eastern Sri Lanka occurred around Batticaloa,Velaichenai, and in Muttur, south of
Trincomalee. In November 2000, homes were reported damaged, a two-year-old
child killed, and twelve others injured during army and police shelling north of Batticaloa.
Again in late April, eight villagers were reported injured in artillery fire
across the Batticaloa lagoon. Three civilians were killed and more than twenty
injured in separate incidents in the Valaichenai area in June and July; the army
acknowledged two civilian deaths and seven injuries during the July 30 assault.
For its part, the LTTE continued to be responsible for or implicated in serious
abuses. On November 7, 2000, newly elected Tamil United Liberation Front
(TULF) member of parliament Nirmalan Soundaranayagam was assassinated near
Batticaloa. Although his assailant was never identified, the LTTE, believed to have
been responsible for the assassination of several other TULF members in previous
years, including human rights advocate Neelan Thiruchelvam in July 1999, was the
prime suspect.
In April 2001, there were reports that the LTTE had executed three men, M.
Kamalanathan, Xavier Albert, and S. Thillainayagam after charging them with
murder and rape. On April 24, LTTE members reportedly abducted two Muslim
civilians near Valaichenai and held them for ransom. Four workers in a prawn farm
and a rice mill from the same area were abducted for ransom on June 1. On May 2,
LTTE members and local thugs reportedly killed Sivanesarajah, a young minister
for a local church group of the Assembly of God near Vakarai. The human rights
organization University Teachers for Human Rights (UTHR) said that the church’s
emphasis on pacifism had been viewed as a threat to LTTE recruitment.
In July, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) accused the LTTE of continuing
to recruit and deploy child soldiers, some of them as young as twelve.Monitors
in the north and east reported a sharp increase in conscription of children by
the LTTE though October and said the LTTE had resorted to extortion and threats
to families to comply. In an article published September 4, LTTE Batticaloa and
Amparai district political leader Karikalan told the Tamil press that a recruitment
drive in eastern areas was attracting “large numbers of youth, male and female”and
praised parents for bringing their children to enlist.He rejected accusations that the
recruitment was forced.
On July 24, the LTTE attacked Katunayake air force base and Colombo’s Bandaranaike
International Airport, destroying military aircraft and passenger jets.
Two civilians, seven security personnel, and fourteen LTTE members were killed.
The attack on Sri Lanka’s only international airport was both a political and financial
blow. It reduced the country’s commercial fleet by half, drove up exporters’
insurance premiums and damaged tourism.
On October 30, Prime Minister Ratnasiri Wickramanayake narrowly escaped a
suicide bombing in Colombo that claimed the lives of three civilians and a police
officer and injured many others. On November 15, three former members of a
paramilitary group working with a Sri Lankan army intelligence unit were killed and another wounded by a suicide bomber in Batticaloa; one civilian was also killed
and eight injured in the attack. The LTTE was suspected in both attacks.
Arbitrary detention and mistreatment of prisoners by police and security forces
remained common. A report by human rights lawyer N.Kandasamy indicated that
some 18,000 people may have been arrested under emergency regulations and the
Prevention of Terrorism Act from January to November 2000. The vast majority
were Tamil, some of whom were ordered detained without trial for more than two
years. Often the only evidence against them was a confession extracted under torture.
Although many such cases were thrown out by courts in 2001 and some torture
victims won court-ordered compensation, cases continued to take years to
make their way through the court system.Deaths in custody in 2001 included that
of Kandaiah Uthayakumar, suspected of smuggling banned commodities in the
northern town ofMannar,who died on February 28 after arrest by Navy personnel.
His children,who witnessed the arrest, said he had been beaten and strangled by the
arresting officers. In late March, a Mannar district judge ordered two naval personnel
detained pending investigation.
Government efforts to stem custodial abuse included a new emergency regulation
promulgated in May requiring detention centers to provide district courts
with a list of all persons in custody every two weeks. Earlier, the government had
established a police unit and special committee under the Justice Ministry to investigate
complaints of illegal detention and harassment by police and armed forces,
and to accelerate the release of victims.
Sexual violence against women by security forces attracted new attention in
2001. The premeditated gang-rape on June 24 of a twenty-eight year old Tamil
woman in Colombo by police and army personnel at a security checkpoint sparked
widespread protests by Tamil and Muslim political parties and women’s rights
organizations, and a general strike by shop owners in the north and east on July 6.
In the media storm that followed, several other custodial rape cases received new
scrutiny and at least one victim of grave sexual abuse was ordered released from
custody. Prosecutions in older cases stalled because witnesses were afraid to testify,
or, as in the case of Ida Carmelita, raped and murdered in Mannar in July 1999,proceeded
extremely slowly.
Pressure on medical officials to cover up evidence of custodial mistreatment was
suggested in another case of sexual abuse — the March 19 gang rape and sexual torture
by police and naval personnel of two women who had been arrested by antisubversion
police in Mannar. The initial report of the district medical officer
concluded there were no signs of mistreatment.After the women’s complaints were
made public, a second examination was ordered about a week later, the second doctor
concluding that the women had been tortured and raped.
Police and military personnel were rarely punished for mistreatment of
detainees or failing to abide by legally mandated procedures, such as notifying the
HRC of arrests and notifying family members when individuals were detained
under special security legislation.No one had been convicted for the crime of torture
since Sri Lanka ratified the U.N. Convention Against Torture in 1994 and
introduced domestic legislation mandating a seven-year minimum sentence for
torture. According to the Attorney General’s Office, several prosecutions were
pending.
Sri Lankan authorities appeared more willing than in past years to acknowledge
official responsibility for atrocities. On January 31, Sri Lankan army personnel in
Batticaloa publicly acknowledged their role in large-scale massacres of civilians in
the east,mentioning notorious attacks in Kokkaddicholai, Sathurukkondaan,Vanthaarumoolai,
and Batticaloa. In February, the attorney general reportedly issued
indictments against more than six hundred police and armed forces personnel
implicated in “disappearances” that occurred before 1994—many in connection
with counterinsurgency operations against the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP)
organization. On June 28, two soldiers were sentenced to six years in prison and
fined Rs. 2,500 (U.S. $27) each for their role in an abduction and murder in 1989.
On March 12, President Chandrika Kumaratunga appointed Justice P.H.K.
Kulatilaka to investigate the October 2000 massacre of some twenty-seven youths
in the Bindunuwewa Rehabilitation camp. The dead included individuals being
held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and LTTE members, some in their early
teens, who had surrendered to authorities. On June 28, the attorney general
reported that forty-three suspects had been arrested in connection with the killings.
In July, President Kumaratunga announced the formation of a three-member
“truth commission” to investigate incidents of ethnic violence between 1981 and
1984, including anti-Tamil riots in July 1983 that killed nearly six hundred people.
Progress was halting or nonexistent in many high profile cases. Some cases were
slowed partly by defendants’ petitions to move cases out of the north and east for
security reasons, including the Mirusuvil massacre case, in which fourteen soldiers
were accused of having tortured and murdered Tamil civilians in northern Jaffna in
December 2000. In 2001, the case was transferred out of the district to the Anuradhapura
District Court. Similarly, while proceedings continued in the trial of soldiers
accused of the 1992 massacre of thirty-five Tamil civilians in the eastern
village of Mailanthani, the case continued to move slowly following its transfer in
1996 to Colombo, far from key civilian witnesses. The case of five security personnel
arrested in connection with the 1999 discovery of fifteen skeletons in Chemmani,
thought to be those of persons “disappeared”by the army in 1996, also made
little progress.
Official restrictions on war reporting, including provisions imposed in 2000,
were relaxed in May 2001, but restrictions on access to areas under LTTE control
remained a serious impediment to accurate reporting on the human rights situation
in conflict areas. In April, journalist Marie Colvin,writing for the London Sunday
Times was shot and seriously injured when she defied a government ban on
travel to LTTE controlled areas and crossed the line of fire.Certain Sri Lankan journalists
also faced arrest, intimidation, and physical threats. The risks were particularly
acute for correspondents in the north and east and those covering political
events.Between October 2000 and November 2001,one Jaffna-based journalist was
killed and at least five others based in the northeast were arrested or threatened by
the security forces.
Criminal extortion rings linked to political forces were blamed for increased
communal tension in central and eastern Sri Lanka. In May, two people were
killed and a large number of shops destroyed when Sinhalese mobs attacked Muslims
demonstrators. The demonstrators had been protesting police inaction after
thugs with alleged ruling party links publicly tortured a Muslim shopkeeper who had refused to pay protection money.Demonstrations—some violent—spread to
Colombo. The government invoked a curfew to prevent further violence and
appointed a commission of inquiry. In September Muslim businessmen in
the eastern town of Muttur demonstrated against an extortion racket allegedly
run by the LTTE. The LTTE reportedly retaliated by burning a passenger ferry
providing transport to the area and threatened mortar attacks if demonstrations
continued.
Violence continued to plague the political process in the lead-up to parliamentary
elections scheduled for December 5. As of November 21, the Police Elections
Secretariat said it had received 1028 election-related complaints of violence,
including three murders.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights defenders in the capital, Colombo, operated in relative freedom,
but individuals and organizations in the north and east faced serious pressure from
state forces, armed paramilitary groups, and the LTTE. In some cases,human rights
defenders in the east asked that the details of threats made against them—particularly
those made by LTTE members and paramilitaries—be kept confidential out of
fear of retaliation.
Journalists (see above) and humanitarian aid workers were also attacked.
Unknown assailants threw two grenades at the Colombo office of Oxfam in late
January and three at the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) office
in Muttur on September 6.Although buildings and other properties were damaged,
no one was injured in either attack.
Local human rights organizations strongly advocated an end to official
impunity and custodial abuse, including violence against women. Sri Lankan
human defenders denounced political violence locally, but were also active in international
fora in events leading up to the Durban World Conference Against Racism
and in the global campaign against the use of child soldiers.
In 2001, rights activists joined academics and other private citizens in Sri Lanka’s
growing peace movement in denouncing the government’s ban on the LTTE and
calling on the LTTE and government to commence negotiations. Sri Lanka’s flagging
business climate, particularly in the wake of the LTTE’s attack on Sri Lanka’s
only international airport, also drove business leaders to renew private efforts to
end the war. The Society for Love and Understanding, founded by Ceylinco group
chairman Lalith Kotelawala, notified political leaders that it intended to open a dialogue
with the LTTE. In September, representatives of more than a dozen of top
national business groups and advertising agencies initiated a “Sri Lanka First”campaign
advocating civil action to end the war.
Human rights defenders continued to express concern about the work of the
HRC, particularly in relation to custodial abuse of detainees. Although HRC officers
visited registered places of detention, critics said the commission needed to
make more regular visits to prevent abuses. Five years after its establishment, the
HRC still had no access to any unregistered place of detention or authority over paramilitary groups, and security forces often failed to report arrests and detentions
to the commission as required by law.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The European Union, India, Japan, and the United States strongly supported
Norway’s efforts to facilitate talks between the Sri Lankan government and the
LTTE, and rejected the idea of an independent Tamil state.Many countries, particularly
Sri Lanka’s donors, criticized human rights and international humanitarian
law violations by government forces and the LTTE. Donors also called for greater
transparency in the government’s financial management and criticized increased
military spending and the apparent erosion of democratic structures.
Sri Lanka Development Forum
After political instability delayed the meeting for more than two years, the Sri
Lanka Development Forum, a consortium of Sri Lanka’s donors convened by the
World Bank, met in Paris on December 18-19, 2000 to discuss assistance plans for
Sri Lanka. In 1997, Sri Lanka received U.S. $860 million in assistance from donors;
it received another $780 million in 1998.But at the December 2000 meeting donors
refused to pledge new assistance, calling instead for the government to take concrete
steps to end the war with the LTTE, speed up restructuring of the public sector,
and account for previous assistance.Donors expressed special concern over the
country’s disproportionately high level of military expenditure and political interference
in development and relief initiatives.
World Bank Vice President for South Asia Mieko Nishimizu described Sri Lanka
as a country “in deep crisis, public institutions are politicized, politicians are not
accountable, people are not heard and they are isolated.” She noted links between
poverty, war, and governance problems in the country, and suggested that progress
on these fronts would be necessary before development partners would provide
additional support.
The European Union emphasized the need for a negotiated end to the war, economic
restructuring, and transparency. It made a special call for accountability in
the Bindunuwewa rehabilitation camp massacre case. The E.U. cautioned that Sri
Lanka’s large military budget was jeopardizing the country’s development. In 2000,
the defense budget consumed about 36 percent of government income or 6 percent
of Sri Lanka’s GDP.Defense expenditure rose by almost $300 million after the government
made additional arms purchases following military defeats in April and
May 1999. In 2001, Sri Lanka purchased arms from Israel (the Israeli defense ministry
sent a delegation to Colombo in August), the Czech Republic ($2.5 million in
tanks, rocket launchers, and other military vehicles), and other countries.
United Kingdom
On February 28, in spite of heavy lobbying by Tamil groups, the LTTE was included on the list of 21 banned organizations proscribed under the U.K.’s Terrorism
Act 2000, making it illegal to belong to, support, or raise funds for the LTTE.
United States
Ambassador Ashley Wills outlined the U.S. position on Sri Lanka in a speech in
Jaffna on March 7.He said that the U.S. supported an end to the war—“the sooner
the better”—and rejected the possibility of a military solution. The U.S. favored a
negotiated settlement and supported Norway’s efforts to facilitate talks. Wills
rejected “the idea of an independent state carved out of Sri Lankan territory” and
the LTTE as sole representative of Tamils in Sri Lanka. He acknowledged complaints
of discrimination against Tamils in Sri Lanka, saying Tamils must be treated
“equally, respectfully and with dignity” within a democratic state. Wills said the
U.S. would reconsider its ban on the LTTE if it renounced violence, embraced
democratic principles, and entered into negotiations to end the war.
The U.S. continued to provide economic support funds (ESF) for development
as well as international military education and training (IMET). The Bush administration
requested $3 million in ESF and $275,000 for IMET in fiscal year 2002, the
latter a $30,000 increase over the previous year.
United Nations
U.N. agencies, including UNICEF, criticized the LTTE’s continued recruitment
of child soldiers. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in a September report to the
U.N. Security Council noted that,despite LTTE commitments, children “continued
to be targeted in the ongoing conflict of Sri Lanka.” Annan noted that the Sri
Lankan government was one of only two to set the minimum age for voluntary
enlistment at eighteen and acknowledged efforts in the country to demobilize child
soldiers, but said prevention of recruitment and re-enlistment was an overwhelming
concern.He stressed the need for adequate resources, structures, and programs
to ensure successful reintegration into society of demobilized children.
Hoping to help revive agriculture in Sri Lanka’s war-torn north and east, the
World Bank in September announced plans to fund renewed U.N. mine clearance
efforts in the northern regions, where civilian casualty rates from mines are
reported to be among the world’s highest.The U.N. began its demining program in
July 1999 but fighting in 2000 had halted operations.
VIETNAM
The government’s human rights record took several major steps backward
during 2001,with religious rights in particular coming under attack. Security
forces arrested dozens of ethnic minority Montagnards in a heavy-handed response to a popular protest over land rights in the Central Highlands in February.
The authorities detained, arrested or harassed many religious leaders and political
dissidents, including members of the banned Unified Buddhist Church of
Vietnam, the Hoa Hao Buddhist sect, Roman Catholics, retired Communist Party
of Vietnam (CPV) members and military veterans known for their criticism of the
party, and ethnic minority Protestants in the northern and central highlands.
The election of new CPV General Secretary Nong Duc Manh, known as a consensus
builder, at the Ninth Party Congress in April, raised hopes that Vietnam
might step up the pace of reform.These hopes had been largely dashed by October.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In February 2001, unprecedented mass demonstrations broke out in Gia Lai,
Dak Lak, and Kontum provinces in the Central Highlands. Thousands of indigenous
minority people known collectively as Montagnards, many of them Christians,
gathered to demand greater land rights and religious freedom. In response,
authorities sent troops to the region, and police conducted door-to-door searches
for suspected leaders of the protests, arresting at least twenty in February alone.
Some were beaten, kicked, or shocked with electric truncheons by police officers
upon arrest and during interrogation. In many parts of the highlands, the government
banned gatherings of more than four people, restricted freedom of movement,
and increased its surveillance and harassment of ethnic minority Protestants.
Telephone communication to, from, and within the region was cut off for weeks.
Diplomats and foreign media were barred from visiting the area, other than a government-
sponsored press tour in mid-March and a four-day trip by the U.S.
Ambassador in July.
Fearing arrest, more than 1,000 Montagnards fled to Cambodia. (See Cambodia.)
In September, the People’s Courts in Dak Lak and Gia Lai sentenced fourteen
Montagnards to prison sentences ranging from six to twelve years on charges of disrupting
security brought under article 89 of the Penal Code.At least ten other Montagnards
were sentenced in several district-level trials quietly conducted in Dak Lak
and Gia Lai in October, bringing the total tried as of November to at least twentyfour
people
Human Rights Watch received reports of security forces burning down several
Protestant churches in the Central Highlands. On March 10, heavily-armed police
and soldiers, in full riot gear and carrying electric batons, raided Plei Lao village,
Chu Se district, Gia Lai where several hundred ethnic Jarai villagers were conducting
an all-night prayer meeting. After police officers arrested one young villager, a
crowd gathered and pulled the youth from the police jeep. Police and soldiers fired
tear gas and then bullets into the crowd.Dozens were wounded by shooting or beating,
and at least one villager, Rmah Blin, was killed.The security forces then burned
down the church. As of October, at least four of the dozens arrested were believed
to remain in detention at T-20 prison in Pleiku. In September, Plei Lao villager Siu
Boc was sentenced to eleven years in prison at a trial in Gia Lai. Beginning in June, provincial authorities conducted dozens of ceremonies in the Central Highlands in
which Montagnards who had participated in the February demonstrations were
forced to read confessions about their alleged wrongdoings and renounce Christianity
in front of entire villages, sealing their pledges by mandatory drinking of rice
wine mixed with goat’s blood.
Throughout Vietnam, the government conducted a systematic campaign of
intimidation and surveillance of perceived political opponents.On February 9, academic
Ha Sy Phu was placed under administrative detention for two years in Dalat
for allegedly collaborating with “hostile forces” abroad. That same month democracy
activist Vu Cao Quan was summoned to police headquarters several times
after he organized a meeting in Hai Phong to discuss democratic reforms. On April
24, Vu was arrested and detained for ten days after meeting in Hanoi with other
democracy activists. On April 26, a squad of policemen in Hanoi went to the home
of another well-known dissident,Hoang Minh Chinh, and insisted that he go with
them to police headquarters.Hoang Minh Chinh refused and remained under surveillance
throughout the year.
In June, security police apprehended Vietnam’s most influential dissident, Tran
Do, in Ho Chi Minh City (Saigon) and confiscated a draft section of his memoirs.
Afterwards, Tran wrote to party leaders and the Vietnam Association ofWriters to
protest the seizure of his writings.
The government stepped up the harassment in September, when fifteen dissidents
were detained in Hanoi, including Pham Que Duong, Hoang Tien, Hoang
Minh Chinh,Tran Van Khue, Nguyen Vu Binh, and Nguyen Thanh Giang. On September
2, just before the detentions, Pham Que Duong and Tran Van Khue had
submitted a request to the government to form an independent anti-corruption
organization. On October 9 Tran Van Khue was officially placed under house arrest
for two years under Administrative Detention Decree 31/CP. In February and again
in June, Pham Que Duong,Hoang Minh Chinh, and Hoang Tien joined more than
a dozen other dissidents in signing joint appeals to CPV officials calling for the
repeal of decree 31/CP,which authorizes detention for up to two years without trial.
Police summoned outspoken Buddhist monk Thich Quang Do, the second
highest-ranking monk in the banned Unified Church of Vietnam (UBCV), for
interrogation several times during the year. On February 4, Thich Quang Do was
detained and searched by security police after visiting UBCV’s Supreme Patriarch,
Thich Huyen Quang, who has been under house arrest in Quang Ngai province
since 1982. In June,Thich Quang Do was placed under administrative detention for
two years at his pagoda after he announced that he intended to escort Thich Huyen
Quang to Ho Chi Minh City for medical treatment. Three other UBCV monks,
Thich Khong Tanh, Thich Quang Hue and Thich Tan An,were also detained at the
same time. On September 2, Ho Tan Anh, a leader of the banned Buddhist Youth
Movement (BYM), which is affiliated with the UBCV, burned himself to death in
Danang, reportedly as an act of protest against religious intolerance in Vietnam.
Afterwards, police searched the homes of several BYM leaders.
As in past years, the government only allowed religious activities by officiallyrecognized
churches and organizations. In April 2001, the State Bureau of Religious
Affairs recognized the Evangelical Church of Vietnam, thus granting legal status to approximately three hundred individual churches in the south but specifically
excluding the much more numerous ethnic minority Protestant house churches.
Christians in ethnic minority areas were suppressed and pressured to renounce
their faith, not only in the Central Highlands but also in the northern provinces of
Lai Chau, Lao Cai and Ha Giang.At least sixteen ethnic Hmong were thought to be
in prison in Lai Chau,Vinh Phuc and Thanh Ha provinces as of October. In April
and June, Ho Chi Minh City police shut down services conducted by outspoken
Mennonite pastor Nguyen Hong Quang, who was beaten and detained on August
17, reportedly for operating a school for children without official permission.
In January, Ha Hai, secretary general of the banned Hoa Hao church, was sentenced
to five years in prison for violating house arrest orders and “abusing democratic
rights.” On March 17, Le Quang Liem, Chairman of the Central Council of
the Hoa Hao Buddhist Church, was arrested in Ho Chi Minh City. Two days later,
Hoa Hao church member Nguyen Thi Thu immolated himself in a protest in Dong
Thap province. Other Hoa Hao members sentenced during the year included Ho
Van Trong and Truong Van Duc.
Despite a visit by a Vatican delegation to Vietnam in June, little progress was
made towards establishing diplomatic ties between Vietnam and the Vatican.Vietnam
continued to insist on having final approval over Catholic religious appointments,
accepting three Vatican-approved bishops in June but rejecting three others.
However, the authorities permitted Catholics to attend an annual celebration mass
at the historic Our Lady of La Vang Church in Quang Tri province. In March,
Catholic Father Nguyen Van Ly was put under house arrest in Hue and denounced
by state media after he submitted written testimony to the U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom. On May 17, he was arrested after leading a religious
service at which he allegedly distributed leaflets.He was charged with violating
his house arrest order and inciting public disorder. In October, after a one-day
trial by the People’s Court in Thua Thien-Hue province, he was sentenced to fifteen
years in prison for “undermining the policy of national unity” and violating his
probation order under articles 87 and 269 of the Penal Code. At least three members
of the Catholic Congregation of the Mother Co-Redemptrix, imprisoned in
1987 for holding training courses and distributing religious books, remained in
prison.
Freedom of association continued to be severely restricted, and the formation of
independent associations, trade unions, or nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) remained prohibited. The government tolerated a number of small gatherings
and “sit-ins” to protest land grabs or corruption. In an unusually large
protest in Hanoi in March ,five hundred ethnic minority people from northern Son
La province gathered outside Ho Chi Minh’s mausoleum in Hanoi to put forward
their side in a land dispute. Police,who allowed representatives of the delegation to
speak with officials,quickly cordoned off the area. Later, as part of security arrangements
for the Ninth Party Congress, the prime minister ordered a clampdown on
public protests in Hanoi.
Strikes,while rare, increased during the year, mostly directed against foreign and
private companies. In the first six months of the year there were more than a dozen
strikes in Ho Chi Minh City against foreign-invested companies. In August, more than four hundred garment workers struck in Ho Chi Minh City to claim unpaid
wages and protest the alleged beating of a pregnant worker at a South Koreanowned
company.
All media remained state-owned and tightly controlled. There were no private
newspapers and television was operated solely by the government. Foreign media
representatives were required to obtain advance authorization from the Foreign
Ministry for all travel outside Hanoi and to clear all interviews with Vietnamese
nationals four days in advance. In July a new media decree, 31/2001/ND-CP, took
effect. It imposed fines for a variety of offenses, including republishing previously
banned stories, intentionally providing false information to the media, and publishing
articles containing pornography or “superstitious attitudes.”
In August, the government passed a decree that imposed stricter regulations on
Internet cafes and imposed fines for illegal Internet usage,while opening up provision
of Internet services to privately-owned businesses, including foreign companies.
The government continued to maintain strict control over the country’s
overall gateway to the Internet by controlling the operation of the sole Internet
access provider. In addition, the government continued to use firewalls to block
access to sites considered objectionable or politically sensitive. In August, Internet
access was terminated in Phu Yen province, on the grounds that it could threaten
national security.
Prison conditions continued to be extremely harsh. Human Rights Watch
received reports of the use of shackles and solitary confinement in cramped, dark
cells, and the beating, kicking, and use of electric shock batons on detainees by
police officers. In June, the official press reported that more than 17 percent of
detainees at Chi Hoa prison in Ho Chi Minh City were held beyond the expiration
of their sentences, including one inmate who was still in detention thirteen years
after his conviction was overturned on appeal.Police officers routinely arrested and
detained suspects without written warrants, and suspects were often held in detention
for as long as a year without being formally charged or tried.Decree 31/CP, the
administrative detention decree, was used on many occasions to place dissidents
under house arrest.
Corruption was identified by the Ninth Party Congress as one of the “four dangers”
facing Vietnam.The Central Committee passed new measures to address corruption
within the CPV, such as requirements for members to reveal their assets. In
July, the Ministry of Public Security proposed to establish a special court to address
corruption, saying it threatened to undermine the CPV’s authority. In September,
six government officials were convicted for corrupt land deals involving the Thang
Long water park. While a businessman convicted in the same case was jailed for
twenty years, the officials were either released or sentenced to prison terms of a year
or less. In mid-November a provincial court opened a trial of twelve people accused
of bribery and embezzling money from government development projects in
northern Lai Chau province, inhabited primarily by low-income ethnic minorities.
The National Assembly appeared to be more assertive than in previous years. In
June, National Assembly members grilled cabinet officials on live television about
their progress on previous policy commitments. That same month the assembly
rejected a law supported by the minister of planning that would have increased the authority of district courts, reportedly because of concerns that the bill would cause
a dramatic increase in the prison population and violations of judicial procedures.
Also in June, assembly members questioned safety plans for the party-approved
Son La dam project as well as the proposed relocation of hundreds of thousands of
people to make way for the dam. Despite the controversy, however, they approved
the project in late June.
In July, Prime Minister Phan Van Khai called for the 1992 constitution to be
amended, reportedly in order to clarify the role of the judiciary, national assembly,
and state bureaucracy, and distribute more decision-making power to local authorities.
A nationwide campaign was announced in August to solicit public opinion on
the proposal, with the caveat that CPV policies be reflected. A clandestine group
called the Vietnam Restoration Party (To Chuc Phuc Hung Vietnam) ignored that
caveat and distributed a letter calling for the repeal of article 4 of the constitution,
which states that the CPV is “the force leading the State and society.”
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The government did not allow independent associations or human rights
organizations to operate in Vietnam. Contact with international human rights
organizations was strongly discouraged and the government continued to refuse to
permit international human rights organizations such as Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International to conduct official missions to Vietnam. In October Tran
Van Khue, who had proposed to establish an anti-corruption NGO, was placed
under house arrest.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Vietnam’s increasingly poor human rights record came under international criticism
during the year. The government’s repression of religious leaders and its
crackdown against ethnic minorities in the Central Highlands drew particular fire.
At the annual World Bank-sponsored donor meeting in December 2000,Vietnam’s
donors, while pledging U.S. $2.8 billion in aid, pressed the government to focus
more on environmental issues and good governance, in addition to economic
reforms. In July, the World Bank signed its largest set of loan agreements with Vietnam,
totaling U.S. $520 million, targeted at infrastructure development, economic
growth, and poverty reduction. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) announced
that its Japan Special Fund would provide U.S. $600,000 for secondary education
in rural areas, targeted at ethnic minorities.
United Nations
In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
(CERD) issued its Concluding Observations on a report, overdue since 1993, submitted
by the Vietnamese government. The committee expressed concerns about religious persecution of ethnic minorities, allegations of forced sterilization of
Montagnard women, and the impact of population transfers to areas inhabited by
indigenous groups. Relations between the Vietnamese government and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) were often strained during
the year over the fact that thirty-eight Montagnards were resettled to the U.S. in
April, and the UNHCR’s establishment of sites to receive asylum seekers in Cambodia.
In July, talks between UNHCR,Vietnam and Cambodia on the possibility of
voluntary repatriation of Montagnards from Cambodia broke down when Vietnam
refused to grant UNHCR unhindered access to the Central Highlands to monitor
the status of returning asylum seekers. In September, Vietnam ratified two
optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, one on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography, and the other on child soldiers.
Japan
Vietnam’s largest donor, Japan, provided assistance to conduct legal training
programs and reform of the legal system in the specific areas of civil code reform,
drafting of the civil procedure code and criminal procedure code, as well as various
commercial laws.
European Union
The E.U., Vietnam’s second largest donor, was vocal in its support of human
rights. In July, the European Parliament adopted an emergency resolution on religious
freedom in Vietnam and denounced the persecution of several religious leaders
and ethnic minorities in the Central Highlands.That same month E.U. External
Affairs Commissioner Chris Patten raised concerns about religious freedom and
restrictions on international media based in Vietnam in a meeting with the Vietnamese
foreign minister. In talks with CPV Secretary General Nong Duc Manh
during an August visit to Vietnam, the foreign minister of Sweden raised the issue
of human rights and greater freedom of the press, and even broached the topic of a
multiparty system. After an European Commission (EC) meeting in Hanoi in
November, an EC spokesman said that Vietnam had made some progress on
human rights conditions but that it still had a long way to go.
Several E.U. political figures became the subject of controversy after they visited
dissidents in Vietnam. In April,Member of the European Parliament (MEP) Lars
Rise of the Norwegian opposition Christian People’s Party was detained and
deported from Vietnam after visiting several dissidents. In June, Italian MEP
Olivier Dupuis was expelled after he tried to stage a sit-in at the monastery where
Thich Quang Do lives under house arrest.
United States
Relations between the U.S. and Vietnam were strained at times during the year,
but the overall trend was positive.Vietnam reacted defensively,however, to any suggestion
that its human rights record could be improved. Several times during the year the Foreign Ministry charged that the U.S. was inciting unrest in Vietnam and
interfering in its internal affairs, in particular by sponsoring hearings on religious
rights in Vietnam in February and by approving Montagnard resettlement to the
United States.U.S.Ambassador Pete Peterson pressed hard for an official visit to the
troubled Central Highlands after the February unrest.He secured approval only in
July, shortly before he ended his term as ambassador. Peterson was highly critical of
some provincial officials for preventing him from talking freely with villagers.
U.S.Assistant Secretary of State James Kelly, the first senior Bush administration
official to visit Vietnam, made a strong statement criticizing the arrest of Father
Nguyen Van Ly, which occurred during Kelly’s visit in May. The seventh round in
the U.S.-Vietnam human rights dialogue took place in Hanoi in July, with no tangible
results.
In October the Senate passed a resolution approving the Bilateral Trade Agreement
between the U.S. and Vietnam. In September, the House approved the Vietnam
Human Rights Act, which would link future increases in non-humanitarian
aid to progress on human rights. Vietnam reacted strongly against the measure,
issuing public statements from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the mass party
organizations.
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Fellow ASEAN members made virtually no comment on Vietnam’s human
rights record during the year. In July,Hanoi hosted the annual ASEAN ministerial
meetings, the ASEAN Regional Forum, and the ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference,
attended by ASEAN members as well as the U.S., E.U., Canada, Japan, and
China.
Vietnam’s relations with neighboring Cambodia were tense at times over the
issue of the Montagnards, especially when Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen
defied his long-time ally by refusing to send the first group of twenty-four Montagnard
asylum seekers back to Vietnam in March. However, the two countries
signed agreements during the year to strengthen border controls, prevent illegal
crossings, and train Cambodian police in Vietnam.
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA OVERVIEW
August 2001 marked ten years since the failed 1991 coup that presaged the
end of the Soviet Union, and the anniversary provoked impatience at
the uneven progress on human rights in the region.After the September 11 attacks
one month later, impatience turned to regret at the lost opportunities for a more
thoroughgoing transition during the interlude between the Cold War and the Antiterror
War.
Many countries in the region had made significant strides since 1991, but abusive
authoritarian rule persisted in several, and others still struggled to overcome
the ethnic conflict that had engulfed large parts of the disintegrating Soviet Union
and Yugoslavia. Looking westward toward eventual integration into the European
Union, central and eastern European countries had undertaken important reform,
while western Europe had turned inward and become increasingly intolerant of
immigration and ethnic diversity. As the year drew to a close, it was not entirely
clear what the new post-September 11 era would hold for human rights, but in
much the same way the Cold War once distorted the human rights agenda, the
prospects for tackling the region’s persistent and newly emerging human rights
problems seemed suddenly to dim in light of the competing and overriding antiterrorism
imperative.
After September 11, governments from Skopje to Moscow scrambled to cast
their own often brutal internal conflicts as part of the new international antiterrorist
cause.With too few exceptions, this opportunism went unchecked. At the same
time,Western European leaders ramped up their anti-immigrant rhetoric and further
restricted the rights of migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers, all in the name
of fighting terrorism. And criticism of human rights abuse softened, particularly
for those states that were strategically important to the U.S.-led military action in
Afghanistan. The United States and Uzbekistan announced a “qualitatively new
relationship,” notwithstanding the latter’s brutal crackdown on independent Muslims.
German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder urged a reevaluation of Russia’s abusive
war in Chechnya. In November, U.S. President George Bush praised Russian
President Vladimir Putin’s talk of negotiating peace in Chechnya, with no public
mention of continued atrocities perpetrated against Chechens since September 11.
The most alarming developments of the year came in Central Asia, where the
transition from the Soviet Union had brought only grinding poverty and ever more
repressive governance. After September 11, it was these very governments that
became the essential allies of the U.S.-led military campaign in Afghanistan. Of
particular concern was the close and apparently unconditional U.S. relationship
with Uzbekistan,where Islam Karimov’s dictatorship permitted no true opposition political activity, no civil society, and no independent media and locked up and tortured
thousands who dared demonstrate independent thinking. U.S. officials
argued that the new relationship with Uzbekistan put them in a better position to
address their partner’s gross violations, but as this report went to press there was
no relief from the Uzbek government’s assault on its own society. In the two months
following September 11, yet another human rights defender was detained, dissidents
and religious believers continued to be arrested and tortured—one died in
custody—and convictions on trumped-up charges of anti-state activity continued.
Ethnic conflict had attended the breakup of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia for
ten years, and in 2001 its aftermath continued to shape much of the human rights
landscape. Russia’s transitional record remained marred by the continued grave
violations committed by its forces in Chechnya. As the Chechen conflict dragged
into its third year, the government’s halfhearted peace bid and promised troop
reductions made no difference in the lives of Chechen civilians. Sweep operations
purportedly aimed at apprehending rebel fighters resulted in widespread looting,
arbitrary detention, torture, and an alarming number of “disappearances” of
Chechens last seen in Russian custody,with the bodies of some later found dumped
or hastily buried in unmarked graves. Chechen fighters were also believed to be
behind an increasing number of abuses, including a wave of assassinations of
Chechen civil servants and religious leaders seen as cooperating with the Russian
government, and the fatal shooting of Viktor Popkov, a leading Russian human
rights activist.
Ethnic tensions flared again in the Balkans, this time in southern Serbia and
Macedonia. The response of both the implicated governments and the international
community differed from past conflicts in the region, reflecting important
transitional developments and lessons learned. When an ethnic Albanian rebel
group emerged in southern Serbia, it was clear that Slobodan Milosevic was no
longer in power in Belgrade. In contrast to Kosovo in 1998, the international community
immediately and intensively engaged and worked with a relatively cooperative
Serbian government to address the legitimate grievances of the ethnic
Albanian community, including through the deployment of a multiethnic police
force in the region. In May the rebels disarmed, and displaced ethnic Albanians
began returning to the region.The lack of Albanian representation in local government,
serious employment discrimination, and sporadic incidents of ethnic violence
remained concerns, but the threat of armed conflict had receded for the time
being.
Similar success came more slowly in Macedonia, where for months the government
insisted upon a military response to its ethnic Albanian insurgency, led by the
so-called National Liberation Army (NLA). The government’s security operations
were characterized by indiscriminate attacks, widespread arbitrary detentions and
beatings of ethnic Albanians, some extrajudicial executions, and vigilante violence
tolerated and in some instances abetted by the police.The Albanian rebels were also
responsible for serious crimes, including the detention and torture of ethnic Macedonians
and Serbs and the “disappearance” of at least ten people from NLA-controlled
areas. Determined to avoid another drawn-out war and cognizant of
Macedonia’s strategic location, the international community mounted an intensive peacemaking effort. Guided by E.U. and U.S. special envoys and supported by
OSCE and NATO deployments, on August 13 the Macedonian government concluded
a framework peace agreement with the main ethnic Albanian political parties.
Deep divisions emerged within the government over the peace deal and
implementation lagged behind schedule, but in mid-November the Parliament
adopted constitutional amendments to grant important new rights to the ethnic
Albanian minority.The peace remained fragile,however,with extremists within the
government and police working to derail the process and skirmishes continuing
between a new Albanian National Army and Macedonian forces, even as Parliament
approved the new constitutional provisions.
Accountability for genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity remained
a high priority in efforts to resolve the ethnic conflicts that have plagued the region.
The April 1 detention of former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic and his
June 28 transfer to the custody of the Hague tribunal were the high points.While
Milosevic stubbornly defied the tribunal and obstructed its proceedings, the prosecutor
brought additional charges against him, expanding the Kosovo indictment
to include important new charges of sexual violence and adding indictments for
war crimes dating from 1991 in Croatia and for genocide and crimes against
humanity in the 1992-1995 Bosnia conflict. The discovery in Serbia of new mass
graves believed to be filled with the bodies of ethnic Albanians slaughtered during
the Kosovo conflict brought unprecedented discussion and reflection in Serbia
about its role in the serial wars in Yugoslavia. Cooperation with the tribunal
remained a contentious issue, however, pitting Serbian nationalist Yugoslav President
Vojislav Kostunica against the more pragmatic Prime Minister of the Republic
of Serbia Zoran Djindjic, who saw cooperation as key to obtaining further
Western integration and much-needed debt forgiveness. Pragmatism seemed to
win the day, with six indictees, in addition to Milosevic, having gone from
Yugoslavia to The Hague by the end of November—three by surrender and three
by Serb government arrest. In contrast, there was no public progress on accountability
for war-time crimes committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
against Serbs and others in Kosovo. The ICTY was reportedly investigating crimes
there but issued no indictments. In Kosovo, even speaking publicly about such
crimes brought warnings of retribution from former KLA members.
With the dramatic developments in Serbia, the most conspicuous haven for war
criminals indicted by the tribunal remained the Republika Srpska, the Bosnian
Serb-controlled part of Bosnia, where Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan
Karadzic and other indictees remained at large. NATO troops deployed in Republika
Srpska deserved some of the blame for the indicted war criminals’ continued
impunity,which undermined the tribunal and the six-year-old Dayton/Paris peace
process.
Russian officials repeatedly assured their international critics that those responsible
for any abuses in Chechnya would be held accountable. On the eve of the
March meeting of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, Russian authorities
commenced the high-profile trial of Colonel Yuri Budanov for the killing of Elza
Kungaeva in 2000, and in April the Russian Duma presented the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly with a list of 358 investigations under way.Unfortunately, careful scrutiny of the Russian government’s accountability effort revealed little
more than an international public relations campaign. Few of the cases on the list
provided to the Council of Europe dealt with the worst abuses in Chechnya. Even
fewer had proceeded beyond the initial investigation phase. As of September, only
five cases had resulted in active prison sentences for the perpetrators. Budanov
never faced rape charges, though forensic evidence showed that Kungaeva had been
sexually assaulted prior to her murder. Morever, Budanov appeared likely to be
amnestied altogether after a psychiatric institute found that he had been “emotionally
distressed” at the time of Kungaeva’s murder.
The decade of ethnic conflict in the region was evidenced in the millions who
remained displaced in 2001, in some cases years after they originally left home. In
Ingushetia, over 140,000 Chechens remained too fearful to return. More than
750,000 remained registered as displaced from Bosnia and Herzegovina, two-thirds
of them within the country, and, because many people no longer registered, actual
numbers were likely much higher. Though return increased, it remained at a rate
that would take years to reverse the “ethnic cleansing”of the territory.Over 200,000
Serbs were too afraid to return to post-war Kosovo, and another 200,000-plus Serbs
declined to return to their homes in Croatia. In Turkey, although armed clashes in
the southeast essentially ceased in 1999 and the government announced an ambitious
return program, few of the 250,000 internally displaced Kurds from that
region ventured home. More than 800,000 Azeris remained displaced from
Nagorno-Karabakh and the surrounding districts of Azerbaijan, seven years after a
1994 cease-fire. About 280,000 Georgians who fled their homes in Abkhazia when
the Georgian army surrendered Sukhumi to Abkhazian separatist forces in 1993
continued to endure displacement in Georgia. Sixty thousand Ossetians and 12,000
Georgians remained displaced from their homes in Georgia and its autonomous
territory of South Ossetia after the 1991-1992 fighting between Georgians and
Ossetians over South Ossetia.
Neither the affected countries nor the international community demonstrated
much determination to tackle this persistent problem, which left millions living in
substandard conditions and unable to return to their homes and property. In some
cases initial post-war efforts had not been sustained as attention and resources
shifted to new crises. In others no attempt at promoting return or restitution was
ever made. The prospects for any concerted efforts to enable return became ever
more remote once the aftermath of September 11 drew humanitarian attention to
a new crisis spot,Afghanistan. The long-term impact of displacement was difficult
to assess and varied among countries, yet in many places its effect on postwar
reconciliation and the prospects for lasting peace remained a serious cause for
concern.
Poverty, conflict, and human rights abuse in the region and beyond drove hundreds
of thousands to travel to Western Europe to seek a better life. The inhumane
and often deadly conditions they endured to reach their destination spoke volumes
of their desperation. Trafficking of women for forced prostitution remained
an urgent concern throughout the region. In many countries the victims of trafficking
faced prosecution and expulsion while their traffickers, sometimes in
cahoots with local police, carried on with their lucrative criminal business. Recent
years had seen heightened attention to the problem of trafficking, with high-level meetings convened on the subject at the European Union, OSCE, and Council of
Europe.Whether these initiatives would be pursued remained an open question as
international attention shifted to the all-consuming antiterrorism effort after September
11.
Western European countries’ attempts to address the demands of increased
migration often led to more restrictive immigration and asylum laws, with little
concern for the rights of vulnerable migrants and refugees. Detention conditions
for migrants were grossly substandard in a number of countries, and many
detainees were denied basic procedural guarantees in the detention and deportation
process. Proposals to hinder migrants’ access to basic healthcare and to deny
migrant children access to education were hotly debated in several countries.
In the aftermath of September 11, many European countries adopted antiterrorism
measures inimical to migrants and refugees. In Hungary, all Afghan refugees
were transported to special detention facilities. In Greece, some migrants arriving
on ships were denied access to asylum procedures and given fifteen-day expulsion
orders. The United Kingdom proposed emergency anti-terrorism legislation that
would deny some asylum seekers an individual determination procedure, classify
as “terrorist” any foreigners with ill-defined “links” to terrorist organizations, and
allow authorities to indefinitely detain them. National governments were spurred
on by developments at the E.U. level,where proposals to combat terrorism included
a broad definition of terrorism that threatened to undermine freedom of assembly
and association and a European arrest warrant that lacked adequate fair trial safeguards.
Racist violence targeting migrants and refugees mounted in Western Europe,
particularly in the wake of the September 11 attacks. Politicians failed to curb this
abuse, too often encouraging it with inflammatory rhetoric equating the fight
against terror with the fight against illegal immigration.
European efforts to come to terms with diversity became ever more critical with
the European Union’s rapidly approaching eastward expansion, set in motion in
the heady, early post-Cold War years.With as many as ten countries to be admitted
by 2004, much remained to be done to restructure E.U. institutions, as well as to
adjust applicant states’ laws to E.U. norms. In the field of human rights, poor treatment
of Roma remained a challenge for nearly all applicant states.Turkey’s persistent
problems relating to torture, free expression, and minority rights kept it as a
case apart among applicant states. Its National Program for Accession to the E.U.
announced in March and the constitutional amendments adopted in October were
both disappointing. The national program was too vague to raise any hope of
meaningful change. Not surprisingly then, incommunicado detention, the death
penalty, and emergency rule remained in place, and important free expression
guarantees were neglected. Having missed these important opportunities for
meaningful reform, Turkey continued to face a long road to E.U. membership.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Conditions for human rights defenders varied widely in the region, with
activists in some countries free to develop innovative new projects while others struggled just to survive in extremely hostile environments. In Turkmenistan, no
independent activist dared undertake any human rights activity. In Belarus, Kyrgyzstan,
Turkey, and Uzbekistan, defenders worked under siege, facing a constant
threat of harassment, police raids, violent attacks by unknown assailants, arrest,
torture, and conviction on trumped-up charges.Under pressure from the U.S. government,
Uzbekistan released human rights defenders Mahbuba Kasymova in
December 2000 and Ismail Adylov in July 2001. In the course of the year, however,
the Uzbek government detained two others, one of whom—Shovruk Ruzimuradov—
died in custody.
Defenders also put their lives on the line in Chechnya, where Chechen fighters
were believed responsible for the shooting death of Russian human rights activist
Viktor Popkov and the January kidnapping of humanitarian aid worker Kenneth
Gluck,who was subsequently released unharmed. Russian forces maintained strict
control on access to Chechnya for human rights monitors, with most groups,
including Human Rights Watch, refused entry to the territory.
Accountability for the murders of defenders remained a low priority for many
governments in the region. The United Kingdom again failed to set a positive
example in this respect,persistently refusing to establish independent inquiries into
the murders in Northern Ireland of human rights lawyers Patrick Finucane and
Rosemary Nelson, despite calls to do so from the United Nations, the U.S. government,
bar councils across the globe, and many nongovernmental organizations.
Notwithstanding the challenges they faced, rights workers in many countries
undertook creative new projects to strengthen protection and build a larger grassroots
constituency for human rights. In Turkey, Sanar Yurdatapan’s Freedom of
Expression Initiative challenged the authorities on their arbitrary restrictions on
free speech by enlisting internationally acclaimed authors to republish statements
for which the original authors had been prosecuted. Throughout the region the
Central and Eastern Europe Bankwatch Network trained and empowered consumer,
human rights, and environmental groups to challenge international financial
institutions to take into consideration the impact of their operations on local
communities. Rights groups, refugee, and migrants organizations joined forces in
many European countries to advocate for the fundamental human rights of
migrants and refugees, and to highlight anti-immigration policies and inflammatory
government rhetoric that often contributed to a hostile climate for these vulnerable
groups.An effective coalition of nongovernmental organizations undertook
a multiyear effort to promote implementation and enforcement of a new E.U.
directive aimed at combating race discrimination.Another alliance of groups came
together to battle for victim and witness protection measures in the E.U. Council
Framework Decision on Trafficking of Human Beings. These and many other initiatives
reflected the creativity and resolve of a resilient civil society that, particularly
after September 11, was the region’s best hope for positive change.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The contentious debate on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights ultimately yielded a strongly worded resolution condemning ongoing violations
of international humanitarian law there and pressing for accountability and
monitoring by the United Nation’s human rights mechanisms. The European
Union tabled the resolution but under the Swedish presidency negotiated an alternative
consensus chairman’s statement with Russia. The United States (supported
quietly by some E.U.member states) found the statement too weak and pressed for
a vote on the resolution. When the resolution passed, Russia immediately
denounced it, refusing to meet any of the demands it contained.Neither the European
Union, the resolution’s reluctant sponsor, nor the United States, the resolution’s
ultimate champion,publicly raised its implementation during the year.When
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan visited Moscow in May, however, he did urge
access for the U.N. human rights mechanisms identified in the resolution.
The United Nations maintained a massive peace implementation operation in
Kosovo, the U.N. Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Though it
gradually shifted certain responsibilities to local authorities, UNMIK, together
with the NATO-led peacekeeping force (KFOR), retained responsibility for security
and judicial affairs, where its activities did not always meet international human
rights standards. In particular, there was a tendency to sacrifice due process guarantees
in the name of improvements to the security situation in the province. Trials
of several Kosovo Serbs and Roma charged before the Kosovo courts with war
crimes and genocide suffered from serious fair trial shortcomings, while the number
of international judges and prosecutors remained far below what was needed to
address ethnic bias in the administration of justice.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia made significant
progress toward achieving justice for war crimes committed in the Balkan wars.
The detention and transfer of Milosevic was a watershed for the tribunal, whose
prosecutor Carla Del Ponte persistently pressed the new Yugoslav government to
cooperate. There were important developments in other cases during the year as
well. In the first eleven months of 2001 seventeen defendants surrendered or were
arrested and transferred to custody in The Hague. Giving the lie to charges of bias
against Serbs, the tribunal continued investigations of KLA crimes in Kosovo and
issued indictments against Croatian generals Rahim Ademi and Ante Gotovina.
The tribunal also created an important precedent with convictions for crimes
against humanity and war crimes in the Foca case, the first to focus entirely on rapes
and sexual assaults perpetrated against women in wartime. Finally, the tribunal
played an important deterrent role by opening an office in Skopje and reminding
the parties to the conflict in Macedonia that it had jurisdiction over any war crimes
they might commit. In November,Del Ponte announced that the tribunal would be
investigating war crimes committed by both government forces and the ethnic
Albanian insurgency.
An unqualified success of the U.N.World Conference Against Racism in Durban was the clear articulation of the fundamental rights of refugees and migrants and a
wholesale rejection of the anti-immigration, “Fortress Europe” mentality that
dominated Western Europe throughout the 1990s. Realizing the gains of the conference
with respect to the rights of migrants and refugees promised to be a difficult
task, however, particularly in light of the repressive measures taken by many
European governments in the aftermath of September 11.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE started the year reeling from an embarrassing December 2000 ministerial
meeting where foreign ministers failed to agree on a final communiqué after
Russia refused to include any reference to Chechnya. In June 2001, Russia finally
permitted the redeployment in Chechnya of the OSCE Assistance Group, a year and
a half after the OSCE Istanbul Summit at which then-President Yeltsin agreed to the
redeployment. A combination of cumbersome security arrangements and OSCE
timidity in pursuing the mandate substantially compromised the mission’s potential
for curbing ongoing abuse. Even its modest monitoring activities brought
intense criticism from the Russian authorities.
The OSCE played an important confidence-building role in Macedonia. In September,
159 new international staff—mostly security monitors and police advisors—
were added to the fifty-one already deployed. Adopting an overly restrictive
interpretation of its mandate, however, the mission limited its human rights monitoring
activities. Particularly disappointing was its failure to report its findings on
an August government assault on the village of Ljuboten that left ten ethnic Albanian
civilians dead, over a hundred detained and beaten, and scores of houses burnt
down. Interior Minister Ljube Boskovski, who was present in Ljuboten the day of
the operation, referred to the OSCE’s silence as confirmation that the security
forces conducted themselves appropriately.
In Kosovo, the OSCE organized municipal and Kosovo assembly elections in
line with U.N. resolution 1244,which governs the province. In Albania, the OSCE’s
Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) published a report
that, although diplomatically couched, was critical of the electoral system and government
manipulation in the June 24 parliamentary elections.
The OSCE continued to finance antitrafficking projects in the region, focusing
primarily on public education campaigns and work by nongovernmental organizations.
In addition, with financial support from the government of Germany, the
OSCE sponsored a high-level conference on trafficking in human beings in October
2001. Participants made numerous recommendations to member states, but it
remained unclear at the time of this writing whether any of those recommendations
would be implemented.
Council of Europe
Throughout the year, Council of Europe experts were seconded to the office of
President Putin’s representative on human rights in Chechnya, Vladimir Kalamanov,
and the Parliamentary Assembly pursued a dialogue on Chechnya with the Russian Duma.Neither effort had significant impact on the ground, disappointing
in particular in their failure to press effectively for accountability.When the bodies
of fifty-one people—at least sixteen of whom were last seen in Russian custody—
were found dumped near the Russian military’s Khankala base, bearing evidence of
torture and execution, the Council of Europe experts failed even to visit the site or
monitor the forensic examination and investigation.
Continuing an unfortunate pattern of decisions on new members, in 2001 the
Council of Europe undermined its own standards by admitting states that flagrantly
violated them. Following a premature mid-2000 Parliamentary Assembly
recommendation that Armenia and Azerbaijan be admitted, the Committee of
Ministers delayed their admission until after the November general elections in
Azerbaijan.Though Council of Europe officials who monitored the elections found
the electoral fraud there scandalous, and a partial repolling did little to remedy the
situation, the council admitted both states in late January 2001. Likely setting in
motion a similar set of concessions, in September the Political Affairs Committee
of the Parliamentary Assembly recommended that Bosnia and Herzegovina be
admitted, though few of the conditions for admission identified in 1999 had been
fully achieved.
The European Court of Human Rights remained an important source of redress
for human rights abuse, though its growing caseload meant justice was often long
delayed. It issued an important decision against the United Kingdom for inadequate
investigations into the killings of eleven people by security forces and paramilitaries
in Northern Ireland and admitted the first two cases against Russia since
its admission to the Council of Europe in 1996. The court censured Turkey for,
among other things, the conduct of its forces in the southeast and for the unfair
1994 trial that landed four Kurdish parliamentary deputies in prison. In a controversial
July decision the Court sided with Turkey over the 1998 closure of the
Islamist Welfare Party. Finding that the party’s intention to establish Islamic law
conflicted with Council of Europe norms, the court effectively endorsed the Turkish
government’s particular form of secularism, often used to restrict nonviolent
expression and other democratic freedoms.
European Union
The European Union’s accession process remained a valuable incentive for
human rights progress among applicant states. In the European Union’s annual
assessment of applicant states, only Turkey failed to satisfy the political criteria for
admission.
On a number of critical issues, however, the E.U.’s stance undermined human
rights principles. The European Union led the international embrace of the new
Yugoslav government of Vojislav Kostunica,without regard for his refusal to cooperate
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.While the
United States demanded Kostunica cooperate or lose assistance, the European
Union moved forward to organize a May 31 donors conference. Only the threat of
a U.S. no-show caused the European Union to postpone the conference until June
30, by which time the Serb government had been compelled to transfer Milosevic.
A similar myopia infected E.U. policy toward Russia. The European Union and its
member states continued their aggressive cultivation of Russian President Vladimir
Putin with virtually no public reference to the ongoing abuses in Chechnya.
Though it sponsored the resolution on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission on
Human Rights, the European Union did almost everything possible to scuttle it.
In the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, the European Union entertained
a number of proposed security measures that would not only violate human rights
at home, but also undermine the E.U.’s credibility as a champion for human
rights abroad. The proposed security measures contained an overbroad definition
of “terrorist activity” that could potentially have the same sweeping effect as laws
used to silence dissidents in, for example, Turkey and Uzbekistan. Having pressed
for conformity with fair trial standards in E.U. applicant states and elsewhere
abroad, the European Union itself entertained a proposal for a European arrest
warrant that lacked sufficient fair trial guarantees.
United States
In the first eight months of the year, the Bush administration sent the mixed signals
of a human rights policy still in formation. On the one hand the administration
announced a foreign policy driven by strictly construed and narrowly defined
national interests, seeming to foreshadow a retreat from peacekeeping and promoting
human rights.After initial equivocation, however, the Bush administration
firmly committed to keeping its troops in the Balkans. The arrest and transfer of
Slobodan Milosevic and other indicted war criminals in Yugoslavia to the Hague
tribunal probably would not have happened, at least for years to come, without
concerted U.S. pressure.The United States was also the most principled advocate of
a resolution on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.
After September 11, however, the U.S. anti-terrorism effort threatened to sweep
aside the human rights agenda, most notably in relations with key anti-terror allies
Russia and Uzbekistan. Once again the United States squandered its leverage to
obtain rights improvements when the State Department omitted Uzbekistan from
its list of the most egregious violators of human rights. In November, President
Bush hosted Russian President Putin for three days in Washington and Texas, with
little more than gratuitous reference to ongoing Russian government abuses in
Chechnya.
International Financial Institutions
Human rights continued to play an ever more important role in the operations
of the international financial institutions, although certain issues remained too
controversial for the banks to touch. The European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) began to take a more robust approach to its charter mandate
to invest only in countries committed to the principles ofmultiparty democracy. In
strongly worded letters to the presidents of Belarus and Turkmenistan, EBRD President
Jacques Lemierre threatened both countries with expulsion from the bank
unless they started to show some evidence of such a commitment. The bank’s
approach to democratization issues was, however, uneven. While Turkmenistan and Belarus were censured, Uzbekistan received relatively muted criticism, and
plans to hold the 2003 EBRD annual meeting in Tashkent moved forward without
any apparent concern for the symbolism of convening in such a repressive environment.
The World Bank continued to emphasize the importance of judicial and legal
reform, sponsoring a major conference on the subject in St.Petersburg in July. In its
policy dialogue with states, the bank increasingly emphasized the importance of
criminal law reform, but it remained hesitant to finance the much-needed reform
of Soviet-era criminal codes, which remained a source of rampant corruption and
abuse.
At the same time, the international financial institutions resisted calls for them
to condition financing in Yugoslavia on the government’s cooperation with the
ICTY. In the same vein, they refused to link their operations in Russia to improved
conditions in Chechnya.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Human Rights Watch’s work tracked the most serious human rights problems
in the region.We gathered testimony about abuse in Chechnya in research missions
to neighboring Ingushetia in February and July. In two separate reports, we published
our findings on forced disappearances and on the government’s botched
investigation into the mass grave near the Khankala Russian military base.We also
monitored the opening hearings in the Budanov trial. By presenting our research
to government officials in national capitals and in Geneva,we helped make the case
for the Chechnya resolution adopted at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights.
We also successfully pressed the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly to
enter into a serious dialogue on accountability with its Duma counterparts.When
the Duma produced a long list of crimes investigated, our analysis helped policy
makers appreciate the holes in the list.
Human Rights Watch also continued to track the government of Uzbekistan’s
brutal crackdown on independent Muslims, their families, and supporters. In
August we published a memorandum on the key aspects of the campaign and
pressed the U.S. government to name Uzbekistan a country of particular concern
under its International Religious Freedom Act. A December 2000 report described
the systematic and increasingly deadly use of torture in Uzbekistan. A second
report on Uzbekistan, released in June 2001, highlighted the plight of victims of
domestic violence,which Uzbek police and local councils routinely countenanced,
advising terrorized victims to return to their husbands. Two years of advocacy on
behalf of jailed human rights defenders Mahbuba Kasymova and Ismail Adylov
were rewarded with their releases in December 2000 and July 2001, respectively.We
honored Adylov at our annual dinner in November 2001, which he attended only
after a long struggle to obtain an exit visa from the government of Uzbekistan to
visit the United States for the event.
Uzbekistan was not the only country where religious freedom was the focus of
our work. In an August memorandum we also documented the escalating violence
against non-orthodox religious believers in Georgia.We repeatedly raised the issue in letters to Georgian President Eduard Schevardnadze and urged the U.S. government
to take appropriate action under the International Religious Freedom Act.
When conflict erupted in Macedonia,we sent five consecutive research missions
to monitor the conduct of both sides and published our findings in a series of press
releases and a report on the abusive government operation in Ljuboten. In Skopje,
Washington, Brussels, and Vienna, we briefed officials on our findings and recommended
an active international human rights monitoring presence and a role for
the Hague tribunal.
Building on a decade of research into violations committed in the wars in
Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo, we pressed for accountability for former Yugoslav
President Slobodan Milosevic and others responsible for war crimes. We documented
and publicized the Yugoslav government’s failure to cooperate with the
Hague tribunal. An open letter from Human Rights Watch to Yugoslav President
Vojislav Kostunica,published in the Belgrade daily Danas, countered his arguments
against the tribunal. After Milosevic’s transfer to The Hague, a Human Rights
Watch representative attended each of his hearings, providing background and
commentary for the media chronicling the proceedings. In October we published
a six-hundred-page account of violations of international humanitarian law committed
in 1998-1999 in Kosovo, primarily by Serbian and Yugoslav forces, but also
by the rebel ethnic-Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, and, though not of a criminal
nature, by NATO.Releasing the report in events in Pristina, Djakovica, and Belgrade,
we aimed to contribute to ongoing discussions about justice and
reconciliation among Serbs and Albanians.
In Turkey, the ongoing prisons crisis remained a priority, as did advocacy aimed
at promoting an ambitious reform agenda for Turkey’s E.U. accession process. In
June and July we conducted a six-week investigation of the Turkish government’s
efforts to promote return of those displaced from the southeast and found that its
program fell far short of the U.N.Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. In
Albania, a November mission focused on restrictions on freedom of the media.
Finally, we continued our monitoring of the treatment of migrants in Western
Europe, publishing the results of a November 2000 investigation in Greece in a
series of memoranda and letters highlighting gaps in proposed immigration legislation,
inadequate detention conditions for foreigners, and the Greek government’s
complete failure to address the serious problem of trafficking in women for
forced prostitution. Our work on detention conditions in Greece sparked close
scrutiny of Greece’s record by U.N. and Council of Europe bodies and contributed
to a growing civil society engagement on migrant rights issues in Greece.We followed
up on the trafficking issue with senior government meetings in Athens in
October. Trafficking was also the focus of a midyear research mission to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In July, October, and November 2001, we continued our
research on migrant rights issues in Spain, focusing in particular on the law and
practice pertaining to migrants who had just arrived or were in detention. After
September 11, our research in Western Europe took on a new dimension as we
monitored and condemned excessively restrictive security measures proposed at
both the E.U. and national levels and their impact on migrants, refugees, and asylum
seekers.
ALBANIA
HUMAN RIGHT DEVELOPMENTS
Albania took important steps towards a return to stability in 2001. The overall
security situation improved significantly, the political climate cooled off in the runup
to the June 2001 general election, and the economy grew. Serious problems
remained, however, with the conduct of elections, police abuses and trafficking of
human beings, in particular the trafficking of women and girls for forced prostitution.
And in the aftermath of the election, the country faced renewed political tensions
as the opposition refused to recognize the outcome of the vote.
In June and July 2001 Albanians voted to elect a new parliament in an extremely
protracted four-round election that left a mixed record. The electoral campaign
was non-inflammatory and issue-based, and the first day of voting was peaceful.
The Central Electoral Commission (CEC) generally acted with greater professionalism
and openness than in previous elections. The subsequent rounds were
marred, however, by what international observers characterized as increasing
police misconduct, biased media coverage, and incidents of electoral fraud, mainly
in favor of Socialist Party (SP) candidates.
The most serious irregularities occurred in Lushnja, where political squabbling
and technical problems delayed the voting by two weeks. The July 8 ballot
in Lushnja became particularly important for three junior parties of the governing
coalition, which at the time of the delayed vote still needed several hundred
more votes to gain seats under the system of proportional representation. The
allocation of nine parliamentary seats turned on the votes of the Lushnja constituency
as did the hopes of the SP and its allies to muster the parliamentary
super-majority (60 percent) required to elect a new head of state in 2002. These
circumstances led to a hotly contested election in Lushnja, where international
monitors observed serious flaws on voting day. A majority of the local election
commission refused to accept the vote as valid, which prompted the CEC to dismiss
the local commission and tabulate the results themselves. The data for some
of the polling stations, however, were missing or questionable.While the irregularities
in Lushnja and elsewhere may not have compromised the Socialists’ right
to create a new government, they may have affected the final allocation of seats in
parliament as well as the chances for an uncontroversial presidential election
in 2002.
Most of the political parties that challenged the decisions of the electoral commissions
did so through the courts, in a sign of increased confidence in the democratic
process. The courts failed, however, to fully investigate a number of key
appeals, including the complaints brought by several political parties about the
electoral process in Lushnja. The opposition alliance led by the Democratic Party
(DP) refused to recognize the outcome of the June election, and their deputies were
still boycotting the new parliament at the time of this writing. Journalists, especially from the opposition media, received harsh sentences during 2001 in criminal libel
actions brought by high-level officials.
The performance of the judicial system continued to be a major stumbling block
for the consolidation of the rule of law in Albania. Judges were poorly trained to
enforce the growing body of new legislation, at times unable to resist outside pressures,
and often insensitive to human rights violations. In the first serious effort to
curb widespread corruption within the judicial system, the government initiated
successful disciplinary actions before the High Council of Justice against more than
a dozen judges and prosecutors. An attempt by the government in May 2001 to
impeach three judges of Albania’s highest court for having allegedly favored a suspected
drug dealer failed to pass a vote in Parliament, in part because of the government’s
inability to substantiate the allegations.
Several cases of torture and other serious abuse by the Albanian police in 2001
highlighted the prevalence of police misconduct, particularly as it concerned children
and opposition activists. A particularly egregious case involved an elevenyear-
old orphan from Saranda,who was detained on charges later found to be false.
While in custody, the child was beaten, cut with a knife, and burned with cigarettes.
The DP repeatedly protested the arrests and alleged police beatings of participants
in its political rallies, which sometimes turned violent. Azgan Haklaj, the head of
the DP branch in Tropoja, was brutally assaulted by the special police in January
2001 after having been arrested for his alleged role in a November 2000 attack on
the Tropoja police station.
Trafficking of human beings, including the trafficking of women and girls for
forced prostitution, continued unabated in 2001, with Albania serving as both a
country of origin and a country of transit for trafficking victims. A report by Save
the Children noted that 60 percent of Albanian trafficking victims were minors.
Trafficking rings preyed upon Albanian women and children, operating with
impunity throughout the country and evading border controls. In 2001 the Albanian
government continued to treat trafficking victims as criminals: far more criminal
charges were brought against victims of trafficking, who were prosecuted for
prostitution, than against traffickers. The government failed to provide even minimal
assistance to victims or to support witness protection programs.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In general, human rights organizations operated freely in the country. The
Albanian Helsinki Committee focused on the monitoring of general elections and
its long-term project on conditions of prisons and police custody. It also looked at
allegations of police misconduct and patients’ rights in hospitals and mental health
centers. The Albanian Human Rights Group also defended the rights of those in
police custody, denouncing severe restrictions on the defendants’ access to defense
counsel. The complaint center created by the group in 1999 saw a significant
increase in its activity.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR)
maintained a robust monitoring presence throughout the drawn-out general election.
The observation mission advised the Central Electoral Commission and
played a key role, together with the OSCE Presence in Albania, in mediating election-
related disputes between the government and opposition parties. The final
ODIHR report on the June general election recommended that a bipartisan parliamentary
commission be established to investigate “concerns surrounding [the]
elections” and propose remedies. In a rare but encouraging public statement, the
OSCE field presence called on the Albanian government to investigate allegations
of police abuse.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe and the European Union continued a joint program to
support the reform of the Albanian judiciary. The Council of Europe-based European
Commission against Racism and Intolerance published a new report on Albania,
finding little awareness in the country on the situation of minority groups and
issues of ethnic discrimination, especially regarding the Roma.
European Union
In a move much awaited by the Albanian public, the June 2001 Göteborg summit
of the European Union decided to open negotiations with Albania for a Stabilization
and Association Agreement, the first step towards E.U. membership. A
European Commission study concluded, however, that much remained to be done
to improve the performance of the judiciary, tackle systemic corruption, enhance
the administration’s capacity to implement legislation, and shrink the massive gray
economy. In response to a government request for assistance to fight trafficking,
several E.U. member states pledged support for the establishment of an antitrafficking
center in Vlora.
United States
The United States continued to exercise significant influence over the Albanian
government and public opinion. The U.S. government publicly supported the
efforts of the Albanian police to restore law and order under difficult circumstances,
but the United States failed adequately to condemn human rights violations
by police officers. A State Department report on trafficking in persons
concluded that the Albanian government “ha[d] not yet made significant efforts to
combat” serious forms of trafficking, and that its actions were hampered by “corruption
at all levels of government.”ARMENIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The trauma of the October 27, 1999, murders in the Parliament continued to
dominate politics and public debate in Armenia. The government did little to
improve on human rights practices, as torture, abuse in the army, and persecution
of religious minorities continued, and growing poverty, combined with corruption,
also led to rights abuses.The Council of Europe admitted Armenia in January.
The trial of Nairi Hunanian and other members of the group alleged to have
killed the prime minister, speaker of Parliament, and six other deputies during the
1999 shootings began in February. After the opposition voiced suspicions that
groups close to the president masterminded the assassinations, Parliament formed
a commission to examine the criminal investigation. In July, at the commission’s
request, forensic experts examined the corpse of suspect Norair Yeghiazarian, who
died in pretrial detention in September 2000.They concluded that an electric shock
followed by a heart attack killed him. Cellmates claimed that he had an accident
with an electric heating device.
Other suspects in the case claimed they were ill-treated or tortured during interrogation.
In September journalist and former detainee Nairi Badalian alleged that
military prosecutors kept him standing for twelve days and poured hot and cold
water over him, to induce him to implicate a presidential adviser in the organization
of the shootings.
The flawed criminal procedure code and the willingness of judges to admit
coerced evidence abetted the routine police practice of extracting confessions
through beatings and other forms of torture. In October 2001, Parliament legislated
a minor improvement to the code, reducing from four to three days the time
police could detain a person without charge.
An egregious case in September demonstrated the impunity security officials
apparently enjoyed in cases of physical abuse.The beaten corpse of Pogos Pogosian
was found in the restroom of a Yerevan jazz club, after a visit by President Robert
Kocharian accompanied by singer Charles Aznavour. Pogosian was reported to
have greeted Aznavour and then made an impertinent remark to President Kocharian,
resulting in an assault by the president’s bodyguards, who took him away. The
bodyguards were suspended, but as of this writing no criminal charges were filed.
Armenian courts continued to deliver death sentences, although the government
pledged to adopt a new criminal code abolishing the death penalty within a
year of Council of Europe accession. A moratorium on executions remained in
place. However, reflecting widespread public calls for the execution of the perpetrators
of the October 1999 Parliament killings, Parliament failed to adopt the new
draft criminal code, which also would decriminalize consensual homosexual relationships
between adults.
Widespread torture, beatings, and noncombat fatalities of soldiers in the army continued. In January, Defense Minister Serge Sarkisian claimed that the number
of soldier deaths had declined compared to previous years,with seventy-two fatalities
in 2000, eight of which were attributed to border skirmishes with Azerbaijan.
Military investigators attributed many soldier deaths to suicide, allegedly doing so
to cover up fatalities under a range of circumstances. Physical abuse of new conscripts
by officers and older conscripts continued to be systematic. Superiors
extorted money or personal belongings from conscripts, abusing those who
refused to comply.
In July, the Presidential Commission on Human Rights issued the first challenge
by an official body to the widespread practice of torture in the detention facilities
under the military procuracy’s direction and to the latter’s role in fostering
impunity for grave human rights abuses in the army. It called also for the suspension
of chief military prosecutor Gagik Jahangirian. The commission raised cases
in which military police and prosecutors allegedly tortured Mikael Arutiunian by
crushing his fingers with pliers and beat another detainee repeatedly on an open
foot wound.However, it notably failed to address the wider problem of brutality in
army units.
In early September, a special investigating commission established by Prosecutor
General Aram Tamazian confirmed several allegations of abuse by the military
procuracy, including the case of Suren Grigorian, who was permanently crippled
when a group of officers allegedly beat him shortly after he was conscripted at the
end of 2000. Military prosecutors had declined to pursue the case and pressured
medical staff to misreport his injuries.However, by choosing to reject most allegations
the special commission signaled that the military procuracy need not answer
for systematic abuse.
In June, Armenia partially implemented a Council of Europe requirement to
pardon all sentenced conscientious objectors, by pardoning and releasing thirtyseven
Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, the authorities flouted the requirement by
continuing to arrest, detain, and imprison conscientious objectors. Armenia did
not adopt a law on alternative service.
The governmental Council for Religious Affairs continued to deny official registration
to the Jehovah’s Witnesses and other non-Orthodox Christian faiths. The
authorities continued to prosecute a Jehovah’s Witnesses organizer, Levon Markarian,
for holding “illegal” religious meetings. They charged him under article 244(1)
of the criminal code: “infringement of individual and civil rights and freedoms.”
Because families with children were present at these meetings, the procuracy
charged him with enticing children into meetings of an unregistered religion, for
which the penalty was a prison sentence of up to five years. A court acquitted him
in September, but the prosecutor appealed the decision.Article 244 of the criminal
code was a remnant from Khrushchev’s antireligious campaign of the early 1960s.
Although Armenia reported its seventh successive year of economic growth, the
majority of the population remained in poverty.Disparities of wealth increased, as
in previous years, with a small elite exercising much control over resources and
political power. The government announced an anticorruption drive, yet corruption
investigations remained highly selective and often appeared to be politically
motivated. A high-profile case was brought against Ashot Bleian, an opponent of the government and a former presidential candidate, who had mounted a legal
challenge on President Kocharian’s eligibility to stand for the presidency. In
December 2000, a court sentenced Bleian to seven years of imprisonment for
embezzlement and abuse of office, although witnesses withdrew incriminating
statements in court, claiming that prosecutors obtained them by intimidation or
blackmail. Two of Bleian’s colleagues were also imprisoned. His sentence was
reduced to five years on appeal in May; he was released in July.
In several cases, newspapers and journalists publishing articles critical of the
authorities received telephoned threats. Police and tax inspectors investigated the
holding company of the newspaper Fourth Estate after it fiercely criticized the official
investigation into the 1999 parliament killings. The authorities did not appear
vigorously to investigate an arson attack on the workshop of freelance journalist
Vahan Gukasian, another critic of the official investigation into the 1999 parliament
killings. The authorities reacted identically to two antigovernment demonstrations—
on October 30, 2000, and September 7, 2001—as police arrested and
sentenced the respective organizers to administrative detention, and confiscated
journalists’ cameras or videotapes. Authorities cut the power to an independent
television station’s transmitter to prevent the broadcast of news footage of the
arrest of October 2000 demonstration organizer Arkady Vartanian.
In a December 2000 report on the state’s failure to respond to domestic violence,
Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights noted that there was a high degree of social
acceptance of domestic violence and that the government did not keep statistics on
it. The research, conducted in Yerevan and Gyumri, indicated that the authorities
did not view domestic violence as a significant problem and that police often
attempted to dissuade women from pressing charges against violent partners. The
report cited a Ministry of Internal Affairs official who claimed: “If women are
assaulted in their homes, it is not considered a crime. According to Armenian tradition,
a man has a right to beat his wife in his home.”
Prisons were overcrowded, poorly supplied, and neglected. In June, Parliament
approved a general prison amnesty, releasing or reducing the sentences of onethird
of the country’s estimated 6,000 convicts and detained suspects. The authorities
planned to implement the transfer of prisons from the jurisdiction of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Ministry of Justice by the end of 2001, as mandated
by the Council of Europe, in order to reform and demilitarize the system.
However, the transfer of pretrial facilities run by the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and the Ministry of National Security, mandated to take place within eighteen
months of Council of Europe accession, appeared to be stalled.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
There were no reported cases of harassment of human rights defenders in 2001.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In November 2000, the Committee against Torture reviewed Armenia’s second
periodic report. It criticized the report for concentrating overly on projected
reforms, such as the draft criminal code, rather than the existing situation, and for
failing to respond to the committee’s 1996 recommendations. It recommended legislative
and practical reforms to address violations of the rights of detainees, particularly
regarding access to lawyers, family, and doctors; poor prison conditions;
hazing in the army; lack of effective compensation for people tortured by state officials;
and the draft criminal code’s inadequate definition of torture.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe did not sufficiently monitor Armenia’s observance of the
obligations it assumed upon membership, and failed to condemn the ongoing
imprisonment of conscientious objectors in violation of Armenia’s pledges. The
three-year deadline it set for the adoption of a law on alternative service was too lax.
A group of experts appointed by the secretary-general visited Armenia in May to
investigate cases of alleged political prisoners, concluding that there were none.
In July the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe published its report on
the revised draft Armenian constitution,which the government intended to put to
a referendum. The commission gave a generally positive assessment of the constitution’s
treatment of human rights, and proposed further revisions, such as incorporating
the abolition of the death penalty.
United States
The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000,
published in February, provided a full and telling portrayal of the human rights situation
in Armenia.
International Financial Institutions
The World Bank and the Armenian government co-hosted an international
donors’ meeting in July, and the bank published its Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS). The report emphasized a need for generating conditions for poverty reduction
through job creation. The paper cited corruption and outward migration as
hampering the business and investment environment. It called for expanded
budget allocations to education, health, and to targeted social assistance for vulnerable
sectors of the population. In August, President Kocharian publicly took
issue with the CAS, disputing its assessment that growth had done nothing to
reduce poverty levels. The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank oversaw
the government’s development of an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy, for
which they earmarked loan credits. In May the World Bank granted U.S. $300,000 for an anticorruption program, to be managed by the Yerevan office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
AZERBAIJAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Azerbaijan became a member of the Council of Europe after staging parliamentary
elections that the international community and local observers branded as
“fraudulent.”Having secured its firm grip on the political process and its entreé to
European institutions, the government harassed the independent media and political
parties and cracked down against protesters with social and economic
demands. It resisted pressure to release more than a few dozen political prisoners.
The Council of Europe had conditioned Azerbaijan’s admission on, among
other things,“free and impartial elections,” and delayed its final decision on admission
until after the vote. The Azerbaijani authorities failed this requirement spectacularly.
The November vote gave the ruling party, Yeni Azerbaycan (New
Azerbaijan) a majority in Parliament, again delivering President Heidar Aliev a
compliant legislature. Opposition parties such as Musavat, the National Independence
Party, and the Democratic Party of Azerbaijan, which enjoy significant support,
were virtually excluded.
Repeat elections in eleven of the one hundred districts, urged by the Council of
Europe, did not affect the overall result. After a campaign period marred by government
interference and intimidation, election officials manipulated turnout figures,
falsified vote tallies, and stuffed ballot boxes. The level of fraud prompted the
Council of Europe observer mission to comment,“[T]he scale of the infringements
doesn’t fit into any framework.We’ve never seen anything like it.”
Exploitation of oil and gas resources allegedly secured benefits for a small ruling
elite. Transparency International rated Azerbaijan one of the world’s five most corrupt
countries. The president of the state oil company, SOCAR, twice sued opposition
leader Etibar Mamedov for claiming that officials exported one and a half
million tons of oil surreptitiously, making it allegedly the country’s biggest source
of corruption. The broader economy was denuded of government attention and
investment. President Aliev’s August decree, ordering SOCAR to pay $190,000 per
month to assist some of the 800,000 Azeris still displaced by the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict, appeared to offer implicit acknowledgement of a link between a small
elite’s control over oil and gas wealth and poverty in society at large.
Opposition parties’ protests against the presidential elections combined with
local anger about unemployment and electricity and gas shortages. In November
2000 police clashed with demonstrators in Sheki, and reportedly beat and detained
hundreds. In July, a court tried twenty-seven of the protesters, mostly from opposition
parties, sentencing most to prison terms of four to six years on charges of
instigating public disorder, using violence against police officers, and destruction of property. In January handicapped Karabakh war veterans embarked on a mass
hunger strike in Baku to demand pension increases. The government promised to
examine their demands, but instead dissolved the Society of Karabakh Invalids,
replacing it with a government-controlled entity. On February 19, police stormed
the society’s Baku headquarters and violently broke up a renewed hunger strike,
reportedly beating men on crutches and in wheelchairs. Local authorities began
withdrawing concessions that had allowed the handicapped veterans to run shops
and minibus services to make a living, and seized all of the society’s branch offices
and property for the new entity. In July, fifteen were found guilty on charges of participating
in public disorders and, absurdly, beating twenty-five policemen, and
were given sentences ranging up to six years’ imprisonment.
Throughout the year the government harassed opposition parties, intimidated
independent media, and deterred social protests, but offered just enough human
rights concessions to placate the Council of Europe. In August, after the council had
presented the government with a confidential experts’ report on alleged political
prisoners in Azerbaijan, President Aliev amnestied or reduced the sentences of
ninety-five prisoners, including seven of the Karabakh handicapped veterans. The
Council of Europe secretary general urged President Aliev to release or grant a new
trial to all political prisoners, whom Azerbajiani nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) numbered in the hundreds. The October 17 release of only three recently
imprisoned newspapermen drew Council of Europe criticism, which President
Aliev’s office dismissed as “subjective.”
In the second half of 2001 the authorities sharply increased their pressure on the
independent media. Tax officials investigated Baku’s ABA Television and confiscated
equipment, which forced the station’s management to shut it down. The
authorities withheld licenses from provincial independent broadcasters, closing or
fining them at will. In September police in Balakan detained the head of a local television
station and shut it down by threatening to imprison him and demolish his
home if he attempted to broadcast again.
Local authorities also undermined the production and distribution of independent
newspapers. The mayor of Baku ordered the removal of newspaper kiosks
belonging to private distribution companies. In September a court ordered the closure
of the Baku Printing Press and imprisoned its director on tax charges.He had
reduced rates for independent newspapers, challenging the monopolistic high
prices for printing and newsprint set by government-controlled enterprises.
State officials used slander laws and obliging courts to close newspapers or issue
them crippling fines for publishing articles that alleged government corruption or
other misdeeds. In September, after it published a polemical article about state
racketeering in which it briefly mentioned the mayor of Baku, a court closed Bakinskii
Bulvar, gave the editor a suspended prison sentence,imprisoned the owner, and
seized his apartment and that of the article’s author, who sought asylum abroad.
The editor of Milletin Sesi (The People’s Voice) newspaper was imprisoned after it
published an article suggesting a presidential administration official consorted
with prostitutes. Both were released on October 17.
Police detained journalists, beat them, and confiscated their equipment as they
attempted to cover demonstrations. In several cases unknown assailants beat journalists.
The authorities disrupted opposition parties’ activities by making it difficult for
them to lease office premises, refusing registration, arresting party officials, and
violently breaking up their meetings and demonstrations. In August, police in
northern Azerbaijan blocked Musavat deputy Rauf Arifoglu’s tour of party
branches, and beat and detained local Adalyat party officials on the eve of their
leader’s visit. Police violently dispersed Democratic Party demonstrations in Baku
in April, and in Nakhchivan in September, beating and detaining party members.
An alleged culture of corruption, bullying, and neglect in the army continued to
cause deaths unrelated to combat. A former Defense Ministry aide reported that
since the 1994 Nagorno Karabakh ceasefire, bullying, accidents, infectious disease,
and malnutrition had killed or crippled more than 5,000 soldiers. Eighteen soldiers
died in a three-week period in August alone,of suicide, sunstroke, and dehydration.
The head of a soldiers’ mothers’ organization linked the deaths of many soldiers
with organized extortion. Some of the dead had earlier asked their families for
money to hand over to their officers.
Chiefly young men from poor backgrounds were drafted, and it was widely
reported that allegedly, a U.S. $2,000 bribe could assure an exemption from military
service on spurious ill-health grounds. Poor and cramped conditions in army
barracks exacerbated and spread diseases such as tuberculosis, diphtheria, and
typhoid. In November former navy captain Janmirza Mirzoev,who had accused the
defense minister of corruption, was sentenced to eight years in prison for his
alleged role in a 1993 murder. The only witness said to have offered any evidence
against Mirzoev withdrew his testimony in court. The murder charges came after
Mirzoev had already endured two years of reported harassment and repeated
detentions.
A new criminal code adopted in September 2000 criminalized torture as a specific
offence and stipulated a five to ten year prison sentence for officials found to
have used torture to extract confessions. However, police continued to torture or
ill-treat detainees with relative impunity. The judge who tried the Sheki demonstrators
ignored the defendants’ assertions that they were tortured or ill-treated in
custody.At this writing no police officers had been indicted for the death in custody
of SOCAR engineer Ilgar Javadov in Baku in May. Reportedly, a forensic examination
established beating as the cause of death, though the police claimed he died
jumping from a window.
In a rare exception to the general rule of impunity, and after President Aliev’s
intervention in the case, a former Baku police station chief was brought to trial in
September for his alleged role in torturing to death a factory trade union leader in
1994.
To a limited extent, conditions and incidence of tuberculosis in the prison system
ameliorated. In May, Parliament adopted an extradition law that expressly forbade
extraditing people to countries where they face torture, in line with
Azerbaijan’s obligations under the Convention against Torture. But Azerbaijan
continued to extradite suspected Chechen fighters to Russia, and in October extradited
two terrorism suspects to Egypt,both countries which systematically tortured
criminal suspects.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In a positive move, the Ministry of Justice and four human rights NGOs signed
an agreement in September to work together on prison reform.
In October 2001 the Ministry of Internal Affairs arbitrarily expelled Mehti
Mekhtiyev, the director of the Human Rights Resource Center, an NGO, back to
Baku from Nakhchivan, where he was visiting twenty-two beaten and detained
members of the Democratic Party.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
A November 2000 report by the U.N. special rapporteur on torture concluded
that torture in Azerbaijan was widespread and that detainees assumed that they
would be tortured. The report concluded that this fostered detainees’ acquiescence
in investigators’ demands and arguably constituted mental torture.
In October 2001 the U.N.Human Rights Committee reviewed Azerbaijan’s second
periodic report. It requested the government to report back within one year on
the measures taken to address the committee’s principal concerns: inaction on violence
against women and trafficking, harassment and prosecutions of journalists
and actions forcing closure of media outlets, and serious executive interference in
the electoral process.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) fielded an
observer mission to the November 2000 parliamentary election. The head of the
OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights described the conduct
of the vote as “a crash course in various types of manipulation” in a press conference,
yet criticism was muted in the organization’s official report. On October 4,
2001 the OSCE representative on freedom of the media expressed alarm at the
growing assault on freedom of media in Azerbaijan.The OSCE Minsk Group intensified
its efforts to mediate a negotiated solution to the Karabakh conflict.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe squandered its leverage over Azerbaijan at the beginning
of the year by admitting it to membership despite the fraudulent election. By midyear
both the secretary general and the Council ofMinisters had dispatched human
rights fact-finding groups to Azerbaijan.Beginning in September the secretary general
expressed concern over the crackdown on independent media and stepped up
pressure regarding the unresolved situation of political prisoners.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank secured pledges of fiscal
transparency, particularly in the handling of oil revenues, and prompted the government
to design a strategy to reduce poverty and encourage broad-based growth
to enable further lending to take place.
BELARUS
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The September 2001 presidential elections brought an unusual level of international
attention to Belarus—but human rights abuses there followed familiar patterns.
There were state or state-sanctioned attacks on the independent press,
human rights defenders, opposition politicians, nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), and peaceful demonstrators. President Alexander Lukashenka was
reelected, although no intergovernmental organization recognized the elections as
free and fair.
In June, credible evidence surfaced implicating state agents in the 1999-2000
unsolved “disappearances”of opposition figures Yury Zakharenka,Viktor Gonchar,
Anatoly Krasovsky, and Dmitri Zavadsky. Two former procuracy investigators who
had fled Belarus in May released documents to support their claims that a special
death squad, “Almaz,” had assassinated the four men.
The election campaign began inauspiciously, when the Belarusian government
prevented Mikhail Chygir, the strongest opposition candidate, from running for
president. In December 2000, the Belarusian Supreme Court reversed a decision
convicting Chygir of abuse of power, but returned his case to a lower court. The
pending investigation precluded Chygir from contesting the September vote.
Detentions of canvassers, police raids on candidates’ offices, the denial of opposition
access to the state media, and unbalanced election commissions seriously
compromised the integrity of the campaign and elections. The opposition united
behind Vladimir Goncharik of the Independent Trade Union of Belarus, but had
little chance of beating the odds. Opposition and independent NGO representatives
were disqualified nearly categorically from district election commissions.
In two July incidents, police in Grodno detained volunteers collecting nomination
signatures for independent candidates and confiscated the signature sheets;
candidate Valery Levonevsky was also detained.
Police raided four of opposition candidate Semyon Domash’s campaign offices
in July, confiscating newspapers. On August 25, police raided Goncharik’s Mogilev
campaign headquarters, seizing election materials and detaining the regional
campaign coordinator. Two days later, the Central Election Commission notified
Goncharik of campaign violations, such as distributing independent newspapers, and warned him that they would remove him from the ballot for further violations.
On September 2, police in Kobrin detained three schoolboys under fourteen
years old for putting up Goncharik posters. Without contacting their parents,
police questioned the children and threatened them with imprisonment.
Authorities strongly encouraged “early voting,”which allowed ballots to be cast
at polling places five days before election day without the presence of monitors,
making possible widespread vote fraud. The Belarusian Helsinki Committee
(BHC) reported that four universities, including Belarus State University, Belarusian
State Medical University, the University of Culture, and the Gomel Cooperative
Institute cancelled classes and closed dormitories during election week. Rights
groups accused authorities of taking these measures to force students to participate
in “early voting” and to leave the cities before planned opposition demonstrations.
On September 10, the BHC filed a complaint with the Central Election Committee
documenting more than one hundred pages of election violations and calling
for the results to be invalidated. After the Central Election Committee rejected
the complaint, the BHC appealed to the Supreme Court,which rejected the case on
October 24.
In the pre-election period, Belarusian authorities systematically sought to cripple
the independent press by confiscating newspapers and presses, bringing charges
against editors and journalists, and detaining individuals for distributing newspapers.
In July and August authorities seized printing equipment or newspapers from
six different independent newspapers, and in August alone, police detained opposition
activists for distributing seven independent newspapers. On election day the
websites of several independent media outlets were inexplicably blocked.
Authorities particularly targeted Magic Publishing House, the independent
publisher in Minsk of eighteen periodicals. During three raids in January and
August, the tax police seized printing equipment, shut down printing presses, and
confiscated issues of Nasha Svaboda (Our Liberty) and Rabochy (The Worker).
Authorities installed the deputy director of the State Press Committee as acting
director of Magic on August 27, obstructing Magic’s independent operations.
The State Press Committee reprimanded the newspapers Narodnaia Volia (The
People’s Will) and Komsomolskaia Pravda Belarus on February 14 for publishing an
article linking the arrest of opposition leader Mikhail Chygir’s son, Alexander, to
state harassment of opposition candidates. On February 20, the editors of the
Krichev district independent newspapers Volny Gorod (Free City) and Nash Volny
Gorod (Our Free City) were convicted of slander for publishing articles critical of the
Russia-Belarus union. On March 13, the State Press Committee annulled the registration
of the only Belarusian publication for sexual minorities, Forum Lambda.
Valery Shchukin, an opposition politician and journalist, received a threemonth
prison sentence in March for “malicious hooliganism.” The charges derive
from Shchukin’s attempt in January to attend a press conference, when police violently
barred him entry, inflicting serious injuries. Although Shchukin had press
credentials, police said the event was open only to journalists from the state-run
media.
The Ministry of Justice denied registration to the Youth Front, an opposition organization, on January 3, 2001, citing “irregularities” in its registration documents.
On February 19, a Minsk court fined the group’s leader, Pavel Syverinets,
about U.S. $460 for organizing a demonstration.
Authorities routinely detained peaceful demonstrators of all ages, often under
article 167 of the Belarusian administrative code,which prohibits the organizing of
unauthorized protests or mass actions. On December 10, 2000,Human Rights Day,
peaceful demonstrators were detained under article 167 in five cities. Sergei Bakun
of the Brest Youth Front was sentenced to ten days’imprisonment; two United Civic
Party activists in Vitebsk were fined the equivalent of U.S. $500 each.
During the annual March 25 Freedom Day demonstrations, twenty-five peaceful
demonstrators were detained in Minsk alone. Pavel Syverinets and Ales Byalytski,
chair of the Viasna Human Rights Center, were sentenced to fifteen days in
prison. Ludmila Griazanova, an opposition politician, was fined approximately
U.S. $100.At the rally in Grodno, a seventeen-year-old photojournalist was reportedly
detained, beaten, and warned not to file his story.
Activists from the youth movement Zubr faced detention for staging demonstrations,
painting anti-Lukashenka graffiti, and distributing opposition materials.
Youth activists were detained—and in some cases interrogated—without counsel,
fined, or imprisoned, in ten cities. Police detained children in at least four of these
cities. On August 14,Zubr reported that a Borisov police officer brutally beat a thirteen-
year-old for posting Zubr stickers.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Authorities used registration regulations, police raids, and web site jamming in
attempts to silence human rights groups. The March 2001 Presidential Decree No.
8 further intensified the scrutiny of NGOs by forbidding funding from abroad to
any organization involved in democracy, civil society, or election monitoring activities,
effectively denying vital assistance to NGOs and independent newspapers.
The Viasna Human Rights Center received written warnings from the Ministry
of Justice in December 2000 and August 2001 threatening to revoke its registration
for alleged administrative violations. In February, the director of the Brest Association
of People with Impaired Hearing was forced to resign for allowing opposition
candidate Semyon Domash to hold a campaign meeting in the group’s office. In
April authorities shut down the Minsk office of the People in Need Foundation, a
Czech human rights group, and deported its director.Unknown persons stole computer
files and research from the Belarusian Helsinki Committee on March 28 and
again on July 9. The items stolen, with other valuables ignored, raised suspicion of
state responsibility.
On April 2, the Ministry of Justice refused to register the Legal Defense of Citizens,
explaining that the organization’s goals were contrary to the official definition
of the term “legal assistance.”
On July 20, civil rights attorney Vera Stremkovskaia was convicted of slander
against the chief investigator in a case against Vasily Starovoitov, whom Stremkovskaia
defended. In court, Stremkovskaia had accused the investigator of corruption.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In November 2000, the U.N.Committee against Torture issued its third periodic
report on Belarus, noting concern about “numerous continuing allegations of torture
and other inhumane treatment or punishment” by state officials or with their
acquiescence. The report called for the establishment of independent national
commissions to investigate torture allegations and human rights abuses.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
In a concerted effort to discredit the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), President Lukashenka personally accused OSCE Advisory and
Monitoring Group head Ambassador Hans-Georg Wieck of “espionage.”Obstruction
by Belarusian authorities forced the OSCE to abandon the planned fullfledged
observation mission. A limited observation mission was deployed,
although two observers were denied visas. On September 3, Lukashenka threatened
to expel both Ambassador Wieck and the U.S. ambassador to Belarus.
On September 10, the OSCE declared that the September 9 presidential elections
failed to meet OSCE standards.The preliminary report on the elections, however,
praised the “growing pluralistic civil society”; called on the authorities, civil
society, and the OSCE to begin a period of cooperation despite “recent disputes”;
and deplored the international isolation of Belarus. Both Freimut Duvé, representative
for freedom of the media, and Gerard Stoudmann, director of the Office of
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, cancelled planned visits to Belarus
when several of their staff members were refused visas.
Council of Europe
In January 2001, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE)
voted against restoring special guest status to Belarus due to the “unsatisfactory”
parliamentary elections and lack of respect for free and fair elections, rule of law,
and human rights. A PACE delegation observed the September presidential elections.
On September 10, the Council of Europe issued a joint statement with the
OSCE and the European Union, calling the campaign and election undemocratic.
European Union
In its public statements, the European Union strongly supported the OSCE and
the international election monitoring mission. A European Parliament delegation
served as short-term observers. On September 11, the European Union announced
that it would not normalize relations with Belarus in light of election violations.
United States
The United States followed closely the presidential campaign and elections in Belarus, issuing statements harshly criticizing authorities’ treatment of the independent
media, civil society, opposition candidates, and election monitors. The
State Department also called for investigation into the “disappearances” of
Zakharenko, Gonchar, Krasovsky, and Zavadsky. On September 10, the State
Department declared the presidential elections undemocratic, citing the OSCE’s
findings.
The State Department’s first annual report on trafficking in persons, released in
July, assigned Belarus the lowest of three possible ratings, citing corruption, lack of
programs to assist victims and witnesses, detention of victims during investigation,
prosecution of victims for violations of other laws, and the criminal code’s light
penalty for trafficking.
International Financial Institutions
In June, the World Bank approved a $22.6 million loan to Belarus, the first since
1994, to install and update heating, lighting, and insulation in 450 schools and hospitals.
The World Bank held the negotiations “in connection with serious achievements
in social and economic spheres which were reached by the Belarusian
government last year.”
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), in an April
2001 letter to President Lukashenka, expressed concern over Belarus’s failure to
comply with the EBRD’s required commitments to multi-party democracy and
pluralism. The letter stated that the bank’s future operations in Belarus would be
reviewed after the fall presidential elections.
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The return of displaced persons and refugees remained the principal unresolved
rights issue confronting the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.The major political
development was the formation of non-ethnic-nationalist governments at the
national level and in one of Bosnia’s two constitutive entities, the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The ethnic nationalists continued, however, to exercise
effective power in majority Croat cantons in the federation. In the other entity,
Republika Srpska, Serbian nationalists remained a leading political force.
Bosnian nongovernmental organizations reported that the general elections
held on November 11, 2000,were the best-organized elections since the 1995 signing
of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement. An “open list” system was used in elections
for the federal House of Representatives, entity parliaments, and the cantonal
assemblies in the federation. The system enabled Bosniacs and Croats in the federation
to vote for candidates from the other ethnic group. The more numerous Bosniacs were thus able to influence the election of Croat candidates. Unsatisfied
with the electoral law, the main political party of Bosnian Croats—the Croat
Democratic Union (HDZ)—organized an ad hoc referendum on Croat self-rule on
the same day as general elections. The party also refused to cooperate with the
implementation of election results.
On February 22, Bosnia’s central parliament elected a cabinet (Council of Ministers)
composed solely of the members of a moderate seven-party grouping
dubbed the Alliance for Change. On March 12, the federation Parliament also
elected an Alliance for Change government. On March 3, HDZ and its nationalist
allies proclaimed self-governance in the territory inhabited by a Croat majority.
The efforts to establish self-rule suffered a decisive blow on April 18, when Stabilization
Force (SFOR) troops and OHR entered the main branch of the Hercegovacka
Bank in Mostar. International auditors blocked the HDZ’s access to funds in
the bank, thereby cutting off the sources of funding for the Croat self-governance
initiative. By mid-June, Croat soldiers who had left the joint federation army at
HDZ’s invitation renewed their contracts with the federation army.
As the security situation and political climate for return improved, the U.N.
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) registered 56,683 returns of minorities
during the first nine months of 2001, an increase of almost 100 percent over the
same period in 2000.Most returns continued to be to in rural areas. The return of
minorities was still not self-sustaining, however, as returnees continued to face
scant employment opportunities and great obstacles to education for minority
children. The international community continued to fail to respond adequately to
the increased interest in return, with reconstruction funds falling far short of the
amount needed.Although rates of property repossession by returnees grew in comparison
to previous years, urban return remained modest.
While the security situation generally improved, serious incidents of ethnically
motivated violence continued to occur. In a dozen cases in Republika Srpska and,
less frequently, in the Croat parts of the federation, unknown perpetrators blew up
or set fire to reconstructed returnee houses, shot at returnees, or planted explosive
devices under their cars. On January 24, Zijada Zulkic, a forty-nine-year-old
Bosniac woman from Banja Luka, was found dead in her apartment with a bullet
wound. On May 7, some 4,000 Serbs beat and stoned three hundred elderly Bosniacs
who came to Banja Luka for a ceremony to mark the reconstruction of Ferhadija
mosque. At least eight people were taken to the Banja Luka hospital for medical
treatment. One of them, Murat Badic, aged sixty-one, died on May 26 of head
injuries. On July 12, a sixteen-year-old Bosniac returnee, Meliha Duric, was shot
dead by an unknown assailant in the village of Damdzici, near Vlasenica in Republika
Srpska. In November, Seid Mutapcic, a Bosniac returnee, was killed in Pale in
Republika Srpska.Again the motive and perpetrators were unknown, but the crime
was disturbing to the returnee community.
On April 6, an organized riot took place in west Mostar, Grude, Siroki Brijeg,
Medjugorje, and Tomislavgrad, during an abortive international audit of the
Hercegovacka Bank offices. A mob beat twenty-one members of SFOR and the
Office of the High Representative tasked with implementation of civilian aspects of
the peace process; two gunmen in Grude took eight investigators hostage and threatened to execute one of them. On May 5, Republika Srpska police in Trebinje
did little to prevent several hundred Serb nationalists from throwing rocks and bottles
at a delegation of state and international officials who came for a ceremony to
mark the reconstruction of a mosque.
Independent journalists received explicit threats from nationalists in both entities.
The Bosnian Helsinki Committee reported that journalist Ljuba Djikic from
Tomislavgrad was threatened with lynching after her son Ivica Djikic, also a journalist,
expressed his opinion about the situation in Croat-controlled parts of the
federation.Mika Damjanovic, a journalist of the Sarajevo daily “Dnevni Avaz” and
reporter-cameraman of the Federation TV, was attacked in Orasje by an HDZ
activist who accused Damjanovic of being a “Croatian traitor.”A bomb exploded in
the doorway of an apartment belonging to journalist Zoran Soviljs, causing only
property damage. The International Police Task Force concluded that his coverage
of trafficking and prostitution had motivated the attack. In April the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Free Media Helpline registered an alarming
increase in complaints from radio and television stations in Croat-dominated
areas about pressure, threats, and intimidation of editors and staff made by the
HDZ and other Croat self-rule supporters.
SFOR apprehended two war crimes suspects, both indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in connection with crimes
committed in Srebrenica in July 1995:Col.Dragan Obrenovic was arrested on April
15, and Col.Vidoje Blagojevic on August 10.NATO officials repeatedly claimed that
NATO did not always know the whereabouts of indicted wartime Bosnian Serb
leader Radovan Karadzic and former Serb army commander Ratko Mladic. In the
alternative, NATO officials suggested that the two were in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and thus out of reach of NATO troops.
On August 4, the federation government surrendered to the tribunal three
Bosniac officers of the Bosnia and Herzegovina army, Enver Hadzihasanovic,
Mehmed Alagic, and Amir Kubura, charged with war crimes against Bosnian
Croats and Serbs during the 1992-1995 war. Bosnian Minister for Refugees Sefer
Halilovic surrendered to the tribunal voluntarily on September 25. The Republika
Srpska had still not apprehended and surrendered to the tribunal a single war crime
indictee. The Tribunal Office of the Prosecutor stated in October that at least seventeen
indictees were at large in Republika Srpska.Two indicted Bosnian Serbs, former
Republika Srpska president Biljana Plavsic and Serb Army officer Dragan
Jokic, voluntarily surrendered to the tribunal, on January 10 and August 15 respectively.
On October 2, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted a law on
cooperation with the tribunal.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Local and international human rights organizations were generally free to monitor
and report on the human rights situation. Due to concern for researchers’
safety, however, some organizations were unwilling to conduct research into corruption
in the country. The Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Helsinki Committee in Republika Srpska continued to be
among the leading human rights groups in the country. The office of the Ombudsman
for Republika Srpska became fully operative in November 2000. A similar
institution had already been in existence in the federation. Most decisions by the
national Human Rights Chamber,Bosnia’s human rights court,pertained to repossession
of houses and apartments by their pre-war owners.
Lara, an antitrafficking NGO in Bijeljina, continued to offer assistance to
women trafficked into Republika Srpska for forced prostitution and received
threats after launching a nationwide antitrafficking campaign.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Office of the High Representative (OHR)
On June 21, the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board extended the
mandate of High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch for another year. Responding
to the March 3 proclamation of Croat self-governance in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
on March 7 Petritsch removed Bosnian Croat leader Ante Jelavic from his seat in the
national Presidency and barred him from holding any official or elected public
office or post within political parties. Between March and June, the high representative
also dismissed three leading HDZ politicians and four top-ranking police
officials in Croat canton seven because of their obstruction of the implementation
of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.The overall number of dismissals declined in
comparison to the previous year, reflecting the OHR-advocated principle of ownership,
whereby indigenous actors—rather than international supervisors—were
to take the initiative in the implementation of laws.
United Nations
In a resolution adopted June 21, the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), for an additional twelve-month period.The
IPTF strength (around 1,800) remained below the authorized number of 2,057.
UNMIBH completed registration of all Bosnian police personnel in May 2001 and
granted provisional authorization to over 9,300 officers to exercise police powers.
Twenty-three police officers had their authorization withdrawn for professional
misconduct or for human rights violations.UNMIBH expected that by late 2002 all
law enforcement officials would have been appropriately vetted prior to receiving
UNMIBH final certification.
In February, UNMIBH dismissed the police chief and the chief of the crime
department in Bratunac, a municipality in Republika Srpska where incidents
against Bosniac returnees were frequent. In May, UNMIBH also dismissed six topranking
police officials in the Croat part of the federation who refused to accept the
authority of the federal Ministry of Interior during the Croat self-rule campaign.
The U.N. Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution on April 18 on human rights in parts of southeastern Europe, in which it welcomed the establishment
of non-nationalist parties in Bosnia and in the federation and condemned the
continued harassment of minority returnees. The chairman of the Commission
appointed Jose Cutileiro of Portugal as a special representative to examine the situation
of human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.
In the first conviction on genocide charges before the U.N. International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Bosnian Serb Army General
Radislav Krstic was sentenced on August 2 to forty-six years in prison.The tribunal
found Krstic responsible for the murder of between 7,000 and 8,000 Bosnian Muslim
men and boys after the fall of Srebrenica in July 1995. On February 22, the ICTY
convicted Bosnian Serbs Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovac, and Zoran Vukovic
for rape, torture, and enslavement committed in Foca during the Bosnian war.This
case marked the first time in history that an international tribunal brought charges
expressly for crimes of sexual violence against women. The decision also marked
the first time that the ICTY found rape and enslavement to be crimes against
humanity. On August 1, the tribunal sentenced Stevan Todorovic, former police
chief in Bosanski Samac, to ten years in prison for persecution of Bosniacs and
Croats in 1992. Bosnian Croats Dario Kordic and Mario Cerkez were sentenced on
February 26 to prison sentences for crimes committed against Bosniac civilians in
1992 and 1993.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE-chaired Provisional Election Commission (PEC) organized general
elections on November 11, 2000. In response to the illegal referendum on Croat
self-rule on the day of the elections, the PEC’s Election Appeals Sub-Commission
(EASC) nullified the mandates of the two HDZ candidates who received the most
votes among the party’s candidates for each of five cantonal assemblies. The EASC
also banned reallocation of their mandates to other candidates. The EASC ceased
operations in April 2001 as part of the process of transferring responsibilities from
the PEC to the permanent Bosnia and Herzegovina election commission, which
commenced its work on November 20, 2001.
On April 10, the OSCE Mission released its 2000 Free Media Help Line report,
including a detailed review of cases reported to the Help Line in 2000. The report
established that the most cases of threats and intimidation reported in 2000 were
committed by government or public officials (34.6 percent), followed by anonymous
and unaffiliated individuals (with 25 percent each).
Council of Europe
At a November 2000 session the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe welcomed the progress achieved by Bosnia and Herzegovina toward meeting
the criteria for accession to the Council of Europe and added that further
progress was needed, including the adoption of an electoral law. The ministers in
May 2001 invited the newly established governmental structures in the country to accelerate the implementation of the required conditions for membership. The
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives adopted an Election Law on
August 21. On September 27, the Political Affairs Committee of the Council of
Europe Parliamentary Assembly recommended that the Committee of Ministers
invite Bosnia and Herzegovina to become a council member.
European Union
The Presidency of the European Union condemned unilateral moves of the
Croat nationalist parties in March to establish a self-governing structure.The Presidency
also supported the decision of the high representative to remove Bosnian
Croat leader Ante Jelavic from his post in the Bosnian presidency. At meetings in
May and June in Brussels, the E.U. General Affairs Council condemned all forms of
separatism and nationalist violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina and supported the
high representative’s responses to these developments.During a visit to Sarajevo in
May, Chris Patten, the E.U. External Relations Commissioner, and Anna Lindh,
Foreign Minister of Sweden (which held the E.U.Presidency at the time), stated that
Bosnia’s accession to the Council of Europe was a precondition to further negotiations
on a stabilization and association agreement with the European Union.
United States
During the year, the United States reduced its contingent in the Stabilization
Force from 4,400 troops to 3,300. A spokesman for the U.S. contingent stated in
early October that U.S. troops in Bosnia would not be pulled out to engage in the
U.S.-led military campaign in Afghanistan. State Department officials refused to
meet with Republika Srpska President Mirko Sarovic and Vice President Dragan
Cavic during their visit to Washington in April. Sarovic and Cavic are leaders of the
Serbian Democratic Party, which was founded by indicted war criminal Radovan
Karadzic. The United States also endorsed the elections of a non-nationalist
national government and expressed support for the decision of the High Representative
to dismiss Ante Jelavic from office.
DynCorp, Inc., the U.S. contractor responsible for employing U.S. IPTF officers
and SFOR contractors, faced two lawsuits for wrongful termination after dismissing
two DynCorp employees who raised allegations that DynCorp personnel had
engaged in human trafficking-related activities. The lawsuits were still pending at
the time of this writing.
BULGARIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The election of a new government in June offered the promise of reform, but
Bulgaria’s human rights record remained poor in 2001.Roma faced official and private
discrimination and abuse. Police misconduct and inadequate prison conditions
marred the criminal justice system. Respect for free expression worsened as
the outgoing government sought to silence critical broadcasting at the state radio
station. Constraints on religious freedom remained a cause for concern. Some
progress was made in curbing the illegal arms trade and destroying surplus small
arms, but more remained to be done to consolidate gains and halt irresponsible
arms supplies.
The victory of the newly formed National Movement Simeon II (Nacionalno
Dvisenie Simeon Tvori, NDSV) party in the June 17 parliamentary elections took
center stage in 2001. The party, headed by former king Simeon II (who took office
as the new prime minister),won half of all parliamentary seats in an election international
monitors characterized as largely free and fair. The NDSV formed a coalition
government with the predominantly Turkish Movement for Rights and
Freedoms (Dvishenie za Prava i Svobody, DPS).As of October, however, the change
in government had made little impact on the serious human rights challenges facing
the country.
The plight of Bulgaria’s Roma remained a key concern. Roma were beaten by
police in at least five cases, including a June 26 assault at Pleven police station in
which a Rom suspect was allegedly tortured with electricity. Private individuals
beat and shot at Roma on numerous occasions. The abuses sometimes occurred in
the context of trespass or petty theft by Roma. Police and prosecutors generally
failed to conduct serious investigations into the attacks. Four Roma were killed in
the month of June, including two men shot dead by a security guard in Mogila on
June 29.As of October 7, there had been no detentions in connection with the four
deaths.
Bulgaria continued to lack a comprehensive antidiscrimination law. A study
released by the Open Society Institute in September confirmed the broad scale of
discrimination against Roma in the provision of housing, social services and health
care. There were encouraging signs in April, however, when Petar Stoyanov, thenpresident
of Bulgaria, gave his support to the full desegregation of Roma schools,
following the success of a pilot project in Vidin. The Ministry of Education began
consultations with Roma school administrators about desegregation in July.
Roma sometimes faced pressure to leave their homes.Arsonists burned down a
Romany home in Sofia on March 15. In August, villagers from Oriahovica formed
a committee to prevent Roma families from registering as residents of the village.
Oriahovica was the scene of attacks on three Roma homes in December 2000,when
a middle-aged Roma couple was beaten. Many Roma living in Stezherovo village fled in August after five hundred residents drew up a petition calling for the expulsion
of all Roma from the village.
Human rights groups continued to receive credible reports of the excessive use
of force by members of the police and security services.Rules of engagement allowing
the use of deadly force to stop unarmed suspects fleeing provided part of the
explanation. Disturbing incidents included the death of an unarmed twenty-oneyear-
old army conscript, shot repeatedly in the chest by a military police officer on
July 22, the killing of a sixteen-year-old girl in Sofia by an off-duty police officer on
January 31, and the November 2000 death of a sixteen-year-old Iraqi boy, shot by
border guards as he tried to enter Bulgaria.
Conditions in prison and police detention remained alarming. The Bulgarian
Helsinki Committee reported severe overcrowding, inadequate food and sanitation
in prisons as well as excessive periods of pre-trial detention and beatings and other
ill-treatment in police custody. Inmates protested poor conditions in August, taking
over the roof of Sofia’s central prison, and carrying out hunger strikes in Varna.
Women’s human rights continued to be inadequately protected.Bulgaria lacked
anti-sex discrimination legislation. The state response to trafficking in persons fell
below minimum international standards with women victims frequently facing
police hostility.
Freedom of expression came under renewed threat, with the attempted murder
of a journalist in December 2000, problematic criminal defamation laws, and government
interference at the state radio, Bulgarian National Radio (BNR). In February
the government-dominated National Radio and Television Council
appointed Ivan Borislavov as BNR director-general. The decision was widely
regarded as an attempt to silence BNR’s criticism of state authorities, especially by
the popular Horizint (Horizon) program, whose staff were quickly replaced with
workers loyal to the government.Nineteen journalists were dismissed from the station
in the protests that followed. Borislavov resigned prior to an April 9 Supreme
Court ruling invalidating his appointment, but his successor continued to dismiss
staff on questionable grounds and refused to negotiate with protesters. The May
appointment of a new director-general Polya Stancheva, resolved the crisis, and the
journalists were reinstated. An August decision by the incoming government to
restrict journalists’ access at the Council of Ministers raised questions about its
commitment to free expression.
Minority religious groups faced official restrictions and societal hostility. The
much-criticized draft denominations law regulating the status of religious groups
failed to pass in the outgoing Parliament leaving repressive communist-era legislation
in force. In March, the European Court of Human Rights admitted a case
against Bulgaria brought by a Muslim permanent resident over his expulsion from
the country in July 1999 for “illegal religious activity,” following the court’s October
2000 judgment against Bulgaria for expelling Muslims on similar grounds.
Bulgaria announced in January that by December 2000 it had destroyed its
stockpile of antipersonnel landmines in accordance with the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty,
to which it is a state party. Bulgaria also took steps to tighten arms export controls,
such as by banning arms sales to twenty countries, most under U.N. or E.U. arms
embargoes.At the time of this writing, however, it had yet to enact promised legislation institutionalizing other important arms trade reforms, nor to incorporate
human rights criteria into such legislation. The new government also gave indications
it might reverse some arms trade restrictions to boost exports and protect
jobs.Moreover, Bulgaria continued to sell off huge stocks of Soviet-era weapons in
anticipation of joining NATO. In October the Bulgarian defense ministry
announced it intended to sell nearly two hundred surplus tanks and other heavy
weapons to finance purchases of NATO-standard equipment. Past practice, including
confirmed 1999 surplus tank sales to Angola, suggested Bulgaria would likely
export the weapons to human rights abusers, contrary to government pledges
under the 1998 E.U. Code of Conduct on Arms Exports and other agreements.
With U.S. financing and under the auspices of NATO’s Partnership for Peace program,
in August Bulgaria began to destroy large quantities of surplus small arms,
especially assault rifles, but no such funds were made available for the responsible
disposal of surplus heavy weapons.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
There were no reports of government interference in the work of human rights
organizations, but two groups representing Roma and Macedonians reported
harassment and interference with public education efforts related to minority participation
in the March national census.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
On March 27, Freimut Duvé, the OSCE representative on freedom of the media,
voiced concern over the crisis at Bulgarian National Radio, focusing particularly on
the dismissal of journalists. On August 31, the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights issued its final report on the June 17 parliamentary elections,
concluding that the elections met OSCE standards, despite overly-restrictive
media regulations.
Council of Europe
On May 31,Bulgaria ratified two agreements enhancing its citizen’s access to the
European Court of Human Rights. The court declared a religious freedom case
against Bulgaria admissible in March. Bulgaria settled a case before the court in
May, agreeing to expunge the criminal conviction of a conscientious objector who
was willing to perform alternative service. In October the court held that Bulgaria
had violated a ethnic Macedonian organization’s freedom of assembly.
European Union
A September 5 European Parliament resolution emphasized Bulgaria’s progress
toward E.U. accession but noted the outstanding areas of concern enumerated in
the May 28 report from the Parliament’s rapporteur on Bulgaria, particularly the
limited improvement in conditions for Roma. In its November 2001 regular report
on Bulgaria’s progress toward E.U. accession, the European Commission highlighted
police violence and the limited progress in improving the status of Roma.
United States
There was no public reference to Bulgaria’s human rights record when Secretary
of State Colin Powell met then-prime minister Ivan Kostov on April 25. The State
Department country report on human rights practices for 2000 reflected the main
shortcomings in Bulgaria’s record.
CROATIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
President Stipe Mesic’s government often failed to confront entrenched ethnic
Croat nationalists obstructing reform, particularly on issues of impunity for wartime
abuses and the return of Serb refugees. The Parliament approved constitutional
changes reducing presidential authority and abolishing the upper house of
Parliament in November 2000 and March 2001 respectively. In local elections held
throughout the country on May 20 nationalist parties made significant gains in
some areas. Police intervention was required in some areas, such as Vojnic, where
ethnic Croat nationalist demonstrators tried to keep elected Croatian Serbs from
assuming office.
Croatia’s first census since 1991 took place on March 31, 2001. Some Croatian
Serb organizations protested that the government did not do enough to include
Croatian Serb refugees in the Fedral Republic of Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the count. Serbian Democratic Forum (Srpski Demokratski Forum,
SDF), a Croatian NGO, distributed over 50,000 census forms abroad.Comprehensive
statistics were not available at this writing, but preliminary results indicated
that Croatian Serbs made up approximately 5 percent of the population of 4.38
million in 2001, compared to approximately 12 percent in 1991.
Optimism over the extent of Croatia’s cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) cooled when the ICTY’s chief prosecutor
reported to the U.N. Security Council in November 2000 that the
government’s cooperation was unsatisfactory, particularly in providing access to
documents requested by the tribunal.
Demands by opposition parties to cease cooperation with the ICTY resurfaced
in June, after the ICTY issued indictments against Croatian generals Rahim Ademi
and Ante Gotovina.Opposition rhetoric cooled after the government, standing by
its commitment to cooperate with the ICTY, survived a vote of confidence in July.
General Ademi, indicted for killing at least thirty-eight people and other abuses
committed by troops under his command in the Medak pocket near Gospic in
1993, surrendered voluntarily to the ICTY in July. At the time of writing, General
Gotovina, indicted for killings, house destruction, and other abuses against Croatian
Serbs in 1995 remained at large. The ICTY also publicly charged Yugoslav and
Serb personnel for abuses committed in Croatia in 1991. In October, the ICTY published
a previously sealed indictment against four members of the Yugoslav
People’s Army and Navy for crimes committed during attacks on the Dubrovnik
region. Two of them, Pavle Strugar and Miodrag Jokic, surrendered to the tribunal
in November.Also in October, the ICTY amended its indictment of former Serbian
president Slobodan Milosevic to include charges of war crimes and crimes against
humanity for the killings, torture, imprisonment, deportation, and other crimes
amounting to persecution of the Croat and other non-Serb population of Croatia
in 1991.
Progress was also made on domestic accountability efforts. In February, Croatian
authorities expanded their investigation into the killing of approximately forty
Croatian Serb civilians in the Gospic area in 1991, naming as a suspect former
Croatian Army general Mirko Norac, who reportedly ordered the formation of a
firing squad. Protesters took to the streets to oppose General Norac’s or ICTY
involvement in his trial. The ICTY prosecutor had not indicted General Norac,
however, and she decided not to request that the Croatian court cede jurisdiction
to the international tribunal. In June, Croatian authorities arrested Fikret Abdic,
the leader of the wartime breakaway Bihac pocket of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and
charged him with war crimes. Bosnian authorities had long sought his arrest, but
his Croatian citizenship prevented his extradition under Croatian law. In August,
Croatian authorities in Bjelovar detained four men, accusing them of killing Croatian
Serb civilians and prisoners of war in 1991. In September, six former military
police were arrested on charges of torturing and killing non-Croat detainees in the
Lora military prison in Split in 1991.
Croatian authorities also pursued war-crimes charges against Croatian Serbs.
The OSCE noted a substantial increase in such cases, many of which involved
defendants arrested pursuant to longstanding dormant indictments. Although
some suspects were refugees arrested when attempting to return to Croatia, others
had been present in Croatia for years. In many cases charges were subsequently
dropped, raising suspicions that the arrests were politically founded and arbitrary.
When three men from Glina were arrested in March on the basis of a 1993 warcrimes
indictment, the alleged witnesses,who had been tortured at a detention center,
were unable to identify any of the three as having been present at the scene of
the crimes.At least two of the suspects had been living in Croatia for over a year and
one had regularized his status as a returnee with the authorities. Although these
men were acquitted, fear of such arrests deterred many Croatian Serb men from
returning to Croatia.
Obstacles to the return of Croatian Serb refugees remained a significant human
rights concern.Although by August 2001 over 100,000 Croatian Serbs had returned
according to the U.N.High Commissioner for Refugees, most were elderly.According
to international organizations, significant numbers of these returnees may have
again departed for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or Bosnia-Herzegovina after
only a short stay in Croatia.
Human rights violations contributed to the reluctance of refugees to return and
to their renewed flight. While violent attacks on Croatian Serbs continued to
decrease in frequency, isolated serious incidents contributed to apprehension
about return. Croatian authorities frequently condemned ethnically motivated
attacks and opened investigations, but arrests or judicial proceedings did not
always follow.
A complicated web of discriminatory and confusing legislation meant that few
Croatian Serbs were able to repossess their pre-war homes or obtain government
reconstruction assistance. Although the Croatian authorities acknowledged the
difficulties and modified some legislation, in many cases these changes simply exacerbated
confusion over implementation. For example, the reconstruction law had
excluded housing destroyed by “terrorist acts” from reconstruction (a category the
authorities often used to describe the tens of thousands of Croatian Serb properties
burned and looted following Croatian military operations in 1995). Although this
provision of the law was repealed, some county offices refused to consider such
applications, claiming that the amended reconstruction legislation contradicted
other laws.With few exceptions, courts also failed to rule favorably in repossession
cases where the prewar housing had been socially owned and occupancy rights
revoked because the residents were absent as refugees or internally displaced persons.
There were no mechanisms for compensating people deprived of such property
rights.
Even when their property rights were recognized, Croatian Serbs also faced discriminatory
practices when attempting to physically repossess their property. For
example, in most jurisdictions, officials failed to implement court decisions, particularly
with regard to evictions of ethnic Croats from Croatian Serb property.
Although the authorities acknowledged this common problem, they failed to condemn
even the most flagrant cases, nor did they take action against officials who
refused to implement the law.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Croatia’s vibrant civil society continued to make an active contribution to public
life despite legislation restricting associations. In a serious but isolated incident,
lawyer Srdj Jaksic of Dubrovnik,who was known for taking on human rights cases,
was shot and injured shortly after his Montenegrin client accused of war crimes was
acquitted in December 2000. At the time of writing, there had been no substantial
progress in the investigation.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The U.N.Commission on Human Rights decided in April 2001 to exclude Croatia
from the mandate of its special representative on the former Yugoslavia. The
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights maintained a field presence
in Croatia,however, focusing primarily on technical assistance to the authorities. In
March, the Human Rights Committee considered Croatia’s initial report on implementation
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.While commending
Croatia on constitutional reforms,the committee criticized the continued
impunity for killings and torture committed during the armed conflict. The U.N.
observer mission in Prevlaka was extended until January 2002. In May,Croatia ratified
the Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
In June, the OSCE Mission to Croatia reported to the Permanent Council on
Croatia’s progress in meeting its international commitments, highlighting the continuing
obstacles to the sustainable return of Croatian Serb refugees. The mission’s
mandate was extended until December 2001, although staff numbers were reduced
in June.
Council of Europe
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance published its second
report on Croatia in July. It found that despite the good will of national authorities,
discrimination endured, particularly against Croatian Serbs in war-affected
areas, but also against Roma.
European Union
Croatia further advanced its ties to the European Union, in May initialing a Stabilisation
and Association Agreement, establishing favorable economic and trade
relations and cooperation in justice and internal affairs. The European Union also
continued to provide significant reconstruction and development aid to waraffected
areas.
United States
Continuing its support for moderate and non-nationalist reforms, the United
States funded reconstruction and demining efforts, as well as development and
technical assistance. The U.S. Agency for International Development did not
directly engage in housing reconstruction, but it did fund community infrastructure
and other projects.
CZECH REPUBLIC
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The treatment of the Czech Republic’s ethnic Roma minority remained a major
stumbling block as it made progress towards membership in the European Union.
The government’s decision in July to allow British authorities to screen passengers
bound for Britain at Prague’s airport drew criticism from human rights and civic
groups, as well as Czech President Vaclav Havel and speaker of the Czech Parliament
Vaclav Klaus, who charged that the checks discriminated against Roma. A
journalists’ strike at the Czech state-run television network in December 2000
focused attention on political interference in the public media and prompted calls
for new legislation to ensure its independence. Policing during the September 2000
World Bank/International Money Fund meetings in Prague drew hundreds of
complaints and several lawsuits alleging police ill-treatment, torture, and misconduct.
While officials stated that they exercised great caution and rejected all suspicious
arms transactions, irresponsible transfers of arms from the Czech Republic
continued to be a source of concern in 2001.
De facto discrimination against ethnic Roma in the country remained the most
disturbing human rights problem in 2001, affecting access to justice, education,
housing, employment, and public services. Little progress was made in implementing
the Czech government’s long-term strategy to improve the situation of the
Romani minority, adopted in June 2000. Racist attacks on Roma continued, but
police and prosecutors frequently failed to adequately investigate and prosecute
Roma complaints.
The July stabbing death of a thirty-year-old Romani man, Ota Absolon, by a
skinhead—racist gang-member—in Svitany, eastern Bohemia, renewed public
attention to the failure of state and local authorities to protect minorities victimized
by racially motivated violence and abuse. In the Absolon case, the accused was a
repeat offender, having received a suspended sentence in 1997 for seriously injuring
a Romani man by stabbing him in the stomach. In another incident, forty-five skinheads
reportedly attacked a group of twenty Romani men with baseball bats in the
town of Novy Bor on April 24, leaving eight Roma injured. According to local
Romani representatives, approximately ten Roma and ten skinheads were charged
in connection with the incident. The arrested Roma men claimed that they were
being punished unjustly for acting out of self-defense.They also criticized the police
for failing to pursue Polish and German skinheads who participated in the attack.
The deployment of British immigration officials at Prague’s Ruzyne Airport on
July 18 drew sharp criticism from human rights groups as discriminatory against
Roma. The Czech government agreed to the checks in order to stave off the reintroduction
of visa requirements for Czech citizens traveling to the United Kingdom.
The agreement was prompted by the wave of mostly-Roma Czech citizens
seeking asylum in the U.K. following the introduction of visa-free travel in 1990.
Between January and September 2001, 1,200 asylum claims were filed in the United
Kingdom by Czech Roma citizens, none of which were successful.
Before the checks were suspended in early August, British immigration officers
had prevented 120 people—the majority of them Roma—from boarding flights to
the United Kingdom. The checks were reinstituted on August 27. To bring public
attention to the selection process, two undercover reporters for Czech Television
(CT),Richard Samko and Nora Novakova, attempted to board a U.K.-bound flight.
When questioned by immigration officials, Samko, an ethnic Roma, gave answers
identical to those offered by his colleague, a non-Roma Czech. Although both are
in their twenties with full-time jobs, carried Czech passports and the same amount
in cash, and possessed the numbers and names of people they would be visiting,
Samko was denied entrance to the flight. Because most of the Czech citizens claiming
asylum in the United Kingdom have been Roma, the Czech Helsinki Committee
argued that the checks were designed to discriminate against this group in
particular. Such discriminatory checks could deny Czech Roma their right to seek
asylum in the United Kingdom.
On December 20, 2000, staff members at Czech Television, the country’s public
television network, barricaded themselves in the company’s newsroom to protest
the Czech Television Council’s appointment of Jiri Hodac as the station’s director.
The television journalists accused Hodac of political bias because of his close ties to
political leaders. The appointment sparked a widely-supported newscasters’ strike,
criticism from media organizations abroad, and a demonstration in Prague by
some 100,000 people. Despite Hodac’s resignation on January 11, journalists continued
to call for changes in the law governing the selection of the council to ensure
its political independence and public accountability. On January 23, the Czech Parliament
passed a bill allowing nongovernmental organizations and civic groups to
participate in the nomination of council members. Although a new council was
appointed under the new system on May 25, CT employees remained critical of a
provision that enabled a parliamentary committee to narrow the list of nominees
before submitting it to lawmakers.
In the aftermath of the September 2000 IMF/World Bank summit in Prague (see
World Human Rights Watch World Report 2000),the U.N.Committee against Torture,
the U.N. Human Rights Committee, the European Union, and local and international
nongovernmental organizatons expressed concern over alleged police illtreatment,
the arbitrary detention of protesters, and violations of detainees’ rights.
Despite numerous pledges to reject arms sales to human rights abusers, areas of
armed conflict, and countries that might illegally divert weapons, the Czech Republic
continued to supply weapons in all such cases.The Slovak submission to the U.N.
arms register indicates that in 2000 (and also in 1999) Czech weapons were supplied
via Slovakia to Angola, whose long-running civil war has been marked by gross
abuses on both sides. The Czech Republic was a major supplier of weapons to wartorn
Sri Lanka.Under a 1999 contract, the Czech Republic in 2000 delivered surplus
tanks to Yemen despite concerns that they might be diverted, as had happened a year
earlier with tanks from Poland, and initiated negotiations for further arms sales to
Yemen. Such sales typically involved surplus Soviet-standard weapons, particularly
undesirable following the Czech Republic’s accession to NATO in 1999.
There were also allegations of Czech involvement in illegal arms transactions,
including a case in April in which a Ukrainian plane carrying Czech weapons was
halted at Bulgaria’s Burgas airport on suspicion that the weapons were to be delivered
to Eritrea, under a U.N. embargo at the time. Following an investigation, the
cargo was released for delivery to Georgia, the authorized destination, although
there appeared to be discrepancies regarding the weapons carried, which reportedly
exceeded that authorized for sale. In June, the Czech Republic, a state party to
the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, reported that it had completed destruction of its stockpile
of antipersonnel landmines. A month earlier, at an arms fair in Brno, a Czech
company offered antipersonnel landmines for sale in violation of the treaty.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights groups worked freely with little government intervention. In July,
following its campaign to bring greater scrutiny to new British immigration controls,
the Czech Helsinki Committee was given permission to monitor the checks at
Prague’s airport. Civic Legal Observers, a nongovernmental organization based in
Brno, filed twenty-six criminal complaints and four constitutional complaints
against police officers for alleged abuses during the IMF/World Bank summit. La
Strada continued to disseminate information on women’s rights, provide social
assistance and support to trafficked women, and influence legislation to ensure the
protection of women’s rights.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In July, the U.N.Human Rights Committee concluded that the Czech Republic’s
antidiscrimination legislation was inadequate. The committee also noted the failure
of police and judicial authorities to investigate, prosecute, and punish hate
crimes and called on the government to take steps to combat racial violence and
incitement and provide proper protection to Roma and other minorities. In May,
the U.N. Committee against Torture expressed concern about instances of racism
and xenophobia in the Czech Republic, including the increase in racially motivated
violence against minority groups.
European Union
In its November 2000 regular report on the accession status of the Czech Republic,
the European Commission called on the government to improve the situation
of Roma and expressed concern over continued disparities in the earnings of
women, who take home on average 25 percent less than men performing similar
work.
The European Parliament’s rapporteur on the Czech Republic produced a report on the country’s accession status in July, expressing concern over political
bias at Czech Television and urging the government to take further steps to combat
prejudice against Roma. In September, the full Parliament adopted a resolution
endorsing the rapporteur’s findings.
United States
In its July report on trafficking in persons, the U.S. State Department noted that
the Czech Republic’s current antitrafficking measures fell short of the minimum
international standards. The State Department’s report on human rights practices
in 2000 expressed concern about the excessive use of force by police, particularly
during the IMF/World Bank protests, the failure of police to take sufficient action
in cases of threats or attacks against Roma, and skinhead violence against minorities.
On International Roma Day (April 8), the U.S. government’s Helsinki Commission
called on the Czech Republic to make adoption of antidiscrimination laws
a priority.
GEORGIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Government pressure on a popular independent television station caused mass
street protests in late October 2001, to which President Shevardnadze responded by
dismissing the entire government. The government’s failure to combat crippling
levels of corruption, improve living conditions, and resolve the ongoing energy crisis
stoked social tension. Law enforcement agencies acquiesced in rising religious
violence, and police corruption led to human rights abuses.
Georgian authorities allowed organized groups of civilian militants to conduct
a sustained campaign of violent assaults and intimidation against members of several
non-Orthodox religious faiths, chiefly Jehovah’s Witnesses, Pentacostalists,
and Baptists. The assailants broke up religious services, beat congregants, ransacked
or looted homes and property, and destroyed religious literature. Vasili
Mkalavishvili, a defrocked Georgian Orthodox priest who led most of the attacks,
justified them by claiming that charismatic faiths were defiling Georgia’s nationhood
and religious tradition.He boasted of receiving assistance from the police and
security services. Emboldened by the inaction or complicity of prosecutors and
police, and by a February Supreme Court decision to deregister the Jehovah’s Witnesses
as a legal entity in Georgia, the frequency of mob attacks rose in 2001. The
Jehovah’s Witnesses reported more than forty attacks on their adherents in the first
half of the year. Police failed to protect endangered worshippers and in at least one
case, played an active role in the attacks. Police on February 27 forced open a gate
to a courtyard in Tbilisi where several hundred Jehovah’s Witnesses had been worshipping, allowing Mkalavishvili and his followers to rush in and beat the congregants
with clubs, large crosses, and Bibles.
The Georgian Orthodox Church did not condemn the attacks, and newspapers
and television stations frequently gave Mkalavishvili a platform, legitimizing his
group’s activities. The Kavkazia television station in particular screened video
footage of the attacks supplied by the assailants themselves. The positive publicity
and impunity aided the spread of religious violence from Tbilisi into the provinces,
where local officials, Orthodox priests and their parishioners, and the neighbors of
followers of non-traditional faiths perpetrated attacks. The group Jvari (Cross)
began attacking Christian minorities in Rustavi. In March an Orthodox priest on
horseback led a crowd of 150 that broke into a private house in Sachkhere and beat
Jehovah’s Witness worshippers inside.
In at least one case, religious persecution extended to denial of the right to education.
In February, staff and fellow pupils of a Tbilisi high school together bullied
a sixteen-year-old student into discontinuing his attendance because of his Evangelist
beliefs.
On September 3, after months of deliberation, the procuracy indicted Mkalavishvili
and his colleague Petre Ivanidze on a limited range of charges relating to just
five of their many attacks, but left them at liberty to lead new assaults. On September
24, Mkalavishvili led a rally in Tbilisi, where he called for widening the campaign
of religious violence. In the most serious of three attacks that week,
Mkalavishvili’s supporters and the Jvari group blocked a highway and beat dozens
of Jehovah’s Witnesses on their way to a planned convention in the southern town
ofMarneuli. The mob then descended on the convention site, destroying and looting
it.
There were widespread reports of torture and ill-treatment in police detention.
In September, Council of Europe monitors reported that Interior Minister Kakha
Targamadze last year had dismissed such reports, telling them that they were made
by “enemies of Georgia.” In a positive move toward addressing torture, amendments
to the criminal procedure code voted in June reportedly granted witnesses
the right to legal representation. It had been common police practice to label
detained suspects as “witnesses” in order to deny them access to a lawyer.
Courts continued to convict on the strength of confessions that may have been
extracted under torture.The state continued to prevent defendants from obtaining
and presenting forensic evidence of torture to the courts by means of procedural
restrictions and by not licensing nongovernmental forensic doctors. In July a court
hearing the case of Lasha Kartavelishvili, accused of murdering a policeman,
refused to admit testimony from independent forensic examiner Maia Nikoleishvili
that Kartavelishvili had been tortured in police detention, on the grounds that she
did not hold a forensic practitioner’s license.
On October 30, 2001, the independent Rustavi 2 television station made an
emergency live broadcast of a visit by National Security Ministry officers who were
seeking evidence of tax violations.Many interpreted the incident as the culmination
of a government campaign of intimidation against the station, and thousands
came to demonstrate in its support, precipitating a political crisis. Several days
before,Minister Targamadze reportedly threatened to send his men to “destroy”the TV company. In previous weeks,Rustavi 2’s 60 Minutes current affairs program had
broadcast three detailed investigations into alleged Ministry of Interior and procuracy
corruption, including an exposé that compelled Targamadze to dismiss the
police chief of a Tbilisi district who was captured on a hidden camera initiating the
planting of drugs on a suspect to extort money from him. Rustavi 2’s management
had briefly taken the program off the air in June after state television, the procuracy,
and intellectuals close to the government vilified it, and the program staff reportedly
received anonymous death threats.
The July assassination of Giorgi Sanaia, the young presenter of Rustavi 2’s Night
Courier news and discussion program, precipitated national mourning. Facing
public suspicion about the role of the security ministries, the government swiftly
invited the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation to give forensic assistance to the
investigation. The police quickly arrested a man previously detained on a fraud
charge, yet at this writing prosecutors had not presented sufficient evidence to
indict him for Sanaia’s murder. Some commentators linked Sanaia’s shooting,
which appeared to be expertly planned and executed, to purported knowledge or
video material he had obtained, allegedly demonstrating links between law
enforcement officials with criminals in Georgia’s Pankisi Gorge who engaged in
kidnappings and the narcotics trade.
Georgian police did not attempt to enforce the rule of law in the Pankisi Gorge,
where 7,000 Chechen refugees had lived alongside Kists—Georgian ethnic
Chechens—since late 1999. Several Georgians and foreign businessmen, most of
them kidnapped in Tbilisi,were believed to be held for ransom in the gorge,which
was also the center of the country’s illegal drug trade.
Fighting flared in the separatist-controlled region,Abkhazia, in October, as ethnic
Chechen fighters launched an assault on breakaway Abkhazian forces in the
Kodori Gorge. Some alleged that the security ministries had arranged to ferry the
Chechen fighters from the Pankisi Gorge to the Abkhaz border. Several civilians
were killed in the fighting.At this writing an international investigative commission
was still trying to determine responsibility for the downing of a helicopter belonging
to the U.N. Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) by a missile over the
Kodori Gorge, which killed nine.
In Abkhazia’s Gali district, Georgian paramilitary insurgents, tacitly supported
by the central authorities, and forces representing the Abkhazian separatist authorities
both abducted civilians for exchange or ransom. In early November 2001, the
latter demanded U.S. $65,000 for the release of four Georgian hunters. Relatives
and representatives of victims of Georgia’s growing kidnapping problem expressed
frustration at the authorities’ inactivity in securing their release. In August Tbilisi’s
new police chief led an operation that freed a Lebanese businessman, held for ransom
near the city.However, the police appeared to have known for some time where
he was held, and they allowed the kidnappers to escape. In July, ethnic Georgian village
militias secured the release of two hostages in the Pankisi Gorge by taking seven
Kists hostage for exchange; local authorities tacitly approved of this arrangement.
Young women in some rural areas could not rely on law enforcement officials to
protect them from the persisting custom of bride kidnapping. Prosecutors reportedly
habitually declined to indict the perpetrators for kidnap or rape, telling the
victim or her family instead to reconcile themselves to the fait accompli. Likewise, the authorities’ failure to make sustained efforts or adopt legislation against trafficking
of women allowed networks fronted by employment and travel agencies to
continue to lure women into being trafficked abroad for forced prostitution.
Despite strong pressure by international financial institutions, the government
did not implement an agreed anticorruption plan. Justice Minister Mikheil
Saakashvili resigned in September after the president declined to support an anticorruption
bill that included strong confiscation provisions. Some of the worst corruption
involved the siphoning of national resources by powerful clans said to be
linked to high-level officials, including a so-called kerosene mafia whose interests
were served by the continuing electricity shortages.
The government’s serious arrears in paying pensions or wages also affected the
armed forces. On May 25 a battalion of national guardsmen mutinied in protest at
fourteen-month wage arrears and conditions of near starvation. They seized an
Interior Ministry troop base near Tbilisi, but relented after President Shevardnadze
met with them and promised to address their complaints.
Electricity shortages provoked street protests in Tbilisi. Together with other
resource shortages and high unemployment, they also strained intercommunal
relations. Ethnic Georgians displaced from Abkhazia since 1993 blocked a highway
in western Georgia in April, protesting local authorities’ failure to pay their promised
monthly living allowance. In July ethnic Azeris in southern Georgia blocked a
highway, protesting lack of electricity, gas, and water supplies. Similar issues generated
discontent in the ethnic Armenian populated southern region of Samtskhe-
Javakheti, causing tension in Georgia’s relations with Armenia.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
A wide range of lively and public-spirited human rights nongovernmental
organizations were based in the capital, Tbilisi.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The UNOMIG continued its efforts to promote dialogue between the government
and the de facto authorities in Abkhazia, and to monitor implementation of
the 1994 ceasefire agreement. It also brokered hostage exchanges and ransom
demands between the de facto Abkhazian authorities and Georgian paramilitary
groups operating there.
In May, the U.N.Committee against Torture reviewed Georgia’s second periodic
report. It called for the establishment of an effective and independent complaints
mechanism to address numerous allegations of torture by police, and for a systematic
review of all convictions based on confessions that may have been obtained by
torture. The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed
concern that Georgian law did not criminalize incitement to racial or religious discrimination.
Council of Europe
Informed by a detailed report compiled by rapporteurs of the Monitoring Committee
of the Council of Europe, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe adopted a strong resolution in September concluding that Georgia was far
from honoring its obligations and commitments to the Council of Europe, and
urged the government to adopt a raft of remedial measures. The resolution welcomed
President Shevardnadze’s April 2000 granting of autonomous status to the
autonomous region of Ajara, but did not comment on the entrenched authoritarian
rule of Ajaran leader Aslan Abashidze.While the resolution noted strong concern
over religious violence in Georgia, the Council of Europe took no other action
to address it.
In early July the European Court of Human Rights accepted as a priority case a
petition from the Jehovah’s Witnesses concerning the failure of the Georgian
authorities to provide a remedy in the case of the very first mob attack on their
adherents, in 1999. The court presented the Georgian authorities with nine questions,
including a request that they account for the actions taken to deal with
approximately six hundred criminal complaints submitted to date by Jehovah’s
Witnesses.
European Union
The E.U.-Georgia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) entered into
force in July. It provided a framework for E.U. development assistance, aimed at
achieving Georgia’s economic convergence with the European Union and enhancing
regional security. Respect for democracy, principles of international law, and
human rights were stipulated as essential elements of the partnership and of the
PCA.
United States
The U.S. Department of Justice announced its intention to supply the Ministry
of Justice with a modern forensic laboratory, and began training Georgian staff in
preparation.The facility was intended to provide alternate sources for the provision
of forensic expertise.
The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom wrote to President
George W. Bush, urging him to raise the Georgian authorities’ failure to stop religious
violence with President Shevardnadze during his October visit to the United
States.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Memorandum to the U.S. Government on Religious Violence in the Republic of
Georgia, 8/01.
GREECE
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Greece faced criticism for its human rights policies and practices from a range
of regional and international actors in 2001. A new immigration bill and the illtreatment
of migrants dominated the human rights landscape and gave rise to a
new dimension in rights activism in Greece. In the aftermath of the September 11
attacks in the United States, the Greek authorities further restricted access to asylum
procedures for refugees. Ongoing discrimination undermined Greece’s
progress toward protecting Roma. Resistance to the recognition of ethnic minorities
remained a systemic problem, with language rights taking center stage. Criticism
of Greece for its poor record on press freedom persisted.
A new immigration bill sparked a heated national debate over immigration policy.
A February 2001 draft of the bill lacked an antidiscrimination clause, violated
the right to family reunification; failed to address trafficking of persons, failed to
acknowledge the basic rights of undocumented migrants, denied undocumented
migrant children access to education and health care, and lacked provisions prohibiting
the arbitrary detention of migrants or their collective expulsion. After
intense lobbying by human rights groups, the law adopted in April contained some
improvements, including permission for trafficking victims to remain in Greece
pending criminal proceedings against traffickers, access to education and healthcare
for undocumented migrant children, the right to challenge immigration
detention before an administrative court, and a time limit of three months for the
detention of migrants who cannot be returned to their home countries. In August,
the independent Data Protection Authority called on the government to scrap a
provision of the law requiring hospital staff and hotel employees to notify the police
if undocumented migrants sought their services because it violated Greece’s privacy
protection laws.
Detention centers for foreigners in Athens,Hellenikon, and Piraeus came under
fire for grossly substandard conditions. A December 2000 Human Rights Watch
investigation at the Alexandras Avenue police station in Athens found severe overcrowding,
inadequate sleeping accommodations, no access to exercise or fresh air,
limited access to medical care, inadequate amounts of food, and a dirty, roachinfested
environment. Migrants who had served their sentences but remained
incarcerated at Korydallos Prison in Athens also suffered from severe overcrowding.
Human rights groups charged the government with arbitrary detention for
indefinitely holding migrants who could not be repatriated to their home countries.
In two decisions against Greece in 2001, the European Court ofHuman Rights
held that detention conditions at Alexandras Avenue and at Korydallos Prison
amounted to inhuman or degrading treatment. In July 2001, the nongovernmental
organization Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM) lodged a complaint with the Greek
ombudsman on behalf of detained foreigners who could not be deported to their home countries, charging that under the new immigration law, any detainee held
in excess of three months who could not be deported must be released. As a result
of the complaint, seventy detained foreigners were released in late July. In September,
GHM lodged another complaint with the ombudsman alleging more illegal
detentions of foreigners and substandard conditions in the Hellenikon and Piraeus
detention centers.
In June 2001, migrants charged that they were brutally assaulted in a makeshift
detention center in Hania, Crete. Hania doctors documented bruises and other
signs of beatings on 164 migrants from Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan,
and Turkey.An initial investigation by the Merchant Marine Ministry completed in
August found three Port Authority officials accused of the beatings to have engaged
in the “irregular execution of duties.” The men faced disciplinary proceedings but
criminal charges had not been brought by the time of writing. Rights groups
charged that authorities downplayed the savagery of the attacks, which they
claimed amounted to torture.
Migrants continued to face police sweeps and collective expulsion from Greece
without the benefit of procedural safeguards. In a potentially positive development,
in February, the Greek ombudsman publicly stated that sweep operations and collective
expulsions were illegal.
Trafficking of women for forced prostitution remained a serious problem and
the government’s response inadequate. Specific concerns included the absence of
anti-trafficking legislation, the few prosecutions for crimes related to trafficking,
the lack of witness protection programs for trafficking victims, the absence of government-
sponsored services for all trafficked women, the detention and prosecution
of trafficking victims, and the complicity of police officers in trafficking.A U.S.
State Department report released on July 12 gave Greece the lowest rating possible
for failing to combat trafficking.
People fleeing the military action in Afghanistan and other refugees and
migrants who arrived in Greece in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks in the
United States were met with a hostile reception. Fearing a large influx of Afghan
refugees, the Greek government severely curtailed access to asylum procedures. In
October, Afghan refugees arriving in Athens charged that they were not permitted
to lodge asylum claims and were summarily given expulsion orders. The Greek
Council for Refugees (GRC) reported that the government had even issued an
expulsion order to an Afghani mother with a three-week-old infant.On October 18,
the GRC charged that the government was in violation of its obligations under the
1951 Refugee Convention. On November 5, a Turkish ship carrying 714 migrants
and refugees from Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, and Turkey—including women and children—
was towed to Zakynthos. The Greek authorities initially refused to permit
any of the persons from the ship to apply for asylum and relented only after a
firestorm of protest from humanitarian, refugee, and human rights groups.
In May 2001 the Greek government took steps to address discrimination with an
action plan for Roma, designed to address health, education and housing needs.
The first successful resettlement of a Roma community—from the Gallikos River
to Gonou—was overshadowed by the inadequate basic services provided to the
resettled Roma community. The self-managed Aghia Sofia settlement established in October 2000 was hailed as an exception to the rule of discrimination against
Roma. Praise was short-lived, however, as Roma children immediately faced opposition
to their attendance at local schools, in particular from the parents’ association
of the Halastra Public School, which closed the school in November 2000 in
opposition to thirty-two Roma children attending. Problems with access to electricity
plagued Aghia Sofia residents throughout 2001 and rights groups charged
the state electricity company with discriminatory pricing practices that resulted in
power cutoffs.
A January 2001 Greek ombudsman’s report found that the municipal authorities’
expulsion of Roma and destruction of their homes in the Asproprygos suburb
of Athens in July 2000 had violated Greek law. The report recommended that an
investigation into the evictions be carried out, but at the time of writing, no investigation
had been initiated. In September 2001,municipal authorities demolished
six more Romani homes in Asproprygos.The operation was halted only after intervention
by the Greek ombudsman and Greek Helsinki Monitor.
In August, the police verbally ordered Roma from the Kalakonero area on
Rhodes to vacate their settlement by September 3 or have their homes demolished.
No demolition occurred though the residents were informed subsequently by
authorities that a process of relocation for the settlement had begun. The Roma
filed a complaint with the Greek ombudsman alleging that the pending eviction
was illegal because contrary to Greek law the community had received no official
relocation plan.
Municipal authorities equipped with a bulldozer entered a Romani settlement
in the Glykada Riganokampos area of Patras on August 29 and destroyed four sheds
that had housed Romani families. The affected Roma subsequently filed a complaint
with the Greek ombudsman alleging that municipal authorities had no right
to enter the settlement because the land belonged to the University of Patras.
An international outcry followed the trial of a member of the Society for Aromanian
(Vlach) Culture in February on charges of “disseminating false information.”
Sotiris Blatsas was sentenced to fifteen months in prison and fined 500,000
Greek drachmas (U.S. $1,400) because he distributed a publication of the European
Union’s European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages (EBLUL) at an Aromanian
festival in July 1995. The EBLUL document listed minority languages spoken in
Greece. Conservative New Democracy Deputy Eugene Haitidis pressed charges
against Blatsas. Numerous intergovernmental and human rights organizations,
including EBLUL, condemned the Blatsas conviction as a violation of free expression.
After two postponements, an appeal date was set for December 18, 2001.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights groups generally operated without interference from the government.
In August the government denied access to the Hellenikon Holding Centre
to representatives of Greek Helsinki Monitor who were attempting to verify complaints
of substandard detention conditions. The organization filed a complaint
with the Greek ombudsman.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In its March assessment of Greece’s record on discrimination issues, the U.N.
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination failed to acknowledge
Greece’s systematic discrimination against Roma, Albanian migrants, and other
minorities or to make specific recommendations to assist the government in remedying
these violations.
In May, however, the U.N. Committee against Torture issued conclusions
severely critical of Greece, including findings of the use of excessive or unjustifiable
force by police when dealing with minorities and foreigners; harsh detention conditions,
in particular the long-term detention of undocumented migrants awaiting
deportation and asylum-seekers in police stations without adequate facilities; and
severe prison overcrowding. The committee recommended that steps be taken to
prevent and punish trafficking of women and other forms of violence against
women.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
In January 2001, the OSCE organized a visit to Greece by representatives of the
Ukrainian government to establish a program for the repatriation of Ukrainian
women trafficked to Greece. The OSCE expressed concern that Greece had no
special mechanism for differentiating between illegal immigrants and trafficking
victims.
Council of Europe
In June 2001, the chairperson of the specialist group on Roma and gypsies of the
Council of Europe visited Roma communities in Greece and publicly condemned
the poor living conditions of many Roma, finding many Roma lived in a situation
of “institutionalized apartheid” in Greece.
Twice in 2001 the European Court of Human Rights found Greece had violated
the rights of foreigners in detention. In Dougoz v. Greece (March), the court found
that a Syrian national was held in detention in two police stations (Alexandras
Avenue and Drapetsona) in conditions amounting to inhuman or degrading treatment
and that the detainee was not afforded an effective opportunity to challenge
his detention. A U.K. national brought the charges in Peers v. Greece (April), in
which the court held that detention conditions in Korydallos Prison amounted to
inhuman, or degrading treatment.
European Union
An April European Parliament report on the exercise of fundamental freedoms
in the European Union criticized Greece for discrimination and ill-treatment of the
Turkish, Roma, and Albanian minorities, and the failure of Greek authorities to
abide by final judicial decisions.
In February 2001, the Council of the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages
(EBLUL) expressed deep concern over the conviction of Sotiris Blatsas for
distributing EBLUL literature and called the conviction an apparent violation of
free expression.
United States
In its first annual trafficking in persons report, issued in July 2001, the State
Department gave Greece the lowest rating possible—along with Burma, Pakistan,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, and Turkey—for failing to combat trafficking, to
acknowledge publicly that trafficking is a problem, to implement comprehensive
antitrafficking legislation, to prosecute traffickers, to punish traffickers when they
were tried, or to address corruption in the police and border control, which the
report called “a major problem.”
The U. S. State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000
noted that human rights problems in Greece included substandard detention conditions
and occasions of arbitrary detention for foreigners awaiting deportation;
the failure to combat trafficking of women for forced prostitution and police corruption
in trafficking; ongoing discrimination against minorities, in particular
Roma; and continuing abusive prosecutions under Greece’s criminal defamation
laws.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Trafficking ofMigrant Women for Forced Prostitution into Greece, 7/01
Human Rights Watch Critique of Greek Immigration Bill, 2/01
Urgent Concerns: Conditions of Detention for Foreigners in Greece, 12/00
HUNGARY
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
While the majority of Hungarian citizens enjoyed a full measure of civil and
political rights and the benefits of a modernizing economy, those on society’s margins
continued to face discrimination and abuse. The poor treatment of the
country’s Roma remained the key concern, despite E.U.-funded government
efforts to improve their status,while anti-Semitism and hostility towards gays persisted.
Prison overcrowding and police misconduct continued to draw international
criticism.Despite some improvements, the state response to violence against
women remained inadequate. Asylum seekers faced long periods of detention
before their claims were heard, and few were granted refugee status.
The situation for many Hungarian Roma remained precarious.With average life
expectancy ten years shorter than the rest of the population and an unemployment rate ten times higher than the national average, Roma faced discrimination in
employment, housing, education, and the criminal justice system, as well as physical
attacks. The French government’s decision in March to grant asylum to fifteen
Hungarian Roma underscored the gravity of their difficulties.The fifteen were part
of a group who fled from the Hungarian village of Zamoly to Strasbourg during
2000 to escape threats, physical attacks and the destruction of their homes. Applications
from ten other Zamoly Roma were rejected by French authorities, while
others remained pending at time of this writing.
Police misconduct against Roma continued. On February 9, police officers
raided a Roma settlement in the village of Bag. Four Roma were beaten, including
an eight-year-old boy. An April 24 police raid on a Roma family party in Budapest
left one family member hospitalized and four more injured. The police response to
reports of violence against Roma was also a concern. The European Roma Rights
Center reported that five Roma men were shot at and threatened in the village of
Fiserbocsa on May 5, allegedly in the presence of a police officer.After several failed
attempts to register a complaint about the attack with police in nearby Kiskoros,
one of the men, Pal Sztoja, returned to the police station on May 10 with a hidden
camera to report the incident. The officer refused to take down the complaint,
threatened to beat Sztojka and said it was unfortunate he had not been killed in the
shooting.
On June 17, gasoline bombs were thrown at the home of Jozsef Ajtai, the head of
the Roma Minority Self-Government in Hencida village. Two of Ajtai’s daughters
suffered burns from the attack. Gasoline bombs were also thrown at two houses in
the village of Jaszladany on June 5, one belonging to a Roma family. No one was
injured.
Discrimination against Roma remained pervasive. On January 30, a Roma man
was prevented from checking onto a flight to Canada by Hungarian airline staff
who claimed he lacked proof of sufficient funds for his stay.His ethnic Hungarian
wife and child were permitted to check in. The denial appeared linked to the large
numbers of Hungarian Roma seeking asylum in Canada. On February 21, a primary
school biology teacher in the village of Erdotelek told pupils that “Gypsies”
were characterized by a “special odor” and were generally either unemployed or in
prison. The leader of the Roma Minority Self-Government in Erdotelek reportedly
received death threats after complaints to the mayor about the teacher.
Some positive steps were taken to improve the status of Roma during 2001,
notably the March 8 decision by the state radio and television board to grant a permanent
license to the Budapest-based Radio C, Hungary’s first Roma-run radio
station. In May, the government launched an E.U.-backed program aimed at
improving infrastructure in Romany settlements and combating discrimination.
Discrimination was also evident in continuing anti-Semitic programming on
state radio and anti-Jewish comments by the vice-president of the parliamentary
Hungarian Truth and Life Party. In July, a district mayor in Budapest sought to ban
gay and lesbian groups from participating in an popular music festival. Although
the government signed the antidiscrimination protocol of the European Convention
on Human Rights in November 2000, it again failed to introduce a comprehensive
domestic antidiscrimination law, even after Parliament adopted legislation granting freedom of movement and access to social welfare programs to the estimated
five million ethnic Hungarians living in neighboring countries.
Prison conditions remained a concern. A comprehensive report on Hungary
released by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) on
March 29 identified overcrowding and limited access to work and exercise facilities
as key difficulties, echoing the findings of the Hungarian Helsinki Committee’s
prison monitoring program. The CPT also flagged shortcomings in the treatment
of pre-trial police detention, including reports of beatings by police and delays in
access to legal counsel.
Hungary remained a popular transit country for asylum seekers and migrants,
and a country of origin, transit, and destination for trafficking. Despite some
improvements in the asylum system, many asylum seekers endured lengthy detention
periods while their claims were adjudicated. Few of those accepted as having
valid claims were granted refugee status, with most given “authorization to stay,”
granting little assistance other than protection from refoulement for one year,
renewable after review. In late September, authorities transferred all Afghan asylum
seekers and refugees to guarded facilities in Debrecen and Szombatheley, citing
concern for the refugees’ safety. Human rights groups believed the measure was
motivated by fear of terrorism after the September 11 attacks on the U.S. and violated
Hungarian law.
Following the suspicious death of a thirty-year-old refugee from Cameroon
during his deportation by police on December 18, 2000, the Hungarian Helsinki
Committee called for an investigation into the cause of death, which an official
autopsy identified as a heart attack.Authorities failed to investigate the complaint.
The state response to human trafficking remained poor, with uneven enforcement
of antitrafficking legislation, inadequate victim support services, and frequent
police hostility toward women victims. Victims of domestic violence and
sexual assault in Hungary faced a biased legal system and a lack of support services.
The appointment of prominent member of the ruling Fidesz party,Karoly Mendreczky,
as president of Hungarian Television (Magyar Televizio), on July 12, raised
questions about the state broadcaster’s editorial independence, despite Mendreczky’s
resignation from the party prior to taking up his new post.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
There were no reports of government interference in the work of human organizations,
although Roma community leaders who stood up for minority rights
sometimes faced harassment and violence.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Hungarian Foreign Minister Janos Martonyi addressed the U.N. Commission on Human Rights on March 30, emphasizing Hungary’s support for a binding convention
on the rights of minorities.On November 6, the Hungarian Parliament ratified
the statute of the International Criminal Court.
Council of Europe
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture report and Hungary’s response to
it were both published on March 29. On September 17, the Advisory Committee on
National Minorities published its opinion on Hungary, noting much progress but
also deep concern about the plight of Roma. Hungary signed Protocol 12 of the
European Convention on November 4, 2000.
European Union
Hungary continued to be regarded as a front-runner for early accession to the
European Union. During a visit to Hungary on April 5, European Commission
President Romano Prodi highlighted the treatment of Roma as an area for further
progress. Discrimination against Roma was also flagged in a May report by Luis
Queiro, the European Parliament’s rapporteur on Hungary, and reflected in the resolution
on Hungary adopted by the full Parliament on September 5. The November
2001 regular report from the European Commission on Hungary’s progress
toward E.U. accession identified a need for greater government commitment to
improve the lot of Roma.
United States
Secretary of State Colin Powell made no public reference to human rights in
Hungary during a meeting with Foreign Minister Janos Martonyi in Washington
DC on May 1 or during his visit to Budapest on May 28-30 for a meeting of North
Atlantic Treaty Organization foreign ministers. Outgoing Secretary of State Madeline
Albright did raise discrimination against Roma with Minister Martonyi in
Budapest in December 2000. The State Department country report on human
rights practices in Hungary for 2000 reflected difficulties faced by Roma and concerns
over police misconduct, and its July trafficking report criticized Hungary for
failing to meet minimum standards.
KAZAKHSTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
As allegations of corruption against top Kazakh officials persisted in the international
press, the government continued to tighten control over political life and the media in 2001. Journalists, editors, and opposition party activists critical of the
government, especially of corruption, faced attacks, criminal charges, and other
forms of persecution.At the same time, a government tax amnesty came into effect
for those who transferred money from abroad back to Kazakhstan.Opposition parties
said the measure legalized money laundering. In a progressive move, authorities
lifted the longstanding requirement that citizens request an exit visa to leave the
country.
The government resisted calls for electoral reform and hounded the political
opposition. Former prime minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin, Nazarbaev’s one-time
rival and leader of the Republican People’s Party of Kazakhstan (RNPK), was tried
in absentia on charges of corruption and tax evasion and sentenced to ten years’
imprisonment in September. On July 15, Kazakh officials prevented Amirzhan
Qosanov, the acting chair of the RNPK’s executive committee, together with opposition
journalist Yermurat Bapi, from boarding a flight to the United States. They
were due to testify at a U.S. congressional hearing on human rights in Central Asia.
At the hearing itself, a Kazakh embassy official attempted to subpoena Kazhegeldin
for a criminal trial in Kazakhstan.
The deputy chairman of the Azamat (Citizen) Party, Platon Pak, was hospitalized
on January 30, after three unidentified people broke into his apartment and
stabbed him. In February, unidentified assailants beat Alexander Shushannikov, of
the Lad Slavic Movement, in the town of Ust-Kamenogorsk.
The government did not fulfill President Nazarbaev’s pledge to implement recommendations
made in 1999 by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) on electoral reform. The lack of progress on electoral reforms
prompted four opposition parties in February to withdraw from a joint working
group with the government, organized with the support of the OSCE, on electoral
reform. One party also withdrew from a roundtable discussion on electoral reform
in May, citing the government’s failure to adopt a new elections law.
In February, Temirtas Tleulesov, an author of two books on corruption in
Shymkent, was tried in absentia and sentenced to two years of imprisonment for
“hooliganism.” The charges arose out of a 1999 incident in which bank security
guards seriously beat Tleulesov in Shymkent. Following Tleulesov’s conviction, the
municipal authorities reportedly banned demonstrations planned for February 22
in support of the author.
The independent print and broadcast media suffered constant harassment and
repression.Marina Soloveva, the former director of Ust-Kamenogorsk independent
television, was attacked on March 6 by several men, resulting in a broken arm.
Police investigators decided that no crime had taken place and charged Soloveva
with making false accusations. Gulzhan Ergalieva, a journalist affiliated with the
political opposition, and her husband and son were severely beaten and robbed in
their Almaty home on March 1. Shortly before this incident, Ergalieva had strongly
criticized the government’s participation in an electoral reform working group.
Yermurat Bapi, the editor-in-chief of the independent newspaper SolDat
(whose name is a variant of Dat, Let Me Speak, a paper closed last year) was found
guilty on April 3 of insulting the honor and dignity of President Nazarbaev.He was
sentenced to a one-year prison term, but was released under a general amnesty.The charges related to an article published alleging that President Nazarbaev and other
Kazakh officials had been funneling millions of U.S. dollars from Kazakhstan into
Swiss bank accounts. The authorities confiscated the edition of the newspaper
before distribution. No publishing house would print SolDat for eight months
prior to the trial.
Bigeldy Gabdullin, editor of the opposition newspaper XXI Vek (21st Century),
faced criminal defamation charges following the publication in October 2000 of
two articles alleging corruption by President Nazarbaev. However, on April 6 the
prosecutor’s office issued a press release stating that it had dropped the case.
Reportedly, XXI Vek has not been able to resume publication. On January 18, the
staff of Respublika-2000 again received violent threats after the publication of an
article about corruption; in September 2000, its editor-in-chief, Lira Baisetova, was
beaten after the newspaper had published a similar article.
On April 17, the Parliament passed restrictive amendments to the Law on Mass
Media,which had been severely criticized by local and international organizations,
including the OSCE. The law brought Internet sites under its regulation and limited
the transmission of foreign television and radio programs, requiring foreign
material to be reduced to 20 percent of all available airtime by January 2003. The
legislation sparked protests by private television stations that relied heavily on the
retransmission of Russian television and could force the closure of smaller stations.
Intolerance of nontraditional religious groups continued throughout the
country. In March, two Baptists from Atyrau faced fabricated criminal charges,
which church members claimed were aimed at stopping their missionary activity.
In Kulsary, a small Baptist church received a prosecutor’s order, dated May 2,
declaring the church illegal due to lack of registration. Three U.S. students found
guilty of illegal missionary activity were fined and ordered to leave the country.The
Taraz procuracy sought, unsuccessfully, to ban Jehovah’s Witnesses’ activity.
Following the general crackdown in the region against independent Islam, four
alleged members of Hizb ut-Tahrir were arrested while distributing leaflets calling
for the reestablishment of an Islamic Caliphate in Central Asia. On May 10, two of
the defendants were sentenced to twenty-two and seventeen months’ imprisonment,
respectively, and the two others were released under a general amnesty.
Prison conditions remained horrific in Kazakhstan, which had one of the highest
rates of imprisonment in the world. Even after an amnesty early in the year
reportedly led to the release of 26,729 prisoners, the prison population in 2001 grew
to 84,000 by the end of April.
On April 13, prosecutors in Kyrgyzstan reportedly announced that they had
arrested a man on charges of selling Kyrgyz citizens as “slaves” to work on plantations
in Kazakhstan. A former plantation laborer claimed in the press that thousands
of Kyrgyz citizens were being used as slaves in Kazakhstan.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The body of a leading Uigur activist,Dilbrim Samsakova, was found in June, following
her “disappearance” several weeks earlier. Her injuries indicated that she died from a blow to the head. Samsakova had been working to prevent the extradition
to China of the widow and children of a Uighur suspected of violent political
activism who was killed during a police operation in Almaty last year. She observed
the trial of four Uighurs charged with “terrorism” in Kyrgyzstan earlier this year.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In May, the U.N. Committee against Torture considered Kazakhstan’s initial
report and expressed concern about allegations of torture by law enforcement officials,
the lack of investigation into allegations of torture, the insufficient level of
independence of the judiciary, and the overcrowding and inadequate access to
medical care in prisons and pre-trial detention centers.
In January, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women delivered concluding observations on Kazakhstan’s initial report. The
committee commended the government for the high levels of education among
women, but expressed concern over a wide range of issues, including stereotyped
attitudes towards women, the prevalence of violence against women and girls, trafficking
in women and girls, and the rise in unemployment and poverty of women.
A coalition of women’s human rights nongovernmental organizations submitted a
report to the committee, recommending that the government introduce training
programs to combat trafficking and provide trafficking victims with witness protection
and support programs.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
In June, the OSCE chairman-in-office, Mircea Geoana, visited Kazakhstan,
meeting with President Nazarbaev and others.Although Geoana stated that human
rights must be developed along with economic, politico-military, and environmental
factors, he expressed approval at the pragmatic approach to democratization
adopted by the current Kazakh authorities. The OSCE ran a series of
roundtable discussions on electoral reform. (See above.) Training sessions were
held for local nongovernmental organizations on human rights monitoring and
the development of leadership for the promotion of women’s rights.
European Union
The European Commission made a formal protest to the Kazakh authorities following
the introduction of the new media laws in April 2001. The European Union
held the third meeting of its Cooperation Council with Kazakhstan in July, during
which it praised Kazakhstan for strong economic growth in 2000 and 2001 but
failed publicly to raise concerns about specific human rights abuses.
Council of Europe
The Political Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council
of Europe continued to consider Kazakhstan’s 1999 application for observer status.
United States
In a July 18 congressional hearing in Washington, a State Department representative
stated that although there had been economic progress in Kazakhstan, steps
towards democracy had been reversed.
The administration requested U.S. $51.5 million in assistance for Kazakhstan
for 2002, with some of the requested funds to be used for the purchase of military
equipment under the Foreign Military Financing Program.
International Financial Institutions
When the president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD) visited Kazakhstan in June, he stated that the country deserved more cooperation
with the EBRD. He reportedly praised the economic reform process, and
did not raise concerns over issues of corruption or human rights which were at
odds with the EBRD’s founding charter. The EBRD expected to invest about $212
million in projects in 2001.
In February, the World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors supported a new
Country Assistance Strategy for Kazakhstan for 2001-2003.Depending on progress
in reforms, the bank was to lend between $270 and $820 million over three years. If
realized, this could make Kazakhstan the largest recipient of bank funding in Central
Asia.
In its December 2000 assessment of the economy, the International Monetary
Fund recommended that the government “ensure further transparency of the oil
sector’s operations and its linkages with public finance” in order to encourage fiscal
management and “public accountability” over the government’s use of oil revenues.
It also recommended that the proposed oil stabilization fund that is meant
to maximize the benefits of oil revenues and protect the economy from an unstable
revenue stream “be based on the principles of transparency and public accountability.”
Previously, the Kazakh government had been criticized and investigated for
allegedly corrupt dealings within its oil sector.
KYRGYZSTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The deterioration in respect for human rights that had dominated the lead-up
to the October 2000 reelection of President Askar Akaev continued unabated in 2001. The government harassed the political opposition, independent media, and
human rights defenders.Government measures responding to the year 2000 incursions
by the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) into Kyrgyzstan violated the
rights of certain ethnic minorities and religious groups.
In January, Gen. Felix Kulov, President Akaev’s rival in the elections and leader
of the opposition Ar-Namys (Dignity) party, was sentenced to seven years of
imprisonment on charges of abuse of office, even though he had been acquitted of
these charges in August 2000.Kulov had intended to contest the October 2000 elections.
The international community criticized his retrial as politically motivated.
On July 17, new charges of embezzlement were brought against Kulov.
President Akaev on August 20 pardoned Topchubek Turgunaliev, a political
activist and founder of Kyrgyzstan’s Guild of Prisoners of Conscience. He was
released after almost a year in prison on trumped-up charges of plotting an assassination
attempt on President Akaev.
After a wave of criticism by community and opposition leaders,President Akaev
on August 16 ordered a review of a draft law that would have banned religious and
other political parties and put new restrictions on nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs).
Progress in press freedoms in early 2001 proved to be ephemeral. For example,
at least two new independent newspapers were registered in the first six months of
the year. But on April 5, the Ministry of Justice, apparently seeking to tighten state
control over the media, required all outlets to reregister by July 1. It later annulled
the registration of the newly created media outlets that reregistered after April 5,
declaring that new media could not be registered until September 1; it later moved
the date to October 1. The editors of several deregistered newspapers attempted,
unsuccessfully, to sue the ministry.
Samagan Orozaliev, a journalist, was arrested on May 28 in Jalal-Abad province
when he was investigating allegations of local corruption. Orozaliev was held in
pretrial detention on charges of taking a bribe. On July 31, he was reportedly hospitalized,
under police guard, due to heart problems. On November 1, a court sentenced
Orozaliev to nine years in prison and confiscation of property, and his
driver, Mukhtar Topchiev, to eight years for, among other things, illegal weapons
possession. They claimed police had fabricated charges against them, and had
planted evidence in their car. As of this writing, lawyers were preparing to appeal
the verdict. In March, the Supreme Court reinstated a conviction against journalist
Moldosali Ibraimov that had been quashed in 2000. The court gave him a two-year
suspended sentence on libel charges, which related to allegations of corruption in
the judiciary.
The opposition newspaper Asaba (The Standard) was declared bankrupt on
April 20, after losing a court battle over the repayment of a loan and receiving an
unprecedented U.S. $100,000 fine for libel of a member of Parliament. The government-
controlled Uchkun publishing house repeatedly refused to publish the
newspaper Res Publica, as a result of, according to the paper’s editor, an edition containing
an article about the financial dealings of President Akaev’s wife.
In a positive move, the procuracy dropped charges of divulging state secrets
against the editor and a journalist of the independent newspaper Delo No (Case
Number), relating to an article on the trial of Felix Kulov in May. In April, however, the editor was fined for insulting an employee of the National Security Service in
an interview he gave.
In another positive move, the Supreme Arbitration Court upheld an appeal by
Osh TV, an Uzbek language station, ordering the court of first instance to reconsider
its decision to force the station to change frequencies. The change would have
led to the closure of the station viewed by the ethnic Uzbek population in the
region.
Police used force to disperse protesters, and arrested protest organizers. An
opposition leader and journalist were fined, along with three members of the Ar-
Namys party, for organizing an unsanctioned rally in Bishkek on April 13. Klara
Ajibeka, chairwoman of the Communist Party, was arrested, convicted, and fined
for delivering a speech at an unsanctioned June 12 picket in support of Kulov.Police
prevented approximately 1,000 demonstrators from gathering in Bishkek’s main
square for a May 1 rally and protest. Also on May 1, in Jalal-Abad, three human
rights activists were convicted and fined for taking part in an unsanctioned rally.
On August 10 police in Osh reportedly arrested fifteen women after dispersing a
demonstration of about two hundred women merchants who were protesting the
local authorities’ decision to stop street trade in the city center.
Kyrgyzstan’s participation in the regional push against Islamic “extremism”
heightened the atmosphere of repression for both independent adherents of Islam
and the Uigur minority in Kyrgyzstan. On April 18, the government required
special religious schools to obtain a license from the State Commission for Religious
Affairs. According to government statistics, between thirty-seven and fifty
people in southern Kyrgyzstan were imprisoned for disseminating “extremist” religious
materials in the first five months of 2001; more comprehensive figures were
not available.The Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) monitored a trial
on July 13 of five alleged Hizb ut-Tahrir (Party of Liberation) members who were
charged with disseminating “extremist” leaflets. The men received sentences of
from two to five years of imprisonment.
A military court sentenced to death two men on June 19 for their participation
in armed clashes between IMU fighters and government troops in August 2000. It
is not known what legal standards of proof or due process the military court
applied.As of this writing, the defendants’ appeal was being considered.
In late July several armed clashes occurred in the southern border region of Kyrgyzstan,
although it is unconfirmed that these involved the IMU. The extent of the
clashes is unknown, since the government denied several reports that its troops
were engaged in ongoing fighting.
Landmines laid by Uzbekistan in Kyrgyz territory in response to the IMU incursions
into both countries have killed at least one person and injured several others
this year. The two countries have been negotiating over the removal of the mines.
Four ethnic Uigurs and one other man stood trial on March 12 on charges
related to two bombing incidents in the city of Osh in 1998. Four of the men were
sentenced to death and one to twenty-five years of imprisonment. The defendants’
lawyer reportedly stated that the trial began without warning and that even though
she was hospitalized at the time, the court refused an adjournment. Thus, her
clients had no legal representation. A previous sentence against the five had been
overturned for lack of evidence.
Despite a presidential moratorium on death penalty, effective until December
2001, courts continued to hand down death sentences. It remains unclear whether
such sentences will be carried out after that date.
Prison conditions remained abysmal due to lack of food, clothing, heating, and
medicine. A group of prisoners’ relatives sent an appeal to the Kyrgyz authorities
and the international community describing prison conditions of starvation and
disease.
Police continued to ignore reports of domestic violence as the Kyrgyz government
failed to implement the 1999 recommendation of the U.N.Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women to provide for law enforcement officials’
training on violence against women.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The KCHR faced continuing persecution in 2001. Bolot Tynaliev, a member of
the KCHR, was reportedly threatened with a knife by five men on January 27. The
men stole his KCHR files and warned him to stop his human rights work. On June
27,Numanjan Arkabaev, the KCHR coordinator for Osh province, was arrested and
charged with defamation and attempting to overthrow the government. He was
released from custody on July 18, after having spent two weeks on a hunger strike.
The National Security Service later dropped the charges.
On September 17, Abdymamat Kadyrbekov, a member of the KCHR in Jalal-
Abad, received a three-year suspended prison sentence on charges of “hooliganism.”
On October 7, according to the KCHR, masked men burst into Kadyrbekov’s
house and caused him severe injuries, warning him not file a complaint about his
sentence.
Albert Korgoldoev, also a member of the KCHR in Jalal-Abad, faced criminal
charges related to his monitoring of the presidential elections results in October
2000; he fled the country in February. According to the KCHR, Kyrgyz authorities
confiscated property from their organization’s head office in Bishkek in late May.
The director of the Kara-Sui Human Rights Center, Ravshan Gapirov, was
arrested on November 13 and charged with “hooliganism” and swindling. He
remained in custody until his trial on February 28, when he received a two-year
prison sentence. On May 7, his sentence was reduced to a fine and he was released.
On September 14, after a verbal dispute with the Kara-Sui procuracy, he was
detained. On October 24 Gapirov was sentenced to thirteen years of imprisonment
for “hooliganism” and insulting state officials.
An unidentified man attacked Tolekan Ismailova, the head of the NGO Coalition
for Democracy and Civil Society, outside her home on March 13. She was hit
on the head and momentarily lost consciousness. The previous day she had
strongly criticized the Kyrgyz government at a round table discussion.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The special representative of the U.N. secretary general on human rights
defenders,Hina Jilani, visited Kyrgyzstan in August.During her trip she stated her
concerns that basic civil rights were not being systematically observed. Kyrgyz
authorities refused to allow her to meet with Turgunaliev,who was in a prison hospital
at the time. Kyrgyzstan was included in the 2001 report of the special rapporteur
on torture,which cited allegations of excessive police violence against peaceful
demonstrators, torture of detainees, and horrific conditions in places of detention.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE report on the October 2000 presidential elections found that they,
“despite some positive features,” failed to comply with Kyrgyzstan’s OSCE commitments.
In March, the OSCE representative on freedom of the media, Freimut Duvé,
met with President Akaev to express regret at the worsening media situation in the
country. In April, the OSCE secretary general visited Kyrgyzstan and met with President
Akaev in a closed meeting. The stated aim of the visit was to assess and discuss
security and stability in the region. In June, after meeting with President Akaev
and others, the OSCE chair announced that he had advised the Kyrgyz leadership
that in order to improve the country’s tarnished image, the legislature should adopt
new laws on human rights, the media, religious freedom, and the status of refugees.
European Union
At the E.U.-Kyrgyzstan Cooperation Council meeting in July, the European
Union reiterated its concern about aspects of democratization, such as media freedom.
The European Union also raised concerns about recent developments surrounding
the KCHR, while it welcomed the suspension of the death penalty and
encouraged its complete abolition.
United States
At a July 18 U.S. congressional hearing, a State Department spokesperson testified
that there had been progress on economic reform but that the government had
been backsliding on democratic reforms and that there were signs of an escalation
in the campaign against peaceful Islamic activities. The Department of State trafficking
in persons report, published in July 2001, criticized the Kyrgyz government
for failing to respond adequately to trafficking in persons. The report noted that
traffickers sent Kyrgyz men, women, and children into situations of forced labor
and forced prostitution in Russia,Turkey, Germany, and the United Arab Emirates.
U.S. financial assistance to Kyrgyzstan remained fairly constant, at about U.S. $ 33
million.
MACEDONIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Macedonia’s image as an island of inter-ethnic peace and coexistence in the
Balkans was dramatically upset in February 2001 by the emergence of an ethnic
Albanian insurgent group, the so-called National Liberation Army (Ushtria Çlirimtare
Kombëtare, commonly known as the NLA), and the ensuing months of
fighting between the rebels and government forces. Negotiations between the
major ethnic Macedonian and ethnic Albanian parties, facilitated by the international
community, led to an August 13 peace agreement providing for far-reaching
constitutional and political measures aimed at enhancing the status of the sizeable
ethnic Albanian minority. In return, the NLA agreed to demobilize and hand over
its weapons to a North Atlantic Treaty Organizaation force, deployed in Macedonia
at the end of August. In mid-November, after a long delay, a lot of filibustering, and
mounting international pressure, the Macedonian Parliament finally adopted the
constitutional amendments envisaged by the peace agreement.At the time of writing,
however, fears persisted that nationalists within the government and police
would still try to derail the peace process and pursue a military solution to the conflict.
There was disagreement as to the causes of the conflict,with NLA leaders claiming
that they were fighting to end systematic discrimination against ethnic Albanians
by the Macedonian authorities, while the government claimed that the NLA’s
real goal was control over Macedonian territory. Government officials insisted that
Kosovar Albanian radicalism lay behind the conflict, not legitimate grievances of
Macedonia’s own ethnic Albanians. Support for the insurgency by the country’s
ethnic Albanians, which was tepid early in the conflict, grew quickly as Macedonian
security forces launched increasingly heavy-handed attacks against ethnic
Albanian civilians and their villages and towns. As of mid-October, about 25,000
refugees remained in Kosovo, while 53,000 ethnic Albanians and Macedonians
were still internally displaced within Macedonia.
Both government forces and the NLA committed serious violations of international
humanitarian law in the course of the six-month conflict. The government
police forces, whose brutality against Albanians has long been a cause of intense
resentment, were responsible for a number of grave assaults against civilians and
their property. Following an April government offensive in the Tetovo area, monitors
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) found
evidence of widespread and indiscriminate destruction and looting in the village of
Selce.More than two hundred ethnic Albanians were arrested in the area, dozens of
whom were later treated in the Tetovo hospital for fractures and severe bruising.
Also in April, a joint mission of the Macedonian,Norwegian, and Serbian Helsinki
Committees reported that some thirty men from Poroj had been arbitrarily
arrested and severely beaten by the police, resulting in the hospitalization of six persons.
The Helsinki mission and Human Rights Watch separately blamed government forces for the destruction of the Runica hamlet in the Kumanovo area in retaliation
for earlier NLA strikes. While the Macedonian government accused the
rebels of using villagers in the Tetovo and Kumanovo areas as human shields, it frequently
responded with indiscriminate shelling of those same villages.
Torture and abuse of civilian detainees was routinely used by the security forces
to obtain information on the NLA and to intimidate ethnic Albanians. Following a
May 22 offensive north of Kumanovo, for example, government forces separated
ethnic Albanian men fleeing the fighting and took them to the Skopje and
Kumanovo police stations, where dozens of them suffered torture and severe illtreatment.
Fear of such practices prevented many civilians trapped in the crossfire
from fleeing to safety into government-controlled territory, forcing them instead to
venture through dangerous mountain trails into neighboring Kosovo.
The most serious violations by the government forces were committed during a
three-day operation in a village north of Skopje. Following a land mine explosion
that killed eight government soldiers, the Macedonian police launched a fierce
attack on the nearby village of Ljuboten, which was heavily shelled for two days in
August 10 and 11, 2001. On August 12, several hundred police entered the village
and began a house-to-house assault, killing six ethnic Albanian civilians, burning
scores of houses and terrorizing the village population. Two men were summarily
executed and another three were shot dead after they attempted to flee their burning
home. More than one hundred men and boys from the village were taken to
police stations in Skopje, where they were subjected to severe beatings. As of late
October, about twenty-four of them were still being detained on charges of participation
in the insurgency.Thirty-five-year-old Atullah Qaini died in police custody,
his mutilated corpse bearing clear signs of torture. Three other men were beaten
unconscious by ethnic Macedonian vigilantes in full view of the police. The minister
of the interior, Ljube Boskovski, who was himself present during the operation
in Ljuboten on August 12, claimed that the village was an NLA stronghold and that
the victims were “terrorists.”However, Human Rights Watch researchers who visited
the village, and interviewed victims and eyewitnesses of the abuses, found no
evidence that there was an NLA presence in Ljuboten during the attack or that any
of the villagers put up armed resistance. The police operation appeared to be motivated
by nothing more than revenge.
NLA forces were responsible for indiscriminate killings, abductions, and intimidation
of ethnic Macedonian and other civilians. In June NLA forces arbitrarily
detained and tortured eight elderly ethnic Serb civilians from the village of Matejce,
subjecting them to repeated mock executions. On August 7, 2001, uniformed
members of the NLA kidnapped a group of construction workers on the Skopje-
Tetovo highway, and, holding them for several hours, the NLA fighters severely
beat, humiliated and sexually abused them. The NLA was also suspected of being
behind the August 26 bombing of an ethnic Macedonian-owned restaurant in
Celopek, which left two of the employees dead.About ten persons from NLA-controlled
areas were still missing at the time of this writing, despite claims by rebel
commanders that the NLA had released all captives before its formal disbandment
by the end of August.
Such methods of warfare against civilians were imitated by an array of ethnic
Macedonian paramilitary groups, whose members were largely drawn from the police reserves. Local and international press reported that the most active of those
groups, including the so-called Lions, Tigers, and Red Berets, were controlled by
radicals within the Macedonian police structure. Members of such groups
appeared to have led a June 6 riot in Bitola,where dozens of ethnic Albanian homes
and shops were burned within a few hours. The local police took no action to stop
the attacks; in fact, some police officers took an active part in the rampage. The
paramilitary groups continued to intimidate and harass ethnic Albanians even after
the signing of the peace agreement, threatening to derail the peace process. In a September
15 incident, five “Red Berets” abducted Muharem Ibrahimi, a Tetovo-based
activist with an ethnic Albanian humanitarian organization, and attempted to kill
him by throwing him into the Vardar river.
The conflict also took a toll on the press covering the events. International and
local journalists, both ethnic Macedonian and ethnic Albanian, faced frequent hostility
and occasional violence, mostly from ethnic Macedonian crowds and security
forces. Reporters sans Frontières protested in June against the ill-treatment of the
Agence France-Presse correspondent Colin Neacsu and his interpreter, who were
detained and repeatedly beaten at a Skopje police station.A Macedonian journalist
from the Utrinski Vesnik newspaper was beaten unconscious by a mob outside
Ljuboten on August 10, as were several Swedish journalists trying to enter the village
on August 12. Ethnic Albanian journalists, in particular, faced severe security
constraints and discrimination, and were frequently denied access to the conflict
areas by the police. Albanian language public television broadcasts were interrupted
for three weeks as the Albanian language bureau rejected an order to air only
translations of programs prepared by the ethnic Macedonian editors.
Two serious incidents raised concerns that communist-era practices of surveillance
of the political opposition and civil society continue unabated in Macedonia.
In January 2001, the opposition Social Democratic Union (SDSM) presented evidence
of the unlawful phone tapping of 150 conversations that had taken place
between September and November 2000.Most of those involved, including prominent
opposition leaders and journalists, confirmed the authenticity of the recordings.
A parliamentary investigation led to the resignation of the minister of the
interior,Dosta Dimovska, but stopped short of assigning responsibility for the violations.
The issue resurfaced after the signing of the peace agreement, when a telephone
conversation between Branko Crvenkovski and Arben Xhaferi, the
respective leaders of the SDSM and the Democratic Party of the Albanians, was
leaked to a television station that accused the two of conspiracy against national
interests.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights organizations generally operated freely in 2001, although security
concerns often prevented their members from reaching certain areas of the
country. Both ethnic Macedonian and ethnic Albanian organizations faced difficulties
in moving across the ethnic divide in the conflict areas. The Helsinki Committee
for Human Rights investigated the Ljuboten events and made findings that
were consistent with the conclusions of Human Rights Watch. (See above.) However, investigation and reporting by local nongovernmental organizations on
human rights abuses committed during the conflict was limited overall and at
times one-sided.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
In contrast with earlier conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, the international
community moved relatively quickly in 2001 to bring the inter-ethnic violence in
Macedonia to a halt, and to limit its human costs. The diplomatic efforts of the
European Union, the United States, NATO, and the OSCE, all of which appointed
special envoys to Macedonia, were critical to the negotiation of the cease-fire and
the peace agreement. But while much effort was put into security monitoring and
shuttle diplomacy, the investigation of human rights violations committed by both
sides was inadequate throughout the conflict. At this writing, the international
community stood ready to assist with the implementation of an enduring peace in
the country, but more needed to be done to integrate critical human rights dimensions
into the process.
United Nations
The U.N. Security Council addressed the Macedonian crisis regularly in 2001.
The council supported the timely implementation of the peace agreement and the
deployment of a multinational security presence in Macedonia. The U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) cautioned the Macedonian government at
the end of September that the return of the refugees remaining in Kosovo and of
the internally displaced persons would require ethnically mixed police patrols in
conflict areas.UNHCR-chartered buses facilitated the movement of all communities
across ethnic lines and security checkpoints in the troubled Tetovo region. The
chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
warned both warring sides early in the conflict that the tribunal’s jurisdiction
extended to the events in Macedonia, and that tribunal staff were on the ground
collecting information on serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE committed itself, under the peace agreement, to providing a significant
number of monitors to report regularly on security incidents, the return of
refugees and trafficking in human beings. OSCE-seconded police experts were
tasked with assisting in the implementation of the envisaged police reforms. On
October 4, however, the OSCE warned the Macedonian government that singlehanded
efforts by the police to hastily retake control of formerly NLA-held areas
were delaying the deployment of the monitors and were jeopardizing the fragile
peace. During the conflict, the OSCE Spillover Monitor Mission to Skopje condemned
human rights abuses committed by the NLA forces, but showed reluctance
to address the serious violations for which the government security forces were
responsible.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
NATO’s role in the Macedonian conflict was limited by its members’ unwillingness
to maintain a long-term security presence in the country. The 4,500-strong
NATO force deployed in Macedonia throughout September successfully completed
its limited,month-long mission to collect about 4,000 weapons voluntarily handed
over by the NLA. Doubts remained, however, as to whether the NLA had surrendered
all its weaponry. To avoid a security vacuum created by an early departure,
NATO agreed by the end of September to maintain a German-led contingent of
seven hundred to 1,000 troops in the country to protect E.U. and OSCE security
monitors. The second NATO force was to operate in Macedonia for three months,
with the option to extend the mission with the consent of the Macedonian government.
European Union
In April 2001, the European Union and Macedonia signed an Association and
Stabilization Agreement that sets the stage for Macedonia’s progressive integration
into the union within ten years. In October the E.U. pledged to finance a 10.3 million
euro (approximately U.S.$9.3 million) program aimed at supporting the
implementation of the peace agreement. The program was part of a 24.7 million
euro emergency package, and in addition to 42.5 million euros of regular support
to Macedonia pledged for 2001.The package was made, however, conditional upon
the ratification of all constitutional amendments envisaged by the peace agreement.
The European Union maintained that improving the status of the country’s
ethnic minorities was a requirement of the association process, and it postponed a
donors’ conference scheduled for October 15, citing Macedonia’s delay in the
implementation of the agreement.
United States
The United States supported the political and constitutional reforms agreed
upon by the Macedonian and ethnic Albanian parties.The U.S. special envoy James
Pardew, together with the European Union’s Francois Leotard, played an important
facilitating role in the negotiation of the peace agreement. Although the United
States contributed no troops to the two NATO missions, it provided intelligence
and logistical support. The U.S. administration pledged also to support the Macedonian
police reform, training of ethnic Albanian police officers, the return of
refugees and the new Southeast Europe University, set up to provide higher education
in the Albanian language.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Crimes Against Civilians: Abuses by Macedonian Forces in Ljuboten, August 10-
12, 2001, 9/01
ROMANIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Despite making progress toward European Union accession, Romania’s human
rights record in 2001 remained uneven. Rights groups continued to receive reports
of excessive use of force by police. The state response to domestic violence against
women and trafficking remained inadequate. No action was taken to remedy constitutional
restrictions on free speech. Legislation designed to enhance minority
rights was not implemented. Roma continued to experience discrimination in
housing, education, medical care, employment, and access to goods and services.
Legislative efforts to outlaw discrimination against gays and lesbians had mixed
results. Romania came under pressure to improve arms export controls, but
enforcement of existing laws continued to be a problem.
There were credible reports of excessive use of force and other misconduct by
police officers, including against children. On March 14, fourteen-year-old Vasile
Danut was detained and beaten severely by police in Vladesti. On April 5, police in
Oradea reportedly attacked sixteen-year-old Ioana Silaghi, and also reportedly
intimidated witnesses. Two police officers were accused of beating a suspect to
death in Cugir in early July. The introduction of new guidelines on the use of
firearms in June, intended to bring police practice into line with U.N. and Council
of Europe standards, appeared to have had little effect. After September 11, Parliament
suspended consideration of a draft bill curbing police powers to detain citizens
for up to twenty-four hours without charge.
Legal protections for victims of domestic violence and trafficking remained
inadequate.The Romanian Domestic Violence Victims’Assistance Center reported
that a long, complicated procedure and probation system discouraged domestic
violence victims from pressing charges against perpetrators.Despite the high level
of trafficking through Romania, the Romanian government did little to address the
problem.
Constitutional curbs on free expression remained in force in 2001 and were used
by authorities to interfere with the work of journalists. Journalists also ran afoul of
broad criminal defamation laws, under which prosecutions for slander of public
officials could bring imprisonment or fines.
Romania continued to show a half-hearted commitment to the rights of
national minorities.The National Minorities Council,meeting for the first time on
July 10, 2001, criticized the legislation creating the council for failing to require the
executive to consult with it on all legislation pertaining to national minorities.
Access to media by national minorities remained limited.
Extremist nationalist parties fueled hostility toward national minorities. The
November 2000 elections demonstrated the emerging popularity of the nationalist
Greater Romania Party (Partidul România Mare, PRM),which captured one-third
of the parliamentary seats. The party leader, Corneliu Vadim Tudor, who received 26 percent of the vote for president in the final round of elections, promised to
destroy the “Gypsy mafia.” In August the Romanian Prosecutor-general’s office
began an investigation into the publication of The Nationalist, a book that minority
leaders said incited racial hatred and anti-Semitism.Although the PRM denied
any connection to the book’s publication, it was written by a party deputy and
endorsed by a top PRM aide.
The problem of discrimination against the Roma population—estimated to
number as many as two million—continued to permeate society. A January 2001
European Roma Rights Center investigation found that violations of Roma rights
were highly unlikely to be prosecuted, and authorities retaliated against complainants.
Roma had their houses raided, and were detained, beaten, and threatened
by private citizens and police. On February 1 and 9, 2001, police stopped
trains headed for Brasov and detained, fingerprinted, and intimidated some one
hundred Roma passengers, and warned them not to enter the city.
On April 25, the government published an ambitious plan for improving conditions
for Roma, but Roma activists questioned its lack of detail on reaching the
goals identified.
The government took steps to enact legal guarantees for gays and lesbians, but
at the time of writing opposition from the Chamber of Deputies cast doubt as to
whether sexual orientation would remain protected under pending antidiscrimination
legislation.
Notwithstanding legislative efforts to decriminalize homosexuality and ensure
the rights of gays and lesbians, gays and lesbians continued to face police harassment.
In December 2000,Romanian citizen Adrian Georgescu was called to a police
station without explanation. There he was questioned about his sexuality by police
officers.After Georgescu publicized this event in January, a police officer admitted
on Romanian television that Georgescu had been detained and questioned solely
because of his sexual orientation.
A U.N. investigative panel determined in 2000 that Romania was a source of
weapons illegally supplied to embargoed rebel forces in Angola from 1996 to 1999.
It noted that reforms were needed in Romania to improve controls, as the weapons
were authorized for sale to Burkina Faso and Togo on the basis of falsified documents.
After taking the important step in mid-2000 of arresting and initiating the
prosecution of a Romanian-Israeli arms dealer accused of illegal arms sales,
Romanian authorities unexpectedly released him in February and he left the
country for Israel. Romanian officials denied he was linked to the Angola case and
said the prosecution would continue in his absence. Romania began a major push
to export more weapons after sales slumped but said it would revise its arms export
laws. Romania ratified the Mine Ban Treaty on November 30, 2000, and the treaty
entered into force on May 1. It declared in June that it would destroy stockpiled
antipersonnel landmines, which numbered just over one million.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human Rights Watch received no reports of interference with the work of rights
groups in 2001.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Despite holding the chairmanship of the OSCE during 2001, Romania’s penal
and civil codes continued to violate the standards of free expression set by that
body. Romania hosted the OSCE Conference on Roma and Sinti Affairs from September
10 to 13.
European Union
The European Parliament’s report on Romania’s application for E.U. accession
welcomed Romania’s intention to accelerate negotiations concerning membership
but sharply criticized its lack of progress in meeting human rights standards,
notably on the rights of children and minorities.The European Commission’s 2001
regular report on Romania’s progress toward accession recognized significant
reforms since the 2000 report, but also urged continued progress, particularly
toward implementation of the Roma strategy and antidiscrimination legislation.
United States
The U.S. State Department’s first annual report on trafficking in persons categorized
Romania as a “Tier-3” country, an indication that it had failed to make significant
efforts to bring itself into compliance with minimum international
standards. In May, the U.S.Agency for International Development awarded a grant
to help fight domestic violence and child abuse in two counties in Romania.
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The ongoing conflict in Chechnya and heated debates about press freedom
dominated the year. Forced disappearances, torture, and extrajudicial executions
by Russian forces were continuing hallmarks of the Chechnya conflict, while
Chechen rebel fighters increasingly targeted for murder Chechen civilians seen as cooperating with the Russian government.The media landscape in Moscow underwent
major changes as media conglomerate Media Most crumbled. President
Vladimir Putin revived movement on judicial and criminal justice reform, which
had been stalled for years.The proposed reforms, however, did not fully address the
entrenched problems of police torture and prison overcrowding.
The situation in Chechnya remained deadlocked, with more than 75,000 Russian
troops deployed in the republic,unable to root out rebel forces. In January,President
Putin transferred command over the Chechnya operation from the Ministry
of Defense to the Federal Security Service (FSB), and announced a gradual withdrawal
of troops. The withdrawal halted in May after 5,000 troops had left the
republic.
The new military strategy announced by President Putin, involving small operations
against specific rebel leaders, did not affect the conduct of Russian forces
with regard to Chechen civilians. They conducted numerous large-scale and targeted
sweep operations, detaining countless men, often arbitrarily, looting the
homes of civilians, and often wantonly destroying their property. Detainees routinely
faced ill-treatment and torture.Many detainees “disappeared,”with the bodies
of some later discovered in unmarked graves.
The sweep operations in Alkhan-Kala, just southwest of Grozny, were paradigmatic.
During a June 19 to 25 operation, which resulted in the death of notorious
rebel leader Arbi Baraev, federal forces summarily executed at least six men and
detained hundreds, many of whom later reported severe beatings. A sweep in late
April resulted in the “disappearance” of twelve men.
The July sweep operations in the villages of Sernovodsk and Assinovskaia, in
western Chechnya,were of unprecedented harshness. In response to a mine explosion
that killed several policemen, soldiers detained hundreds of villagers, often
without even asking for their identity papers.Many were later severely beaten and
tortured with electroshock.
Russian forces also commonly detained people outside the context of sweep
operations who then “disappeared.” In January, for example, police detained
Zelimkhan Murdalov in Grozny and took him to a local police station.He has since
then been unaccounted for.
In 2001, villagers found numerous unmarked graves containing the corpses of
people last seen in Russian custody.The largest—containing fifty-one bodies—was
discovered near the main Russian military base in February. Law enforcement
agents botched the subsequent investigation. At least sixteen of the people whose
bodies were found there and identified had last been seen in Russian forces’ custody.
Some of the bodies found in this and other unmarked graves showed clear
signs of torture.
Chechen fighters were widely believed to be responsible for a wave of assassinations
of local civil servants and religious leaders who were reportedly targeted for
their cooperation with the Russian government. In 2001, those murdered included
at least eighteen leaders of district and town administrations, at least five religious
leaders and numerous Chechen police officers, teachers, and lower-ranking civil
servants. Several attempts were made on the life of Akhmad Kadyrov, the head of
the pro-Russian administration of Chechnya, and one of his deputies was killed.
On January 9, masked gunmen kidnapped humanitarian aid worker Kenneth
Gluck, of Médécins sans Frontières, on a road near Starye Atagi. Upon his release,
about three weeks later, Gluck’s captors handed him a letter signed by rebel leader
Shamil Basaev calling the kidnapping a “mistake.” On April 18, gunmen in Alkhan-
Kala opened fire on Viktor Popkov, a leading Russian human rights activist.Popkov
died six week later from his wounds. People close to Popkov believe Chechen fighters
were involved in the attack.
About 140,000 internally displaced persons from Chechnya remained in
Ingushetia, many in squalid conditions, despite strong pressure from the federal
government to return to Chechnya. Those interviewed by Human Rights Watch in
July 2001 cited poor security guarantees as the main reason for not returning to
Chechnya.
The Russian government continued to resist a meaningful accountability
process for human rights violations committed in Chechnya, although the number
of investigations rose significantly in 2001. In April, a joint Council of Europe-
Russian Duma working group compiled a list of 358 criminal investigations into
alleged abuses against civilians. But only about 20 percent of the cases were under
active investigation; more than half had been suspended. In “disappearance” cases
as many as 79 percent of the investigations had been suspended. The criminal
investigations list did not include a single case of torture or ill-treatment.Very few
abuse cases had progressed to the courts. Courts issued guilty verdicts against servicemen
in eleven cases, five of which resulted in prison sentences.
The only trial against a high-ranking military official, for the murder of a
Chechen woman in March 2000, seemed set to end in a minimal sentence. In September,
a psychiatric institution found that Col. Yuri Budanov was “emotionally
distressed” at the time he murdered Elza Kungaeva, allowing the charge to be
reduced to manslaughter and opening the way for him to be amnestied. Earlier,
prosecutors had dropped a rape charge despite convincing evidence that she had
been sexually assaulted.
Media freedom continued to be under attack in Chechnya. Several journalists
were briefly detained or punished for their independent reports, and strict limitations
on access to Chechnya for journalists remained in force throughout the year.
On February 21, federal forces detained Anna Politkovskaya of Novaia Gazeta
(The New Gazette) in Khatuni while she was investigating abuses. Russian forces
interrogated her and kept her overnight in a basement on a military base. In
December 2000, a court in Dagestan found Andrei Babitskii, a Radio Liberty correspondent
who had been detained in Grozny in 2000, guilty of carrying a falsified
passport (his captors had not returned his Russian passport) but amnestied him.
The Ministry of Press delivered several warnings of possible sanctions to Moscow
newspapers and the NTV television station for publishing interviews with rebel
leaders.
On November 21, 2000, unidentified gunmen speaking Chechen shot dead freelance
cameraman Adam Tepsurkaev in Alkhan-Kala.Tepsurkaev had shot extensive
footage of Russian soldiers abusing Chechen civilians. Russian soldiers had earlier
detained and tortured Tepsurkaev’s younger brother, demanding that Adam Tepsurkaev
turn himself in to Russian authorities.
In December 2000, Chechen rebels in Georgia’s Pankisi gorge briefly detained three Georgian television journalists on suspicion of cooperating with Russian
intelligence services.
During a year of heated debates about press freedom, the media landscape in
Moscow underwent major changes as media conglomerate Media Most crumbled.
As of this writing, the nationwide broadcast media transmitted a variety of political
views.
At the heart of the debates about press freedom were the stormy and convoluted
events concerning Media Most and its outlets, in particular its television station,
NTV, and radio station, Ekho Moskvy. In April 2001, NTV, the country’s largest
nonstate-owned television station, came under control of Gazprom, a colossal gas
company that is partially owned by the state. The procuracy launched new charges
of financial malfeasance against Media Most owner Vladimir Gusinski, and tried,
unsuccessfully, to secure his extradition from Spain.
Prosecutors questioned several top Media Most officials and detained its financial
director on embezzlement charges. By mid-February, company officials
claimed prosecutors and the tax police had conducted no fewer than thirty raids on
its offices since the investigation into Gusinsky’s affairs began in mid-2000.
Gazprom started its bid to take over NTV when Media Most failed to repay a
loan worth several hundred million U.S.dollars.After months of bitter controversy,
the two sides reached an agreement whereby the gas giant would not obtain a controlling
stake in NTV. However, in early 2001, Gazprom obtained a controlling
stake after all when a court froze part of Media Most’s shares. In April, Gazprom
ousted NTV’s board and appointed its own executive director. Part of the NTV
team left the company in protest. Gazprom also ordered the closure of Media
Most’s flagship newspaper, Sevodnya (Today), and fired the entire editorial team of
its weekly newsmagazine, Itogi (The Results).
As of October 2001, the fate of Russia’s most popular radio station, Ekho
Moskvy, remained undecided. The station’s staff had threatened to resign should
Gazprom obtain a majority stake. Gazprom, which owned a 52 percent stake, had
promised in July to sell 9.5 percent to Ekho Moskvy staff, but by October 2001 the
transaction had not taken place.
While Gazprom had legitimate business interests at stake in Media Most, the
manner it which it gained control over NTV and the vigor and selectivity of law
enforcement agencies’ pursuit of Media Most and its owner strongly suggested a
political motivation for the takeover. Gusinski had been a vociferous opponent of
President Putin.
In Russia’s regions, journalists and media outlets continued to face violent
attacks—the Glasnost Defense Foundation reported that by late May 2001 at least
five journalists had been murdered and thirty-nine violently attacked—but in
many cases it was impossible to determine whether attacks were politically motivated.
Some journalists in the regions faced prosecution for their professional
activities.
In April,police in Belgorod detained journalist and parliamentarian Olga Kitova
on charges of slander. Several months earlier Kitova had published an article in Belgorodskaia
Pravda accusing police officers of torturing several teenagers into confessing
that they had sexually molested a classmate. When police tried to bring
Kitova,who enjoyed immunity as a member of the local parliament, to the precinct for questioning, she resisted and was, as a result, also charged with resisting arrest
and beating police officials. In May, prosecutors released Kitova on her own recognizance.
As of this writing, a local court was examining the case.
The FSB continued to chill freedom of expression and academic freedom by
pursuing espionage cases involving material that defendants claimed was declassified.
In July, military journalist Grigorii Pasko went on trial on espionage charges,
after Russia’s Supreme Court overturned a 1999 ruling by a Vladivostok court
acquitting him. The Vladivostok court had excluded several pieces of evidence, citing
falsification by the FSB. Pasko was accused of passing state secrets on the combat
readiness of the Russian Pacific Fleet to the Japanese media.As of October 2001,
the trial was ongoing.
The trial of Igor Sutyagin, a security and arms control researcher at the U.S.A.
and Canada Institute, continued. The FSB arrested Sutyagin in 1999, charging him
with passing state secrets to two employees of a British consultancy firm.However,
according to his lawyers, Sutyagin never had access to classified materials and had
only collated materials available in the public domain.
The FSB brought espionage charges against academic Valentin Danilov, head of
the Thermo-Physics Center at a university in Krasnoyarsk. Following the scientist’s
arrest on February 16, the FSB charged Danilov with passing to a Chinese company
state secrets relating to satellite technology. In an open letter to the procuracy,
twenty of Danilov’s colleagues maintained the information had been declassified in
1992. Danilov’s trial was expected to start in late 2001.
The espionage conviction of former diplomat Valentin Moiseev also raised fair
trial concerns. The Moscow City Court found Moiseev guilty after erratic court
proceedings in which three different judges started hearing the case before being
removed from it without clear explanation. A fourth judge eventually sentenced
Moiseev to a four-and-a-half-year prison term in August.
In a move that could potentially restrict academic freedom, the presidium of the
Russian Academy of Sciences in June issued a directive ordering research institutes
to exercise “constant control” over scientists’ cooperation with foreigners to avoid
espionage. Although the directive did not contain any provisions that explicitly
restricted academic freedom or freedom of expression, to many, the foregoing espionage
cases indicated that the directive might in practice be applied arbitrarily.
In Moscow, racist attacks by skinheads—extremists known for their shaved
heads and violence—continued to be a serious problem, as did racist police harassment.
Although President Putin sharply and repeatedly condemned racist violence,
his statements were undermined by the absence of efforts to hold police accountable
for their harassment of ethnic minorities.
Police routinely extorted bribes from ethnic minorities, particularly Chechens,
if their victims lacked a propiska, the obligatory residence permit. Police continued
to plant ammunition, explosives, or narcotics on Chechens, often seeking large
bribes in exchange for not pressing charges.
In late October, a group of skinheads stormed a bazaar on the outskirts of
Moscow, killing two vendors from the Caucasus in what appeared to be a racially
motivated attack. Police attributed the violence to “hooliganism” after Spain’s
defeat of Moscow’s soccer team. Skinhead violence erupted in April around Adolf Hitler’s birthday, when a group of about 150 skinheads attacked an Azerbaijani
market in southwestern Moscow and beat many of the vendors. The next day, skinheads
taunted and stabbed to death a young Chechen man in central Moscow.
In August, a group of Russian teenagers, using broken bottles and baseball bats,
attacked six African asylum seekers near an office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in Moscow. One of the Africans died of his wounds several
weeks later. A week after the incident, two teenagers warned the U.N. office that
“they would . . . declare a real war against the Africans.”
Russian law enforcement agencies continued to cooperate with Central Asian
governments seeking the extradition of political dissidents in Moscow. In June
2001, police arrested religious dissident Nodir Aliev, who was then extradited to
Uzbekistan and sentenced to a seven-year prison term on charges of “undermining
the constitutional order” of Uzbekistan. Also in June, police detained Tajik journalist
Dodojon Avotulloev on an extradition request from the Tajik government,
which sought to prosecute him for insulting the president of Tajikistan. After a
week of intense international pressure, the Procuracy General denied the extradition
request and released Avotulloev.
For the first time in years, the State Duma seemed set to pass a package of laws
that would reform Russia’s judiciary and criminal justice system.However, the proposed
reforms did not adequately address major rights issues, such as torture and
ill-treatment in police stations, overcrowding in prisons, and state indifference to
domestic violence and rape.
In June, the State Duma passed a draft criminal procedure code in its second
reading, the last step before final adoption. If adopted and signed into law, the code
would introduce some long-awaited changes, such as a transfer from the procuracy
to the judiciary of the authority to approve arrest and search warrants. However,
the draft omitted steps that would help combat torture; for example, detainees
would still require a prosecutor’s consent for a forensic medical examination.Also,
the draft code allowed for law enforcement agencies to seek signed statements from
suspects before explaining their rights to them.
The State Duma also adopted amendments to several laws on the judiciary to
introduce jury trials throughout Russia and to combat corruption among judges.
Under the amendments, jury trials would be introduced in all eighty-nine regions
of Russia by 2003. Draft amendments would also facilitate the prosecution of corrupt
judges. However, some legal experts warned that the amendments made
judges more susceptible to political pressure.
Although Penal Reform International reported that overall numbers of inmates
in Russian prison facilities had decreased, overcrowding in pretrial detention
remained severe.An important initiative that would have relieved overcrowding by
limiting pretrial detention to one year failed, due to resistance from the procuracy.
In the first half of 2001, public officials undermined Russia’s moratorium of the
death penalty.Russia’s justice minister and some members of the State Duma called
for the restoration of capital punishment, and an army general called for the public
executions of Chechen rebel leaders.However,President Putin very firmly spoke
out against the death penalty in July.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
For a second consecutive year, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in April
adopted a resolution expressing grave concern about human rights violations in
Chechnya. The resolution strongly condemned the use of disproportionate force
and serious human rights violations by Russia’s forces. It called on Russia to investigate
all violations of international human rights and humanitarian law, to establish
a national commission of inquiry, and to extend invitations to several U.N.
special mechanisms. Notably, it fell short of calling for an international commission
of inquiry.
At the commission’s September 25 session, U.N. High Commissioner for
Human Rights Mary Robinson spoke about Russia’s noncompliance with the resolution,
specifically its failure to create a national commission of inquiry and to issue
invitations to special mechanisms. The Russian delegation responded that the
Russian Federation does not consider itself bound by the resolution.
In October 2000, the U.N. Human Rights Committee issued its first ruling
against Russia since that country recognized in 1991 the individual right to petition.
It found that Russian citizen Dmitry Gridin’s right to a fair trial had been violated
in his 1990 conviction for rape and murder and urged his immediate release
from prison.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
On June 15, the OSCE Assistance Group returned to Chechnya, opening its
office in Znamenskoye after working from Moscow for more than two years. The
Assistance Group had received a considerable number of human rights complaints
and worked with the office of the special representative for human rights
in Chechnya, other Russian authorities, and human rights nongovernmental
organizations. The failure by the OSCE to make full use of its human rights mandate
and to commit sufficient staff to the Assistance Group undermined its effectiveness.
Council of Europe
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe continued to monitor
closely the situation in Chechnya. In January, it restored the Russian delegation’s
suspended voting rights, opting for engagement over exclusion. The assembly
established a joint working group made up of European and Russian parliamentarians
to monitor Russian compliance with Council of Europe requirements. In
April, the joint working group provided the assembly with an exhaustive list of all
investigations into crimes against civilians committed by servicemen and members
of special police forces, an important contribution toward transparency in the
accountability process. In July, assembly president Lord Russell-Johnston expressed
his concern about continuing abuses. In September, the joint working group reported on Russia’s failure to comply with the January assembly resolution and its
dissatisfaction with Russian investigations into alleged abuses.
Council of Europe Human Rights Commissioner Alvaro Gil-Robles visited
Chechnya in February and pressed the Russian government on investigations into
rights abuses.However, he chose not to investigate a mass grave near the Khankala
military base, discovered days before his arrival in Chechnya. He opted instead to
urge the authorities to share information on the investigation with the office of the
president’s representative on human rights in Chechnya.
The secretary general of the Council of Europe,Walter Schwimmer, also repeatedly
criticized the Russian government for the lack of prompt investigations into
human rights abuses in Chechnya.
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture issued a rare public statement
strongly criticizing Russia’s lack of cooperation with the committee’s recommendations.
The statement specifically addressed Russian authorities’ failure to carry
out a thorough and independent inquiry into alleged abuses at the Chernokozovo
detention facility in 2000 and to prosecute cases of ill-treatment of detainees in
Chechnya.
The European Court of Human Rights declared admissible two applications
against Russia for the first time since Russia’s accession to the Council of Europe in
1996.
European Union
The European Union wavered on human rights in Chechnya in 2001. In April,
the European Union tabled a draft resolution on Chechnya at the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights but then tried to negotiate a much weaker chairman’s statement.
When the United States forced a vote on the draft resolution, the European
Union voted in favor.At two E.U.-Russia summits, the European Union reportedly
discussed Chechnya issues behind closed doors, but avoided mentioning them in
public statements.
In December 2000, the European Parliament passed a resolution on the implementation
of the E.U. Common Strategy on Russia. It called for a “double-track”
strategy of collaborating with Russia on strengthening the rule of law and democratic
structures while “whenever necessary, explicitly condemning human rights
violations and the disproportionate use of force, as in the case of Chechnya.”
U.K. Prime Minister Tony Blair and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder
undermined the European Union’s efforts in Geneva, repeatedly praising President
Putin’s leadership but neglecting publicly to raise abuses in Chechnya, including
Russia’s failure to comply with E.U.-sponsored U.N. resolutions. Following the
September 11 attacks in the United States, Chancellor Schroeder called for a
“reevaluation” of world opinion on the Chechnya conflict.
United States
The Bush administration repeatedly expressed concern over press freedom in
Russia in early 2001 and played a critical role in bringing the Chechnya resolution to a vote the resolution at the Commission on Human Rights in April. However,
once the resolution had passed, the Bush administration missed key opportunities
to press for Russia’s compliance with the resolution’s requirements.
In June, President Bush and President Putin held their first summit in Slovenia
at which Bush declared his support for Putin’s leadership, and forfeited the opportunity
to publicly ask for Russia’s compliance with the U.N. resolution. Subsequent
summits brought no U.S. public criticism of the conduct of the Chechnya campaign.
After the September 11 attacks, the United States actively sought Russia’s support
for its response.While the administration continued public criticism of the
abuses in Chechnya, it did little more to bring Russia to pursue a more vigorous
accountability process.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Burying the Evidence: The Botched Investigation into a Mass Grave in Chechnya,
5/01
The “Dirty War” in Chechnya: Forced Disappearances, Torture, and Summary
Executions, 3/01
SLOVAKIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Slovakia made progress during 2001 in its efforts to join the first wave of candidate
countries for European Union accession, but its human rights record
remained uneven. Roma faced continued violence, discrimination, and police
abuse, occasionally with fatal consequences. The state response to discrimination
was inadequate,with Roma, gays and lesbians, and domestic violence victims lacking
full legal protection. A punitive criminal defamation law impinged on free
expression. Reforms were also needed to curb the trade in weapons with human
rights abusers.
The July death of a Roma man in police custody demonstrated the vulnerability
of Slovakia’s Roma population. The deceased,Karol Sendrei, and his two sons were
detained after a July 5 altercation between Sendrei and the local mayor in Magnezitovce,
in which the mayor and his police-officer son seriously assaulted Sendrei.
Following their arrest, Sendrei and his sons were handcuffed to a radiator at the
police station in nearby Revuca and beaten throughout the night. Sendrei died
from his wounds. Seven people were arrested in connection with the incident,
including the mayor and his son,who were charged with causing the death, and two
other police officers who face abuse of power charges.
Despite the arrests and assurances from the interior minister that he would ensure that justice would be done and improve police training, Sendrei’s death was
part of a continuing pattern of police failure to prevent racist violence against Slovak
Roma. In a week of incidents, racist gang members beat and harassed Roma in
the town of Holic, culminating in an August 13 assault on Milan Daniel that left
him needing brain surgery. Roma residents asserted that the police had failed to
protect them despite repeated complaints. On August 20, police finally charged two
youths with the attack on Daniel. On August 30, Peter Bandur was sentenced to
seven years’ imprisonment for his part in the beating death of a Roma woman,
Anastazia Balasova, a year earlier. (See Human Right Watch World Report 2001.)
While Bandur was convicted of the more serious crime of racially motivated
assault, his two accomplices received three and five years respectively for simple
assault (without racist intent).
Roma continued to face discrimination in employment, education, and housing.
Hostility on the part of other Slovaks formed part of the problem: a government
plan to resettle five homeless Roma families in Medzilaborce was met in
February by a protest petition signed by around 2,000 of the town’s residents. But
the government also failed adequately to implement and fund legal and policy
measures to combat anti-Roma discrimination. Positive developments came in the
form of the replacement in June of Vincent Danihel, the much-criticized minister
for Roma issues, by Klara Orgovanova, and the appointment of Roma parliamentarian
Ladislav Fizik as advisor to the interior minster.
Equal treatment for gays and lesbians suffered a setback on July 2, when the
National Council (parliament) rejected a proposal prohibiting employment discrimination
on the grounds of sexual orientation. There was some progress in official
recognition of the rights of national minorities, demonstrated by Slovakia’s
signing of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages on February
20 and expanded Hungarian-language teaching. Antagonism toward minorities
remained, however, with the desecration of Hungarian monuments in Kosice in
March and Jewish tombstones in Zvolen in July. Anti-domestic violence laws
remained inadequate, although the Alliance for Women cooperated with a government
criminal law reform committee in efforts to remedy the shortcomings. Victims
of rape faced bias in the justice system. Slovakia continued to lack an
ombudsman office, although the government approved a draft law creating the
post on September 19.At time of this writing,Parliament had yet to vote on the legislation.
Free expression continued to mature in Slovakia, but government officials’ use
of a criminal defamation law against journalists raised ongoing concerns. The
office of the Slovak president brought a criminal defamation suit brought against
Ales Kratky, a journalist with the daily Novy Cas, over an article questioning the
president’s fitness for office, leading to formal charges by a state prosecutor on July
2. Kratky faced a prison sentence if convicted. On July 12, the European Court of
Human Rights found that a Slovak court’s 1992 conviction of writer Lubomir
Feldek under the same law, for an article about a government official’s war record,
was a violation of Feldek’s right to free expression under article 10 of the European
Convention on Human Rights.
Slovakia’s growing popularity as a transit country for asylum seekers and migrants and a country of origin and transit for trafficking accentuated its significant
shortcomings in refugee and trafficking policy. Principal concerns were the
continued lack of an appeal mechanism for asylum petitions, lack of adequate facilities
to house asylum-seekers, and inadequate guarantees against return to a
country where individuals face threat of persecution.
Slovakia continued to authorize weapons transfers that risked fueling human
rights abuses in recipient countries. For example, it continued to be a major supplier
of arms to the highly abusive Angolan government, supplying mostly surplus
weapons made redundant by military modernization plans linked to Slovakia’s
NATO aspirations.United Nations investigators found that Slovakia was the point
of origin of weapons that were funneled to Liberia, in violation of a mandatory
arms embargo. In addition, Slovakia played a role as a transit country for arms
shipments originating in other countries. A weapons shipment from Iran apparently
destined for Angola via Slovakia and Israel was impounded at Bratislava airport
in September because the cargo was wrongly declared.The Slovak government
at this writing had not taken action to close a legal loophole that permits weapons
to transit through the country for up to seven days without a government license,
nor to incorporate in national law minimum export criteria agreed under the 1998
E.U. Code of Conduct and a November 2000 OSCE agreement on small arms. Slovakia,
a state party to the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, announced on October 18, 2000,
that it had completed destruction of its stockpile of antipersonnel landmines.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
There were no reports of interference with the work of domestic monitoring or
international human rights monitors. In March 2001, the Slovak Helsinki Committee
initiated a project to monitor news reporting on minorities. Initial findings
were encouraging,with more than 75 percent of news reporting on Roma and ethnic
Hungarians assessed as neutral. The European Roma Rights Center continued
their efforts to secure civil rights for Slovak Roma, filing suit against Slovakia in the
European Court of Human Rights on October 5 on behalf of Lubomir Sarissky, a
Roma man who died in police custody in August 1999.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In May, the Committee against Torture considered Slovakia’s initial report on
compliance with the Convention against Torture. The committee expressed concern
at police involvement in attacks on Roma, allegations of ill-treatment of
detainees in police custody, and the failure of Slovak authorities adequately to
respond to police misconduct. The special rapporteur on the independence of
judges and lawyers, Dato’Param Cumaraswamy, visited Slovakia in November 2000
to investigate government attempts to remove the president of the Supreme Court, Dr. Stefan Harabin, in light of ongoing concerns about political interference in the
judiciary. The government proposal to remove Dr. Harabin was subsequently
defeated by the National Council in December 2000.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The death of Karol Sendrei while in police custody was condemned in July by the
OSCE contact point for Roma and Sinti. The contact point, Nicolae Gheorghe,
emphasized the importance of an effective investigation by the Interior Ministry.
Council of Europe
In addition to signing the minority languages charter (see above) in February,
Slovakia allowed publication on July 6 of the Opinion on Slovakia by the Advisory
Committee on the Framework Convention on the Protection of National Minorities.
The opinion, adopted by the committee in September 2000, noted progress in
Slovakia’s compliance with the convention but expressed concern about the treatment
of Roma.Similar concerns were highlighted by Human Rights Commissioner
Alvaro Gil Robles while visiting a Roma settlement in Kosice during his May trip to
Slovakia.
European Union
E.U. concern over the plight of Roma remained a sticking point in relations with
Slovakia during 2001. After visiting a Roma settlement in Jarovnice during a February
trip to Slovakia, E.U. Enlargement Commissioner Guenther Verheugen contrasted
Slovakia’s overall progress towards accession with its continued
discrimination against Roma. The European Parliament’s rapporteur on Slovakia,
Jan Marinus Wiersma, condemned the death of Karol Sendrei. Discrimination
against Roma was also noted in Wiersma’s May 8 report to the Parliament’s Foreign
Affairs Committee on Slovakia’s membership application and the related resolution
adopted by the full Parliament on September 5. In its regular report on Slovakia’s
progress toward E.U. accession released in November 2001, the European
Commission noted continued concerns about the slow implementation of programs
designed to assist Roma.
United States
The State Department country report on human rights practices in Slovakia
largely reflected the main developments during 2000, including trafficking,
although Slovakia was omitted from the department’s July global report on trafficking.
The U.S. government’s interagency Helsinki Commission maintained its
scrutiny of Slovakia’s record on Roma issues.
TAJIKISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Four years after a peace agreement ended Tajikistan’s civil war, political violence
continued and the government moved closer to single-party rule. It imposed
increasing control over political and religious life by obstructing political opposition,
arresting citizens on religious grounds, and severely restricting the media.
Torture by police and security forces remained endemic.
Assassinations of high-ranking political figures reflected ongoing internal
power struggles between and within the parties to the 1997 peace agreement—the
government, led by President Emomali Rakhmonov, and the United Tajik Opposition
(UTO), now disbanded. On April 11, Deputy Interior Minister Habib Sanginov,
a former UTO political representative and key contributor to the peace
negotiations, together with two of his bodyguards and driver, was shot by three
unidentified assailants in Dushanbe. Sanginov’s relatives dismissed the official version
for his killing—that Sanginov had refused to repay a loan—and asserted it was
connected to his efforts to identify illegal criminal groups with alleged links to the
government. Authorities detained and harassed Sanginov’s friends and relatives,
causing at least one to flee the country. On July 17,gunmen killed Karim Yuldashev,
a presidential foreign policy advisor, at his home in the capital. On September 8,
Minister of Culture Abdurahim Rahimov was shot by unidentified gunmen outside
his home in Dushanbe.
Renewed fighting between former UTO members and government forces in
2001 highlighted continuing distrust between the two sides and shortcomings in
the demobilization process envisaged in the 1997 peace agreement. In June, former
UTO field commanders based in northeastern Tajikistan took hostage at least four
policemen in Teppa Samarkandi and fifteen members of a German humanitarian
aid organization in Tavil-Dara.The kidnappers protested the arrest of former UTO
members in connection with the murder of Habib Sanginov. All hostages were
released unharmed,but a military operation against the rebel fighters ensued.Local
legal experts and journalists reported that government forces’ indiscriminate fire
killed or injured up to eighty civilians, and that Tajik law enforcement agencies beat
civilians and looted.Authorities acknowledged six civilian deaths.
UTO representation in the government, mandated by the peace accords,
remained at best a formality, as in practice their officials and parliamentary
deputies supported official policy and the president on almost all points. In 2001
the government moved to consolidate its de facto single-party control by banning
and denying registration to opposition parties.The Adolatkhoh (Justice) party was
banned on charges of violation of the law on political parties, and party officials
claimed that its supporters had been intimidated by authorities into denying membership
in the party. Registration documents for the Social Democratic Party languished
with the Ministry of Justice. Pro-government candidates in the December 2000 and May 2001 parliamentary by-elections ran uncontested, as opposition
candidates were denied registration on charges of violating electoral procedure.
The government harassed and arrested several members of the Islamic Revival
Party (IRP), a key part of the former UTO, claiming they were members of Hizb ut-
Tahrir (Party of Liberation), a banned Islamic organization. The IRP claimed that
only one of its members supported the organization and that the government was
using the crackdown against Hizb ut-Tahrir as a pretext to weaken the IRP.
Courts handed down increasingly severe sentences against scores of Hizb ut-
Tahrir members. Whereas in previous years sentences ranged between five and
twelve years, on charges of inciting religious hatred, distributing antistate literature,
membership in banned organizations, and attempted violent overthrow of the
state, in 2001 these charges brought sentences of up to fourteen years of imprisonment.
Hizb ut-Tahrir advocated Islamic government and reestablishment of the
caliphate by peaceful means.
The government continued severely to restrict freedom of expression. The sole
state-owned publishing house for newspapers continued to censor material critical
of the government or influential public figures. The authorities “counseled” all
media on political content, and enforced pre-publication censorship and burdensome
licensing procedures for media outlets. The government granted broadcast
licenses to one independent radio station in northern Sugd province,while authorities
in Dushanbe continued for a fourth year to deny operating licenses to both
independent radio and television stations.
The authorities attempted to punish a foreign-based journalist for his criticism
of the government. On July 5, Dodojon Atovullo, exiled editor-in-chief of the
opposition newspaper Charogi Ruz (Light of Day), was arrested in Moscow, upon
the request of Tajik law enforcement agencies. Atovullo had in recent years published
articles accusing Tajik authorities of corruption and involvement in narcotics
trafficking. Threatened with extradition back to Tajikistan to face charges of
sedition and publicly slandering the president, he was released after six days after
pressure from other governments and international organizations.
Tajik authorities continued to refuse entry to more than 10,000 Afghanis who
fled fighting in northern Afghanistan in late 2000.The government claimed that the
presence of armed combatants among the refugees posed too great a security risk
to Tajikistan and that the country lacked the necessary economic and social
resources to accommodate them. The displaced Afghanis were living in squalid
conditions on islands in the Pianj River on the border between the two countries
and were at times subjected to crossfire between United Front and Taliban forces.
Their numbers steadily increased prior to and during the U.S.-led military offensive
in Afghanistan. Authorities also ordered several thousand Afghan refugees
already resident in Dushanbe to relocate to areas south and west of the capital to
“ensure security and public order in places of settlement.”While police harassed
refugees following the order, as of this writing there were no reports of refugees
having been forcibly relocated. In mid-October Dushanbe authorities closed three
Afghan schools, charging that they violated administrative regulations, and refused
to issue identity documents to Afghan refugees.
The International Organization for Migration reported that more than a thousand women, including minors, were trafficked in 2000 to the Middle East and
Commonwealth of Independent States countries,where they were often employed
in the sex industry. Traffickers paid bribes to Tajik law enforcement officials to procure
travel documents and facilitate travel arrangements.
Antipersonnel landmines remained a feature of the Tajik landscape in 2001.
Most were laid by Uzbek government forces in 2000, in response to the incursions
of that year by the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan through Tajikistan into Uzbekistan
and Kyrgyzstan.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Local human rights defenders raised human rights violations in international
fora, but the atmosphere of fear and intimidation prevented active monitoring and
advocacy within the country. One notable initiative included a roundtable on the
death penalty jointly organized by the OSCE and the League ofWomen Lawyers of
Tajikistan. A principal recommendation was a moratorium on the death penalty.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Tajikistan assumed a high profile as the U.S. military counterterrorism campaign
in Afghanistan got underway. It was of strategic importance both for humanitarian
relief operations in northern Afghanistan, and potentially as a base for U.S.
military deployment. International actors seeking to bolster financial assistance to
Tajikistan in recognition of its new strategic role made no effort whatsoever to take
into account the country’s dismal human rights record. Tajikistan was granted
membership in NATO’s Partnership for Peace program.
United Nations
The U.N. Office of Peace-Building (UNTOP), the United Nation’s small peacebuilding
mission that followed six years of peacekeeping operations, made a priority
of attracting international assistance for job creation programs for former
combatants and improvements of the rule of law. The UNTOP mission’s staff
included a human rights officer, whose brief, however, did not include human
rights monitoring.
The U.N.High Commissioner on Refugees (UNHCR) pursued a wavering policy
regarding the displaced Afghanis on the Pianj river islands. In early 2001, the
high commissioner requested the Tajik government to create the necessary conditions
to admit the displaced, by, among other things, separating combatants from
civilians and moving the latter to a safer area. When the authorities refused,
UNHCR suspended its own relief operations on the islands in mid-March, also
arguing that effective relief could not be delivered until combatants were separated
from civilians. UNHCR continued to press the Tajik government on devising a
strategy for separating combatants from civilians.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE mission headquarters in Dushanbe and its field offices in Khujand,
Shaartuz, Dusti, and Kurgan-Tiube intervened in several individual human rights
cases involving torture, rape, murder, and commutation of the death penalty. It
monitored policies in southern Khatlon province on employment and access to
land that discriminated against the Uzbek minority, visited some of the country’s
prisons, and did limited trial monitoring. Other notable activities included round
tables on the death penalty and trafficking of women and children and the initiation
of a project to train prison personnel. The mission also provided legal assistance
to Tajiks deported from Uzbekistan and helped to draft new laws on the
media to bring them into conformity with international norms. It did not,however,
publicly intervene to attempt to prevent the single-party elections in May.
Russia
After the September 11 attacks in the United States,Russia for the first time publicly
admitted its longstanding provision of material support to the United Front,
delivered via Tajikistan. It also increased this support during the course of the U.S.
campaign. Tajikistan’s role as a strategic partner in the U.S.-led operation in
Afghanistan became possible when Russia cleared the way for U.S. use of Tajikistan’s
airports.
In October, Russia sent at least 1,500 troops to Tajikistan, adding to the already
more than 10,000 Russian border guards stationed along the Tajik-Afghan border,
and about 10,000 troops of the 201st Motorized Rifle Division headquartered in
Dushanbe.
United States
Tajikistan became a strategic partner in the U.S. government’s counter-terrorism
campaign when it offered the use of airports by U.S. forces should the need
arise, and the United States continued to channel important amounts of humanitarian
aid through the country. The State Department’s annual report of human
rights practices delivered an unbiased and in general accurate account of the
human rights situation.
International Financial Institutions
Donor activity increased significantly in 2001, largely in reaction to the recognition
of Tajikistan’s importance to Central Asian security.A U.N.-sponsored donors’
conference in May resulted in pledges of U.S. $430 million for poverty reduction
and economic growth in 2001-2002. In addition, the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development contributed $2 million for rehabilitation and $13 million
in loans for telecommunications modernization,while the World Bank issued
a $50 million tranche of a continuing loan for poverty reduction programs and economic
reforms. The Asian Development Bank made a $4.4 million loan for reconstruction of water supply systems.During the course of the U.S.-led military coalition
operations in Afghanistan, Germany included Tajikistan on its list of priority
countries for development assistance.
TURKEY
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The strongly nationalist ruling coalition of the Democratic Left Party,Nationalist
Action Party, and Motherland Party once again failed to enact key reforms in the
face of longstanding opposition to these measures by the army and security forces.
The government’s National Program for Accession to the European Union should
have marked a turning point for human rights, but consisted mainly of vague and
general undertakings that were clearly designed to delay or avoid significant
change. In June the Constitutional Court closed the religious Virtue Party for
“actions against the republic’s secular principles.” An opportunity for significant
change was missed in October,when a package of constitutional amendments were
enacted that shortened detention periods,but left the death penalty and constraints
on freedom of expression on the statute books. Three provinces remained under
state of emergency. In December, security forces deliberately killed prisoners resisting
transfers to new high security “F-type prisons,”and beat them in transit.Thirtythree
prisoners died in hunger strikes.
The Turkish government talked about lifting constraints on free expression, but
did not take effective legislative action to do so. Those who challenged the official
view of the role of religion, ethnicity, and the army were prosecuted and imprisoned.
In June, Dr. Fikret Baskaya began serving his third prison term for his writings,
a sixteen-month sentence for “separatist propaganda” under article 8 of the
Anti-Terror Law, for a 1999 newspaper article about the trial of Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) leader Abdullah Öcalan. Ahmet Turan Demir, deputy chairperson of
the People’s Democracy Party (HADEP) which has a largely Kurdish membership,
was committed to Ankara Closed Prison in August to serve a one-year sentence
under article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law for a speech at his party’s youth congress in
1998.
Military courts tried civilians on charges limiting free expression. In December
Sanar Yurdatapan, coordinator of the Freedom of Expression Initiative, and Nevzat
Onaran of the Contemporary Journalists’ Association were imprisoned by the
General StaffMilitary Court with two-month sentences for “criticizing the institution
of military service.”
Governors closed exhibitions, banned film shows, and confiscated books and
newspapers. In August police confiscated the Women Pensioners’ Union booklet
Voice and Courage, which published speeches from a conference on sexual assault
and rape in custody, and officials of the group were charged with “insulting the
security forces.”
The High Council for Radio and Television (R.T.U.K.) temporarily or permanently
suspended scores of independent broadcasters and in August banned BBC
World Service and Deutsche Welle on the grounds that they “threatened national
security.”
Various legal pretexts were used to prevent broadcasting and education in
minority languages, calling into question whether the 2001 constitutional amendments
ostensibly lifting the broadcasting ban would be fully implemented. Local
governors prohibited the use of Kurdish street names and banned plays, cassettes,
and films in Kurdish on the grounds that they were “separatist.”
The ban on wearing the headscarf was applied with increasing severity against
students and civil servants and extended to private universities. A change in regulations
prohibited any student wearing a headscarf from sitting for the June university
examinations, a move that human rights groups criticized as violating the
students’ right to freedom of religion, conscience, and thought. Teachers and doctors
were also dismissed for wearing the headscarf on duty.
Many lawyers and human rights defenders charged that the use of torture and
ill-treatment increased.Detainees in all quarters of the country reported that police
or gendarmes inflicted torture by beating, death threats, hosing with cold water,
sexual assault, electric shocks, and hanging by the arms. Victims included women
and children, and people detained for common criminal offenses as well as State
Security Court (SSC) offenses (those involving narcotics and organized crime,
political violence, and some nonviolent political offenses). Two people died as a
result of beatings during arrest.
The Turkish government refused to abolish incommunicado detention, the
principal factor in the persistence of torture in Turkey identified by U.N. and
Council of Europe experts. Turkish law continued to permit detention for SSC
offenses for up to four days without access to family or lawyers. In practice this was
frequently extended. Those held for common criminal offenses were entitled to a
lawyer from the first moments of detention but rarely got one. Blindfolding, similarly
condemned by international experts, also continued unchecked.
Legal safeguards for children in police custody were frequently ignored. In
March, parliamentary deputy Sema Piskinsüt, former president of the Parliamentary
Human Rights Commission, estimated that 90 percent of imprisoned children
had been tortured in police custody. In January, nine children under the age of fifteen
complained that they had been beaten, forced to remain standing for long
periods, and deprived of food, drink and sleep while detained in Viransehir in the
province of Sanlıurfa in southeast Turkey. Local lawyers complained about the illtreatment
and breach of detention procedures, but as of November 2001 no action
had been taken against the responsible police officers. A fifteen-year-old detained
in April during an Istanbul demonstration against F-type prisons reported that
police officers beat him with wooden sticks about the head and body. Medical
examination showed extensive bruising and broken teeth.
Women reported sexual abuse and rape in police custody. The Women’s Commission
of the Diyarbakır Bar stated in February that over the preceding year it had
received complaints of sexual assault or rape by police or gendarmes from 123
women. In July,Health Minister Osman Durmus issued a circular which appeared
to circumvent a 1999 ban on “virginity examinations” by providing for the expulsion of female medical students proven to be sexually active or engaged in prostitution.
The minister later denied that he had authorized the reinstatement of such
examinations, but did not rescind the circular. A sixteen-year-old in Van reported
that in June she was taken from a gendarmerie post, where she was being questioned
for alleged links with the PKK, to a state hospital and there subjected to a
forced “virginity test.”
The climate of impunity for torture remained unchanged.Where security personnel
were charged and convicted of crimes based on torture, sentences were frequently
light or suspended. In February a policeman convicted of torturing a
thirteen-year-old boy in Istanbul in 1994 received a suspended sentence of fifteen
months’ imprisonment and returned to active service. In August the Turkish Parliamentary
Human Rights Commission reported that it had forwarded 451 torture
cases to local prosecutors, who had responded in only sixty-nine cases. Only one
prosecution had been opened. The December 2000 Law on Conditional Release
and Suspension of Sentences, resulting in the release of thousands of prisoners held
on common criminal charges, also suspended sentences for police officers convicted
of ill-treatment under article 245 of the Turkish Criminal Code.
Torturers continued to be protected by the abuse of medical examination procedures.
In December, Dr.Nur Birgen, a Forensic Institute official, was convicted of
issuing misleading reports that concealed torture. Her three-month prison sentence
was commuted to a fine of approximately one U.S. dollar.
HADEP officials Serdar Tanıs and Ebubekir Deniz “disappeared” after being
summoned to a gendarmerie station in Silopi, Sırnak province, in January. The
authorities first denied and then admitted that the two men “visited” the gendarmerie,
but claimed they had left after half an hour.
The Justice Ministry moved forward with its long-planned transfer of prisoners
held for SSC offenses from large ward-based prisons to new F-type prisons organized
in smaller cells for up to three prisoners. The ministry ignored warnings from
nongovernmental and international organizations that the planned F-type regime
might amount to cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment and that the lack of
transparency surrounding the prison reform risked exacerbating prisoners’ fears.
In December, the government launched “Operation Return to Life,”sending 10,000
soldiers into twenty ward-based prisons to transfer hunger-striking prisoners into
small-group isolation in the newly constructed F-type prisons. The operation left
twenty-eight prisoners and two gendarmes dead. Some prisoners burned themselves
in protest, but others were deliberately killed by security forces. Gendarmes
beat and tortured prisoners during transfer and on arrival at the F-type prisons.
Eight male prisoners formally complained that gendarmes anally raped them with
truncheons on arrival at Kandıra F-type Prison, but they were not medically examined
for three weeks.
Complaints that F-type prison guards maintained discipline through beatings
were corroborated by medical evidence in several cases. In February, Sabri Diri
made a formal complaint that guards at Tekirdag F-type Prison twice beat him and
subjected him to falaqa (beating on the soles of the feet) in his single cell. A medical
examination delayed for a week showed no signs of ill-treatment but a June
medical examination using scintigraphy, an imaging technique, revealed evidence consistent with Sabri Diri’s allegation of falaka and beating. As of October 2001,
thirty-three prisoners and eight relatives had died in hunger strikes in protest at the
F-type regime.More than fifty other hunger strikers suffered severe and permanent
brain damage.
More than 250,000 mainly Kurdish villagers remained unable to return to their
homes in the southeast, despite the substantial reduction in hostilities between
government forces and the PKK in that region. The vast majority had been forced
from their homes in the early and mid-1990s by security forces in brutal operations
accompanied by torture and “disappearances.”A smaller number had fled their villages
after repeated PKK attacks. Returns were slow due to apparent official reluctance
to repopulate distant rural areas.Where civil authorities granted permission
to return, villagers were sometimes turned back by gendarmerie or neighboring
communities’ paramilitary village guards who had occupied their lands.
Sporadic forced evacuation and house destruction actually continued. Following
the death of a gendarme in a landmine explosion near Beytüssebab in Sirnak
province in July, gendarmes forcibly evacuated the villages of Asat and Ortaklı.
The decline in attacks by armed illegal political organizations in recent years
continued but political killings of civilians continued. In September, a suicide
bomb attack by a member of the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front
(DHKP/C) in Istanbul killed Australian tourist Amanda Rigg and two Anti-Riot
Squad officers. A fifteen-year-old was killed and three other schoolchildren injured
in an attack on the extreme right Idealist Hearth in Istanbul. Official reports
claimed the attack was committed by the Turkish Communist Labour Party
(TKEP).
Asylum seekers were frequently denied proper protection. Under Turkey’s geographical
reservation to the 1951 Refugee Convention,non-European asylum seekers
were required to register with the police so that the U.N. High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) could determine whether they were refugees and eligible
for resettlement in a third country. Hundreds of asylum seekers entering the
country from Iran and northern Iraq were summarily returned across the borders.
Others were arbitrarily refused permission to register or to report weekly to police
stations, thereby exposing them to risk of summary return as illegal residents. In
July more than two hundred African asylum seekers, including some recognized by
UNHCR as refugees, were rounded up in Istanbul. One female member of the
group died in custody, while others reported that gendarmes ill-treated, raped, or
otherwise sexual assaulted them before forcing them at gunpoint across the Greek
border.
Landmines laid by the government along the borders and by both sides in the
conflict between the security forces and the PKK, killed at least ten people. In April,
however, Turkey declared that it would begin procedures to accede to the Ottawa
Convention on the prohibition of production and use of anti-personnel mines.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Prime Minister Bülent Ecevit issued a circular in June that required government authorities to be “tolerant towards civil society organizations,” but also said that
members of such organizations did not deserve to be called human rights defenders.
Human rights organizations saw little benefit from the circular. In September,
police raided the Diyarbakir referral center for the treatment of torture survivors
run by the Turkish Human Rights Foundation (TIHV) and carried off computers,
patient files, and information about assisting doctors. In March, nineteen participants
in a conference on sexual assault and rape in custody were put on trial for
“insulting the State authorities”at Beyoglu Criminal Court.Nazli Top,who was tortured
and raped with a truncheon in police custody in 1992, was a speaker at the
June 2000 conference and a defendant in the ongoing trial.
The F-type prison crisis and associated hunger strikes imposed considerable
strain on the human rights community.Government authorities relentlessly persecuted
TIHV, Human Rights Association (HRA), and Turkish Medical Association
members who were stretching their resources to the limit in order to document
abuses, ensure supplies of vitamins and clothing to F-type inmates, and provide
support to the relatives of sick, dead, and dying prisoners. Five HRA branches were
shut down by local governors because of their work on F-type prisons.HRA members
were repeatedly beaten and detained when they tried to make public press
statements. The Justice Ministry announced that providing information about the
hunger strikes was “supporting terrorism.”Accordingly,Ankara HRA branch president
Lutfi Demirkapı and eleven others were charged in March under the Anti-
Terror Law for their defense of human rights and face possible seven and a half year
prison sentences. Their trial at Ankara SSC was under way as of this writing.
In October, Yeni Safak (New Dawn) published an April 1998 memorandum
from the military’s Office of the Chief of General Staff, outlining a military plan to
discredit the HRA with false information linking it to the PKK.The military did not
deny the April 1998 memorandum’s authenticity but claimed it was never implemented.
However, an attempt on HRA president Akın Birdal’s life in May 1998 was
provoked by the type of groundless accusations contemplated in the memorandum.
Birdal barely survived the attack, which left him disabled.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In January, the U.N. special rapporteur on religious intolerance and discrimination
published a report on his 1999 visit to Turkey. The report strongly questioned
the Turkish Republic’s view of itself as a secular state, stating that the Directorate of
Religious Affairs wields “excessive powers of religious management such that religious
practice appears to be regimented by the government and Islam is treated as
if it were a ‘State affair.’”
The report noted that Muslim and non-Muslim religious minorities were not
satisfactorily protected and recommended that the U.N. Working Group on
Minorities review the effectiveness of safeguards provided by the Treaty of Lausanne, the foundation for Turkey’s policies towards minorities.The special rapporteur
also urged recognition of the right to conscientious objection.
The February visit of the U.N. special rapporteur on extrajudicial, arbitrary and
summary executions included investigations into the “disappearance” of HADEP
officials Serdar Tanıs and Abubekir Deniz.
In June the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that the Turkish
government introduce legislative changes and an awareness campaign in order
to combat “honor killings,” the murder of women by family members who believe
that they have been dishonored by the woman’s conduct. The committee was also
“extremely concerned” that children were being exposed to torture and ill-treatment
as a result of incommunicado police detention.
Council of Europe
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture (C.P.T.) concertedly engaged the
Justice Ministry on the violence of the December prison operation, isolation in Ftype
prisons, and associated hunger strikes. The C.P.T. visited Turkey in December
just before the operation, attempting to resolve hunger strikes that started in October.
It visited again in January,April, and September.
The Turkish government authorized the committee’s publication of all outstanding
reports visits dating back to 1990. The C.P.T. did not oppose the change
from large wards to cells but emphasized that small-group isolation in F-type prisons
was “not acceptable” and urged the Justice Ministry to establish out-of-cell
activities and independent monitoring.
In a number of judgments the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruled
that Turkish security forces had been responsible for arbitrary house destruction,
torture, “disappearance,” and extrajudicial execution in their operations in the
southeast.
The ECHR’s controversial judgment in July rejected the Welfare Party’s complaint
against closure by the Turkish Constitutional Court for “activities against the
principle of secularism” in 1998. The European Court considered that the party
leadership’s intention to establish Islamic law (shariah) conflicted with values
embodied in the convention, and that statements by the leadership suggested that
it might resort to force in order to gain and retain power. In the same month the
court ruled that Kurdish former parliamentary deputies Hatip Dicle, Orhan
Dogan, Selim Sadak, and Leyla Zana, sentenced to fifteen years for treason in 1994,
had been imprisoned after an unfair trial.
European Union
The E.U. Presidency’s May statement on the prison crisis urged the Turkish government
to implement “generously and properly” the C.P.T.’s suggested steps and
underlined that prison reform was a priority area for meeting the accession criteria.
In June, a European Parliament delegation visited Turkey to investigate developments
in F-type prisons.
The European Parliament’s October 2000 report on the accession process criticized the vagueness of the National Plan and noted that “the signs of openness
which are on occasion expressed by governmental authorities may be challenged by
military powers, which still have an unusual influence on Turkish politics.” The
European Commission’s November 2001 Regular Report concluded that on
human rights, “the situation on the ground has hardly improved.”
United States
The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000 surveyed
the continuing abuses, giving examples of restrictions on speech and the
press, extrajudicial killings and torture.The report blamed incommunicado detention
and impunity for the persistence of torture. It documented child labor, violence
against women, and spousal abuse.
Its description of “an upsurge in the rate of returns” of displaced Kurdish villagers
gave a more optimistic picture than warranted. The conclusion, apparently
based on official Turkish government pronouncements, was not borne out by
Human Rights Watch investigations. The State Department’s Trafficking in Persons
Report stated that Turkey did not meet the minimum standards nor had it made significant
efforts to combat trafficking of women and girls to Turkey for forced prostitution.
Technical issues slowed contractual negotiations on the sale of 145 attack helicopters
to Turkey by U.S. manufacturer Bell Textron. This class of equipment was
implicated in past human rights violations in Turkey, making the pending sale,
which is subject to U.S. Congressional approval, highly controversial in the United
States.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Small Group Isolation in F-type Prisons and the Violent Transfers of Prisoners to
Sincan, Kandira, and Edirne Prisons on December 19, 2000, 4/01
TURKMENISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In 2001, Turkmenistan isolated itself from the international community and
continued to stifle all forms of dissent, to hound religious and ethnic minorities,
and to exercise strict control over all media and expression.
President Saparmurad Niazov’s cult of personality reached new levels. “President
for Life”in the year 2000, in February he declared his intention to remain president
only until 2010, when he promised multicandidate elections without
opposition candidates. On October 19, the government’s highest legislative body declared that Rukhnama (Book of the Soul),written by President Niazov, was a holy
text, and officials indicated that it would be comparable to the Bible and the Koran.
In January, President Niazov added about 1,000 agents to the National Security
Committee (or KNB), bringing their number to 2,500. Successor to the KGB, the
KNB exercised truly pervasive surveillance over the population, using intimidation,
searches without warrants, arbitrary detention, and torture to dissuade all
dissent.
In response to international pressure, Turkmen authorities released in December
2000 two dissidents,Nurberdi Nurmamedov and Pirkuli Tangrikuliev, imprisoned
since January 2000 and August 1999, respectively. President Niazov signed a
decree pardoning the two after their videotaped statements of “repentance” were
broadcast on television.
Mukhmatkuli Aimuradov, a political prisoner since 1994, continued to serve an
eighteen-year prison sentence. Notwithstanding his worsening health, the authorities
limited family visits and delivery of food parcels and medicines, and denied his
petition to have his sentence reduced.
Since 1997, the government has officially allowed only two religious denominations,
Sunni Islam and Russian Orthodox Christianity, and viciously persecuted
those who followed other faiths, which were considered illegal. Religious persecution
worsened after a January 26 presidential speech tasked the KNB with reinvigorating
the struggle against “various non-native religious groups intent on
fracturing our society.” Pentacostalists, Baptists, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and Hare
Krishnas bore the brunt of this new crackdown. Police and KNB agents interrogated
and intimidated worshippers, confiscated their literature, and prevented
group worship. The government also continued to deport religious activists who
were not citizens of Turkmenistan.
At least fifteen believers were tortured or ill-treated during police and KNB
interrogations about their beliefs or “illegal” religious activities.On March 11,KNB
agents detained seven Hare Krishnas at a wedding in Mari, and beat them on the
soles of their feet to punish them for adherence to an “incorrect” faith. A court sentenced
them to five days of detention on trumped-up charges of “hooliganism.”
In January 2001, President Niazov claimed that in 2000 law enforcement agents
had confiscated 350,000 religious books and 80,000 cassettes that were “incompatible
with our faith.” In March, authorities banned the sale of Bibles in Russian or
Turkmen.
By March the government had closed the last Pentacostalist and Baptist houses
of worship. Several families were evicted from their homes in retaliation for praying
at unsanctioned gatherings.
In February, Shahgildy Atakov, an imprisoned Baptist pastor convicted in 1999
on unfounded charges of alleged financial misdealings, was transferred in serious
condition to a prison hospital in Mary. The authorities had reportedly offered to
release Atakov provided he take an oath of allegiance to the president. When he
refused, state agents beat him and forcibly medicated him with psychotropic drugs.
The government denied Atakov’s ill-treatment but ignored diplomats’ requests to
meet with him. On March 23,Atakov was transferred to the remote Turkmenbashi
prison facility. Also in March, his wife, Artigul Atakova, and five children were forcibly relocated to Kaakhka, where local authorities reportedly threatened to
deny parental rights to Atakova unless her children participated in the school ritual
of swearing allegiance to the president.
At least six Jehovah’s Witnesses were serving prison sentences, mostly for conscientious
objection to military service. Authorities in some cases reportedly
brought new charges against conscientious objectors when they finished out their
terms.
Islamic groups also suffered state harassment. On June 25, President Niazov
stated that he had ordered the official head Turkmen Muslims to close the last
madrassah (religious school) in the northern city of Dashoguz. Only the department
of theology at Ashgabad University, which is under strict police surveillance,
had the right to teach Islamic studies. The Shiite community had been denied registration
since 1997, although some communities had permission to gather for
prayer on major holidays.
Law enforcement agencies stepped up pressure on nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs). In November 2000, a special commission in Turkmenbashi composed
of the KNB, procuracy, tax police, and local government officials launched
“inspections” to intimidate thirty NGOs that had participated in a seminar on
democratization sponsored by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). Umid (Hope), the NGO that had organized the conference, was
forced to cease its operations. From July through September, the Ministry of Justice
and procuracy repeatedly summoned forty-eight environmental and humanitarian
NGOs, some of which had previously been denied registration, to warn them
that any activities pursued by unregistered NGOS were illegal.
The government systematically stifled all media freedoms, and imposed prepublication
state censorship. The authorities forced people to subscribe to Turkmen
newspapers, even if they did not speak Turkmen. In March state libraries were
instructed to confiscate the works of about twenty authors who either “inaccurately
depicted” the country’s history or had emigrated for political reasons.
The government went to extraordinary lengths to block all information about
the human toll of the December 6, 2000, earthquake in western Turkmenistan.
President Niazov publicly stated that no one had perished, though dozens were
reported dead, and declined all foreign assistance.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2000, the government took unprecedented
action to curtail freedom of movement. It declared two of Turkmenistan’s five
provinces “closed”; travel there required a special pass. In several of the country’s
largest cities, local authorities banned the sale of homes to residents of other cities
and strictly enforced propiska (obligatory residence permits) rules. Several people
were denied permission to travel abroad on political or religious grounds. In 2001,
the government gave few visas to foreigners, and in numerous cases KNB agents
warned individuals not to issue invitations to their friends and relatives abroad,
required for Turkmen visas.
To discourage contact with foreigners, on June 4 President Niazov signed an
order requiring a fee of U.S. $50,000 to register a marriage with a foreigner.
President Niazov’s grandiose construction projects for Ashgabad required the
destruction of many homes, and according to diplomats, homeowners in numerous cases were not paid the full amount of promised compensation, or received
nothing. Those who had the right to alternative housing in some case did not
receive it.
In December 2001, President Niazov amnestied 11,774 of the country’s 19,000
prisoners, but prisons remained overcrowded and horrific. Corruption pervaded
the amnesty process.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The government does not allow domestic human rights NGOs.Due to emigration,
Russian Community, an unregistered entity, collapsed. The organization had
defended the rights of ethnic minorities and assisted them in emigration matters.
On May 2, KNB agents interrogated one of its former activists,Viacheslav Mamedov,
after he visited the OSCE in Ashgabad. They accused him of giving the OSCE
a “political document” and banned him from traveling to the capital to meet with
foreigners without first informing them.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Turkmenistan declared its support for a U.N.-led campaign against terrorism,
and agreed to allow the United Nations to deliver humanitarian aid through its border
with Afghanistan.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
For the fourth year in a row, Turkmenistan failed to sign a substantive Memorandum
of Understanding with the OSCE’s Office of Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights, one of the conditions under which the OSCE had agreed in 1998 to
establish a center in Ashgabad. Nonetheless, Chairman-in-office Mircea Geoana
met with President Niazov in June 2001 for talks on security and human rights
issues, and claimed to have made steps toward “re-engaging Turkmenistan on the
human dimension of the OSCE.”
In February, the head of the OSCE center in Ashgabad requested permission to
visit Shahgildy Atakov, but officials ignored the request.He also publicly noted that
President Niazov’s decision to hold elections in 2010, while positive in setting a
limit to his presidency, effectively cancelled the elections scheduled for 2002. Also
in February, OSCE representatives attempted to monitor the trial of Nurberdi Nurmamedov;
officials barred them entry, despite having invited them to attend.
Despite hindrances to its operation, the OSCE Center sponsored a number of
seminars and events on human rights issues.
European Union
The ratification of the E.U. Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA)
with Turkmenistan remain stalled, due to human rights concerns. But the PCA’s
Interim Agreement extended full trade benefits, squandering the European Union’s
leverage with Turkmenistan.
After the September attacks in the United States, the European Union began to
reevaluate its engagement with Central Asian states bordering on Afghanistan.
Within this context Belgian Foreign Minister Louis Michel, representing the E.U.
presidency, visited Turkmenistan to discuss cooperation on terrorism, border control,
and drug trafficking.
United States
In the post-September 11 context of U.S. policy toward Central Asian states,
Turkmenistan’s human rights record took second place to its strategic location,
sharing a border with Afghanistan. The Bush administration’s list of countries of
particular concern for religious freedom,released in October, did not include Turkmenistan.
In August, the U.S.Commission on International Religious Freedom had
recommended its inclusion.
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
In a letter to President Niazov in July 2001, the EBRD threatened to cut off all
activities in Turkmenistan if political and economic reforms were not enacted
within a year, citing “grave concerns about the state of democracy and the lagging
pace of political and economic transition.” The EBRD had ended public sector
lending to Turkmenistan in April 2000.
UNITED KINGDOM
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In the aftermath of the September 11 attacks in the United States, the United
Kingdom proposed emergency measures that threatened to undermine civil liberties
and the rights of refugees and migrants. Three years after the 1998 Multi-Party
Agreement was negotiated in Northern Ireland, the agreement’s human rights provisions
were not yet realized.Contentious outstanding issues included the creation
of a representative, accountable police force, and the establishment of public
inquiries into the murders of two slain defense lawyers.
On September 27, British Home Secretary David Blunkett suggested that
Afghans who might flee their country were not entitled to seek refuge elsewhere.
“There is already a major problem on the Afghan border,” he said. “The main aim
is to stop people coming from that region and spreading across the world. That is
also necessary for reasons of terrorism.”Blunkett indicated that in order to prevent
terrorism it might be necessary to curb the appeal rights of those refused entry into
the United Kingdom. Such measures threatened to prevent asylum seekers from
having their claims for refugee status assessed fully and fairly.Most individuals recognized
as refugees in the United Kingdom had appealed an initial negative decision.
In October, the British Home Office proposed new security measures—including
enhanced police powers; a denial of judicial review for decisions made by the
Special Immigration Appeals Commission,which deals with asylum claims of persons
suspected of terrorist activities; and provisions for the indefinite administrative
detention of those suspected of terrorist activity or associated with terrorist
groups or their members. In February, the United Kingdom lifted its derogation
from article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which governs the
rights of individuals in custody. The indefinite detention proposal would have
required the United Kingdom to reinstate the derogation.
On November 12, Home Secretary David Blunkett declared a “state of emergency,”
a requirement for derogation from certain provisions of the European Convention
on Human Rights (ECHR).Blunkett told the Guardian that the declaration
was a legal technicality—necessary to ensure that certain antiterrorism measures
that contravene the ECHR could be implemented—and not a response to any
imminent terrorist threat. In a statement to Parliament on October 15, Blunkett
stated that “[t]here is no immediate intelligence pointing to a specific threat to the
United Kingdom.” These public pronouncements raised concern that the United
Kingdom sought to derogate from its human rights obligations in the absence of
conditions amounting to a bona fide state of emergency.
The Home Office subsequently introduced the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and
Security 2001 bill on November 13. The bill included a definition of “international
terrorist suspects” that included persons who “have links with a person who is a
member of or belongs to an international terrorist group,” giving rise to concern
that people could be found guilty by association; provided for indefinite detention
with limited judicial review for foreigners certified by the Home Secretary as suspected
terrorists; and undermined the 1951 Refugee Convention by denying those
considered suspects the fundamental right to seek asylum and potentially excluding
them from the United Kingdom, or detaining them indefinitely without adequate
safeguards. An expedited process was implemented to see the bill to
adoption, which was expected by December.
Attacks against Muslims living in the United Kingdom increased dramatically
after September 11. On September 17, three white men beat an Afghan taxi driver
so severely that he was paralyzed from the neck down. Although such attacks were
condemned by the government—with a promise to toughen enforcement of hate
crimes legislation—new government calls for antiterrorist measures,more restrictive
immigration and asylum controls, and for halting the flow of Afghan refugees
into Europe contributed to an increasingly hostile climate toward refugees and
migrants in the United Kingdom.
The Northern Ireland peace process faced numerous challenges in 2001. On
August 18, the Irish and British governments issued a revised implementation plan
for the 1999 Patten Commission report on policing. Although Northern Ireland’s
Irish nationalist Social Democratic Leadership Party (SDLP) agreed to the plan, the
republican party Sinn Fein refused to approve it, citing its failure to incorporate key
provisions of the 1998 Patten report, which recommended fundamental reform of
policing arrangements. In September, the Northern Ireland Police Board—the
policing oversight body—was established with representatives from all the major
political parties except Sinn Fein.Without support from Sinn Fein,members of the
Catholic minority that identify themselves as republicans or nationalists were less
likely to seek jobs in the service.
In June, the Royal Ulster Constabulary introduced “less lethal” plastic bullets
into its cache of weapons.Human rights groups and Labor Party MPs argued that
scientific evidence indicated the new bullets remained lethal and continued their
calls for a total ban on the use of plastic bullets.
Children’s right to education was threatened in September in the Ardoyne area
of Belfast where local protesters—who identify themselves as Protestant “loyalists”
to the U.K.—lobbed a blast bomb, tossed bottles, and shouted sectarian slurs at
Holy Cross elementary students, girls aged four to eleven, as they made their way to
school. Loyalists issued death threats against some parents. On November 11, a sixteen-
year old loyalist protester died after a pipe bomb exploded in his hand.
Catholic parents charged the RUC with failing to protect their children adequately.
In November, the RUC arrested a nationalist who was videotaping loyalist protests
outside the school.
Press outlets continued to suffer setbacks in their efforts to report on the Force
Research Unit (FRU), a unit within British Army intelligence alleged to be responsible
for a number of killings—through its agents in both loyalist paramilitary
groups and the Irish Republican Army (IRA)—including the murder by loyalist
paramilitaries of defense lawyer Patrick Finucane in 1989. On April 24, the Ministry
of Defense secured a temporary injunction against Ulster Television’s Insight series,
which was about to broadcast a program about FRU’s infiltration of former soldiers
into the IRA.The program alleged that members of the security forces and the public
died in IRA attacks that were allowed to go ahead in order to protect those
agents’ cover. A permanent injunction was served on UTV on April 26 banning the
station from broadcasting information about the ban.
In February 2001, the Irish government issued a public statement supporting
the call for an independent international public inquiry into the March 1999 murder
of human rights lawyer Rosemary Nelson. In August 1 proposals to advance the
political process, the British and Irish governments called for the appointment of
an international judge to investigate allegations of official collusion in several cases,
including the murders of Rosemary Nelson and Patrick Finucane. The Nelson
and Finucane families continued to call for independent public inquiries into the
murders.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In July 2000 human rights activists discovered a web site listing names of persons
being targeted by loyalist paramilitaries, including defense lawyers, journalists,
and community activists. The police got the list off the web in December 2000.
Evidence subsequently came to light that loyalists had the list and were amending
it. The RUC warned hundreds of people that their names were on the list.
On September 28, journalist Martin O’Hagan, who wrote about alleged collusion
between the security forces and loyalist paramilitaries, was shot dead in
Lurgan.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In April, the U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers
and the special rapporteur on human rights defenders called for public inquiries
into the murders of Rosemary Nelson and Patrick Finucane.
In November, the U.N. Human Rights Committee issued concluding observations
on the United Kingdom’s fifth periodic report. The committee welcomed the
entry into force of the Human Rights Act 1998 and the establishment of a police
ombudsman and human rights commission in Northern Ireland. It recommended
that any derogation from the International Covenant on Civil and Political Righs
(ICCPR) in the effort to combat terrorism comply with the requirements on derogation
contained in article 4, to implement “a full, transparent, and credible
accounting” of the circumstances into disputed killings in Northern Ireland,
including the murders of Patrick Finucane and Rosemary Nelson, to examine the
asylum system to ensure that asylum seekers’ rights under the ICCPR receive full
protection, and to establish a national human rights commission.
Council of Europe
In four judgments issued in May, the European Court of Human Rights held
that the United Kingdom had failed to conduct effective investigations into disputed
killings in Northern Ireland.The cases were brought by the families of eleven
people killed by security forces and one person killed by Loyalist paramilitaries
with the alleged collusion of the security forces. The court unanimously found in
all four cases that the procedures for investigating the use of lethal force by police
officers failed to meet the requirements of article 2 of the European Convention on
Human Rights, which guarantees the right to life.
United States
On March 15, the second anniversary of Rosemary Nelson’s murder, the House Subcommittee on International Operations and Human Rights held a hearing on
the review of the criminal justice system in Northern Ireland.
The U.S. State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000
adequately catalogued the concerns of human rights groups, including the lethal
potential of plastic bullets, alleged collusion between security forces and loyalist
paramilitaries, and the unresolved murders of lawyers Rosemary Nelson and
Patrick Finucane.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Commentary on the United Kingdom’s Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill
2001, 11/01
UZBEKISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The new U.S.-led campaign against terrorism dramatically changed Uzbekistan’s
international position, but its appalling human rights record remained
unchanged. The government retained tight control over all media and other forms
of expression, dealing harshly with dissidents and rights activists who sought to
expose abuses. It did not tolerate independent political parties or social movements.
State agents tortured those in custody and at least five people died in custody
under highly suspicious circumstances in 2001.
The government pressed forward with a campaign of unlawful arrest, torture,
and imprisonment ofMuslims who practiced their faith outside state controls, and
took increasing numbers of pious women into custody. Police forcibly disbanded
protests by relatives of religious prisoners, and placed several under administrative
arrest for demonstrating.
Seventy-three mountain villagers were convicted, after being tortured and illtreated,
on charges of abetting the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) insurgency
in 2000 in southeastern Uzbekistan.
While authorities withheld comprehensive statistics on prisoners held on religious
and political charges, conservative estimates put the total number at around
7,000. Local rights organizations estimated that in 2001 at least thirty people per
week were convicted for alleged crimes related to their religious affiliation or
beliefs. The majority of cases involved those accused of membership in Hizb ut-
Tahrir (Party of Liberation), which espouses reestablishment of the Islamic
Caliphate by peaceful means.The government of President Islam Karimov equated
the group’s beliefs and activities with attempted overthrow of the state, and authorities
prosecuted any person in possession of the group’s literature or in any way
affiliated with it. They also prosecuted so-called Wahhabis, or Muslims who were not members of any organized group but who worshiped outside state controls and
were subsequently branded “extremists” and “fundamentalists.”
Those associated even loosely with well-known religious leaders branded as
“Wahhabis”were tried in unfair proceedings on charges of conspiracy to overthrow
the government, and sentenced to lengthy prison terms. On April 9, twelve men
accused of taking Koran lessons and attending religious services at the mosque of
Imam Abduvahid Yuldashev were sentenced to terms ranging from two-year suspended
sentences to eighteen years of imprisonment. The men, who claimed that
they had been engaged only in worship and study of Islamic texts, testified that
police held them incommunicado and tortured them. A Tashkent court sentenced
Imam Yuldashev himself to nineteen years in prison, ignoring his testimony that he
was tortured and his family threatened.
Following a well-established pattern, authorities arrested or harassed the relatives
of independent Muslim leaders. In at least one prominent case in 2001, police
used a family member as a hostage to coerce an imam into cooperating with an
investigation. On March 17, 2001, Tashkent police arrested Rahima Ahmedalieva,
wife of Imam Ruhiddin Fahruddinov, whom authorities labeled a “Wahhabi” and
who was believed to be in hiding, fearing arrest. Police held Akhmedalieva, conditioning
her release on Fahruddinov’s appearance for questioning. Police detained
Akhmedalieva’s nineteen-year-old daughter, Odina Maksudova, on March 20,
threatened her with physical abuse, and forced her to write a statement incriminating
her mother. They also threatened to send Akhmedalieva’s minor children to an
orphanage, “so [they] won’t become ‘Wahhabi,’” and tore off the religious headscarves
worn by Maksudova and Akhmedalieva, ordering the younger woman not
to wear religious dress again.Maksudova was released the next day.
On March 26, when Maksudova filed an appeal on behalf of her mother to the
United Nations with the office of the United Nations Development Programme,
police confiscated the appeal from a U.N. employee,detained Maksudova as she left
the U.N. building, and forced her to disavow the appeal. On September 21,
Akhmedalieva was sentenced to seven years in prison for alleged anti-state
activities.
On August 23, President Karimov issued an amnesty decree for various categories
of prisoners, excluding those charged with anti-state activities or sentenced
to lengthy terms for alleged membership in banned religious organizations.However,
an unknown number of religious prisoners sentenced earlier to relatively
short terms in prison were reportedly released following the amnesty decree.
Notwithstanding the government’s longstanding policy of dispersing unsanctioned
public demonstrations,women in various parts of Uzbekistan protested the
campaign against independent Muslims. On March 21, 2001, an estimated three
hundred demonstrators, primarily women, took to the streets in Andijan to
demand the release of their male relatives,imprisoned for their religious affiliations
and beliefs. The participants reportedly carried signs reading, “2001: Year of the
Widow and Orphan,” a play on President Karimov’s declaration of the year 2001 as
the “Year of the Mother and Child.” Police dispersed the demonstration and
detained at least two female participants, carrying one off by her arms and legs.
Two days later,Andijan police reacted even more quickly to disperse a followup protest. Officers allegedly detained female demonstrators violently, fined them
each 2,200 som (approximately one month’s salary), and threatened to extend the
prison sentences of the women’s jailed relatives if they did not submit statements
asking for forgiveness for their actions. After another similar demonstration, local
authorities organized a public meeting to denounce the protesters.
On April 12, 2001, police violently dispersed and detained some forty women
protesting outside government buildings in Tashkent, injuring at least ten. A
human rights defender who witnessed the protest reported that officers fired blanks
over the women’s heads.Most of the women were released the same day; four were
released three days later. Police allegedly beat one of the women in custody.
September 4, 2001, saw two more protests organized by female relatives of independent
Muslim prisoners, to voice dissatisfaction with the August amnesty decree.
Police in Karshi arrested twelve of a group of about sixty women who called for the
release of their loved ones. As of this writing, their whereabouts remained
unknown. In Tashkent, police arrested another ten demonstrators, including
Fatima Mukadirova, the mother of two young men imprisoned for alleged membership
in Hizb ut-Tahrir.Arresting officers accused Mukadirova of membership in
the Islamic group and placed her under arrest on charges that she attempted the
violent overthrow of the Republic of Uzbekistan. On November 5,Mukadirova was
given a three-year suspended prison sentence, under which she was to report to
authorities every ten days.
In 2001, the government of Uzbekistan took an important step toward transparency
in the prison system with its decision to allow access for the first time ever
to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to prison facilities.However,
progress proved illusory.According to prisoners’ relatives, the authorities consistently
ordered prisoners not to speak to the international observers and
temporarily transferred political and religious prisoners from facilities prior to the
visits. Conditions in Uzbekistan’s prisons remained ghastly. Overcrowding forced
prisoners to sleep in turns.Meals were commonly limited to one loaf of bread for
four men and one cup of tea.With poor hygiene, diseases such as dysentery, eczema,
kidney ailments, and tuberculosis were rampant and claimed numerous lives.
Authorities routinely denied prisoners access to medicine and medical attention.
Prison guards systematically beat prisoners with wooden and rubber truncheons
and exacted particularly harsh punishment on those convicted on religious
charges, subjecting them to additional beatings, and forcing them to sing the
national anthem and recite poems praising the president and the state. Those who
attempted to observe the five daily Muslim prayers were beaten and sometimes
locked in isolation cells for days on end.
Torture remained endemic in pretrial custody as well, abetted by the practices of
failing to notify family members of an individual’s detention and holding people
incommunicado, sometimes for up to six months. Authorities systematically tortured
detainees to force them into giving testimony or self-incriminating statements
and used it as a form of extrajudicial punishment. At least five suspicious
deaths in pre- and postconviction custody in 2001 were likely due to torture,
including that of a human rights defender. In all cases officials provided implausible
explanations for the cause of death.
Police detained Emin Usmon on February 11, 2001, on suspicion of “religious radicalism,” and on March 1 returned his corpse to his family. Usmon, a wellknown
writer and commentator in Uzbekistan, had spoken out on behalf of others
held on such charges. Fifty to sixty police officers surrounded Usmon’s neighborhood
when his corpse was returned, stopped the family from holding a viewing of
the body, demanding that they bury the body immediately and preventing relatives
and neighbors from attending the funeral. Initially, police told the family that
Usmon had committed suicide; however, the death certificate ultimately given to
the family stated that he had died of a “brain tumor.” No independent medical
examination was allowed. Nonetheless, one relative alleged he saw clearly an open
wound on the back of Usmon’s head during the procedure of preparing the body
for burial.
Police also offered an implausible explanation for the death of Hazrat Kadirov,
a displaced person who had spoken out about poor conditions for those displaced
from Surkhandaria province. Police officers detained Kadirov for “informal questioning”
on December 11, 2000; three days later, they returned his corpse. Officials
claimed that Kadirov had tried to escape police custody and then had died of a heart
attack. A person who viewed Kadirov’s body reported seeing multiple injuries.
On October 17, 2001, Tashkent police arrested brothers Ravshan and Rasul
Haidov on suspicion of membership in Hizb ut-Tahrir. Ravshan’s body was
returned to his family on October 18.Those who viewed the body reported that the
thirty-two-year-old’s neck was broken, as was one leg below the knee; that his upper
back was injured; and that his body was covered with bruises. The official cause of
death was “heart attack.” As of this writing, twenty-five-year-old Rasul Haidov
reportedly remained in intensive care in a local hospital under armed guard.
In late December 2000, Habibullah Nosirov, a Hizb ut-Tahrir member imprisoned
since 1999, reportedly died from injuries sustained during beatings in prison.
He was the brother of Hafizullo Nosirov, who in March 2000 was convicted for
being the reputed head of Hizb ut-Tahrir in Uzbekistan.
Uzbek authorities did not respond to repeated requests for information regarding
the whereabouts in custody of Bahodir Hasanov, a teacher at the Alliance
Française, who was arrested in July 2000. By November 2001, he was unaccounted
for.
Journalist and artist Shukhrat Bobojonov was forced to flee Uzbekistan in
August 2001 under fear of arrest. State prosecutors in his hometown of Urgench
had repeatedly summoned Bobojonov for questioning relating to an investigation
of his membership in the Union of Artists of Uzbekistan in the early 1990’s.
Internews reported that Bobojonov had objected to the government’s 1999 closure
of his independent television station in Urgench and that he had even sued to have
his broadcast license reissued.
On October 23, the National Security Service (SNB) arrested Yusup Jumaev, a
well-known Uzbek poet, stating that his poetry, published in 1994 and 2000, qualified
as “anti-state activities.”As of this writing, Jumaev was being held in the basement
of the Bukhara district SNB, where he allegedly had been tortured.
Uzbekistan executed undisclosed numbers of persons by firing squad in 2001.
On October 29, the Uzbek parliament amended the criminal code to reduce from
eight to four the number of crimes punishable by death.
As part of its declared aim to counter the threat of Uzbek militants based outside Uzbekistan, the government mined its borders with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan,
with mines killing an estimated thirty civilians and injuring numerous others in
2001, according to media and government reports.
In 2001, local and international human rights organizations uncovered evidence
that authorities forcibly displaced approximately 3,500 mountain villagers from
their homes near the Tajik border during and after the August 2000 IMU incursions.
The government had reported that the civilians had fled. The displaced persons
were relocated to centers where they were cut off from interaction with the
general community and deprived of means of livelihood. The military prohibited
the displaced persons’ return to the area even to retrieve personal belongings and
razed their homes to create a cordon sanitaire along the border.
Obstacles to women’s escape from severe domestic violence and pursuit of
remedies persisted at the local and national levels. In particular, neighborhood
authorities, or mahallah committees, thwarted women’s attempts to obtain
divorces and split from violent husbands by preventing them from pursuing legal
remedies when they asked for assistance and encouraging their return to violent
households.The authorities thereby blocked women’s access to the criminal justice
system. These actions were consistent with a larger government campaign to “save
the family” by maintaining a low divorce rate.
Female university students expelled since 1997 for wearing hijab, headscarves
that covered their faces, were as in the past not permitted to rematriculate unless
they removed their religious garb and agreed to pay tuition. All universities in
Uzbekistan were state-run, and only a small percentage of students were normally
required to pay tuition.
Government officials obstructed the registration of Christian and other non-
Muslim religious groups, depriving them of legal status in Uzbekistan. Proselytism
remained illegal. Authorities discouraged ethnic Uzbeks in particular from converting
to Christianity. In 2001 several churches reported that local officials rejected
congregation lists, required for registration, which included members with Uzbek
names.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
In 2001, the Uzbek government released two human rights activists who were
wrongly convicted, but it continued to harass and arrest others. One defender died
in police custody, an apparent victim of extrajudicial execution. In December 2000
President Karimov ordered the release of rights defender Mahbuba Kasymova of
the Independent Human Rights Organization of Uzbekistan (IHROU). A mother
of five, Kasymova served one and a half years of a five-year sentence on fabricated
charges brought in retaliation for her efforts to expose police abuse against independent
Muslims.However, shortly after her release, authorities in Tashkent briefly
detained Kasymova and threatened to arrest her again if she continued to monitor
trials of those brought up on religious charges.
Seven months after Kasymova’s release, on July 3, another IHROU defender,
Ismail Adylov, was released from prison after serving two years of a seven-year term on wholly spurious charges that he was a member of a banned religious organization.
Upon his release Adylov revealed that prison authorities had denied him medical
attention and had systematically beaten him during his incarceration. The
authorities attempted to deny Adylov an exit visa—official permission still necessary
for travel abroad—to travel to the United States to be honored for his human
rights work. Only after intense intervention by diplomatic representatives, particularly
the U.S. government, did the authorities grant Adylov permission to travel.
The chairman of the IHROU, Mikhail Ardzinov, continued to be denied his
passport,which was confiscated at the time of his detention in 1999.Uzbek citizens
must carry their passports with them at all times; travel within the country is difficult
without this form of identification and travel outside the country is impossible.
Persons without passports are routinely denied their pensions or other
government assistance.
Any perceptions that the Karimov government grew more tolerant of rights
defenders were shattered when police apparently tortured to death Shovruk Ruzimuradov,
a long-time dissident and activist in the Human Rights Society of
Uzbekistan (HRSU). Officers arrested Ruzimuradov, forty-four, on June 15 in his
hometown in southwestern Uzbekistan, and held him incommunicado for some
twenty-two days before returning his corpse to his family on July 7.
Police blocked all entry within one kilometer of the Ruzimuradov home and
turned away fellow rights defenders who traveled from Tashkent to view the body
and attend the funeral services. Police threatened to arrest the activists and “tear
[them] to pieces” if they investigated the case further, and expelled them from the
area.A preliminary report issued by state authorities gave the cause of death as “suicide
by hanging.” Shortly before his death, Ruzimuradov had spoken out publicly
on the arrest and conviction of seventy-three men from Surkhandaria province, on
charges of collaborating with armed insurgents in 2000. He also advocated on
behalf of those forcibly displaced from Surkhandaria as part of the armed forces’
“mop up” operation there.
Other members of HRSU in Tashkent, Jizzakh, Khorezm, Andijan, and
Kashkadaria reported being temporarily detained, subjected to intimidating interrogation
and threats, and otherwise harassed in 2001.
On April 6, 2001, police detained Elena Urlaeva, a member of HRSU who
worked on behalf of people dispossessed of their homes by city authorities.Authorities
forcibly committed her to a state mental hospital, where staff systematically
medicated Urlaeva during two months of confinement, causing her severe medical
problems. Finally,on June 30, 2001, after considerable international outcry,Urlaeva
was allowed to leave the hospital and return home. However, on November 6, law
enforcement agents raided the office of the state human rights ombudsman,where
they arrested Urlaeva. Police cleared the office, searched Urlaeva, and took her into
custody.The rights defender was first held under armed guard in a hospital ward in
Tashkent and then transferred to a police holding facility. She was released on
November 16.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In March 2001, the U.N.Human Rights Committee considered Uzbekistan’s initial
report on compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. The committee’s concluding observations were frank and highly critical of
the government’s report and its lack of progress implementing basic rights. The
committee expressed grave concern regarding reports of torture and inhumane
treatment and stated that such allegations should be investigated and persons
responsible prosecuted. It also expressed concern about impediments to detainees’
access to legal counsel, prison conditions, particularly deaths in prison, and forced
displacement of villagers. It added that it “deplores the State party’s refusal to reveal
the number of persons who have been executed or condemned to death, and the
grounds for their conviction . . . .”
In its February concluding observations on Uzbekistan’s initial report, the U.N.
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women requested that
the government “. . . enact laws on violence, especially on domestic violence, including
marital rape, as soon as possible and . . . ensure that violence against women and
girls constitutes a crime punishable under criminal law and that women and girl
victims of violence have immediate means of redress and protection.” The committee
also requested that the Uzbekistan government provide more information
on the trafficking of women and girls.
European Union
The E.U.-Uzbekistan Cooperation Council met in January 2001 to discuss
implementation of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), signed in
July 1999. The two parties agreed to intensify cooperation in the areas of trade and
investment, and to continue political dialogue. The E.U. reportedly raised human
rights and rule of law issues, and future E.U. assistance to Uzbekistan for training
members of the judiciary.The PCA requires that partner states guarantee basic civil
and political rights. The statement following the January meeting praised the
Uzbek government for granting the ICRC access to prisons.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
In December 2000, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) renegotiated its presence in Uzbekistan with the government, renaming its
office in Tashkent the OSCE Center. Similar centers had already been established in
the other Central Asian states.
The OSCE office undertook training sessions in women’s rights and continued
a series of training seminars for local rights defenders. Its representatives visited
Elena Urlaeva while she was forcibly confined to a mental institution.
A June visit to Central Asia by OSCE Chairman-in-office Mircea Geoana failed
to include meetings in Uzbekistan. The official explanation given by the government of Uzbekistan was scheduling problems. A subsequent visit to Uzbekistan in
October 2001 included meetings with President Karimov and other government
officials. Scheduling problems reduced a planned meeting between the chairmanin-
office and human rights defenders, a group at particular risk, to a very brief
forum together with journalists; the human rights leaders had no opportunity to
present issues of concern to the OSCE head.
United States
After years of relative obscurity in the U.S. foreign policy making community,
Uzbekistan became an essential U.S. ally in the post-September 11 coalition against
terrorism. As of this writing, it was too soon to judge whether the Bush administration’s
“qualitatively new relationship”with the Uzbek government would translate
into enhanced pressure for human rights improvements, or whether it would
be yet another squandered opportunity for leverage.
The United States’ diplomatic initiatives in late 2000 succeeded in pressing the
Uzbek government to allow the ICRC access to prisons.The agreement, finalized in
record time, marked the first formal acceptance by the government of Uzbekistan
of foreign monitors in prison and pretrial detention facilities. U.S. insistence on
Uzbekistan’s compliance with legislation known as the Cooperative Threat Reduction
program, which states that countries receiving assistance under this program
must be “committed to observing internationally recognized human rights,” also
resulted in the release from prison of prominent human rights activists Mahbuba
Kasymova and Ismail Adylov. U.S. intervention also aided Adylov in receiving an
exit visa to travel outside Uzbekistan in November 2001.
In October 2001, the U.S. government failed to designate Uzbekistan as a
“country of particular concern for religious freedom” under the terms of the 1998
U.S. International Religious Freedom Act.
The United States offered security and financial assistance in exchange for use of
an air base in Uzbekistan for the U.S. military operation in Afghanistan. At least
1,000 U.S. troops from the 10th Mountain Division were deployed to an Uzbek military
base by mid-October.Unofficial reports also indicated that U.S. bombers had
targeted the Afghanistan-based training camps of the IMU,which the United States
in 2000 had placed on a list of terrorist organizations.
After meeting with U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld during his
November visit to the region, Uzbek Minister of Defense Qodir Guliamov stated
that the military had benefited from training and joint exercises with U.S. forces
and hinted that he expected other types of aid to be forthcoming. “I am confident
that the kind of cooperation which is being developed now is characterized by a
higher level [sic], and consequently I am positive that the forms of our cooperation
with change accordingly,”Guliamov said. The September 11 events also brought to
light past U.S. assistance to, and joint covert operations with,Uzbekistan in efforts
against Osama bin Laden.
Recognizing the potential human rights consequences of military assistance to
Uzbekistan, the U.S. Congress adopted an amendment to the Foreign Operations
Appropriation Act with new reporting requirements. Under the amendment, the State Department must provide a list of U.S. security aid given to Uzbekistan, how
Uzbek units used the defense articles and services, and which units engaged in violations
of human rights or international humanitarian law during the reporting
period.
In 2001,Uzbekistan received $63.57 million in U.S. assistance and $136 million
in U.S. Export-Import Bank credits, which were granted through a certification
process that included human rights conditions.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Memorandum to the U.S. Government Regarding Religious Persecution in Uzbekistan,
8/01.
Sacrificing Women to Save the Family?: Domestic Violence in Uzbekistan, 7/01
Uzbekistan: “And it Was Hell All over Again . . .”: Torture in Uzbekistan, 12/00.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA
SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The December 2000 Serbian parliamentary elections consolidated the transition
from the authoritarian rule of former president Slobodan Milosevic, with the
Democratic Opposition of Serbia (DOS) winning 64 percent of the vote. In Montenegro,
the early elections in April 2001 served as an informal referendum about
the status of the smaller of the two Yugoslav republics. Pro-independence parties
only won slightly over half the votes, less than generally anticipated, but the ruling
coalition continued to boycott the work of the federal institutions. The authorities
in Serbia and Montenegro made little progress toward solving the federal constitutional
crisis, but the real risk of armed conflict under the Milosevic government
gave way to a political process.
On April 1, Serb authorities arrested Milosevic on corruption charges. Faced
with mounting pressure from human rights organizations, the United States, and
the European Union to surrender Milosevic for war-crimes prosecution before the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),Yugoslav President
Vojislav Kostunica and other officials argued that Milosevic’s transfer required
adoption of a law on cooperation with the ICTY first.The Yugoslav Ministry of Justice
drafted a law in June, but the Montenegrin partner in the federal coalition government,
the Socialist People’s Party (SNP), blocked its adoption. On June 23, the
cabinet, dominated by DOS members, adopted a cooperation decree in lieu of the
law. The Federal Constitutional Court, filled with appointees from the Milosevic era, stayed application of the decree while examining its constitutionality. To avoid
the emerging political and legal gridlock, the government of Serbia transferred
Milosevic to The Hague on June 28, invoking the Statute of the Tribunal and the
Constitution of Serbia as the legal basis.
Progress on accountability for wartime abuses was otherwise disappointing.
Serbian authorities arrested and surrendered to the tribunal indicted Bosnian Serb
Milomir Stakic on March 23, and Bosnian Serb brothers Nenad and Pedrag
Banovic on November 9. Blagoje Simic, another Bosnian Serb living in Serbia, surrendered
himself to the tribunal under pressure from the Serbian government, as
did retired General Pavle Strugar and former naval commander Miodrag Jokic,
who both had been indicted for crimes committed in Dubrovnik in 1991. Nonetheless,
at the time of this writing, at least four senior Yugoslav and Serb officials or
former officials remained at liberty in Serbia who were charged with crimes against
humanity committed by troops under their command in Kosovo, along with three
Yugoslav Army officials indicted on charges relating to the destruction of Vukovar
and two other officers indicted for crimes committed at Dubrovnik.
Public debate on crimes committed by Serb forces in Kosovo and Bosnia slowly
started in 2001. Between June and September, the police exhumed five mass graves
in Serbia, containing more than three hundred bodies thought to be Kosovo Albanians
killed by the police and the army during the 1999 NATO bombardment. In
an unprecedented move, the state-run television showed a BBC documentary
about the 1995 killings of more than 7,000 Bosnian Muslims in Srebrenica.
In contrast to the Milosevic era, the political opposition in Serbia could openly
express its views and operate free of government harassment.The new government
initiated criminal investigations into corruption and other charges against dozens
of former Milosevic cronies, with the proceedings apparently driven by the
demands of the rule of law rather than by political revanchism. Only one of these
cases had proceeded to trial as of October, resulting in convictions for former head
of Serbian State Security Radomir Markovic and two of his closest collaborators.
Their trial was closed to the public on grounds of state security, raising questions
about the fairness of the proceedings.
The Serbian parliament replaced fifty-seven of two hundred presidents of
municipal courts by July 2001, substantially clearing the judiciary of Milosevic
appointees. Although the new government stopped short of exerting direct pressure
on the judiciary, well-known judges repeatedly complained that pro-government
media and some politicians obstructed judicial independence by publicly
recommending criminal prosecutions and “appropriate” punishments.
An amnesty law adopted in February covered Kosovo Albanians convicted for
seditious conspiracy and armed rebellion, but not those convicted on terrorism
charges.When Slobodan Milosevic was ousted from power in October 2000, 850
Kosovo Albanian prisoners detained during the 1999 Kosovo war remained in Serbian
prisons. By August 2001, an estimated 225 Kosovo Albanian prisoners
remained, an estimated fifty of whom had been sentenced for political reasons in
unfair trials.
The new Serbian government generally respected freedom of expression. Some
media were closer to one or the other party in the political conflict between nationalist Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica and pro-Western Serbian Prime Minister
Zoran Djindjic, but neither leader directly controlled the state-run media or
major private outlets.
The media in Montenegro generally operated free of government intrusion. In
a surprising setback, on September 3, a court in Podgorica convicted the editor of
the opposition daily Dan on a charge of criminal libel and handed down a suspended
five-month prison sentence. The newspaper had published a series of
articles on cigarette smuggling, implicating a businessman associated with Montenegrin
President Milo Djukanovic.
The police practice of so-called informative talks, much abused during the
Milosevic era, occasionally reappeared in 2001. On May 29, State Security agents
interrogated student Milos Cvorovic, an activist in a nongovernmental group in
Belgrade, about his contacts with Kosovo Albanians. A reporter from Valjevo with
the daily Blic, Predrag Radojevic, was taken to the police station on July 12 for an
“informative talk” about his work as a journalist. Radojevic had written a series of
articles during the previous months on the presence of the mafia in the town. Blic’s
editor-in-chief Veselin Simonovic was also interrogated on August 14, following
the publication of an article about a former State Security agent who was killed on
August 3.
The authorities in Belgrade made positive steps toward reducing ethnic tensions
in the Presevo valley,where ethnic Albanians were a majority of the population.As
a result of months-long negotiations, armed Albanian groups there voluntarily disbanded
in May, and civilian life began returning to normal. At the end of May the
first multiethnic police patrols were deployed in the area, following a short training
course under the auspices of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).Two more courses were completed by mid-July.Nearly 4,000 of the
estimated 15,000 local Albanians who had left their homes during and after the
1999 Kosovo conflict returned in June and July 2001.
Police brutality against Roma was a common occurrence in 2001. On September
22, two policemen broke the arm of a fourteen-year-old boy in Novi Sad after
beating him and a group of other Roma children. Police in Leskovac detained Daka
Zekic, a seventy-six-year-old Roma for two days in January, deprived him of food
and water, and subjected him to beatings and racial insults. On March 5, four
policemen beat and uttered racial insults against Miroslav Milic, a Roma teenager
from Belgrade. On May 7, three police officers in Backa Topola beat up and uttered
racial slurs against two Roma villagers, Stevan Brancic and Sasa Gojkov. In a positive
development that may help counter these abuses, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia acceded to the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities on May 11.
According to a large-scale recount of refugees in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, 390,000 persons from Croatia and Bosnia were registered as refugees, a
30 percent drop from 1996 figures. The government failed to support the return of
Serb refugees to their pre-war homes in Croatia and Bosnia, while facilitating Serb
refugee integration in Yugoslavia. The Serbian commissioner for refugees stated
that between 230,000 and 250,000 internally displaced persons from Kosovo also
lived in Serbia proper.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
With the one known exception of the police interrogation of Milos Cvorovic,
human rights activists carried out their activities free of government intrusion.
The positive change reflected the fact that several human rights and minority
rights advocates, including federal ministers Goran Svilanovic,Momcilo Grubac,
and Rasim Ljajic, assumed prominent positions in the government. The Humanitarian
Law Center continued to be the leading source of reliable information on
the treatment of Roma, police brutality, and violations committed by all parties
in Kosovo. Among other leading human rights groups were the Helsinki Committee
for Human Rights, the Belgrade Center for Human Rights, the Yugoslav
Lawyers’ Committee for Human Rights, and the Leskovac Council for Human
Rights.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
On November 1, 2000, the General Assembly approved admission of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to membership in the United Nations. Yugoslav efforts
toward a peaceful settlement of the crisis in the Presevo valley won praise from the
Security Council in December 2000 and from the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights in April 2001.The commission expressed its concern at the continued detention
in Serbia of Kosovo Albanian political prisoners, however, and replaced the
long-standing mandate of its special rapporteur for human rights in the former
Yugoslavia with a special representative to examine the situation of human rights
in Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The special representative, Jose
Cutileiro, visited Yugoslavia at the end of August and the beginning of September.
Examining the first individual petition from Yugoslavia, the Committee against
Torture concluded on May 11 that Yugoslavia had violated its obligations under the
Convention against Torture since its government agencies had failed to investigate
promptly and effectively allegations regarding the torture ofMilan Ristic,who died
in February 1995 of injuries inflicted by the police.
The Federal Republic ofYugoslavia signed the Statute of the International Criminal
Court on December 19, 2000, and it ratified the statute on September 6, 2001.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Yugoslavia,which was suspended from the OSCE in July 1992, became a participating
state following a decision by the OSCE Permanent Council on November
10, 2000.An International Election Observation Mission, including representatives
of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and
the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly, concluded that the December 2000 elections in
Serbia were conducted in line with accepted international standards. An ODIHR mission also monitored the April 22 elections in Montenegro and found the entire
electoral process transparent. On March 16, the OSCE opened a mission office in
Belgrade.
Council of Europe
On November 9, 2001, Yugoslavia applied for Council of Europe membership.
In January, the Parliamentary Assembly granted special guest status to the Federal
Assembly of Yugoslavia and adopted conditions for membership. Among other
conditions, it called on Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the ICTY and to surrender
war crimes suspects, to carry out legislative reforms including the abolition of
the death penalty, and to amnesty political prisoners. On March 16, a Council of
Europe office was opened in Belgrade for a renewable one-year term. The Parliamentary
Assembly representatives who made up part of the International Election
Observation Mission that monitored the December 23, 2000, parliamentary election
in Serbia praised the way in which they were conducted. A delegation from the
Parliamentary Assembly also observed and positively assessed the elections in
Montenegro in April 2001.
European Union
After the fall of Slobodan Milosevic in October 2000, the European Union provided
200 million euros (U.S. $168 million) to help Serbia with electricity, heating
fuel, and food payments during the winter. On February 27, 2001, European Union
foreign ministers lifted all sanctions imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
since 1998, except the financial, trade, and travel restrictions on firms and individuals
connected to the Milosevic regime. On April 10, the European Commission
allocated the first part of a 240 million euros aid program for Yugoslavia to support
energy supply, healthcare, agriculture, and medium-sized companies. Included in
that sum was the allocation of 49.5 million euros for human rights projects. In mid-
July, the Council of Ministers invested 300 million euros in macro financial aid for
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, consisting of 225 million euros in loans and 75
million euros in grants.
While E.U. bodies called on the new authorities in Belgrade to cooperate with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, they failed to condition
financial assistance on the country’s cooperation. The European Parliament
called on the Yugoslav government to release all political prisoners by presidential
pardon or on the basis of an amnesty law.
In November of 2001, the European Union and a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Consultative Task Force met in Belgrade to discuss various topics, including democracy,
human rights and minority issues as well as regional cooperation and compliance
with international obligations. The commissioner for external relations,
Chris Patton, visited the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in October.The two parties
hoped to initiate discussions that would draw the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
closer to the European Union. Further meetings were expected in 2002.
United States
The U.S.Congress prohibited the continuation of economic aid to Belgrade past
March 31, 2001, unless Yugoslavia arrested and transferred those indicted by the
war crimes tribunal to its custody, cut off economic assistance to the Bosnian Serb
army, and took steps in democratization and minority protection. The conditionality
placed considerable pressure on Serb and Yugoslav authorities and contributed
to the eleventh-hour detention of Slobodan Milosevic on April 1. On April
2, the secretary of state certified the conditions for continued aid were present but
stressed that the United States’ support for the holding of an international donors
conference for Yugoslavia would depend on the country’s continued progress
toward full cooperation with the tribunal. Lack of progress and the refusal of the
United States to participate led to a postponement of the conference from May 31
to the end of June. On the eve of the conference, Serbian and Yugoslav officials
firmly committed themselves to cooperation, and on June 28 Slobodan Milosevic
was transferred to the custody of the tribunal.The United States participated at the
conference and pledged U.S.$182 million, the largest individual state pledge.
KOSOVO
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
In the third year of Kosovo’s international administration the human rights situation
in the province continued to be of serious concern. Violence and hostility
rendered normal life impossible for Serbs, Roma, and other minorities. Participation
of minorities in the November 2001 elections for the Kosovo Assembly gave,
however, some hope for the prospects of ethnic coexistence in the province. The
U.N. administration came under growing local and international criticism for
attempting to improve the security situation by curtailing fundamental rights.And
despite the efforts of the United Nations, the administration of justice continued to
suffer from judicial bias, inadequate enforcement of human rights norms, and poor
investigations of serious crimes.
Ibrahim Rugova’s Democratic League of Kosovo (Lidhja Demokratike e
Kosovës, LDK) overwhelmingly won the October 2000 municipal elections with 58
per cent of the overall vote and a majority in twenty-four out of thirty municipal
assemblies. The main parties led by former KLA commanders, the Democratic
Party of Kosovo (PDK), and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), fared less
well, receiving 27.3 and 7.7 percent of the vote, respectively.Members of the more
moderate LDK suffered numerous violent attacks in the months preceding the
election.Moreover, the elections were marred by the collective refusal of the Kosovo
Serb community to register and vote.While the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) pointed to the Belgrade authorities’ influence
over the Serb community’s decision, the preelection environment was rife with
incidents of violence and intimidation against members of the minority groups.
After the elections, the special representative of the U.N. secretary-general (SRSG), who exercises ultimate legislative and executive power in Kosovo, appointed
municipal assemblies in three localities with a majority Serb population. Representatives
of Kosovo’s Ashkalija,Bosniac, Egyptian, and Roma minority communities
generally accepted appointments to the new local government bodies.
In May 2001,UNMIK promulgated a Constitutional Framework for Provisional
Self-Government in Kosovo.The framework contained guarantees for the rights of
the minority communities and their members, including proportional or equal
representation in parliamentary committees, and safeguards against simple outvoting
by the majority on matters related to the minorities’ “vital interests.”
UNMIK retained exclusive authority in the sensitive areas of the judiciary, law
enforcement, and external relations. The framework incorporated into the document
a number of international human rights treaties that are directly applicable
in Kosovo. Its human rights chapter suffered, however, from two serious omissions:
the failure to incorporate the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the lack of any judicial review mechanisms through which individuals
and groups would enforce their constitutional rights. A special
constitutional chamber was established within the Supreme Court, but only governmental
actors were given standing to file motions with the chamber.
Whatever promise the new Constitutional Framework held for the future of the
Kosovo’s minorities, their members—the Serbs and Roma in particular—continued
to face severe threats to their personal safety, freedom of movement, and socioeconomic
well-being. The year 2001 saw some of the worst cases since the end of
the NATO campaign of organized violence targeting minorities, who make up a
disproportionate 20 percent of the victims of major crimes. In late January and
early February, Serb homes, churches, and cultural sites were damaged by mortar
fire and other similar attacks. Some of these sites had been designated for the
accommodation of potential returnees. On February 13, a convoy of Kosovo Serbs
en route to Strpce, escorted by peacekeepers of the multinational Kosovo Force
(KFOR), was the target of a shooting that left one person dead.Only three days later
a weekly convoy of civilian buses carrying about 250 Serbs to Gracanica, with a
KFOR escort of seven armored vehicles, fell victim to a brutal bomb attack killing
eleven people and injuring dozens. On April 18, the head of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia passport office in Prishtina, Aleksandar Petrovic, was killed in yet
another deadly bomb attack.
Attacks on minorities appeared to be increasingly focused and sophisticated.
Groups of Serbs and Roma returning from Serbia and other neighboring countries
were frequent victims of armed attacks. On November 9, 2000, three Ashkalija men
and a fifteen-year-old boy were shot dead, in execution style killings, a few days after
they had returned to Dosevac near Prishtina. Another group of Roma that had
recently gone back to Shtime was injured in a bomb attack on August 8. In August
2001 the first organized return of a group of fifty-four Serb refugees to Osojane was
followed by ethnic Albanian protests in nearby Istok.These and other incidents had
a devastating effect on the efforts of the international community to help refugees
and internally displaced persons return to their homes. The number of returnees
remained very small, and in some areas more minority residents were still leaving
Kosovo than returning.
Non-Albanians were not the only victims of organized violence. In November
2000, Xhemal Mustafa, a chief aide to Rugova and head of the Kosovo Information
Center, was assassinated in central Pristina. A pattern of politically motivated
killings which began in the spring of 2000 continued in 2001 with several attacks
against Kosovar Albanian political activists, generally LDK supporters. In April
2001, unidentified gunmen murdered Ismet Rraci,Mayor of Klina and chairman of
the local LDK branch. On September 1, the houses of two LDK officials from the
villages of Belobrod and Brodosavce were bombed.However, no other serious incidents
took place in the run-up to the November 17 general election, and the election
day itself was largely peaceful.
Twenty-six political parties and independent candidates, including representatives
of five minority groups, were certified by the OSCE to contest the November
election. These included a coalition of twenty Kosovo Serb parties and organizations,
named Coalition Return,which decided to register at the last minute. In contrast
with the 2000 municipal elections, Kosovo Serb and other minority voters
registered in large numbers: 70,000 within the province and an additional 100,000
in Serbia and Montenegro. And in spite of the drawn-out hesitation both in Belgrade
and among the Kosovo Serbs about their participation in the vote, about 46
percent of all eligible Kosovo Serb voters turned out to vote on November 17. In
northern Kosovo,where Serbian extremists were responsible for widespread intimidation
of voters into abstention, the participation of ethnic Serbs was considerably
lower than the average.
Trafficking of women into Kosovo for forced prostitution continued to surge in
2001: the International Organization for Migration reported that 160 trafficked
women and girls received repatriation assistance between February 2000 and May
2001. Implementation of a new UNMIK regulation providing for victim and witness
assistance came slowly, and only a handful of prosecutions went forward. The
United Nations disciplined four civilian police officers for alleged involvement in
trafficking. According to a report issued by the OSCE Legal Systems Monitoring
Section, women who brought charges for domestic violence, rape, or trafficking
faced bias, discrimination, and contempt from the judicial system, and the average
sentence for sexual violence cases declined from three years to one year.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The Humanitarian Law Center (HLC) looked into allegations of unlawful
detention and monitored trials against Kosovo Serbs charged with war crimes and
other serious offences. In one case it protested to UNMIK when international
authorities at the Mitrovica prison denied an HLC attorney access to his clients and
conducted unlawful searches of his effects. The Council for the Defense of Human
Rights and Freedoms continued to monitor and report regularly on human rights
violations in the province. Although the council was still more sensitive to violations
of the rights of ethnic Albanians than those of non-Albanians, it condemned
attacks against minority members in stronger terms than in previous years. The
Ombudsperson Institution, which started work in November 2000, dealt mostly with complaints related to property rights, employment controversies,due process,
and personal security. The Ombudsperson,Marek Antoni Nowicki, issued a number
of public reports on human rights violations by the U.N. administration, and
requested the latter to remedy them. One report concluded that a 2000 regulation
on privileges and immunities granted to KFOR and UNMIK violated the property
and due process rights of Kosovar individuals; another report looked into the lawfulness
of cases of executive detention ordered by the SRSG and found them in violation
of the defendants’ rights to a fair trial.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In response to the unsatisfactory performance of the justice and law enforcement
systems, UNMIK created a new justice and police component and adopted
legislation to combat organized crime, weapons trafficking, and terrorism. But
these measures did not result in any significant improvement in the overall security
situation. Most major incidents of ethnic and political violence remained unresolved,
while the SRSG ordered the prolonged detention of certain suspects. Following
widespread criticism of its practices of administrative detention, in
September UNMIK set up a commission of international legal experts to make final
decisions on the legality of administrative detentions. A new UNMIK regulation
authorized potential victims of ethnic bias in the criminal justice system to request
that their case be tried by a panel with a majority of international judges.The number
of international judges and prosecutors, however, fell short of what was needed
to implement the regulation. UNMIK’s failure to adequately consult and involve
local and international organizations in drafting legislation also caused frustration.
Acting pursuant to an indictment charging Slobodan Milosevic and four other
Yugoslav and Serbian officials with crimes against humanity and violations of the
laws and customs of war committed in Kosovo, the Serbian authorities handed
Milosevic over to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia on
June 28, 2001. The tribunal was also investigating allegations of crimes committed
by the KLA during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo; however, it had issued no public
indictments at the time of writing. The U.N.’s special rapporteur on human
rights in the former Yugoslavia at the time, Jiri Dienstbier, reported in January and
March 2001 on the human rights situation in Kosovo. The U.N. Commission on
Human Rights appointed José Cutileiro as its special representative with a one-year
mandate to monitor the human rights situation in certain parts of the former
Yugoslavia, including Kosovo.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE Mission in Kosovo (OMIK) continued to monitor and report on the
situation of Kosovo’s minorities and the human rights performance of the justice
system. A February OSCE report highlighted the persistence of bias in criminal proceedings, the absence of habeas corpus procedures, and the lack of effective
access to defense counsel. The OSCE was particularly critical of several convictions
of Kosovo Serbs and Roma charged with war crimes and genocide, which its monitors
found inconsistent with the evidence presented in the courtroom. In one of
the genocide cases, the OSCE called for review of the sentence by a panel of international
judges. The organization of the November elections in line with international
standards was a major challenge for the OSCE, which cooperated with the
International Organization for Migration to open registration centers for Kosovo
refugees in neighboring countries.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
The 40,000-strong NATO-led KFOR made greater efforts in 2001 to cooperate
with the U.N. civilian police in confronting organized violence and crime. In a
number of cases, however, it refused to share information with U.N. officials investigating
serious crimes in which members of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC)
were thought to be implicated. In an attempt to address a major public relations
problem, KFOR offered to review Kosovar claims relating to land and properties
damaged or taken by its troops without compensation. Between November 2000
and June 2001 the ombudsperson received sixty-two compensation claims against
KFOR, despite making it clear that he lacked jurisdiction over the multinational
force.
European Union
In January 2001 the European Union called on the Belgrade authorities to
release Kosovo Albanian political prisoners detained in Serbia. E.U. officials condemned
the violent attacks against Kosovo’s minorities and threatened to withdraw
promised economic aid if violence did not stop. The European Union nevertheless
continued to be Kosovo’s main donor,with 362.5 million euros pledged in 2001 for
reconstruction assistance and humanitarian aid.
United States
The incoming U.S. administration avoided a blow to the stability of Kosovo and
the Balkans by declaring that the United States had no intention of withdrawing
troops unilaterally from the region. In July President Bush blacklisted five senior
KPC officers for their support of the ethnic Albanian armed insurgency in Macedonia.
The five were promptly discharged by the head of UNMIK. U.S. officials
came under criticism, however, for their alleged failure to support criminal investigations
involving top KPC officials, and in some cases for attempting to unduly
influence the investigations.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Under Orders: War Crimes in Kosovo, 10/01
MIDDLE EAST AND
NORTH AFRICA OVERVIEW
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Clashes between Israelis and Palestinians that erupted in September 2000
overshadowed most other developments in the Middle East and North
Africa region. Over seven hundred Palestinians and over two hundred Israelis,
many of them civilians,were killed in the violence by November 2001. The conflict
was marked by attacks on civilians and civilian objects by both Israeli security
forces and Palestinian armed groups, suggesting that respect for fundamental
human rights and humanitarian law principles counted for little among leaders of
either side.
Israeli security forces were responsible for extensive abuses, including indiscriminate
and excessive use of lethal force against unarmed Palestinian demonstrators;
unlawful killings by Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers; disproportionate
IDF gunfire in response to Palestinian attacks; and inadequate IDF response to
abuses by Israeli settlers against Palestinian civilians; and “closure” measures on
Palestinian communities that amounted to collective punishment. They also
mounted a series of killings of suspected Palestinian militants under a controversial
“liquidations”policy directed against those believed responsible for orchestrating
attacks against Israelis.
For its part, the Palestinian Authority (PA) did little to exercise its responsibility
to take all possible measures to prevent and punish armed attacks by Palestinians
against Israeli civilians, including suicide bombings. In addition, the various security
forces of the Palestinian Authority carried out arbitrary arrests of alleged Palestinian
“collaborators”with Israel.Many were held in prolonged detention without
trial and tortured; others were sentenced to death after unfair trials and two were
executed. The PA also arrested some Islamist and other militants suspected of
responsibility for attacks against Israelis and held them in untried detention. Both
Israeli and Palestinian authorities failed to take the necessary steps to stop the security
forces under their control from committing abuses, and failed to adequately
investigate and punish the perpetrators.
But even this current intifada dropped from international attention following
the devastating September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, and in some
cases governments in the region welcomed that shift of focus to justify their abusive
policies. Egypt’s leaders were quick to draw parallels that justified their government’s
harsh record. Prime Minister Atef Abeid decried human rights groups
for “calling on us to give these terrorists their ‘human rights,’” referring to documented
reports of torture and unfair trials, and suggested that Western countries should “think of Egypt’s own fight and terror as their new model.”President Husni
Mubarak was categorical: “those who carry out terrorist acts have no claims to
human rights.” In November, Egypt put ninety-four civilians, most of whom were
arrested in May, on trial before a military tribunal on charges of forming a secret
organization to commit terrorist acts. Three days after the September 11 attacks,
Israeli Defense Minister Binyamin Ben Eliezer noted, apparently with satisfaction:
“It is a fact that we have killed fourteen Palestinians in Jenin, Kabatyeh, and Tammum,
with the world remaining absolutely silent,” while Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon repeatedly referred to Palestinian Authority President Yasir Arafat as “our
Bin Laden.” In October, Jordan amended its penal code and press law in order,
according to Prime Minister Ali Abu Ragheb,“to cover all the needs that we are confronting
now.” The amendments empowered the government to close down any
publications deemed to have published “false or libelous information that can
undermine national unity or the country’s reputation,” and prescribed prison
terms for publicizing in the media or on the Internet pictures “that undermine the
king’s dignity” or information tarnishing the reputation of the royal family.
At the same time, the fact that key al-Qaeda leaders and most of the alleged perpetrators
of the September 11 attacks were nationals of Saudi Arabia and Egypt
prompted unprecedented discussion in the region as well as internationally concerning
the bleak rights records of those countries and of violations of human
rights across the region more generally.
By contrast, several initiatives taken across the region represented tentative but
important steps to investigate and hold accountable the perpetrators of gross
human rights violations, including torture, summary executions, and “disappearances.”
While the general pattern of violations across the region remained relatively
unchanged, with progress in some areas but deterioration in others, this growing
effort to bring to justice those responsible for past gross violations represented a
change, and one that appeared to bode well for the future. In some cases, alleged
perpetrators were prosecuted in domestic courts—in Iran, unfortunately, with a
frustrating outcome—while in other cases justice was sought abroad under the
principle of universal jurisdiction. As local human rights groups and lawyers continued
to call for an end to impunity and campaigned actively on behalf of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), it became increasingly clear that the international
justice movement had not bypassed the region but enjoyed growing support
there.
As these disparate yet determined efforts generated publicity, inspired others to
action, and put past and current human rights abusers on notice, they indicated
that a culture of accountability was beginning to develop in civil society and the
judiciary. Disclosures by former intelligence officials in exile also suggested that
impunity had become an issue within the ranks of some governments’ internal
security forces. In Egypt, a local criminal court sentenced the director of the maximum
security Wadi Natroun II prison to a ten-year prison term for forgery and fabricating
reports in an attempt to cover up the death under torture of a criminal
convict. The court also sentenced one of the prison’s senior officers to a seven-year
term and four sergeants to five years for beating the inmate to death. The court’s
judgment constituted a clear victory for Egypt’s beleaguered human rights community, which has long documented and criticized the prevailing climate of
impunity for torture and deaths in custody. In another case, however, an officer at
Cairo’s Agouza police station received only a two-year prison term for beating a
detainee to death.
In Iran, a court convicted fifteen intelligence officials in January in connection
with the 1998 killings of four intellectuals and political figures, and sentenced three
of them to death and five to life imprisonment.The proceedings were mostly secret,
however, and the trial was flawed, so information about who had ordered the murders
did not emerge. An attorney for two of the defendants sought to call ten witnesses
prepared to testify that former Minister of Intelligence Ghorbanali Dori
Najafabadi, now a senior judicial official, who had not been indicted, had ordered
the murders, but the court did not permit them to appear. Iranian investigative
journalists also reported on connections between the death squads and state institutions
and suggested that Dori Najafabadi and another former information minister,
Ali Fallahian, were involved. In August, the Supreme Court reversed the
convictions of the fifteen officials; in November, it remained unclear whether they
would be retried.
In Tunisia, President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali stated publicly more than once
that his government would hold abusive members of the security forces accountable,
but a climate of impunity generally prevailed and the justice system was
widely perceived as an element of state repression. In July, however, a court sentenced
four prison guards to four-year prison terms for torturing a criminal suspect
and ordered the state to pay the victim compensation.
In Morocco, the nongovernmental Moroccan Human Rights Association
(AMDH) publicly demanded that the justice minister bring charges against fourteen
alleged torturers, including still-serving senior security officials and a member
of parliament, but the minister did not do so. Subsequently, and perhaps as a consequence,
the authorities detained thirty-six AMDH and other activists when they
tried to hold a peaceful public protest in favor of accountability for past human
rights abuses; they were prosecuted and initially sentenced to three months in
prison, but then acquitted on appeal in November.
In Yemen too, despite a general climate of impunity, a court convicted three
Criminal Investigation Department (CID) police officers in November 2000 in
connection with the death of a detainee in custody, sentencing them to three-year
prison terms, loss of rank and dismissal. Relatives of the victim lodged an appeal,
seeking longer sentences commensurate with the offense. In November 2001, eight
members of Central Security, an arm of the Interior Ministry,were awaiting trial in
al-Dhali’ province for the premeditated murder of a member of the opposition
Yemeni Socialist Party; they were charged in July.
The search for justice also brought advocates to European courts to press their
claims, an effort that was foreshadowed in late 1999 when Bahraini exiles and
British human rights campaigners sought to initiate legal action in the United
Kingdom against Ian Henderson, former head of Bahrain’s notorious Security
Intelligence Service. Tunisian torture victims pursued legal action against former
Interior Minister Abdellah Kallel in Switzerland, where he was receiving medical
care; after a Swiss prosecutor opened a preliminary investigation, citing Switzerland’s obligations as a state party to the United Nations (U.N.) Convention against
Torture,Kallel quickly left the country.And in Belgium, survivors of the September
1982 massacre by Lebanese Phalange militia of hundreds of Palestinian and other
civilians at Sabra and Shatilla refugee camps in Beirut lodged a complaint against
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.He was Israel’s defense minister at the time of
the massacre and permitted the militia to enter the camps.Also, in late November,
a Jerusalem-based organization lodged a complaint in Brussels against Palestinian
Authority President Yasser Arafat, accusing him of crimes against humanity.
Activists in Morocco, aided by detailed disclosures in the country’s newspapers,
pressed for truth and accountability for the fierce repression practiced against dissidents
during the “dirty war” of the 1960s and 1970s. One high-profile case was
that of opposition leader Mehdi Ben Barka, who “disappeared” after he was picked
up on a Paris street by French police and driven away in a police vehicle in October
1965.An investigating judge in France initiated an inquiry but was unable to obtain
testimony from former Moroccan secret police officer Ahmed Boukhari, who
alleged that Ben Barka died in France under interrogation by Moroccan agents,
because Moroccan authorities imprisoned him on spurious charges. A coalition of
international human rights groups urged the U.S. and French governments to
declassify and release all official documents related to the case.
There were calls in Syria too for a hard look at several decades of brutal human
rights abuses, but the government rounded up leading dissidents in an undisguised
attempt to quash demands for reform and accountability. Human rights activist
Nizar Nayouf, in France for medical treatment after nine years of imprisonment in
Syria, insisted on efforts to address the horrors of his country’s political past,
including the summary execution of as many as 1,100 Islamist inmates at the infamous
Tadmor military prison.Members of the paramilitary Defense Brigades carried
out the killings over several hours on June 27, 1980, in retaliation for an
assassination attempt on then President Hafez al-Asad a day earlier.
Defectors from Iraq’s security apparatus continued to provide detailed information
about gross human rights abuses, although a legal case against Saddam
Hussein for crimes against humanity was yet to materialize. In November 2000, former
Iraqi intelligence officer Captain Khalid Sajed al-Janabi alleged that a March
1998 presidential directive to “clean up Iraqi prisons” resulted in the execution of
some 2,000 detainees and sentenced prisoners at Baghdad’s notorious Abu Ghraib
prison on April 27, 1998. A physician who worked in the prison’s hospital, and fled
to Jordan in July 2001, said that mass executions continued, mostly of political
detainees identified by number rather than name. In some cases, according to his
account, doctors were forced to inject detainees with poisons but attribute their
deaths to natural causes.
The growing but still nascent efforts to press for accountability for past abuses
were also reflected in the process by which governments in the region acceded to
the International Criminal Court treaty of July 17, 1998.The court,which will prosecute
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes if national
courts fail to respond, initially had a lukewarm reception from governments in the
region. Only Jordan signed the treaty in 1998, and Israel and Iraq were among the
seven states that voted against it. However, faced with a December 31, 2000, deadline to sign and thereby play a role in the development of the court, twelve countries
in the region did so, most of them in the closing weeks of 2000. Algeria,
Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Israel,Kuwait, Oman,Morocco, Qatar, Syria, the United Arab
Emirates, and Yemen thus joined 139 other states in endorsement of the court.Yet,
by November 2001, no country in the region had taken the crucial step of joining
forty-six other countries worldwide in ratifying the treaty. Sixty states must ratify
the ICC treaty before it comes into force.
Space for independent political activity remained a scarce commodity throughout
the region, with governments targeting both secularists and Islamists who
sought to challenge authoritarian rule or call for reform, including by pursuing
legitimate political activities such as standing for political office. The methods and
scope of repression varied from country to country, although politically divergent
ruling elites were united in their reluctance or refusal to open up stagnant political
systems, to accommodate a diversity of opinions, and to facilitate and protect the
growth of independent civil society institutions, including local media.
The impact of decades of strict constraints on peaceful opposition politics coupled
with severe punitive measures for those who defied authorities was shown to
carry ominous implications for stability and security. At best, it fostered a climate
of intimidation and self-censorship; at worst, it led individuals and groups into
clandestine, and in some cases violent opposition activities. In the aftermath of the
September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, many in the region and
beyond began to focus on the tough security policies of governments in the Middle
East and North Africa that have contributed to radicalizing disaffected political
activists, leading some of them to move their operations abroad.
Nationwide electoral democracy once again was revealed as a sham in Egypt, as
authorities rounded up Islamist opposition candidates in advance of the October-
November 2000 People’s Assembly elections and the May-June 2001 contest for
eighty-eight seats on the Consultative Council.Although these elections took place
for the first time under full judicial supervision, authorities seemed determined to
block peaceful Islamists, mostly members of the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood,
from participating in the political system and gaining more than a token number
of seats in the 444-seat lower house of parliament, still overwhelmingly controlled
by President Husni Mubarak’s ruling National Democratic Party. They detained
hundreds of known or suspected members of the Muslim Brotherhood both before
and during the elections, including candidates and their supporters. In November
2000, the military court sentenced fifteen defendants linked to the Muslim Brotherhood
to prison terms of three to five years.Most were lawyers, university professors
or other professionals involved in electoral politics. Similar blatant repression
occurred in advance of the consultative council elections, with at least 140 Muslim
Brothers arbitrarily arrested starting in mid-April, including candidates. All of
them were later released without charge.
The power struggle in Iran between conservatives and reformers continued,
despite the overwhelming electoral victory of President Mohamed Khatami,
returned to office for a second successive term in June.The conservative clerics who
controlled the judiciary and other institutions used their power to eliminate the
country’s independent pro-reform newspapers and other publications, and to imprison peaceful advocates of political reform, including investigative journalist
Akbar Ganji, student leader Ali Afshari, and veteran politician Ezzatollah Sahhabi.
In March, the Tehran Revolutionary Court ordered the closure of the Freedom
Movement, a group that had long advocated constitutional Islamic rule with
respect for democratic principles, and the group’s leaders were among sixty political
activists detained in March and April. Ayatollah Hossain Ali Montazeri
remained under house arrest in Qom, despite mounting protests, though his critical
analysis of Iran’s political system continued to circulate widely on cassette tapes,
the Internet, and through photocopied statements.
In Syria, as the government was releasing long-term political prisoners, many of
them Islamists detained in the early 1980s, ten reform-minded secular activists
were targeted for arrest and prosecution. The arrests followed the de facto closure
earlier in the year of the country’s independent civil forums, the lively discussion
groups that emerged amid the easing of controls following the death of President
Hafez al-Asad, breathing welcome life into a civil society that had been virtually
moribund during decades of repression. President Bashar Asad forewarned of the
clampdown when he declared in February that “the development of civil society
institutions must come at a later stage and they are not therefore among our priorities.”
Trials of two of the reformers, parliamentarians Riad al-Seif and Mahmoud
al-Homsi, were underway in a criminal court in November 2001. Eight others—
including former political prisoner Riad al-Turk, prominent academic Arif Dalila,
and other civil forum activists—were then behind bars, awaiting trial in the State
Security Court.
In neighboring Lebanon, calls increased for the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty
and full independence from Syria, including public demonstrations led by
students and other anti-Syrian political activists. The redeployment of some 6,000
Syrian troops from most of metropolitan Beirut, which occurred in June, seemed
only to embolden Lebanese to press more vocally for a full Syrian withdrawal.Cardinal
Nasrallah Sfeir, the Maronite Catholic patriarch and a leading critic of Syrian
dominance over Lebanon, commented that there was still “a long way to go before
there are balanced ties.” The arrest of over two hundred Christian anti-Syria
activists in August, with the apparent approval of the Syrian president, generated
public uproar across Lebanon’s political spectrum, including charges that the state
was being transformed into a military dictatorship under President Emile Lahoud,
the former army commander.
The Lebanese army defended the roundups by saying it had acted in Lebanon’s
“high national interest,” but the president of the Beirut Bar Association, Michel
Lian, condemned the arrests as illegal, noting that under Lebanese law “security
agencies are not part of the judicial police and therefore have no right to arrest
people.” Those targeted were members or supporters of the disbanded Lebanese
Forces (LF) and the Free Patriotic Movement, aligned with imprisoned-for-life LF
militia leader Samir Geagea and exiled Gen. Michel Aoun, respectively. Among
them were ten students hastily convicted in the military court for “distributing
leaflets harming the reputation of the Syrian army and of defaming the president
of the Lebanese republic,”and sentenced to terms of five to forty-five days in prison.
Others were charged with “acts, writings and speeches not allowed by the government and which puts Lebanon in danger of aggressive acts and disturbs its relations
with a sisterly state.” On August 10, Lebanon’s Central Security Council warned of
the ongoing restrictions on freedom of assembly, stating that “any political group
that does not enjoy an official license or permit is banned from staging demonstrations
or organizing strikes.”University students united to protest the intrusion onto
the campus of St. Joseph University on November 21 of Internal Security Forces
(ISF) troops,who removed photographs of plainclothes intelligence agents assaulting
students and others at an earlier demonstration to protest the August arrests.
The photos were part of a student display that included Lebanese flags draped in
black ribbons, a reference to Syria’s domination of the country. One student leader
termed the ISF action “a continuation of the militarization of the regime.”
The extremely poor human rights conditions in “closed” countries such as Iraq
and Saudi Arabia remained beyond the detailed scrutiny of independent local or
international monitors due to the utter lack of freedom of expression and association
there, and the ongoing lack of access for outsiders. Critics, whether of secular
or religious orientation, had no space to exercise basic rights, leaving in place distorted
political enterprises beholden to an authoritarian dictator, as in the case of
Iraq, or an all-powerful ruling family, as in the case of Saudi Arabia.
The year saw positive developments during the year in Bahrain. In a national referendum
in February, Bahraini citizens—men and women—overwhelmingly
approved a National Charter that established a two-chamber legislature. Prior to
the vote, Shaikh Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, the country’s amir, or ruler, announced
an amnesty for more than four hundred persons detained or facing charges for
security-related offenses, a category covering most of the country’s political prisoners.
More than one hundred Bahrainis who had been exiled abroad were allowed
to return, and more did so later.
In the weeks following the referendum, the amir abolished the 1974 State Security
Law, under which thousands of persons had been detained for years without
trial, and the State Security Court, the procedures of which failed to meet international
fair trial standards. In July, an amiri decree set up a general prosecuting
authority under the Ministry of Justice, effectively removing prosecutorial authority
from the Interior Ministry.
Other needed reforms in the penal code and laws governing publications and
associations remained under study by a National Charter committee headed by the
prime minister. A separate committee was charged with proposing amendments to
Bahrain’s 1973 constitution, whose provisions governing civil liberties had been
effectively suspended by the government since 1975. Article 18 of the penal code,
which prohibits political activity, remained in place. No political parties had been
set up, but several political groupings—the Islamic National Reconciliation Society,
the National Democratic Front, and the Association of the Arab and Islamic
Center—were reportedly permitted to register as social and cultural organizations.
Meetings and gatherings in clubs and professional associations continued after the
referendum, although this remained technically illegal, and many Bahrainis felt
that the greatest gains were made in the realm of freedom of expression, but were
concerned about the lack of concrete steps to codify basic rights protections and to
monitor implementation of announced reforms. These concerns were heightened in July when the official General Organization for Youth and Sports insisted that
organizations secure prior approval for public meetings and adhere to guidelines
promoting national unity, and in November with the publication ban against
prominent columnist Hafez al-Sheikh.
With Internet use growing around the region, authorities in several countries
tried to restrict its use for circulating independent information and views. Saudi
authorities made no secret of their determination to continue blocking online
political content that they deemed objectionable, and foreign companies all-tooeagerly
bid for the contract to help the government censor what Saudis could
access. Tunisian authorities continued to periodically bar Tunisians’ access to websites
of human rights organizations and foreign newspapers likely to contain critical
coverage of the government. Egypt, a country that had a tolerant approach to
online content, carried out its first arrest of an Egyptian for something he had
posted on a foreign server.Police arrested Shohdy Naguib on November 22 for having
posted a provocative political poem by his late father, Naguib Surour, on his
website, www.wadada.net, which was hosted in the U.S. Three days later, Naguib
was released on bail and faced possible obscenity charges in connection with the
poem. In Morocco, another country with a good record of tolerating online expression,
the government was alleged to have temporarily blocked sites maintained by
al-‘Adl wa’l-Ihsane, an Islamist political movement. Earlier, that movement had
used the Internet in an exemplary anti-censorship fashion, electronically circulating
video clips that showed police beating their sympathizers during demonstrations—
scenes that never aired on Moroccan television. In Algeria,where cybercafes
were proliferating and there were no reports of website blocking, police in one city
invited cybercafe owners to report on users who accessed “subversive” sites.
There was an ironic turn of the tables in October, when the U.S. government
attempted to pressure the emir of Qatar, during a state visit to Washington, to rein
in the region’s popular al-Jazeera satellite television station,which is headquartered
in Doha.The emir and other Qatari authorities publicly defended the station’s right
to broadcast its own programming and commentary, despite the fact that the U.S.
found objectionable some of its reporting from Afghanistan and coverage of
Osama bin Laden. “Because this comes from the United States, which considers
itself the strongest advocate of freedom of expression, it comes as very strange and
unacceptable,” Jazeera’s news editor Ahmed Sheikh said in an interview.
Women across the region had their rights compromised based solely on gender,
suffering from severe forms of institutional and societal discrimination in nearly
every aspect of their lives. Despite some positive developments, tens of millions of
women continued to be denied full equality, with religion, culture, and tradition
often cited to justify their continued subservience. Perpetuation of inequality was
linked to unequal personal status laws—most notably in areas related to marriage,
divorce, inheritance, and child custody—and the lack of effective legal redress for
crimes of domestic violence.Women continued to fall victim to so-called “honor
crimes,” in which male family members murdered women relatives to restore family
“honor”—and the perpetrators typically enjoyed impunity. See Women’s
Human Rights. In many states, discriminatory laws remained in effect that did not
permit women to pass on their nationality to their children.
Saudi Arabia was the most extreme example, with women forced to observe an
austere public dress code, denied the right to identity cards in their own names,
prohibited from driving vehicles, and subject to strict segregation in education,
employment, and all public venues. Moroccan and Algerian authorities took no
decisive action during the year to reform the highly discriminatory codes of personal
status.Women in Kuwait were still denied the right to vote and they continued
to mobilize for the franchise. Saudi Arabia had no democratically elected local
or national legislative institutions, and there were no women on the appointed
Consultative Council.
Bahrain provided a potentially welcome departure from the prevailing scenario
with the establishment of the Supreme Council for Women by a decree of the emir
on August 22, and the November decision by the Shura Council to support
Bahrain’s accession to the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).Abdul Aziz Al Fadhel, minister
of state for Shura Council Affairs, stated that the decision to sign the convention
was based on article 2 of Bahrain’s constitution, which states that the Shari’a is the
main source of the country’s legislation, and article 18,which stipulates that all citizens
are equal and have the same rights and duties.
In another positive development, Egypt’s prosecutor general rejected on May 23
complaints filed against the well-known feminist writer, Nawal al-Sa’dawi, by a
lawyer who called for her to be forcibly divorced from her husband on grounds of
her alleged apostasy.The case was brought following remarks she had made on religious
issues during a media interview in March. The plaintiff also filed a separate
case against al-Sa’dawi before the Personal Status Court,which ruled on July 30 that
the case was inadmissible.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
The human rights movement in the region maintained its vitality despite alarming
prosecutions of activists in Egypt, Morocco, Syria, and Tunisia. Defenders
sought to make the most of somewhat greater openness in a few countries, while
well-established human rights communities elsewhere fought to defend their activities
and mandates. Determined and courageous individuals pushed the boundaries
of public openness in Morocco, Iran, Syria, and Tunisia, in some cases at a
price. In sharp contrast, Saudi Arabia, Libya, and Iraq retained policies of absolute
intolerance to any human rights related activity, and there were no human rights
organizations in Qatar, Oman, and the United Arab Emirates. Some governments,
including Egypt and Syria, relied on vaguely-worded laws to intimidate, stifle, or
prosecute local human rights defenders and limit or totally restrict their sources of
financial support from abroad.
Governments in Syria, Tunisia, Egypt, and Yemen manipulated their powers of
regulation of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in order to harass and
obstruct the activities of local human rights groups. In Egypt, the government
maintained its crackdown on human rights activists with the trial and May 21 conviction
of Saadeddin Ibrahim, director of the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies, and twenty-seven co-defendants. Egyptian NGOs continued their lobbying
efforts despite ongoing uncertainty over the amended draft of the Law on Civil
Associations and Institutions, presented to the Shura Council in April but not
debated by parliament by November. A new law on associations took effect in February
in Yemen, empowering the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs to supervise
NGOs and requiring the ministry’s approval for all foreign-funded activities.
Hopes of greater openness in Syria were dealt a blow when President Bashar al-
Asad’s government arrested activists in August and September, including Habib
Issa and Walid al-Bunni, who attended the July 2 founding meeting of the Independent
Human Rights Society in Syria, and Kamal Labwani, a member of the
administrative council of the Committees for the Defense of Human Rights. These
arrests followed a period in which Syrian intellectuals and human rights activists
had begun to exercise freedoms and speak out publicly in a manner impossible
under the previous regime.Human rights activist Nizar Nayouf was released from
prison in May after serving the majority of a ten-year prison sentence imposed in
1992, only to be informed in early September that the ruling Ba’ath party had filed
a new case against him.
Despite the lack of formally-constituted human rights organizations, debate
about human rights remained at the core of the power struggle in Iran between
conservatives and reformers. Eight reformist parliamentarians faced charges for
comments made under the cover of parliamentary immunity. In May, the International
Center for Dialogue Among Civilizations and a private university in Qom
hosted an unprecedented international human rights conference with a diverse
group of participants in Tehran.
Civil society and political figures also challenged the status quo in Tunisia,
despite heavy-handed governmental efforts to block their activities. At least four
women human rights activists were assaulted by police during the year, and one,
Sihem Ben Sedrine, was arrested on June 26 and detained until August 11. In
Morocco, human rights groups worked to end impunity for state officials responsible
for human rights abuses under the previous regime.
Bahraini human rights activists received official authorization in March to set
up the Bahrain Human Rights Association, the first independent human rights
monitoring group allowed in the country. In June, the association condemned
attacks in two government-supported daily newspapers against Lord Avebury of
the U.K., a long-time supporter of Bahraini rights groups, immediately prior to a
government decision to ban a visit to the country by Avebury. In an interview in Al-
Hayat on August 31, the association’s general secretary, Sabika al-Najjar, said it was
focusing on cases of persons still in exile or who lacked citizenship, and that the
organization had received government permission to visit the country’s prisons. In
November, the association vigorously protested a government ban on publications
by well-known political commentator Hafez al-Shaikh.
Violence in Algeria, Israel, and the Occupied Palestinian Territories impeded the
work of human rights defenders. Israeli authorities detained at least four Palestinian
field researchers from well-known human rights groups. The Palestinian
Authority denied human rights lawyers access to prisons under its control, and
arrested at least one Palestinian lawyer.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Human Rights Watch researched and reported on a wide-range of violations
across the region, with a particular focus on the use of force against civilians and
restrictions on freedoms of expression, assembly, and association.We condemned
efforts to gag the media or to silence dissidents and called for reforms of oppressive
laws enabling such actions.We challenged governments to be accountable and permit
investigations into past abuses, and we welcomed efforts to end impunity.We
criticized the absence of due process in legal proceedings in civilian and military
courts and sought to defend the independence of the judiciary against pressure and
interference by the executive branch of government.
Throughout the year we continued to look beyond the U.S. to European governments
and others for sources of influence on human rights violators in the
region. In dealing with offenders we sought both to focus on gross violators but also
to respond to new restrictions imposed in countries that claimed to have ended
abusive practices and permitted the exercise of basic rights.
Underpinning our effectiveness were our efforts to reach a broader segment of
the region’s population through faster and wider dissemination of our published
materials. We issued reports and communiqués in Arabic, Farsi, French, and
Hebrew, as well as English, using print, radio, television, and the Internet to substantially
improve their coverage in major regional and local media.
One of our highest priorities remained consultation and coordination with
local and regional human rights groups in order to develop effective strategies to
end abuses and address regional priorities.We also continued to defend those who
were persecuted for their human rights work and to pressure governments to provide
the space to enable them to conduct their work.
In February, we published on Bahrain, welcoming the release of most of the
country’s remaining political prisoners prior to a national referendum on proposed
political reforms. We called for the abolition of State Security Courts, an end to
unfair trials and to prolonged detention without trial, and urged that all Bahraini
exiles be allowed to return home.Human Rights Watch also supported the need for
Bahraini human rights activists to be allowed to establish independent nongovernmental
groups.
In the same month,we published a critique of Yemen’s referendum on constitutional
amendments and local elections, held the same day, that strengthened the
power of the president and the ruling General People’s Congress (GPC). In particular,
we drew attention to harassment of political activists,human rights defenders,
and journalists in the run up to the votes.
In March, we presented a memorandum to the United Nations Human Rights
Committee on Syria’s compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.We welcomed the improvements since Bashar al-Asad replaced his
father as president in July 2000—including the release of some six hundred political
prisoners, the emergence of independent civic forums meeting openly and discussing
agendas for political reform, and the granting of a licence to the first
privately-owned newspaper since 1963—but we sounded a warning about the clampdown that threatened a return to state monopoly of all forms of public
debate.
We urged the committee to give particular attention to five issues: the stripping
of Syrian political exiles and their families, including children, of the right to maintain
or obtain Syrian nationality; discriminatory treatment of Syria-born Kurds;
discrimination against women under the personal status law and penal code;
accountability for violations of the right to life and other gross human rights
abuses; and violations of freedom of association.
In an eighty-two page report,Center of the Storm: A Case Study of Human Rights
Abuses in Hebron District, published in April, Human Rights Watch documented
excessive use of force and unlawful killings by Israeli forces, Palestinian targeting of
Israeli civilians, and a systematic policy of Israeli blockades and curfews that
amounted to collective punishment. The report also brought to light a disturbing
pattern of violence committed by Israeli settlers against Palestinian civilians in and
around Hebron, often committed with the knowledge of Israeli Defense Force
(IDF) soldiers in the area. We urged the Israeli government and the Palestinian
Authority to take immediate steps to stop abuses by the forces under their control,
and called for an independent, international monitoring presence in the West Bank
and Gaza Strip to monitor and report on Israeli and Palestinian abuses.
Also in April, we issued jointly with Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders a report, A Lawsuit Against the Human Rights League, An Assault
on All Rights Activists, detailing the Tunisian authorities’ actions against its human
rights critics, including police actions to block meetings of human rights organizations,
physical assaults on men and women activists, passport confiscations, and
interruptions in phone service.We urged the French and other European Union
governments to monitor the appeals court case against the Tunisian Human Rights
League,which opened on April 30, and to pressure the Tunisian government to stop
its harassment of human rights monitors.
In June, in the run-up to presidential elections in Iran, Human Rights Watch
published Stifling Dissent: The Human Rights Consequences of Inter-Factional Struggle
in Iran.This traced the conservative backlash that occurred after reformists won
a landslide victory in parliamentary elections in February 2000, in which political
and religious conservatives manipulated their control of the judiciary and the
Council of Guardians, and the office of the Leader of the Islamic Republic to clamp
down on pro-reformist media, political activists, intellectuals, and reform-minded
government officials. The report said more than thirty-five independent newspapers
and magazines had been closed down in the previous fourteen months and
condemned the use of arbitrary detention, unfair trial, political violence, and
restrictions on basic freedoms.
We issued a briefing on Egypt’s human rights record in October that examined
how more than two decades of emergency rule had been used not only against violent
opponents of the government but also to stifle peaceful critics and democrats.
It reported that torture remained widespread and that basic liberties such as the
rights to freedom of speech and association were sharply restricted. The briefing
also examined the confrontation between the state and Islamist armed political
groups, including al-Jihad, some of whose key figures were reportedly associated
with Osama bin Laden.
Throughout the year we also sought to defend those who were persecuted for
their human rights work. In January, we wrote to Tunisian president Zine el-
Abidine Ben Ali to protest various measures that stifled independent human rights
activity, including the one-year prison sentence imposed on Moncef Marzouki,
spokesperson of the National Council on Liberties in Tunisia, for “disseminating
false news.” In Egypt, we protested the May sentencing by the Supreme State Security
Court of human rights defender Saadeddin Ibrahim and twenty-seven codefendants
to between one and seven year prison terms in a politically motivated
unfair trial. In July, we welcomed the decision of Cairo’s Administrative Court to
overturn the government’s refusal for unspecified “security reasons” to register the
Egyptian Organization for Human Rights and called on the Egyptian government
to implement the ruling without delay. In Algeria, we protested the authorities’s
restriction of Mohamed Smaïn, including the confiscation of his passport and
national identity card, for his work on kidnappings, “disappearances,” and assassinations
in the western province of Relizane.
We expressed dismay at the conviction and sentencing of thirty-six Moroccan
human rights activists in May on charges of holding an illegal demonstration in
December 2000, organized by the Moroccan Association of Human Rights, to
demand an end to impunity for the perpetrators of human rights violations.
Almost a year later they were acquitted in a November 2001 appeal hearing.While
welcoming the acquittal Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International jointly
expressed concern in a published briefing that the right to assemble peacefully
remains sharply curtailed in Morocco.
Staff and other representatives of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East and North
Africa division traveled during the year to Egypt, Iran, Israel and the Occupied
Territories, Iraqi Kurdistan, Morocco, Tunisia, and Palestinian Authority-controlled
areas.Missions involved field research, dialogue with government officials,
trial observations, coordination with local and international groups and efforts at
outreach, and advocacy. Human Rights Watch requests for access to Algeria,
Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and Syria were not granted and remained pending at the end
of the year.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
The European Commission (E.C.), the executive arm of the European Union
(E.U.), issued a lengthy “communication”to the Council ofMinisters and the European
Parliament on May 8 proposing a more coherent and consistent E.U.
approach to human rights issues by “ensur[ing] that all E.C. assistance instruments
are mobilized in support of human rights and democratization objectives.” The
document included few concrete suggestions as to how this could be achieved,
however, in particular how to overcome the frequent reluctance of member states
and the Council ofMinisters to speak out against or take steps to end abuses in individual
countries.
The most noteworthy development in the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean “Barcelona Process” was the signing, on June 25, of the Association Agreement
with Egypt, after more than five years of negotiation. (See Egypt.) Previously
signed agreements with Jordan and the Palestinian Authority remain to be ratified
by some E.U. member states before coming into force, while negotiations continued
with Algeria, Lebanon, and Syria. Tunisia’s Association Agreement has been
operative since March 1998, Israel’s since June 2000, and Morocco’s since early
2000, but there was no significant public or official discussion as to how the poor
human rights records of those governments could be squared with article 2 of each
agreement,which states that it is premised on “respect for human rights and democratic
values.” One indication of the ambiguous status of human rights was the
Euro-Mediterranean conference of ministers of foreign affairs,meeting in Brussels
in early November. The group’s communiqué “welcomed the continuation of the
political dialogue, especially with regards to human rights, by means of national
and regional presentations making it possible to improve awareness and hence
mutual understanding of our partners’ reference systems.”
A U.S. Congressional Research Service study of transfers of conventional arms,
released in August, reported that almost 84 percent of the United Kingdom’s arms
deliveries to developing countries in the 1997-2000 period were to the Middle East.
The equivalent figure for France was more than 41 percent.
United States
The Bush administration entered office on January 20 determined to have a
lower profile than its predecessor in efforts to revive negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority. Secretary of State Colin Powell’s initial tour of the
region was to solicit support for changes in the U.N. sanctions regime on Iraq, an
effort that eventually failed to materialize owing to Russian resistance in the Security
Council.The administration’s plans to stay relatively removed from the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict did not prove realistic. The administration declined to name a
successor to Dennis Ross, who had served as special coordinator for the Middle
East, instead naming Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs William
Burns as U.S. chief negotiator. Secretary Powell visited the region in June in an
unsuccessful effort to bring about a ceasefire. The need to forge a political and military
coalition following the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington
sharply increased pressure on the administration to give greater attention to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In November, President Bush, in a speech to the U.N.
General Assembly, declared support for a Palestinian state. As the political and
security situation continued to deteriorate, the president sent retired Marine Corps
Gen. Anthony Zinni as a special envoy to the region. Secretary Powell said Zinni
would stay there “for as long as it takes” to bring about a negotiated settlement.
Issues of human rights and democracy did not figure significantly in U.S. public
diplomacy or foreign assistance programs related to the Middle East. The State
Department, in its fiscal year (FY) 2002 request to Congress, budgeted U.S. $7 million—
up from just under $4 million in FY 2001—under the heading ofMiddle East
Democracy. The presentation stated that these funds would be used to support
“democracy-related projects” of NGOs in Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Oman, and Yemen, as well as programs for judicial reform and “protection of human and private
property rights.” The funds would also be used to improve the capacity and
effectiveness of legislatures and elected advisory councils and to assist preparations
for fair elections in Morocco and Algeria. Of the individual country presentations,
human rights and democratic reform appear to be a substantial component of the
program only for Morocco. Tunisia was implausibly characterized in the presentation
as a “stable democratic country,” and U.S. promotion of democracy in Tunisia
was limited to funds for training Tunisian military officers.
Funding under the Anti-Terrorism Assistance (ATA) program, according to the
State Department presentation, included working with participating countries “to
increase respect for human rights among foreign police by sharing modern,
humane and effective antiterrorism techniques.”The presentation did not say what
proportion of the $38 million requested would be for such programs, or which
countries were included. Some $4.7 million of the total was earmarked for the Middle
East.
The fact that the top leadership of al-Qaeda and most of the alleged perpetrators
of the September 11 attacks were nationals of Saudi Arabia and Egypt focused
considerable media and other attention on the authoritarian character of those
states’ governments, both close U.S. allies. The attacks stimulated some public
reflection on U.S. neglect of democracy and human rights issues in the region. Secretary
Powell, testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on October
25, acknowledged that “[in] many of these nations, leadership does not
represent the street.” Secretary Powell went on to say, “I have started to raise these
issues and talk to some of our friends in the region and say, you know, in addition
to sort of criticizing us from time to time and terrible editorials about us in your
newspapers, better start taking a look in the mirror.”
On October 31, Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Rights and Labor
Lorne Craner, in a speech on “The Role of Human Rights in the administration’s
Foreign Policy Agenda,” included a paragraph on the Middle East.After discussing
China, he said: “Similarly, in the Persian Gulf, Oman is experimenting with an
increasingly independent legislature and Qatar will hold local elections, with
women voting, in 2003.No one, least of all me, would claim any of these countries
are democracies, and it may be that the end result,many years from now, is not precisely
comparable to our democratic system. The point is that the United States is
now willing to assist those working to bring pluralism to their countries, even if it
may only occur over the long term.”
According to the Congressional Research Service’s annual report on conventional
arms sales, the U.S. delivered $26.4 billion in arms to the Middle East in the
1997-2000 period, or just over 62 percent of all U.S. deliveries to developing countries.
Saudi Arabia ($16.2 billion), Israel ($3.9 billion), Egypt ($3.6 billion), and
Kuwait ($1.5 billion) were the largest recipients.
ALGERIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
More than 1,500 people were killed in a tenth successive year of endemic political
violence involving the security forces and armed groups claiming to be Islamist.
The casualty level, although down from the mid-1990s, refuted official claims that
the violence was “residual.”As well as security force members and militants killed
in clashes and ambushes, the casualties included hundreds of civilians who were
indiscriminately attacked in their homes, at roadblocks, and in public places.
The year also saw the first mass popular protests since a state of emergency was
imposed in 1992. The protests were concentrated in the Berber-majority Kabylie
region. According to local nongovernmental organizations, over ninety civilians
died in the unrest, most of them victims of shootings by the security forces.
In the realm of public freedoms, Algeria presented a mixed picture. Massive
anti-government demonstrations were sometimes permitted, at other times forbidden
or aggressively broken up.Revisions to the penal code threatened press freedom,
yet private newspapers continued to criticize President Abdelaziz Bouteflika
daily.
Sweeping impunity prevailed for the perpetrators of massive human rights violations
on all sides of a conflict that has claimed well over 100,000 lives.
The 1999 “Civil Harmony” law offering amnesty or leniency to surrendering
militants, known as repentis, failed to end the political violence. There were apparently
few new surrenders in response to President Bouteflika’s suggestion in February
that the amnesty offer was still available even though the deadline specified in
the law had passed. In June, the level of violence increased and spread to regions
that had been relatively spared in recent years.
Much of the violence was blamed on two armed groups that had rejected the
amnesty, the Armed Islamic Group (Groupe islamique armé, GIA) and the Salafist
Group for Preaching and Combat. According to the often-sketchy available information,
the GIA slaughtered civilians indiscriminately and systematically while the
Salafist Group frequently targeted members of the security forces and governmentbacked
militias, but also killed civilians.Attribution was often difficult because the
assailants usually fled without being apprehended and rarely claimed responsibility
or explained their motives.
The governorates (wilayas) of Tipasa,Medea, Chlef, and Mascara were particularly
affected,while the Mitidja south of the capital suffered a resurgence of attacks.
On February 10, for example, an unidentified group of armed men gunned down
four families living in a shantytown near the city of Berrouaghia. Most of the
twenty-six killed were women and children. On August 12, in one of numerous
attacks committed by men who had set up roadblocks on intercity roads, seventeen
passengers were killed by armed men dressed in military uniforms in the wilaya of
Mascara. On September 26, attackers invaded a wedding party in the city of Larbaa, killing thirteen in attendance and nine others who happened to be in their path,
according to reports in Algerian private newspapers.The terror drove thousands of
Algerians toward more urban areas that offered relative safety but also social and
economic hardship.
A total of some 6,000 militants had applied for amnesty since the Civil Harmony
law went into effect in July 1999, according to government statements made during
2001. A de jure blanket amnesty was given to members of the two armed groups
that had formally agreed to disband in January 2000. Amnesty-seekers from other
groups were required to disclose their past deeds to government-controlled probation
committees. These bodies were charged with conducting investigations and
deciding whether applicants should be exempt from prosecution or, if they were
suspected of committing serious crimes, face reduced sentences.
In practice, the probation committees tended to exonerate repentis after a cursory
examination, according to victims’ rights groups. As a result, suspected assassins
were reportedly cleared to return home without punishment, even though the
Civil Harmony law states that persons who participated in killings or rape are disqualified
from receiving probation or reduced sentences.
Prime Minister Ali Benflis told European Parliament member Helène Flautre in
May that some four hundred surrendering militants were facing prosecution, but
this figure could not be independently verified. The committees operated behind
closed doors, and excluded victims, their survivors, and the public from their deliberations.
Even if accurate, the figure of four hundred prosecutions would represent
only 7 percent of the militants who were reported to have turned themselves in.
More than ninety Algerians were reported killed during street protests that
began on April 21 and continued sporadically for months. The demonstrations
were sparked by the death on April 20 of Berber high school student Guermah
Massinissa, who, two days earlier, had been shot while in custody in a gendarme
barracks. Local youths rejected gendarmerie claims that the shooting was accidental
and alleged that the gendarmes had increasingly harassed the local population
in the preceding months.
Many of the protests in the Kabylie were peaceful but in others, protesters threw
stones or Molotov cocktails at gendarmes, and damaged public buildings and property,
as well as private businesses. During the first and bloodiest week, gendarmes
repeatedly opened fire on protesters without warning, using live ammunition.They
also beat wounded persons and others not involved in the protests, according to
many eyewitnesses.
The demonstrators demanded, among other things, recognition of the Berber
language and cultural identity and the withdrawal of the gendarmes from the
region. In June, the street rallies spread to other regions, fueled by local grievances
over corruption, joblessness, and housing allocations.
On April 30, President Bouteflika announced an independent probe into the
events. On May 2, he named a respected jurist,Mohand Issad, to head it. The commission’s
interim report,made public three months later, contrasted favorably with
previous government-ordered inquiries that either were whitewashes or never
came out at all. The commission found that the gendarmes had “kept the pot boiling
by shooting live ammunition, ransacking, plundering, provocations of every sort, obscene language, and beatings.” It concluded that self-defense claims could
not justify the gendarmes’ fatal shooting of fifty civilians and the wounding of
another 218 by gunfire between April 22 and 28. During this period, it noted, one
security force member died, by electrocution, although many were injured.
The commission’s interim report did not identify gendarmes or officers responsible
for the excessive use of lethal force. Issad promised to resume the inquiry in
August, but further findings were unavailable as this report went to press.
Shortly after President Bouteflika’s address on April 30, security forces began
showing greater restraint in their use of live ammunition. Authorities also reassigned
many of the troops suspected of acting harshly, and deployed riot police
units who used teargas more than live bullets.
These factors helped to reduce casualties despite the larger and more widespread
nature of the protests during May and June. On May 21 and 31, huge demonstrations
were held, first in Tizi-Ouzou, then in Algiers. But on June 14, a Berber-dominated
march of about half a million people in the capital degenerated into looting
of shops and clashes involving the police, demonstrators, and local youth. Over
three hundred were injured and four killed. Many of the hundreds detained by
police were unaccounted for during several days; however, all were eventually
released.
On June 18, President Bouteflika banned all demonstrations in Algiers “until
further notice.” Police were deployed massively in the city and on roads leading
from the Kabylie to thwart would-be demonstrators. Pre-announced marches were
blocked in this manner on July 5,August 8, and October 5.
On October 3, Prime Minister Ali Benflis met with Berber community representatives
and announced that President Bouteflika had promised several initiatives.
These included amending the constitution to make the Berber language,
Tamazight, a national language; compensating victims of the disturbances; prosecuting
those responsible for crimes and killings during the clashes; and restructuring
the security forces in those areas of the Kabylie where abuses had taken place.
As of October, there was no verifiable information available about prosecutions of
security force members responsible for abuses during the protests, although there
were unconfirmed reports of arrests.
State-controlled television and radio remained government mouthpieces, usually
ignoring major demonstrations and massacres that were covered on locally
available European and Arab stations. Opposition politicians received little or no
television coverage except during the regularly broadcast sessions of parliament.
Private newspapers,by contrast,often criticized government actions,publishing
eyewitness accounts of the gendarmerie’s suppression of demonstrations, and
speculating openly about President Bouteflika’s future in office. However, they
exercised self-censorship concerning the army’s role in politics.
In June, El-Watan and el-Khabar became the first national dailies to print part
of their daily circulation at a private press, loosening the indirect editorial pressure
that accompanied the state’s near-monopoly on printing.However, revisions to the
penal code that took effect in July lengthened prison terms and increased fines for
defaming or insulting the president, state institutions, or officials. The amendments
were justified by officials as necessary to “preserve the dignity of the state and to protect individual and collective freedoms.”As this report went to press, no journalist
had yet been charged under the new amendments,which also curbed speech
in mosques by lengthening to five years the maximum sentence for delivering sermons
“capable of harming social cohesion.”
Entry visas for foreign reporters were sometimes approved, sometimes ignored
without explanation. Country specialists at the Paris dailies Libération and Le
Figaro were prevented from visiting during much of the year.
Internet use continued to grow as connection fees dropped and cybercafes proliferated.
There were no reports of sites being blocked, although the Internet regulations
required service providers to “constantly monitor the content available to
[their] subscribers to prevent access to . . . information contrary to the public order
or morality.” Early in 2001, police in the city of Boufarik ordered cybercafe operators
regularly to submit a log of their patrons’ names, and to report any activity that
seemed subversive or immoral.
No progress was achieved in locating or learning the fate of the thousands of
Algerians who had been forcibly “disappeared” by the security forces, primarily
between 1994 and 1996.Although there were no new cases of persons who had been
detained by security forces during 2001 and then remained missing for an extended
period, families came forward to report additional cases dating to the 1990s. The
National Association of Families of the Disappeared stated that its registry of documented
cases had surpassed 7,000.
In a speech on October 9, President Bouteflika asked families of the “disappeared”
to “trust the authorities” and to refrain from doing anything that “could
tarnish the image of the country or of Algerians.”
Government officials continued to provide statistics on cases the government
claimed to have “clarified,”while rarely if ever furnishing any useful information to
families. For example, according to a report issued in June by European Parliament
member Helène Flautre, Justice Minister Ahmed Ouyahia told Flautre in May that
out of 3,000 missing-person complaints received by the government, “a thousand
had been cleared up: 833 [of the missing persons] had joined the armed groups,
ninety-three had been killed, eighty-two were in detention, seventy-four had
returned home, and seven had benefited from the Civil Harmony [amnesty].”
However, the authorities furnished no evidence to families that particular missing
persons had joined armed groups. Few if any turned up among the thousands
of armed group members who had surrendered in recent years; nor did these
repentis provide information corroborating the government’s claim that many of
the supposedly “disappeared” had been alongside them in the mountains.
No headway was made in finding any of the several thousand Algerian civilians
said to have been abducted in previous years by armed groups. Few families learned
anything about relatives who had been abducted, despite the discovery in recent
years of several mass grave sites believed linked to the conflict, and the surrender of
thousands of militants, some of whom may have had knowledge of the abductions.
Security forces continued to torture detainees who were suspected of involvement
with or knowledge of the armed groups, according to human rights lawyers.
However, reports of torture declined along with the number of security-related
arrests compared with previous years.
In February, ex-army officer Habib Souaïdia published in Paris La Sale Guerre
(The Dirty War), the most detailed indictment yet of the army’s conduct. Souaïdia
detailed a pattern of torture and of summary executions practiced by anti-terrorist
units on suspected Islamists, and other abuses that he claimed to have witnessed
between 1993 and 1995.Algerian officials dismissed La Sale Guerre as part of a campaign
to smear the government.
In another challenge to impunity, on April 25, a Paris judge opened an investigation
into complaints filed against Khaled Nezzar by Algerians now living abroad
who said that they, or their deceased relatives, had been tortured in the early 1990s
when Nezzar was minister of defense. Nezzar, in France for the publication of his
memoirs, cut short his visit and left the country that night by private plane.
In some trials, including politically sensitive ones, judges conducted the proceedings
with seriousness and impartiality, but others were tainted by irregularities.
In a one-day trial on April 12, Fouad Boulemia was convicted and sentenced to
death for the November 1999 killing of Abdelqader Hachani, at the time the preeminent
Front Islamique du Salut (FIS) leader who was at liberty. Boulemia told
the judge he had been tortured into signing a “confession” that he now repudiated,
but this claim was rejected by the court. Boulemia was questioned neither
by his own lawyer nor the prosecutor. Boulemia remained in prison as of this
writing.
In another case, journalist Faouzia Ababsa, managing editor of the French-language
daily l’Authentique, was convicted of defamation on July 11 even though she
had not been notified of the trial and was not present. She received a suspended sixmonth
prison sentence and a fine.
In their indiscriminate attacks on civilians, armed groups abducted and raped
girls and women, when they did not kill them on the spot.Women’s rights groups
decried the lack of support services for rape victims.
The more general problem of gender-based violence was dramatized by attacks
on women living alone carried out by mobs of men who were apparently unaffiliated
with armed groups. On the evening of July 13, more than one hundred men
set upon a neighborhood of the oil-rich city of Hassi Messaoud.While other residents
were spared, migrant women were pulled from their homes, beaten, clubbed,
stabbed, and raped. The assault lasted well into the night, even though security
forces monitor the city closely. On October 9, El-Watan reported that thirty-eight
of the men had been charged with assault, rape, or other offenses, and of those
charged twenty-nine were being held in pretrial detention. According to one version,
the assailants were local residents motivated by accusations that the women
practiced “loose morals.” Later in the month, groups of men in the eastern city of
Tebessa twice raided a neighborhood where women lived alone, assaulting three
women in one instance and ransacking homes in the other. Attackers who were
arrested by police claimed they were fighting “debauchery.”
The highly discriminatory Family Code of 1984 remained intact. On March 8,
international women’s day, President Bouteflika called the code “discriminatory”
and said some of its provisions ran counter to “the spirit of Islam.” But neither he
nor the National Assembly took any initiative to amend articles that favored men
in matters of marriage, divorce, inheritance, and child custody.
On October 9, Algeria ratified the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction (Mine Ban Treaty). It will enter into force for Algeria on April 1, 2002.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Algerian human rights and victims’ rights organizations, lawyers, and certain
political parties collected information and lobbied in defense of rights. The main
obstacle to documenting abuses appeared to be the fear among victims and their
families to testify, particularly among rural populations hard-hit by political violence.
Police generally tolerated the regular sit-ins organized by families of the “disappeared”
in front of public buildings, but broke them up on occasion.An attempted
march by families in the city of Relizane on September 19 was blocked on the
grounds that it was unauthorized.
Mohamed Smaïn, a spokesperson of the Relizane bureau of the independent
Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights, was detained on February 23
and held for two days in connection with a defamation suit filed by Hadj Fergane,
a former mayor and militia chief whom Smaïn had accused of involvement in kidnappings
and extrajudicial killings. Smaïn’s identification documents were seized
and he was prohibited from traveling without court authorization. On October 28,
with the case still pending, the gendarmerie cautioned Smaïn that the travel restriction
remained in effect. The confiscated documents had not been returned. In
November,however, Smaïn prevailed in another case in which a Relizane court sentenced
Fergane to six months in prison for defaming Smaïn.
The National Association of Families of the Disappeared remained active even
though its application for legal recognition had gone unanswered. In September,
another organization of families of the “disappeared,” SOS Disparus, opened a
national headquarters in downtown Algiers, the first office devoted solely to this
issue.
In contrast to 2000, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, and the
International Federation for Human Rights were not permitted to conduct fieldwork
in Algeria during the first ten months of 2001.However, the French freedom
of expression organization Reporters sans Frontières visited in January to investigate
the cases of five missing Algerian journalists.
The government continued its refusal to grant long-standing mission requests
from the U.N. special rapporteurs on torture, and on extrajudicial, summary, or
arbitrary executions, and the Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances
(WGEID). The International Committee of the Red Cross conducted its
fourth and fifth rounds since 1999 of visits to prisons, including private interviews
with inmates. Its agreement with the authorities excluded visits to facilities run by
the ministries of interior or defense.
In March, authorities dissolved the nine-year-old National Human Rights
Observatory,which reported to the president and was viewed as ineffective by most
victims of government abuse who had sought its assistance. It was replaced in October by the National Consultative Commission for Promoting and Protecting
Human Rights.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
E.U. countries received 20 percent of their natural gas supplies from Algeria and
purchased 70 percent of Algeria’s total exports.
Negotiations continued over a bilateral association agreement between the E.U.
and Algeria, and the E.U. funded modest programs to support private newspapers
and to train the police in forensic science and in human rights.
On June 16, the European Council, composed of the heads of government of the
E.U. countries, publicly urged “all those responsible in Algeria” to “act to end the
present confrontations and violence,” and called on the government to “launch a
political initiative to overcome the crisis by means of dialogue among all Algerians.”
The statement pledged the E.U.’s support for “the political, economic, and social
reforms necessary for restoring peace, stability and prosperity.”
Human rights received some attention at the ministerial-level “troika”meetings
held in Algeria on April 24. (The troika consists of representatives of the current
E.U. presidency, the commission, and the High Representative for the Common
Foreign and Security Policy.) The Europeans presented a list of some thirty “disappeared”
cases and requested clarification.Anna Lindh, the foreign minister of Sweden
(at the time E.U. president), stated that the E.U. “takes a serious view” of
“disappearances,” arbitrary arrests, and torture. She also voiced concern about the
proposed penal code amendments restricting press freedom.
A resolution adopted January 18 by the European Parliament condemned all
forms of violence against civilians in Algeria and urged the government to cooperate
with the U.N. WGEID. A resolution adopted May 17 criticized the killing
of demonstrators and urged greater respect for Berber cultural and linguistic
rights. In his statement before the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the E.U.
representative on March 29 urged Algeria to allow visits by U.N. human rights
rapporteurs.
France
France was Algeria’s leading source of imports and home to the largest Algerian
community outside of Algeria. French assistance to Algeria came mainly in the
form of credits for the purchase of French exports.
During the conflict that has raged in Algeria since 1992, France has been circumspect
on governmental human rights abuses committed against suspected
Islamists. In 2001, the French government spoke out more forcefully when the
security forces killed some fifty protesters in the Kabylie during the last week of
April.Kabyles (Berbers) constitute a large percentage of France’s Algerian community
and are politically well-organized.On May 2, Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine warned that France could not remain silent about “the violence and repression”and
urged “political dialogue.” On June 19, he said the demands by the Algerian people
for “real change” were “thoroughly legitimate.” In an interview published in Le
Monde of July 11, Vedrine scoffed at the accusation made by President Bouteflika
and others that foreign meddling had caused the recent disturbances: “The Algerian
regime knows very well that this is false, that this contestation is the result of
internal problems.”
On other human rights issues, France was more discreet.Vedrine, Interior Minister
Daniel Vaillant, and State Secretary Michelle Demessine all visited Algiers in
February and made no public statements regarding human rights at the time.
United States
Never a priority country in the region for the U.S.,Algeria received greater attention
during 2001. Human rights concerns were raised in bilateral meetings but
remained secondary to anti-terror cooperation, U.S. private investments, and
resolving the conflict over the Western Sahara.
These were among the topics discussed when President George W. Bush met
with President Bouteflika on July 12 in Washington. It was the first meeting
between heads of state since a military-backed coup in 1992 halted Algeria’s elections.
Bush reportedly urged Bouteflika to make progress on human rights, but the
White House did not comment publicly on the subject.
Relations had been gradually warming prior to the summit. In February in Germany,
Carlton W. Fulford, deputy commander of the American forces in Europe,
received General Mohamed Lamari, chief-of-staff of the Algerian army, which is
implicated in massive human rights abuses.
Following the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, Algeria
shared with Washington a list of 350 Algerians abroad with alleged links to Osama
bin Laden, and a list of alleged Islamist militants inside Algeria, according to news
reports. The State Department and National Security Council (NSC) declined to
comment to Human Rights Watch on those reports.
U.S. interest in anti-terror cooperation was undoubtedly a factor in President
Bush’s receiving President Bouteflika again in Washington on November 5. The
U.S. made no public comments about what they discussed. But on November 9, an
NSC official told Human Rights Watch that Algeria had been asking the U.S.“to be
more forthcoming” on licensing private arms sales. He added that the U.S. was
maintaining its “go-slow” approach and had not changed its opposition to selling
night-vision equipment, an item Algeria has long sought for counter-insurgency
use.
Algeria received minimal direct aid from the U.S. However, the U.S. government-
run Export-Import bank,which provides loans and guarantees to assist U.S.
investment abroad, stated that its exposure in Algeria rose in the fiscal year ending
September 30 to nearly U.S. $2 billion, a level matched in the Middle East and
North Africa only by the bank’s exposure in Saudi Arabia. Total private U.S. investment
in Algeria was about U.S. $4 billion, nearly all in the energy sector.
In November 2000,Harold Koh, then-President Clinton’s assistant secretary for human rights, democracy, and labor,made his first trip to Algeria.During two days
he met with human rights activists and government officials. His public remarks
about local rights conditions were general and brief. In the year since Koh’s visit, the
U.S. government made no high-level public statements on human rights except for
the solid chapter on Algeria in the State Department’s Country Reports on Human
Rights Practices.
EGYPT
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The human rights situation continued to deteriorate, marked by violations of
freedom of expression, association, and assembly; widespread arrests of government
opponents and prolonged detentions under state of emergency laws, in force
almost continuously since 1967; and grossly unfair trials before military and state
security courts.
Elections for the 454-member People’s Assembly, conducted in three stages
between October 18 and November 14, 2000, were the first to be held under full
judicial supervision, following legislative reforms prompted by a July 2000 ruling
of Egypt’s Supreme Constitutional Court. The ruling National Democratic Party
(NDP) won by a large majority but supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood, who
could only run as independent candidates, secured seventeen seats and eleven other
opposition parties shared sixteen. Despite judicial supervision, clashes between
rival supporters and with the police left between nine and fifteen people dead, and
scores wounded. The authorities arrested hundreds of Muslim Brotherhoodaligned
and other opposition candidates and supporters in the run up to the elections
and prevented others fromreaching polling stations.
The authorities carried out further arrests of pro-Muslim Brotherhood candidates
and supporters in advance of the May-June elections to the Majlis al-Shura
(Consultative Council, the upper house of the parliament). These elections passed
off relatively peacefully, and were also won by the NDP.
The government-controlled Political Parties Committee of the Majlis al-Shura
licensed Egypt 2000, a new political party, in April, having previously rejected it in
1999 only for that decision to be overturned on April 7 by the Political Parties Tribunal.
Egypt 2000 was only the second political party to be licensed since the formation
of the Political Parties Committee in 1977, several other political groups
having been rejected, usually on grounds that their programs did not differ significantly
from those of existing registered political parties.
The Islamist opposition Labor Party, whose activities were frozen by the Political
Parties Committee in May 2000, remained suspended and its publications
banned. At least eleven Administrative Court rulings ordered the lifting of a ban
on the party’s bi-weekly newspaper, al-Sha‘ab, as a breach of constitutionally guaranteed
press freedoms. On March 20, the Administrative Court declared unlawful the government’s non-compliance with its rulings and its delaying tactic of lodging
appeals before courts that were clearly not competent to hear such cases.
Despite this, on March 21, the Political Parties Committee confirmed the ban on
al-Sha‘ab as the Labor Party’s status remained unresolved. In mid-July, a board of
advisers to the Supreme Administrative Court, which has previously upheld rulings
in favor of al-Sha‘ab, supported the committee’s position. The board argued
that earlier Administrative Court rulings were incorrect in stating that while the
committee was empowered to suspend political parties, it did not have the authority
to ban publications. In the interim, al-Sha‘ab continued to appear in an on-line
version.
Magdi Hussain, al-Sha‘ab’s imprisoned editor-in-chief, was released under a
presidential pardon on December 27, 2000, as were al-Sha‘ab journalist Salah
Bdeiwi and cartoonist ‘Issam Hanafi. All three were sentenced in August 1999 for
defaming Minister of Agriculture YusufWali. In March,Hussain was elected secretary-
general of the Labor Party, but in August, party leader Ibrahim Shukri suspended
him and ten others from the party’s executive committee and replaced him
as al-Sha‘ab’s editor-in-chief in an effort to purge the party of Islamists and so
obtain government approval to operate again.
The government continued to try civilian political suspects before military
courts and in mid-October announced that 253 Islamist detainees would be tried
before the Supreme Military Court.Of these, eighty-three had been arrested in May
and detained for membership of an illegal organization, illegally possessing
weapons, planning to overthrow the government by force, and forging official documents.
They included several foreign nationals; local press speculation linking
them to Osama Bin Laden’s al-Qaeda (The Base) network was later rejected by
President Husni Mubarak. The other 170 were suspected members of the banned
al-Gama’a al-Islamiyya (Islamic Group), many of whom, according to defense
lawyers, had already been held without trial for several years. All 170 reportedly
faced charges of carrying out acts of political violence between 1994 and 1998.
Local human rights groups condemned the decision to try more civilians in military
courts, from which there is no right of appeal. Since 1992, such courts have
convicted hundreds of Islamists, often after grossly unfair trials and torture during
pre-trial interrogation, and handed down scores of death sentences,many of which
have been carried out. On September 20, government security agents abducted
publisher Farid Zahran, a leader of the Egyptian People’s Committee for Solidarity
with the Palestinian Uprising (EPCSPU), to forestall a demonstration on September
28 called to mark the first anniversary of the outbreak of renewed conflict
between Palestinians and Israeli forces. Detained for two weeks, Zahran was
accused of disseminating tendentious information aimed at disturbing public
order and planning demonstrations, then released on bail on October 4.
Thousands of alleged members or supporters of banned Islamist groups contuinued
to be detained without trial, but a few were released, including Hamdi Abd
al-Rahman and Isma’il al-Bakl, both al-Gama‘a al-Islamiyya leaders. They were
released in July after serving fifteen-year prison terms for their part in the 1981
assassination of former president Anwar al-Sadat plus an additional five years when
they were held illegally.
Police routinely tortured or ill-treated detainees, and there were three deaths between January and July. In two earlier deaths in custody, criminal proceedings
against those accused of inflicting torture resulted in convictions. On February 7,
the Shibin al-Kom criminal court sentenced the director of Wadi Natroun maximum
security prison to ten years of imprisonment in connection with the death
under torture of Ahmad Muhammad ‘Issa, an awaiting trial prisoner, and sentenced
a major to seven years and four sergeants to five year terms, dismissing all
from their posts. In another case, a lieutenant at al-‘Agouza police station in Cairo
received a two-year prison term with labor on July 25 for beating detainee Ahmad
Imam ‘Abd al-Na‘im to death
Egyptian courts sentenced at least sixty-nine people to death between November
2000 and November 2001 for murder, rape, and other crimes, and carried out
eight executions.
The government continued to clamp down on Islamist political activists,
breaching their rights to freedom of expression and association. On November 19,
2000, a military court sentenced fifteen lawyers and other professionals linked to the
banned Muslim Brotherhood to prison terms of up to five years on charges including
membership of an illegal organization,but acquitted five other defendants. Earlier,
in October, the authorities detained hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood
supporters in Cairo, Alexandria, and elsewhere in advance of the parliamentary
elections, including some who were standing as independent candidates. Those
held included several members of the campaigning team of Jihan al-Halafawi, the
only woman candidate linked to the Muslim Brotherhood, and Labor Party members
running Magdi Hussain’s electoral campaign while he served his prison sentence.
This pattern was repeated in advance of the Majlis al-Shura elections. The
authorities detained at least 140 Muslim Brotherhood sympathisers starting in
mid-April 2001 in Asyut,Alexandria, al-Fayyum, and other centers, including some
who had just registered as candidates, such as Muhammad al-Sayyid Habib, an
Asyut University professor and former parliamentarian, and Abu Bakr Mitkis. All
were released without charge after the elections. Twenty-five other leading members
of the Muslim Brotherhood were arrested on July 15 in Imbaba for allegedly
holding an illegal meeting. They included Muhammad al-Shater, a former political
prisoner and reputedly a member of the Muslim Brotherhood’s highest decisionmaking
body, the Maktab al-Irshad (Guidance Bureau).
The government also prosecuted people on the basis of their alleged sexual orientation.
In July, the authorities referred fifty-two men to the Emergency State
Security Court for Misdemeanours, from which there is no right of appeal, on
charges of “obscene behaviour” under the Combat of Prostitution Law (Law 10 of
1961). Two defendants were also charged with expressing “contempt for religion”
under article 98(f) of the penal code,while a sixteen year old minor was sent before
the Juveniles Court.Most of the defendants had been arrested on May 11 in Cairo
and initially held incommunicado. During their trial, which began on July 18, the
court refused to investigate allegations by some defendants that they had been tortured
to make them confess and on November 14,twenty-one of them received sentences
of between one and two years of imprisonment on the “obscenity” charge.
The two charged with “contempt for religion” received three- and five-year terms.
The others were acquitted. The sixteen-year-old, who did have a right of appeal
from the Juveniles Court, was sentenced to three years of imprisonment for
“obscenity”on September 18.His appeal was due to be heard in November.
On December 6, 2001, the authorities released eighty-nine prisoners on humanitarian
grounds pending a verdict by the Sohag Criminal Court. They had been
among ninety-six Muslims and Coptic Christians tried in connection with communal
violence at al-Kusheh village in December 1999, in which twenty Copts and
one Muslim died. The Sohag Criminal Court had acquitted all the defendants
except for four Muslims,who were sentenced to terms ranging between one and ten
years for illegal possession of weapons, manslaughter, and damaging property, but
Coptic religious leaders and families of those killed criticized the verdict and the
General Prosecution quickly lodged an appeal. In July, the Court of Cassation
quashed the verdict and ordered a retrial of all the defendants, which then opened
in November.
In June, thousands of Copts demonstrated in Cairo over four days in protest at
the publication of sexually explicit photographs of a former Coptic monk by the
weekly newspaper al-Naba’ and its sister publication Akher Khabar, both of whose
publishing licenses the authorities withdrew on July 4. Several demonstrators were
injured in clashes with the police.The authorities charged Mamdouh Mahran, editor-
in-chief of al-Naba’, with undermining public order, defaming the Coptic
Church, publishing pornography, and other offences, and his trial opened on June
24 before the State Security Court for Misdemeanours. On September 16, he was
convicted on all but one count and sentenced to three years of imprisonment. President
Mubarak ratified the sentence on September 30, but Mahran suffered a heart
attack and was then hospitalized under guard. He appealed successfully to the
Administrative Court to overturn the Egypt Press Association’s decision to revoke
his membership, though a counter-appeal by the association to the Supreme
Administrative Court was still pending by November.
In January, Sherif al-Filali, an engineer, went on trial before the Emergency
Supreme State Security Court (ESSSC) charged effectively with espionage. Prosecutors
alleged that he was recruited into Israel’s Mossad intelligence agency by a
Russian army officer, Gregory Sergevic, who was tried in his absence in the same
case. During two months of pre-trial detention by the State Security Intelligence
(SSI) in Cairo, al-Filali was reportedly subjected to “psychological pressure” to confess.
However, while Sergevic was sentenced to life imprisonment al-Filali was
acquitted. The presiding judge ruled that Egyptian law provides for acquittal if a
defendant confesses before the start of a criminal investigation, as in al-Filali’s case,
even if the available evidence is sufficient to secure a conviction. On June 27, the
state security prosecutor announced that he would seek a re-trial, permissible
under emergency legislation. Verdicts of the ESSSC, which cannot be appealed,
must be ratified by the president. But in September, the president’s office refused to
endorse the verdict. The authorities then rearrested al-Filali and his new trial
opened on October 28. If convicted, he faced up to twenty-five years of imprisonment
with hard labor.
The government continued to target writers for exercising their freedom of
expression. In December 2000, the General Prosecution successfully appealed for the re-trial of Salahuddin Muhsin after the State Security Court for Misdemeanours
in Giza gave him a six-month suspended sentence in July 2000 for denigrating
Islam in his writings. In January 2001, he was retried before a different
circuit of the State Security Court, convicted and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment
with hard labor.He had no right of appeal.
The government also continued to ban books it deemed “offensive” to society,
either because their contents were held to be sexually explicit or because they were
considered defamatory to Islam. In May, al-Azhar’s Islamic Research Academy
banned two works, respectively by ‘Alaa’Hamed and Ibrahim Abu Khalil on the latter
ground.
Workers’ rights came under attack through arbitrary measures taken against
trade union activists who were outspoken around issues such as worker safety in the
state sector. Such measures, designed to prevent them from participating in union
elections, included transfer to other companies at short notice in the run-up to
elections, and being pressurized into withdrawing their candidacy. In the run-up to
the General Federation of Trade Unions elections, which began on October 8,
scores of workers who had been disqualified from running as candidates to shop
floor committees lodged appeals before the administrative courts contesting irregularities
in nomination procedures. The Center for Trade Union and Workers’ Services
(CTUWS), an Egyptian NGO that monitors and campaigns for workers’
rights, also came under pressure. Its director,Kamal Abbas, and Abdul Rashid Hilal,
board member and vice-chairman of the Iron and Steel Company trade union,
were both summoned before prosecution officials in Helwan in mid-September as
part of the government’s attempt to stifle criticism of working conditions and of
irregularities in trade union election procedures.
In February, the Egyptian Bar Association elected a new board and chairman,
ending five years of judicial sequestration imposed by the government in 1996 for
alleged financial irregularities by board members. There was wide speculation that
the government hoped the election, held under judicial supervision,would diminish
the Muslim Brotherhood’s influence over the association but the outcome once
again produced a Muslim Brotherhood-dominated board, with Nasserist lawyer
Sameh ‘Ashour elected as chairman.
In a landmark ruling on June 2, Egypt’s Supreme Constitutional Court declared
as unconstitutional article 48 of the penal code,which punished criminal complicity
to commit felonies or misdemeanours by two or more persons even if no crime
had actually been committed. The article, which provided for up to fifteen years of
imprisonment for felonies and up to three years of imprisonment for misdemeanours,
was widely used against Islamists charged with security offences, and
most recently invoked in the case the Saadeddin Ibrahim. (See below.) In late July,
Prosecutor General Maher Abdel Wahed decided not to exercise his right to refer
the ruling back to the court for re-examination, and ordered the release of all prisoners
convicted on the basis of article 48. In September, lawyers acting for scores of
Islamist prisoners lodged appeals with the State Security Court requesting their
release on these grounds, but by November it was unclear if any had been released.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
An amended version of the controversial Law on Civil Associations and Institutions
(Law 153 of 1999), which the Supreme Constitutional Court had overturned
in June 2000, was presented to the Majlis al-Shura in April but it had not been presented
to the People’s Assembly by November, and the earlier Law on Private Associations
and Institutions (Law 32 of 1964) remained in force. One positive
amendment would allow administrative courts to hear cases arising from disputes
between NGOs and the authorities, in lieu of courts of first instance, in line with the
Supreme Constitutional Court ruling, but other provisions that would allow the
government to control and interfere in the internal activities of NGOs, remained
unchanged.
On July 1, Cairo’s Administrative Court overturned the government’s decision
to refuse, for unspecified security reasons, to register the Egyptian Organization
for Human Rights (EOHR) as a recognized NGO. Following the overturning of
Law 153 of 1999, the EOHR had applied for registration under Law 32 of 1964 but
was informed by the Ministry of Social Affairs in July 2000 that a decision on its
application had been deferred upon a request from security officials. The EOHR
took the matter to the Administrative Court in February, and the July ruling stated
that since the ministry failed to process the EOHR’s application within the sixtyday
period specified by law, it was deemed accepted. The ruling was legally binding
on the ministry and its implementation could not be deferred even if appealed
before the Supreme Administrative Court, but by November the ministry had not
complied.
The government maintained its crackdown on human rights activists with the
trial and conviction of Saadeddin Ibrahim, director of the Ibn Khaldun Center for
Development Studies, and twenty-seven co-defendants. On May 21, the Supreme
State Security Court sentenced Ibrahim to seven years of imprisonment on charges
of receiving funding without authorization, disseminating false information damaging
to Egypt’s interests, and securing funds through fraud.He and four co-defendants
were acquitted on a fourth charge of conspiring to bribe public officials. The
court imposed one-year suspended sentences on twenty-one defendants, and sentenced
six others, including two who faced separate bribery charges, to between two
and five years of imprisonment with labor.
Ten of the accused remained at large, however, having been tried in their
absence. Most of the defendants were associated with two local NGOs, the Ibn
Khaldun Center and the Hoda Association, five as employees and the rest as shortterm
contract workers. Many had been arrested in mid-2000 in connection with
two projects funded by the European Union (E.U.) aimed at promoting voter education
and encouraging eligible voters to register and exercise their political rights.
The seven-month trial opened on November 18, 2000. In addition to serious
pre-trial irregularities, the proceedings failed to meet international standards for
fair trial.Verdicts of the Supreme State Security Court, an exceptional court based
on emergency legislation, could only be appealed by cassation or review, limiting
the grounds for appeal to points of law and precluding the facts of the case.Defense lawyers did not have full access to prosecution documents presented to the court
until four months into the trial. After sentencing, Saadeddin Ibrahim, Khaled al-
Fayyad, Usama Hammad, and Mohammad Hassanein were held in Tora Mazra‘at
prison, and Nadia Abdel Nour and Magda al-Bey at the women’s prison in Qanater.
The defendants who received suspended sentences were released within days. An
appeal hearing before the Court of Cassation was scheduled for December 19. The
outcome of the trial was condemned by Egyptian and international human rights
organizations, and both U.S. and E.U. officials voiced concern.
In June, the government shut down the offices of the Sudanese Human Rights
Organization (SHRO), which had been operating in exile in Egypt since 1991.
Although no official reason was given, the SHRO’s president believed that the closure
was the direct outcome of a report issued by the organization on the practice
of slavery in Sudan.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In January, the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child considered Egypt’s
second periodic report on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. It welcomed improvements to infant and child mortality rates, but noted
that “narrow interpretations of Islamic texts by authorities, particularly in areas
relating to family law, are impeding the enjoyment of some human rights under the
Convention.”The committee criticized continued violations of children’s rights to
healthcare and education, conditions for juvenile detainees, inadequate safeguards
against physical or sexual abuse of children, and economic exploitation. Among
other things, the committee recommended implementation of the 1996 Children’s
Code and the systematic involvement of “civil society, especially children’s associations
and advocacy groups, throughout all stages of the implementation of the
Convention, including policy-making.”
In January also, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women considered Egypt’s third, fourth, and fifth reports on its application
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. The committee welcomed the reduction in female illiteracy rates and legislative
reforms aimed at eliminating discrimination against women, particularly
relating to divorce rights. However, it criticized other discriminatory laws, including
the Nationality Law which bars Egyptian women married to non-Egyptians
from passing on their nationality to their children, and certain provisions of the
penal code. The committee recommended legislative reforms in these areas, and
greater efforts by the authorities to prevent violence against women, including
domestic violence, marital rape, abuses against detained women, and female genital
mutilation.
In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
considered Egypt’s most recent reports on its implementation of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. The committee noted the “significant role” of the Supreme Constitutional Court in “upholding human
rights and constitutional guarantees . . . as well as the prevention and elimination
of discrimination”but criticized the absence of legal provisions establishing that an
ethnic or racial motivation for defamation or acts of violence be considered an
aggravating factor. The committee also expressed concern about the discriminatory
provisions of the Nationality Law, noting the government’s promise to revise
it, and recommended speedy resolution of the “difficulties relating to the registration
of some non-governmental organizations dealing with the promotion and
protection of human rights,” particularly those working to combat racial discrimination.
The U.N. special rapporteur on torture, in his report to the Commission on
Human Rights published on January 25, concluded that “torture is systematically
practised by the security forces in Egypt, in particular by State Security Intelligence,”
and that despite government denials, the practice is “habitual, widespread
and deliberate in at least a considerable part of the country.”The special rapporteur
cited thirty-five cases of torture and thirty-two cases of death in custody reportedly
caused by torture or medical negligence that were transmitted to the government
between 1997 and 1999, to which the government replied in March and October
2000. He expressed particular concern at “the persistence of the explanation of
death in many of the cases as being ‘a sharp drop in blood pressure,’”and stated that
the government’s responses reinforced rather than alleviated his concerns. The
special rapporteur also criticized the government’s continuing failure to permit
him access to the country.
On May 25, the U.N. special representative on human rights defenders and the
special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers issued a joint statement
of concern about the conviction of Saadeddin Ibrahim and his co-defendants
following unfair trial procedures. They commented that “the conviction of these
members of civil society for their human rights activities will have a chilling effect
on the activities of other human rights defenders in Egypt,” and called for the
release of the defendants pending their appeal hearing.
European Union
On December 13, 2000, the European Commission (E.C.) issued a statement
concerning the charges levelled against Saadeddin Ibrahim and some of his codefendants
that they had misused E.C. funding of two projects administered by the
Ibn Khaldun Center and the Hoda Association.The projects, for which the E.C. had
provided a total of 315,000 euro, involved the promotion of voter education and the
exercise of political rights. The E.C. stated that “both the Ibn Khaldun and HODA
projects were the subject of external mid-term audits whose reports gave no cause
for concern, financial or otherwise.” On May 23, a spokesman for External Affairs
Commissioner Chris Patten expressed concern about the sentences passed on the
defendants in the case, and said that while E.U. aid to Egypt had not been suspended,
it was “encountering certain difficulties in its implementation.” On June
14, the European Parliament passed a resolution expressing concern about the verdict
and calling for Ibrahim “to be assured a fair trial,” expressing its support for the Ibn Khaldun Center and calling on the E.C. “to continue to support its initiatives.”
With reference to the case of Ibrahim and that of Nawal al-Sa’dawi, the resolution
called on the E.C. “to strengthen its MEDA programme for democracy, in cooperation
with the Egyptian authorities, in particular with a view to supporting freedom
of expression and the independence of the media.”
The Association Agreement between Egypt and the E.U.,which had been under
negotiation for over five years, was initialled by the two sides on January 26 and
signed on June 25. The agreement, which enters into force after ratification by the
parliaments of Egypt and of E.U. member states, covers economic, political, security,
and social relations between the two sides. Following the signing of the agreement,
Commissioner Patten stated that the “partnership is firmly based on shared
political and economic interests as well as a joint commitment for the promotion
of democracy and the respect of human rights.” He added that the human rights
provisions in the agreement would provide a framework within which human
rights issues would be raised with the Egyptian authorities.
United States
The U.S. maintained the previous year’s levels of foreign aid to Egypt, with the
Bush administration requesting for fiscal year 2002 an estimated U.S. $1.3 billion
for military assistance and U.S. $655 million for economic support funds. The
administration said military assistance would “support a modern, well-trained
Egyptian military that will help ensure stability in the region” and “enable Egypt to
participate as a coalition partner in operations that further U.S. interests.” Of the
funds requested for economic assistance, an estimated 14 percent was earmarked
for “programs meant to reduce the fertility rate, improve health care, support
democratic institutions and increase access to schooling for girls.”
Following the conviction and sentencing of Saadeddin Ibrahim and his codefendants,
a State Department spokesman said in a press briefing on May 21 that
“we are deeply troubled about the outcome, and . . . we have been expressing all
along our concerns about the process that resulted in this sentence.”U.S. embassy
staff in Cairo had observed the trial and visited Ibrahim, who held dual Egyptian-
U.S. citizenship, in Mazra’at Tora prison where he was taken after sentencing.
In its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000, the State Department
said that while the Egyptian government “generally respected the human rights of
its citizens in some areas, . . . its record was poor with respect to freedom of expression
and its treatment of detainees.” It pointed to the government’s use of emergency
laws to restrict “many basic rights,” including freedom of expression,
assembly, and association.
A delegation from the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom
visited Egypt from March 20-24 as part of a wider fact-finding tour of the Middle
East. It met with government officials, religious leaders, academics, journalists, and
NGO representatives, but several Egyptian human rights groups declined to cooperate
or assist the delegates. On March 28, the commission urged President George
W. Bush to raise the issue of religious freedoms with President Mubarak during the
latter’s U.S. visit in April. The commission’s detailed findings, released on May 14 as an addendum to its annual report, concluded that “serious problems of discrimination
against a number of religious groups remain widespread in Egypt,” including
Coptic Christians, Baha’is, and Muslims deemed by the authorities to be
“fundamentalists.
President Mubarak visited Washington, D.C. in the first week of April and held
talks with President Bush, political leaders, and representatives of the business
community. The visit focused on continuing efforts to salvage Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations and on economic ties between Egypt and the U.S., with Egypt
calling for a free trade agreement with the U.S.There was no indication that human
rights issues were discussed.
The Bush administration announced in November that an arms deal with Egypt
worth an estimated U.S. $400 million had been reached, and that economic aid to
Egypt would be accelerated to offset the adverse effects which the September 11
attacks on the U.S. were having on the Egyptian economy, notably the tourist
industry. On November 29, a legal assistance treaty between the U.S. and Egypt
came into effect, aimed at increasing cooperation in combatting transnational
crimes, including drug trafficking,money laundering, and “terrorist group financing,”
according to the State Department.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Egypt: Underage and Unprotected: Child Labor in Egypt’s Cotton Fields, 1/01
IRAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Factional conflict within Iran’s clerical leadership continued to result in severe
restrictions on freedom of expression, association, and political participation.
Deteriorating economic conditions made worse by severe natural disasters contributed
to increasing unrest and a pervasive sense of social insecurity, reflected in
clashes between demonstrators and the security forces and in harsh measures
against drug-traffickers and other criminals. President Mohammad Khatami won
another landslide victory for those associated with the cause of political reform
when he was reelected by 77 percent of voters for a second four-year term in June,
but the power struggle between conservatives and reformists remained unresolved.
Conservative clerics maintained a strong grip on power through the judiciary, the
Council of Guardians and the office of the Leader of the Islamic Republic, Ayatollah
Ali Khamenei.Promises by reformists to increase respect for basic freedoms and
the rule of law remained unrealized, and severe restrictions imposed on the independent
print media, the major visible gain of President Khatami’s first period in
office, remained in place. The judiciary, and branches of the security forces beyond the control of the elected government, resorted increasingly to intimidatory tactics,
with a sharp increase in public executions and public floggings. Conservative clerics
taunted critics of corporal punishment, and accused them of being opposed to
Islamic rule—in some cases even calling for the shedding of the blood of such critics.
Such remarks fueled an increasingly polarized political stand-off, which, coupled
with governmental ineffectiveness in the face of mounting economic and
social problems, contributed to a volatile situation where the threat of political violence
loomed large.
The clampdown on the independent print media that had followed the sweeping
reformist victory in parliamentary elections in February 2001 (see Human
Rights Watch World Report 2001) was followed by the detention of scores of leading
independent and reformist figures and activists.Many of these activists had participated
in the flowering of the independent press in the late 1990s as writers, editors,
and publishers. Other targeted activists included supporters of the national religious
trend, a loose alliance of intellectuals and politicians advocating Islamic government
with adherence to the rule of law and the constitution,who for many years
had been one of the few currents of internal political opposition tolerated by the
establishment.
Seventeen reformist figures, many of them prominent, were brought to trial in
October 2000 in connection with their participation in an international conference
on the future of Iran, held in Berlin, Germany, in April 2000. The trial before the
Tehran Revolutionary Court was unfair.Many of the defendants were held in protracted
incommunicado detention after returning from Berlin, during which time
they were forced to make incriminating statements that formed the evidence
against them at their trial. Akbar Ganji, a well-known investigative journalist who
was among the accused, protested at his hearing in November 2000 that he had
been beaten by his interrogators while in detention in order to pressure him to confess
to crimes.Most of the trial was conducted behind closed doors.
On January 13, the court convicted seven of the defendants on vague charges of
having “conspired to overthrow the system of the Islamic Republic.” The severest
sentences, ten years of imprisonment,were passed on Akbar Ganji and Saeed Sadr,
a translator at the German embassy in Tehran. A second translator, Khalil Rostamkhani,
received a nine-year sentence, even though he had not attended the conference.
His wife, Roshanak Darioush, a translator of German literature into
Persian, had served as a translator at the conference but did not return to Iran to
face charges. The trial and the harsh sentences imposed on local employees of the
German embassy appeared designed to cause maximum embarrassment to President
Khatami’s government in its relations with Germany, a major trade partner
which he had visited in 2000, and with other European states.
The court also sentenced student leader Ali Afshari to five years in prison, and
veteran politician Ezzatollah Sahhabi to four and a half years. Both were already in
prison by the time the trial began in October 2000.Women’s rights activists Shahla
Lahidji and Mehrangiz Kar each received four-year prison sentences, but were
released pending an appeal. Ezzatollah Sahhabi was also provisionally released, but
he was re-arrested following public remarks he made in March and was still
detained without charge in November.
An appeal court reduced Akbar Ganji’s sentence to six months of imprisonment but before he could be released, the Tehran Press Court sentenced him again to a
ten-year term on the same charge of conspiring to overthrow the system. He had
the right of appeal but no appeal had been heard by November. In March and April,
the authorities detained more than sixty political activists associated with the
national religious trend, including the leadership of the formerly tolerated Freedom
Movement (Nehzat-e Azadi). Throughout its fifty-year history the Freedom
Movement had been an advocate of constitutional Islamic rule with respect for
democratic principles. On March 18, the Tehran Revolutionary Court ordered the
closure of the Freedom Movement, accusing it of attempting to “overthrow the
Islamic regime.”
These detentions further chilled the political climate in the run-up to the June
presidential election as opponents of reform showed themselves determined to
intimidate, silence, or punish those known to support the reformist cause. A leading
conservative cleric, Ayatollah Mesbah Yazdi, stated in April: “what is being
termed as reform today is in fact corruption.” And other conservatives sought to
discourage President Khatami, the reform movement’s figurehead, from standing
for a second term.When he could not be discouraged, they signaled by their actions
that regardless of the outcome of the election, there would be no concession to the
reformist agenda.
Another persistent challenger to the dominant orthodoxy of the conservative
clerics who held power was Ayatollah Hossain Ali Montazeri, the former designated
successor to Ayatollah Khomeini as Leader of the Islamic Republic. He remained
under house arrest in Qom, but his criticism of the present system, especially of the
institution of the velayat-e faqih (rule of the supreme jurist), continued to circulate
by cassette tapes, photocopied statements, and through the Internet. In December
2000, the authorities detained the ayatollah’s son for allegedly distributing illegal
literature, but the real reason appeared to be related to the publication of Ayatollah
Montazeri’s memoirs on the Internet. These directly attacked the position of
Supreme Leader, arguing that the concentration of power in the hands of one man
was contrary to Islamic principles. Protests about the continuing restrictions on
Ayatollah Montazeri’s liberty mounted throughout the year. In June, the ayatollah’s
children (with the exception of his jailed son) circulated a letter calling for the lifting
of these restrictions, and 126 out of 290 members of parliament signed a similar
statement. President Khatami several times publicly criticized the stifling of
dissent, including closures of newspapers and magazines, and the imprisonment of
political dissidents, but he appeared unable or unwilling to remedy these problems.
In February, in a speech marking the Islamic Revolution’s twenty-second anniversary,
he warned: “those who claim a monopoly on Islam and the revolution, those
with narrow and dark views, are setting themselves against the people.” He also
complained repeatedly that he lacked the power to carry out his obligation as president
to uphold the constitution. But even after his sweeping election victory in
June, when he increased his share of the popular vote, he continued to shy away
from open confrontation with his opponents and made no discernible progress in
implementing his promised reforms. Increasingly, through his statements, he
appeared to represent more of a safety valve for public frustration than an agent of
tangible change.
A severe drought in the east and floods in the north-west exacerbated the country’s economic malaise and contributed to public scapegoating of Afghan
refugees and migrants,who were blamed for high unemployment and rising crime
and were increasingly a target of violence.Afghans were viewed as particularly culpable
for drug offenses, and thousands were detained and scores executed in an
intensified official clampdown on alleged drug-traffickers. The government repatriated
thousands of other Afghans under a process agreed with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),despite insufficient safeguards to prevent
those at risk of persecution being returned. At the same time, there were new
influxes of refugees fleeing continuing unrest and violence in Afghanistan,
although the border was officially closed by Iran. The repatriation process was
halted with the onset of U.S. bombing raids in Afghanistan in October, when there
were fears of a further massive influx to add to the one and a half to two million
Afghan already displaced to Iran.
Law enforcement authorities made increased use of public executions and corporal
punishment, often after only cursory trial proceedings. In February, five convicted
drug-traffickers were publicly executed by being hanged from construction
cranes in the Khak-i Sefid district of Tehran, part of an intensified clampdown on
drug-traffickers, and the authorities carried out more than twenty public executions
for drug-related offenses in July and August. Public floggings were also
increasingly used for a wide range of social offenses, including breaches of the dress
code, despite opposition from Ministry of Interior officials who questioned the
effectiveness of such punishments. In July and August, clashes reportedly occurred
at public floggings and executions in Tehran between police and demonstrators
opposed to these punishments.
In August, the parliamentary commission charged with investigating human
rights violations by public institutions, known as the Article 90 Commission, produced
a report sharply critical of deteriorating prison conditions. The report itself
was not made public, but members of the commission said it identified the sharp
rise in the number of offenders being sent to prisons as a major cause of prison
overcrowding and the high level of drug abuse among prisoners.More than twothirds
of all prison inmates were reportedly held for drug-related offenses, and
AIDS and other diseases were reported to be spreading rapidly among the prison
population.
The proliferation of unofficial, illegal detention centers, such as the so-called
Prison 59 in Tehran, gave major cause for concern.Prison 59 was reportedly administered
by the Ministry of Intelligence, the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps and
clandestine paramilitary forces, and was entirely beyond official oversight. Political
prisoners detained there or in similar facilities could be held for months at a time
without their families or lawyers being informed or having any idea of their whereabouts,
treatment or conditions, and being powerless to seek remedies.
The independent press, before it was closed down in mid-2000, had sought to
expose the connections between certain state institutions and the clandestine
underworld of death squads and enforcers. It was the investigative journalism of
people such as Akbar Ganji that led to the prosecution of eighteen Intelligence Ministry
officials for alleged involvement in the murder of a group of intellectuals and
political leaders at the end of 1998. (See Human Rights Watch World Report 2000.)
On January 27, fifteen of these defendants were convicted after a trial mostly held behind closed doors: three were sentenced to death, five received life imprisonment,
and seven received prison terms of between two and a half and ten years. It
remained unclear, however, who had ordered the murders: press investigators had
pointed to senior figures, such as former information ministers Dori Najafabadi
and Ali Fallahian, as possible suspects but they were not charged and no information
against them emerged at the trial. On August 18, the Supreme Court reversed
the convictions of the fifteen ministry officials, who may be re-tried. Lawyers representing
the murder victims’ families accused the judiciary of failing to ensure a
thorough inquiry into the crimes.
In a similarly unrevealing trial in May, guilty verdicts were announced against
the so-called Mahdaviyat group, a group linked to the authorities, who were convicted
of inciting violence against Sunni Muslims and committing political killings.
This trial, which involved links between state bodies and illegal political violence,
was held behind closed doors.The sentences have not been publicly announced but
its was reported in the press that at least one of the defendants was sentenced to
death.
Earlier, on January 30, the Supreme Court rejected the appeals against conviction
of ten members of the minority Jewish community in Shiraz who had been
sentenced to prison terms in 2000 for allegedly maintaining contacts with Israel,
considered a hostile foreign power.None of the group were released.
The conservative backlash set in motion by the sweeping reformist victory in
parliamentary elections in February 2000 showed no signs of abating.By the end of
November 2000,more than fifty daily and weekly newspapers had been issued with
closure orders, and more than twenty leading independent and reform-minded
journalists, editors, and publishers remained in prison. In January 2001, the
authorities closed the philosophical and cultural monthly,Kiyan. The journal had
published academic articles debating the philosophical underpinnings of the
reform movement. The conservative faction also sought to prevent reformists
being elected to the parliament. Before the June parliamentary election, held concurrently
with the presidential vote, the Council of Guardians vetoed 145 out of 356
candidates nominated for the seventeen seats, a far higher proportion than in February
2000. In a further display of conservative power, in August, the parliament
was forced to accept two candidates nominated by the judiciary to the Council of
Guardians. The parliament initially rejected the two nominated jurists, Mohssen
Ismaili and Abbas Ali Khadkhodai, claiming that they lacked adequate experience,
but the head of the judiciary, an appointee of the supreme leader, refused to withdraw
their names. Eventually, the Council of Expediency, another body appointed
by the supreme leader headed by former president Hashemi Rafsanjani, crafted a
rule change whereby the appointments were ratified without obtaining majority
approval from members of parliament.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
A few members of parliament were willing to confront what they viewed as conservative
attempts to circumvent and undermine their constitutional powers as the
people’s elected representatives, and to speak out against violations of constitutional principles. They included outspoken parliamentarian Fatima Haqiqatjou,
who protested the arrest of journalists and accused the judiciary of exceeding its
constitutional functions. Her criticisms made her the target of criminal prosecution,
and in August she was sentenced to twenty-two months in prison for “spreading
propaganda against Islam” and insulting state officials. Haqiqatjou appealed
her conviction, denying the charges and also claiming parliamentary immunity for
comments made in the course of parliamentary debate. She remained at liberty
pending her appeal. However, seven other reformist parliamentarians were facing
charges for remarks they had made under the cover of parliamentary immunity,
part of a growing struggle between conservative elements of the judiciary and
reformist members of parliament.
Despite the silencing of the independent press, the debate about human rights
remained at the center of the political struggle in Iran, especially within the clerical
leadership. Reformist clerics repeatedly argued that there was compatibility
between Islam and international human rights principles; conservative clerics, just
as insistently, asserted that appeals for liberty and respect for human rights were
akin to apostasy.
Hassan Youssefi Eshkevari,who was detained in August 2000 for advocating liberal
interpretations of Islam supportive of international human rights principles,
continued to be imprisoned.He had been convicted of apostasy in a secret trial by
a Special Court for the Clergy. In September, however, he was allowed to leave
prison for two days and it was unclear whether or not he remained under sentence
of death.
Access to the country for independent human rights investigators remained
restricted, although representatives of international human rights organizations
were allowed to visit Iran to attend conferences. The U.N. special representative on
Iran,Maurice Copithorne of Canada, continued to be denied access to the country,
but in April he was able to meet in Geneva with Abbas Ali Alizadeh, the head of the
Tehran justice department, the highest level judicial official he had been able to
meet with for several years.
In May, the International Center for Dialogue Among Civilizations, headed by
the reformist former minister of culture and Islamic guidance, Ataollah Mohajerani,
together with a clerically-supported private university in Qom, hosted an
international human rights conference in Tehran with a diverse group of participants.
Iranians who attended in the conference were candid in their criticism of
domestic conditions.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
Iran played an active role in multilateral diplomatic efforts in the human rights
field, hosting, in February, the Asian regional preparatory conference for the United
Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR) and entering into negotiations with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights over a program of technical
assistance in the human rights field. In April, the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights renewed the mandate of the special representative on Iran.
European Union
Relations with the E.U. continued to improve. British government minister
Marjorie Mowlam visited Iran in February: she praised the government’s efforts to
combat drug-trafficking but criticized continuing human rights violations including
the clampdown on journalists and the press. In September, Foreign Minister
Kamal Kharazi met with E.U. commissioners for wide-ranging talks.Human rights
concerns were again reported to be part of the agenda, but the major emphasis was
on expanding trade ties.
British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw visited Iran twice following the September
11 attacks on the U.S. This first visit by a senior British minister for several years
focused on the crisis in Afghanistan rather than domestic human rights issues in
Iran.
United States
Contrary to some initial expectations, oil industry interests closely associated
with the new Bush administration brought no discernible shift in U.S. government
relations with Iran. Restrictions on freedom of expression and persecution of
minority religious communities were roundly condemned in the State Department’s
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, and the U.S. continued to voice
objections to Iran’s alleged efforts to obtain weapons of mass destruction, its
alleged support for international terrorism, and its opposition to peace efforts
between Israel and the Palestinians.
In April, the Iranian parliament convened an international conference in support
of the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation, which was attended by
representatives of numerous groups on the U.S. government’s list of terrorist
organizations, including Lebanese Hizbollah, and the Palestinian groups, Hamas
and Islamic Jihad.At the preparatory conference for the WCAR, Iran supported the
insertion of language singling out Israel and Zionism for special criticism. These
high-profile forays into the Israeli-Palestinian dispute provoked U.S. ire. In April,
Attorney General John Ashcroft named the government of Iran as an unindicted
co-conspirator in the attack on the Khobar Towers barracks in Saudi Arabia in
1999. In May, Iran was identified as a state sponsor of terrorism in the State Department’s
Patterns of Global Terrorism Report. The Iranian government responded
sharply to this accusation: “The U.S. government, which itself is one of the supporters
of Israeli state-terrorism, is not in any position to judge us.”
In this climate of increasing rhetorical antagonism against Iran it came as no
surprise in June when the International Relations Committee of the House of Representatives
voted to maintain sanctions against Iran for a further five-year term.
The Bush administration had originally signaled a preference for a two-year renewal
of the sanctions regime, but with opposition from Congress, the administration voiced its support for long-term enforcement of sanctions. The U.S. government
continued to support policies seen as unfavorable toward Iran in disputes over control
over exports of energy resources from the Caspian Basin region.
If the U.S. and Iran were clearly divided on their policies to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, they had more in common with respect to their shared concern over
the Taliban government in Afghanistan. In the aftermath of the September 11
attacks on New York and Washington, and the identification of the Afghanistanbased
Osama Bin Laden as a prime suspect in these attacks, the possibility of closer
cooperation between the U.S. and Iranian governments emerged as a prospect for
the first time in more than twenty years.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Iran: Stifling Dissent: The Human Rights Consequences of Inter-Factional Struggle
in Iran, 6/01
IRAQ AND IRAQI KURDISTAN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The Iraqi government of President Saddam Hussain perpetrated widespread
and gross human rights violations, including arbitrary arrests of suspected political
opponents and their relatives, routine torture and ill-treatment of detainees,
summary execution of military personnel and political detainees as part of a
“prison cleansing” campaign, and forced expulsions of Kurds and Turkmen from
Kirkuk and other regions.
The Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan
(PUK), who controlled most of the northerly Duhok, Arbil, and Sulaimaniya
provinces, sought to implement a 1998 U.S.-brokered peace settlement but did not
agree to set up a unified administration for the region. There were repeated threats
of military action and incursions into Kurdish-controlled areas by Iraqi government
troops, and by Turkish government troops pursuing members of the opposition
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). Human rights abuses were committed by
Kurdish opposition groups, including in the context of clashes between PUK forces
and those of Islamist groups.
Economic sanctions imposed on Iraq by the United Nations Security Council in
1991 remained in force despite the continued erosion of the international consensus
on the issue. The government continued to deny U.N. weapons inspectors
access to Iraq. Efforts by the United States (U.S.) and the United Kingdom (U.K.)
to restructure the sanctions by removing restrictions on civilian imports yet tightening
controls on military goods and oil revenue failed due to other Security Council
members’ opposition. The Iraqi government also opposed the proposal and
temporarily suspended its oil exports in protest.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
IN GOVERNMENT-CONTROLLED IRAQ
The Iraqi authorities reportedly carried out numerous executions of military
personnel suspected of involvement in alleged coup attempts. These included, in
March, three air force officers, including Fawzi Hamed al-’Ubaidi and Faris Ahmad
al-’Alwan, and an army major-general, Tareq al-Sa’dun. In July, the authorities executed
two more air force officers in Kirkuk, including Kadhim Khairallah al-
Dulaimi, and at least five Republican Guard officers, including Staff Colonel Sami
Abd al-Ghaffur al-Alusi.Other executions of military personnel were carried out in
August and October at Abu Ghraib prison near Baghdad; the victims included former
army colonels ‘Abd al-Salam Hadi al-Tikriti and Saleh Manna’ Salman al-
Tikriti, detained since 1995 and executed on October 8. Other senior military
personnel were reportedly arrested in Baghdad in late October.
The authorities also executed numerous inmates at Abu Ghraib,al-Makasib,and
other prisons, including long term untried political detainees and convicted prisoners.
Some were apparently tortured first.Relatives reported that the body of ‘Abd
al-Wahed al-Rifa’i, hanged in March after two years in detention without trial, bore
marks of torture when they collected it on March 26 from the General Security
Directorate in Baghdad. Thirteen Abu Ghraib detainees, including students, were
executed in August, and twenty-one prisoners convicted by special courts of killing
several security agents were executed in October, including Falah Ahmad Hussain,
Muhsin Yassin Kadhim, and Baqer Jassim ‘Ali.
In November 2000, a former Iraqi intelligence officer who fled to Jordan in June
1999 disclosed the existence of a government “prison cleansing”campaign.Captain
Khalid Sajed al-Janabi, an intelligence operative from 1979 to 1999, said a March
15, 1998 directive from the Office of the President had authorized the establishment
of supervisory committees to “clean up Iraqi prisons” and that he had been
appointed to the Abu Ghraib prison committee. The “cleansing” operations, he
said, resulted in the execution of some 2,000 detainees and sentenced prisoners on
one day,April 27, 1998.Al-Janabi also reported that at least fifty Kuwaitis detained
by Iraq since the 1991 Gulf war were still being held at the General Investigative
Bureau in Baghdad between April and July 1998. A doctor who worked at Abu
Ghraib prison hospital before fleeing to Jordan in July also reported regular mass
executions of prisoners.Maher Fakher Khashan said most of those executed were
political detainees identified by serial number rather than by name, whose bodies
were removed for burial in special vehicles, and that he had most recently witnessed
thirty-four such executions on July 8. He reported too that prison authorities
forced doctors to inject some detainees with poison and then issue death certificates
attributing their deaths to natural causes.
A preliminary survey carried out in northern Iraq by the U.N. Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat) estimated the number of internally displaced persons
at 805,000 by the end of October 2000, comprising 23 percent of the population.
On December 4, the executive director of the U.N. Office of the Iraq Program
(OIP) told the Security Council he was “greatly concerned with the increasing
number of internally displaced persons,” whose living conditions in some cases were “abominable.”A major factor in the rising number of internally displaced persons
was the government’s continued expulsion of Kurds and Turkmen from their
homes in Kirkuk, Tuz Khormatu, Khaniqin, and other districts as part of its “Arabization”
program.Most were expelled to areas controlled by Kurdish opposition
forces and a smaller number to central and southern Iraq. According to PUK officials,
those expelled between January 1991 and December 2000 and resettled in
areas under its control totaled 93,888,while some 25,000 others expelled during the
same period were resettled in KDP-controlled areas. Scores more were reportedly
expelled between January and March, particularly from the Tuz Khormatu area. In
August and September,Kurdish opposition sources said the government was intensifying
the rate of resettlement of Arab families in areas from which Kurds and
Turkmen had been expelled, including the Lailan, Shwan, and Qara Hanjir districts
of Kirkuk. The government also gave Arabs title deeds of property owned by those
expelled, built new housing in villages around Altun Kopri and Tuz Khormatu to
accommodate more Arab families, and substituted Arabic for Kurdish, Turkman,
and Assyrian place names. On September 6, according to the government press,
Iraq’s Revolution Command Council issued decree 199, enabling Iraqis aged eighteen
or over to change their official ethnic identity by applying to register as Arabs.
Criminal proceedings against Fowad Hussain Haidar, arrested in late June 2000
following the killing of two staff members of the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) in Baghdad, and the wounding of eight others, remained inconclusive.
(See Human Rights Watch World Report 2001.) On December 5, 2000, the
Security Council called on Iraq to complete its investigation into the incident, but
on March 2, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan said he had not been provided
with the government’s report into the investigation. On May 18, he informed the
Security Council that on May 14, “the criminal court postponed, yet again, for the
seventh time, its proceedings in the trial of the accused, to 28 May.”By October, no
further information was available on the case.
In his March 2 report to the Security Council on the implementation of the “oilfor-
food” program, the U.N. secretary-general said that increased revenues placed
the Iraqi government “in a position to reduce current malnutrition levels and
improve the health status of the Iraqi people.” In his May 18 report, the secretarygeneral
expressed regret that no progress had been made on arrangements for local
procurement of goods and services and the provision of a cash component, provided
for under resolution 1284 (1999). He noted that an “increasing range of
equipment is being imported under the program, with insufficient local resources
available to undertake installation, training and maintenance.” In his September 28
report, the secretary-general reiterated his concern about the increase in the “number
of holds placed on applications, the total value of which was $4.05 billion as at
14 September 2001,” impeding the implementation of the “oil-for-food” program.
He urged the Security Council and the Sanctions Committee to further streamline
approval procedures, and “allow greater latitude so that a wider variety of medicine,
health supplies, foodstuffs, as well as materials and supplies for essential civilian
needs can be procured and supplied most expeditiously.”He also said that the program
had been adversely affected by the “substantial reduction in revenues received
from oil exports” decreased or totally suspended by Iraq, and well as by the “inordinate
delays” and refusals in the issuance of visas by Iraq to U.N. personnel.
Concern about the overall humanitarian situation in Iraq was voiced by U.N.
and other humanitarian agencies. In a December 2000 report, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) said that “despite the increased availability of
food,medicines and medical equipment, following a rise in oil prices and the extension
of the ‘oil-for-food’programme,suffering remained widespread.”Information
released by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) on July 11 warned that
“one in five children in the south and centre of Iraq remain so malnourished that
they need special therapeutic feeding,” and that child sickness rates remain “alarmingly
high.”The organization called for speedy implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1330, which had earmarked five per cent of oil revenues for “the most
vulnerable groups in Iraq.”
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAQI KURDISTAN
Most of the three northerly Duhok,Arbil, and Sulaimaniya provinces remained
under the control of the KDP and the PUK, which maintained separate administrative,
legislative, and executive structures in areas under their control. Efforts to
implement the 1998 Washington Accord began after meetings between KPD leader
Mas’ud Barzani and PUK leader Jalal Talabani in January, leading to negotiations
over the gradual normalization of relations between the two sides. By November,
they had not agreed on a unified administration for the region; earlier, the KDP
held municipal elections in areas under its control on May 26. However, the two
sides eased restrictions on the free movement of people and trade between their
respective areas and decreased their military presence along the ceasefire line. They
also facilitated the gradual exchange of people internally displaced since the 1996
clashes, with some 1,300 families returning to their homes in Arbil, Duhok, and
Sulaimaniya between June and October. The two sides also increased cooperation
on security matters and prisoner exchanges.Both sides continued to grant access to
their prisons to the ICRC, which reported that during 2000 it visited 792 detainees
held “for security reasons or in connection with the inter-Kurdish fighting” in
thirty-two places of detention.
President Hussain proposed the reopening of negotiations between the government
and Kurdish political parties on July 15, but in a joint statement on July 27,
the KDP and PUK set preconditions: they demanded an end to mass deportations
of Kurds and Turkman, clarification of the fate of detainees in Iraqi government
custody and missing persons, and acceptance by the Iraqi government of federalism
as the basis of future relations between the Kurdish region and Baghdad. The
government rejected these demands in August.
Iraqi troops were deployed to the northern region on several occasions, apparently
with the aim of launching armed attacks on Kurdish-controlled territory. In
mid-June, the government deployed tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery
and infantry units south of Arbil, coinciding with efforts by the U.K. and the U.S.
to restructure the economic embargo imposed on Iraq and to impose “smart sanctions.”
Government troops clashed with PUK forces in the Kifri region on September
9, and in early October they reportedly entered and occupied the village of
Sadawa, south-west of Arbil.The KDP said that repeated artillery bombardment of some thirty front-line villages by government troops had resulted in the displacement
of their inhabitants.
There were at least eight bomb attacks in Arbil in other cities between November
2000 and October 2001. Some targeted buildings used by U.N. personnel and
by local and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). In August, the
KDP said it had arrested two men in separate incidents whose vehicles were apparently
carrying explosives, and that they had confessed to working for Iraqi intelligence.
Among them was a Tunisian national employed by the U.N.who was caught
on July 19 while returning from Baghdad with explosives in his vehicle. He was
released on July 31 and handed over to Tun Myat, U.N. humanitarian coordinator
for Iraq, during his visit to Iraqi Kurdistan.
Other bomb blasts in KDP-held territory, including one in Arbil on April 23 and
another in Zakho on October 15, were reportedly attributed to Islamist groups
based in the region, notably Harakat al-Tawhid al-Islami (Islamic Unity Movement,
IUM). The IUM, one of three Islamist groups which broke away at different
times from the mainstream Islamic Unity Movement in Kurdistan (IUMK) and in
September merged to form Jund al-Islam (Soldiers of God), was also held responsible
by the KDP for the assassination on February 18 of Francois Hariri, governor
of Arbil and member of the KDP’s Central Committee. He was shot dead by
unidentified assailants as he drove to work in the city.His bodyguard was also killed
and his driver wounded. The KDP announced in late March that it had identified
several IUM members as being responsible for the assassination, one of whom was
apprehended.
Clashes between PUK forces and Jund al-Islam began in September, shortly after
the group’s leader, Abu ‘Ubaidullah al-Shafi’i, declared Jihad (Holy War) against
secular and other political parties in Iraqi Kurdistan deemed to have deviated from
the “true path of Islam.”After the September 11 attacks in the U.S., the PUK accused
the group of links with Osama bin Laden’s al-Qaeda (The Base) network and said
its members included Arabs of various nationalities who had received military
training in Afghanistan. The PUK also accused the group of imposing an extreme
form of Islam in their strongholds of Biyara and Tawela, including barring women
from employment and education, and of preventing the Naqshabandi Sufis based
in the area from practicing their religious rites.
On September 22, Jund al-Islam abducted a doctor, Rebwar Sayyid ‘Umar, from
his surgery in Halabja and detained him for twenty days in Biyara near the border
with Iran. On September 23, thirty-seven PUK fighters were killed by Jund al-Islam
in the village of Kheli Hama on the Sulaimaniya-Halabja road. Several died in an
ambush, but the majority was reportedly killed after surrender. Photographs of the
victims made available by the PUK showed that some of the prisoners’ throats had
been slit and some of the dead had been beheaded or mutilated, including by having
their sexual organs severed.During the ensuing clashes, an estimated one hundred
PUK fighters and some forty Jund al-Islam fighters were killed. The PUK
regained control of Halabja and its vicinity by September 26, arresting suspected
supporters or members of Jund al-Islam, and during October the fighting extended
to Sharazur,Hawraman, and elsewhere. At least thirty-eight Jund al-Islam fighters
were reportedly killed in these clashes, while some twenty-four others were captured or surrendered. Other Kurdish political parties, including the KDP, offered
military assistance to the PUK. On October 11, the PUK declared a ceasefire and on
October 25, it issued a thirty-day amnesty for Jund al-Islam fighters. The amnesty
did not cover those responsible for the assassination of Francois Hariri, or those
involved in the killing of the thirty-seven PUK fighters on September 23. The PUK
also said that foreign nationals among them would not be permitted to remain in
Iraqi Kurdistan.
Turkish government troops launched repeated military incursions into northern
Iraq in pursuit of PKK members. In December 2000, Turkey deployed several
thousand troops near the Iran-Iraq border, in order, the Turkish prime minister
said on January 7, 2000, to provide “technical support” to PUK forces that had been
engaged in military operations against the PKK since September 2000. According
to PUK officials, some 120 PKK and thirty-five PUK fighters were killed in December
2000.The PUK accused the PKK of forcibly occupying forty-six villages in areas
under PUK control. Turkish troops were also deployed in PUK-held territory in
July and August, and in KDP-held areas near Zakho in September. Earlier, in January
2000, the KDP and the PUK adopted a unified policy to expel the PKK from
Iraqi Kurdistan.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
The “oil-for-food”humanitarian relief program for Iraq was extended for a further
six months on December 5, 2000, under Security Council Resolution 1330.
The Sanctions Committee was requested to approve lists of supplies and equipment
in the electricity and housing sectors for “fast-track”approval procedures and
to expand lists in other sectors. It approved the reduction of the allocation for the
U.N. Compensation Fund from 30 percent to 25 percent, transferring the additional
funds to meet the costs of humanitarian supplies to vulnerable groups in
central and southern Iraq. It also allowed funds of up to 600 million euros to be
used for the cost of installation and maintenance of the oil industry.
Divisions within the Security Council on the sanctions policy were evident during
a debate over a draft resolution proposed by the U.K. on May 22, aimed at introducing
“smart sanctions” by removing most restrictions on Iraq’s civilian imports
while tightening controls on military goods and oil revenue. Russia, China, and
France opposed the resolution, in part over the list of prohibited “dual-use” goods
which would remain subject to Security Council scrutiny. Russia introduced its
own counter-resolution proposing the lifting of restrictions on civilian goods once
weapons inspectors were fully deployed, while Iraq suspended its oil exports on
June 4 in protest at the U.K. proposal. On June 1, the “oil-for-food” program was
extended for one month under resolution 1352, giving the Security Council more
time to debate the issue. By July 2, however, no consensus was reached and the U.K.
postponed indefinitely a vote on its draft resolution. The “oil-for-food” program
was renewed for a further five months on July 3 under resolution 1360.
Weapons inspectors of the U.N.Monitoring,Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), continued to be denied access to Iraq,with the government
maintaining its rejection of resolution 1284.Talks held between Iraqi and U.N. officials
in February failed to resolve the deadlock over weapons inspections, and
UNMOVIC Executive Chairman Hans Blix said that documents submitted by Iraq
as evidence that it no longer had weapons of mass destruction contained “very little
new data.”
The Iraqi government also denied Yuli Vorontsov, the secretary-general’s highlevel
coordinator for the return of missing property and missing persons from Iraq
to Kuwait, access to the country. In March, Vorontsov said Iraq was concealing
information about an estimated 605 Kuwaiti and third-country nationals unaccounted
for since February 1991. On July 3, Foreign Ministry officials rejected as
“false facts” information submitted by Vorontsov to the Security Council on April
20, saying that his role was “partisan and less than objective.”The Iraqi government
declined to participate in a meeting of the Tripartite Commission scheduled for
July 19 under ICRC auspices, saying its participation was conditional on the withdrawal
of the U.S. and the U.K. from the Tripartite Commission. It also called on
Kuwait to account for an estimated 1,142 Iraqis which it said remained unaccounted
for since 1991. In August, the Security Council urged Iraq to cooperate
with Vorontsov and with the ICRC to clarify the fate of those missing.
On February 14, Benon Sevan, executive director of the U.N. Office of the Iraq
Program (OIP), criticized Iraq for failing to utilize increased oil revenues “to reduce
current malnutrition levels and improve the health status of the Iraqi people,” saying
that the sums allocated for this in the government’s distribution plan were not
“commensurate” with the problem. In a statement to the Security Council on
March 8, he expressed “grave concern over the unacceptably high level of holds
placed on applications,” including “some essential items required for key sectors
such as electricity.”He urged “all parties concerned, including the Government of
Iraq, to depoliticize and facilitate the program’s implementation in order to alleviate
the continued suffering of the Iraqi people.”In mid-April, the OIP said the Sanctions
Committee had delayed some 1,685 contracts valued at U.S. $3.44 billion.
Relations with the U.N. deteriorated further when a Foreign Ministry official
accused the OIP in July of financial mismanagement and impropriety, and in
August requested regular audits of “oil-for-food” revenues by “independent, legal
and neutral accountants.” Iraq also accused the U.N. in July of deliberately delaying
a visit by World Health Organization (WHO) experts, adding that Sevan was “prejudiced
against Iraq.” On September 5, Foreign Minister Naji Sabri al-Hadithi
announced that Iraq had expelled the previous day five OIP personnel based in
Baghdad, allegedly for supplying security information to “enemy states.” A sixth
OIP employee had been expelled on August 31, and two peacekeepers of the U.N.
Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM) on August 22 for allegedly violating
“standard operating procedures by . . . taking photographs.” During a Security
Council debate on Iraq on September 6, Iraq’s U.N. ambassador Muhammad al-
Douri accused the U.N. of sending “spies” to Iraq. U.N. officials denied these
charges, saying that Iraq had failed to provide any supporting evidence, and that the
OIP had decided to “withdraw these personnel for strictly safety reasons.” Two
other UNIKOM peacekeepers had left Iraq in April after government officials made similar complaints against them. On October 25, Sevan announced he had submitted
documents to the Security Council providing evidence that Iraqi oil estimated
at U.S. $10 million was smuggled in violation of U.N. sanctions. The
government denied the charges.
Eight WHO experts visited Iraq from August 27 to 31 to finalize agreements with
the government on research to be conducted on non-communicable diseases and
congenital malformations in the country. In a September 5 statement, WHO
announced that one major area of research agreed was a “study of environmental
and other risk factors (including depleted uranium) to health.” The government
said that increases in cancers and birth defects among Iraqis were linked to the use
of depleted uranium by allied forces during the 1991 Gulf war, and had requested
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the U.N. Environment Programme
(UNEP) to sanction a fact-finding visit.
In a December 4, 2000 resolution, the General Assembly condemned “systematic,
widespread and extremely grave violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law by the Government of Iraq, resulting in an all-pervasive
repression and oppression sustained by broad-based discrimination and widespread
terror.”These included summary and arbitrary executions, routine and systematic
torture,widespread use of the death penalty, and the repression of political
opponents and their families. It urged the government to abide by its international
human rights and humanitarian law obligations, to cooperate with U.N. human
rights mechanisms, to implement relevant Security Council resolutions, and to
cooperate with the Tripartite Commission over the fate of persons unaccounted for
since the withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait in 1991. The resolution also reiterated
its call for the special rapporteur to be granted access to the country.
In a January 16 report to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the special
rapporteur on Iraq Andreas Mavrommatis said he continued to receive allegations
of human rights violations by the government. These included arbitrary executions,
frequent arrests of Shi’a religious figures and students, torture and ill-treatment
of detainees, the retroactive application of death penalty legislation, and the
forcible expulsion of Kurds and others from the Kirkuk region.The rapporteur said
it was “absolutely necessary” that he be allowed to visit Iraq “to verify the truthfulness
of the accounts received” and urged the government to agree to this. On April
18, the commission renewed the rapporteur’s mandate for another year, condemned
continuing violations and urged the government to cooperate with U.N.
mechanisms and grant the special rapporteur access to Iraq. In a report to the General
Assembly in September, the rapporteur detailed additional information on
abuses against women, religious persecution, torture and extrajudicial killings, and
on the humanitarian situation in Iraq. By November, the government had still not
permitted him to visit the country.
On August 16, the U.N. Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of
Human Rights decided, without a vote, to reiterate its appeal to the international
community and to the Security Council for the lifting of “the embargo provisions
affecting the humanitarian situation of the population of Iraq.” It also urged all
governments, including that of Iraq, to facilitate the delivery of food, medical supplies,
and other basic needs.
European Union
In May, the European Commission announced an increased “humanitarian
assistance package” for Iraq. It allocated a total of 13 million euros for the year
through the European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO), maintaining
the E.U.’s position as Iraq’s largest humanitarian aid donor. The program was
intended to fund projects in central and southern Iraq run by U.N. specialized
agencies and NGOs in the areas of health, water and sanitation, and social rehabilitation.
In a resolution adopted on November 30, 2000, on the progress achieved in the
implementation of the common foreign and security policy (CFSP), the European
Parliament urged “the Council and Member States to take the initiative at the
United Nations to propose the formation of an ad-hoc International Tribunal on
Iraq to investigate the responsibility of Saddam Hussain’s regime in crimes of war,
crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide.”
The European Parliament debated Iraq on March 1, focusing on continued air
strikes by U.S. and U.K. forces. Commissioner for External Relations Chris Patten
stressed the importance of maintaining sanctions until Iraq complied with Security
Council resolutions concerning weapons inspections, but noted the importance
of reviewing overall policy toward Iraq and “the possibility of replacing the
present sanction regime by a ‘smart sanctions program’ and other appropriate
measures,”while ensuring that Iraq did not develop weapons of mass destruction.
United States
Secretary of State Colin Powell testified before the International Relations Committee
of the House of Representatives on March 7 that the Bush administration
would review policy toward the economic embargo on Iraq, the “no-fly zones,”and
assistance to the Iraqi opposition.He said the sanctions “were starting to fall apart”
and needed to be focused more clearly on preventing Iraq from developing
weapons of mass destruction, while refuting claims that this represented an
“easing” of pressure on the Iraqi authorities. In May, the U.S. backed a resolution
introduced by the U.K. at a Security Council debate on Iraq,which aimed at removing
restrictions on almost all civilian exports to Iraq while tightening controls
over arms imports and over the smuggling of Iraqi oil through its neighboring
countries.
The U.S. and the U.K. continued to police the “no-fly zones” over northern and
southern Iraq from bases in Turkey and Saudi Arabia. In congressional testimony
in March and May, Bush administration officials reaffirmed U.S. commitment to
the policy,which they stated was necessary to prevent Iraq from building up its military
forces and from launching air attacks on the Kurdish population in the north
and the Arab Shi’a population in the south. In May, the Pentagon announced that
two U.S. military commanders overseeing the “no-fly zone”operations had recommended
a significant reduction in the number of sorties being flown by U.S. and
U.K. pilots while maintaining the monitoring of Iraqi troop movements in these
areas.The Iraqi government said three people were killed and eleven others injured after air strikes by U.S. and U.K. planes near Baghdad on February 16, and that a
further twenty-three people were killed and eleven injured as a result of air strikes
on June 19 over a soccer field in the city of Mosul. U.S. and U.K. government officials
denied these reports, and stated that no air strikes had been launched on June
19.U.S.Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said that any such incident “undoubtedly
was the result of misdirected ground fire.”
Members of the opposition Iraqi National Congress (INC) began training in
November 2000 in the collection of evidence for use in war crimes trials as part of
a wider program sanctioned under the 1998 Iraq Liberation Act. On January 10, the
Clinton administration approved U.S. $12 million in aid to the INC for the distribution
of food,medicine, and other humanitarian relief in government-controlled
areas of Iraq. On January 30, the Bush administration authorized the INC to draw
on the U.S. $4 million approved by Congress in 2000 to fund opposition activities
inside Iraq, including the gathering of evidence on human rights abuses by the Iraqi
government. In testimony before the International Relations Committee of the
House of Representatives on March 29, the State Department said that the administration
had “an active program with the Iraqi opposition . . . that could contribute
to a change of leadership in Iraq,” and that over U.S. $6.7 million had already been
channeled through the INC and other groups. In mid-June, the State Department
announced it was releasing an additional U.S. $6 million to the INC to fund the
sending of individuals into Iraq to gather human rights and war crimes information,
publications, and television broadcasting.
In its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000, released in February
2001, the State Department condemned Iraq’s human rights record as “extremely
poor.” It said that “security forces committed widespread, serious, and systematic
human rights abuses,”and that the government continued to be responsible for disappearances,
torture and summary execution of suspected political opponents,and
to subject citizens to arbitrary arrest and prolonged incommunicado detention.
Iraq was also one of nine countries nominated by the U.S. Commission on International
Religious Freedom as being “the world’s worst religious-freedom violators.”
In its Annual Report on International Religious Freedom for 2001, the State
Department said that the Iraqi government’s violations of religious freedoms
remained severe. It noted that in addition to arbitrary arrests, prolonged detention
and torture, “the regime systematically has killed senior Shi’a clerics, desecrated
Shi’a mosques and holy sites, interfered with Shi’a religious education, and prevented
Shi’a adherents from performing their religious rites.”
ISRAEL, THE OCCUPIED WEST BANK AND
GAZA STRIP, AND PALESTINIAN
AUTHORITY TERRITORIES
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Many civilians were among the over seven hundred Palestinians and over two
hundred Israelis who, by November 2001, had been killed in the violence that followed
the eruption of clashes between Israelis and Palestinians in September 2000.
In addition, some 16,000 Palestinians and some 1,700 Israelis were injured in the
violence. The conflict was marked by attacks on civilians and civilian objects by
both Israeli security forces and Palestinian armed groups. Both Israeli and Palestinian
authorities failed to take the necessary steps to stop the security forces under
their control from committing abuses, and failed to adequately investigate and
punish the perpetrators.
Israeli security forces were responsible for extensive abuses, including indiscriminate
and excessive use of lethal force against unarmed Palestinian demonstrators;
unlawful or suspicious killings by Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers;
disproportionate IDF gunfire in response to Palestinian attacks; inadequate IDF
response to abuses by Israeli settlers against Palestinian civilians; and “closure”
measures on Palestinian communities that amounted to collective punishment.
They also mounted a series of killings of suspected Palestinian militants under a
controversial “liquidations” policy directed against those they claimed to be
responsible for orchestrating attacks against Israelis.
For its part, the Palestinian Authority (PA) did little to exercise its responsibility
to take all possible measures to prevent and punish armed attacks by Palestinians
against Israeli civilians, including suicide bombings. In addition, the various security
forces of the PA carried out arbitrary arrests of alleged Palestinian “collaborators”
with Israel. Many were held in prolonged detention without trial and
tortured; others were sentenced to death after unfair trials and two were executed.
The PA also arrested some Islamist and other militants suspected of responsibility
for attacks against Israelis and held them in untried detention.
Israel and the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip
The Israeli-Palestinian clashes continued throughout the first ten months of
2001. In December 2000, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and his Labor Partyled
coalition lost office following an early election for prime minister called by
Barak. Ariel Sharon, leader of the Likud party, won a decisive victory, replacing
Barak as prime minister, and fashioned a governing majority in alliance with Labor
and other, mainly rightwing, parties.
The IDF resorted to excessive and indiscriminate use of lethal force, causing
civilian deaths and serious injuries and damaging or destroying homes and other property. In one case directly investigated by Human Rights Watch, on December
22, 2000, IDF soldiers used live ammunition against a stone-throwing crowd of
Palestinian youth in Hebron district, killing 15-year-old Arafat al-Jabarin with several
shots. The soldiers, equipped with several armored cars and a tank, were
located in a defensible position above and nearly 150 meters from the youths. Given
the distance and the elevation, the stone throwers did not pose the “grave threat to
life” that both the United Nations (U.N.) Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials and the IDF’s own open fire regulations
require before allowing the use of lethal fire. The subsequent IDF account of the
incident did not allege any use of firearms by Palestinians, and said that the IDF had
responded “with riot dispersal equipment.” In another incident, on June 9, an IDF
tank fired flechette shells in a populated area between Gaza City and the settlement
of Netzarim. The shells, which spread razor-sharp darts over a wide area, killed
three Palestinian women and injured three others. IDF officials initially said they
fired in response to Palestinian gunfire from the area, but Prime Minister Sharon
acknowledged on June 11 that the killing of the three women “should not have happened.”
IDF officials said that they opened an internal inquiry, but the results had
not been made public as of this writing.
As the clashes continued, Palestinians fired at Israeli settlers and carried out suicide
bombings against Israeli civilians while the IDF made increasing use of heavy
weaponry, including F-16 fighter jets, combat helicopters, tanks, and light rockets
against Palestinian targets, including PA police stations, security offices, prisons,
and other installations.
Under Prime Minister Sharon, Israel maintained the “liquidations” policy initiated
by the previous Barak administration, targeting individuals whom it accused
of planning or carrying out attacks on Israeli security forces or civilians. The IDF
used snipers, helicopter-fired missiles, tanks, and explosive devices to carry out the
assassinations. When first introduced, Israeli authorities justified the policy as
neessary to prevent a “clear, specific and imminent terrorist threat,” but then
expanded it to include those considered responsible for planning or carrying out
atttacks on Israelis. In some cases, however, it appeared that those targeted were
killed in circumstances where Israeli forces could have arrested them.According to
Israeli and Palestinian human rights groups, at least thirty-five Palestinians were
targeted under the “liquidations” policy between November 2000 and October
2001. In one case under the Barak government, on December 31, 2000, IDF snipers
killed Thabet Thabet, the secretary general of Tulkarem’s Fatah branch and director
general of the PA’s Health Ministry. Israel subsequently accused him of being the
regional head of a Palestinian squad responsible for shooting at Israelis. On January
9, Thabet’s widow petitioned the Israeli Supreme Court to order Prime Minister
Ehud Barak to refrain from “executing people without trial.” The court first
accepted to hear the petition but then changed its decision when the government
contended that the court had no jurisdiction in the matter.
Israeli security forces were responsible for a number of killings and shootings of
Palestinian civilians under circumstances that warranted investigation and possible
criminal prosecution. In January, the Israeli government publicly categorized
the clashes as constituting “armed conflict” and insisted that it was therefore under
no obligation to carry out investigations of wrongful deaths at the hands of its security forces. There was no investigation, for instance, of a February incident where
soldiers opened fire on a minibus carrying sixteen Palestinian workers to their jobs,
killing twenty-year-old Ziad Abu Swayyeh and injuring several others, one seriously.
The shootings took place when the minibus, after driving around an army
roadblock, followed the soldiers’ orders and turned around to go back to al-Khadr,
near Bethlehem.
The IDF opened investigations in only a few cases that it characterized as “criminal”
and “extreme,”but did not contact or interview crucial witnesses to the shootings
or inform the relatives of the victims. One case the IDF military police did
investigate was the wounding of Jad Allah al-Ja’bari, an elderly Palestinian municipal
cleaner, after a journalist filmed most of the incident in which he was shot by an
Israeli soldier near a checkpoint. The IDF said that the soldiers responsible had
received a “severe reprobation” for violating open-fire instructions and that a military
police investigation found that, in addition, the soldiers had failed to follow
normal arrest procedures and to provide immediate medical care, interfered with
the work of an accredited journalist, and provided inaccurate accounts to their
superiors about the incident.
According to B’Tselem (the Israeli Information Center for Human Rights in the
Occupied Territories), Israeli settlers killed at least eleven Palestinians between September
2000 and September 2001 and injured dozens more. Settlers attacked Palestinian
homes, destroyed stores, automobiles and other property, uprooted trees,
prevented farmers from reaching their fields, blocked major roads, stoned Palestinian
cars, including ambulances, and targeted humanitarian workers, diplomats,
and journalists. Following the killing by a Palestinian gunman of an Israeli settler
child, one-year-old Shalhevet Pass, in Hebron on March 26, some fifty armed settlers
fired on the Palestinian Abu Sneineh neighborhood, burned cars and shops,
caused other damage to Palestinian property, and wounded six Israeli border
police. The Israeli authorities rarely intervened to stop or prevent settler attacks
against Palestinians or to investigate them. When they did, perpetrators received
disproportionately light sentences if they were punished at all.
Citing security reasons, Israel imposed the most severe restrictions on West
Bank and Gaza Strip Palestinians’ freedom of movement since it first adopted its
“closure”policy in 1993. Israeli authorities sealed off the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
restricting movement of Palestinians between and within those areas as well as into
Israel, effectively confining them to their towns and villages for extended periods.
The IDF blocked or controlled access to towns and villages by placing cement
blocks, boulders, earthen dams, and army checkpoints on roads. The IDF also
imposed curfews on certain Palestinian areas in response to stone throwing or
shootings to protect settlers’movement along “bypass” roads. The 30,000 Palestinian
residents of the Israeli-controlled area of Hebron known as H2 were kept under
a nearly continuous round-the-clock curfew, but no restrictions were placed on the
five hundred Israeli settlers living in the H2 area. Palestinian drivers complained
that soldiers enforcing Israel’s closure policy often beat and humiliated them and
their passengers, slashed tires, shot at vehicles, and confiscated keys for lengthy
periods.
Curfews, closures, and blockades had a devastating impact on Palestinians’ lives,
obstructing access to health care, schools and universities, businesses, and places of worship. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the closures damaged
water, electricity, and sanitation services. The Palestine Red Crescent Society
(PRCS) said that delays at Israeli roadblocks and checkpoints contributed to a
number of deaths of Palestinians in need of medical treatment. In February, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) initiated a “Closure Relief Program”
and said the policy of isolating whole villages for an extended period was
“contrary to International Humanitarian Law.”
The U.N. special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the occupied
Palestinian territories reported that between September 2000 and October 2001 the
IDF demolished more than three hundred Palestinian homes throughout the West
Bank and Gaza, for alleged security or for punitive reasons, and uprooted 385,000
fruit and olive trees. Israeli authorities also confiscated Palestinian lands in order to
expand Israeli settlements and for the construction of bypass roads, as at Deir Qiddis
village near Beit Sefer settlement in June. Prime Minister Sharon authorized the
construction of additional settlements and settler housing units in the West Bank,
in violation of international humanitarian law.
The clashes involved Palestinian Arab citizens of Israel to an extent unprecedented
in earlier periods of unrest affecting the Occupied Territories. In early
October 2000, Israeli police gunfire killed thirteen Arab citizens and injured hundreds
during demonstrations in Arab towns and villages in northern Israel protesting
Israeli policies in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In response, the Barak
government set up a Public Commission of Inquiry headed by Supreme Court Justice
Theodore Or. Four special anti-terrorist police snipers later testified that they
were ordered to fire at unarmed demonstrators and those wielding slingshots in
Nazareth and Um al Fahm, and northern district police commander Alik Ron
stated that police had not been provided with sufficient non-lethal equipment and
that police snipers used live bullets.
There were new reports of torture of detainees by Israeli security forces after
October 2000. The Public Committee Against Torture in Israel (PCATI), an Israeli
nongovernmental organization (NGO), reported that Israeli security forces kicked
detainees and beat them with rifle butts and other implements, deprived them of
food and drink for long periods, exposed them to extreme heat and cold, and used
other methods that Israel’s High Court of Justice explicitly prohibited in a 1999 ruling,
including sleep deprivation and prolonged shackling in contorted positions. In
March, according to PCATI, General Security Services (GSS) interrogators forced
Iyad Nasser to squat in a painful position for an extended period of time and
deprived him of sleep for seven consecutive days. At the end of May, PCATI called
for Attorney General Elyakim Rubinstein to intervene on behalf of over three hundred
Palestinian minors arrested since October 2000 who were reported to have
been doused with freezing water,beaten,deprived of sleep, and had their heads covered
with sacks during interrogation. On November 23, the U.N. Committee
against Torture expressed its concern that the 1999 Supreme Court decision banning
certain interrogation practices did not definitely prohibit torture, and that
Israel’s policies of closure and house demolitions might, in some cases, constitute
cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.
Israel continued to detain Palestinians for extended periods without charge or
trial. According to statistics published by B’Tselem in October, Israel held twentyseven Palestinians under administrative detention, including Hassan Khader
Shtiyeh, held since December 1, 2000. For the first time in four years, two Palestinian
Arab citizens of Israel—Ghassan Athamneh and Kamal Obeid—were detained
under administrative orders. According to B’Tselem, Israeli authorities held more
than 1,700 Palestinians in Israeli prisons as of October 2001. Prisoners complained
of food shortages and denial of medical treatment.The ICRC reported that its family
visits program to prisoners was severely hampered by Israeli closures and
administrative requirements.
Discrimination in law and practice against ethnic and religious minorities and
other societal groups, especially on issues of employment and social benefits
remained major problems. In July, the High Court ruled unanimously when considering
a petition by the Association for Civil Rights in Israel (ACRI) that Palestinian
Arab citizens were entitled to fair and proportionate representation on
governmental bodies. The court ruled that the principle of affirmative action
should apply to the Lands Council, responsible for supervising the Israel Lands
Administration (ILA) whose twenty-four members included only one Arab, first
appointed in May 2000.
On April 2, 2001, the High Court rejected another petition filed by ACRI against
the ILA, the Jewish Agency, and the settlement of Katzir for contempt of court.
ACRI claimed these bodies had not carried out the High Court’s precedent-setting
Ka’adan ruling of March 2000 banning discrimination between Jews and Arabs in
land allocation. The respondents argued that they retained the right to interview
the Ka’adan family before reaching a decision. They were instructed to do so by the
court within sixty days. In November 2001, the Katzir admissions board rejected
the Arab couple’s application.
Israel continued to detain Sheikh ‘Abd al-Karim ‘Ubayd and Hajj Mustafa al-
Dirani,who were abducted by Israeli forces from Lebanon in 1989 and 1994 respectively.
Israel said it was holding them as “bargaining chips” for the release of an
Israeli pilot, Ron Arad, missing in Lebanon since 1986. On July 4, the Tel Aviv District
Court renewed both men’s detention orders until December 17, 2001, after the
state contended that their release endangered national security. On August 23, a
five-judge panel headed by Supreme Court Justice Aharon Barak ruled that the two
detainees should be permitted visits by the ICRC; four days later,however, the court
delayed implementation of this decision at the request of Arad’s family and those
of three soldiers abducted by Hizbullah in October 2000 pending further consideration
of the case by a full bench of eleven judges. On October 31, 2001, the government
stated officially that the three soldiers captured in October 2000 were dead.
In July 2001, the Israeli ministerial committee for legislation approved an application
for continuity of an “Intifada Law”that would end compensation payments
to Palestinians whose persons or property were harmed during the 1987-1993
intifada and preclude compensation suits by Palestinians injured during the current
clashes.
Palestinian Authority
Security and military courts established by the PA continued to issue death sentences
after grossly unfair trials, and the PA carried out two executions, both in January. Palestinians alleged to have collaborated with Israel faced arbitrary arrest and
detention, torture and ill-treatment under interrogation, unfair trials, and the
death penalty. At least five detainees died in custody; in some cases, there was evidence
of torture. Some thirty Palestinians, including suspected collaborators, were
victims of vigilante killings by other Palestinians; although no one was held to
account for these murders. The PA also arrested and held without trial members of
Islamist and other groups that claimed responsibility for attacks on Israelis.The PA
released most of these detainees in October 2000, soon after the outbreak of the
current intifada, despite concerns that some may have been responsible for attacks
on Israeli civilians. Some of those released as well as other suspected militants were
briefly detained and released periodically during the year. At the end of October
2001, following a series of attacks on Israeli civilians by Palestinian armed groups,
the PA began employing administrative detention orders and detaining larger
numbers of suspected militants.
In other incidents,Palestinians shot and killed Israeli drivers and passengers and
fired at Israeli settlements. Israel cited the PA’s failure to prevent such attacks to justify
its “liquidations” policy as well as IDF attacks on PA offices and security installations
.
Various PA security forces detained and tortured suspected collaborators.
Khaled al-Akra, arrested in February, said that interrogators in Nablus Central
Prison handcuffed him to a window and punched and beat him with sticks for six
days before releasing him. In March, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
reported that a letter smuggled out by inmates of a West Bank Palestinian prison
warned that one of their number had been tortured for weeks to the point where
his life was at risk.
Vigilante killings by Palestinians resulted in the deaths of some thirty alleged
collaborators. In November 2000,Palestinian gunmen shot dead thirty-seven-yearold
Kasem Khlef, suspected of collaborating with Israel in its killing of Fatah leader
Hussein Abeyat. In reporting his death, Palestinian TV showed a caption that read,
“He lived as a beaver and died as a dog.” In February, the PA issued a statement urging
Palestinians not to take the law into their own hands. Later that month, however,
forty-year-old bus driver, Muhammad Musa Abd al-Rahman, was shot to
death when he answered his door. The Palestinian media, citing unnamed Palestinian
security officials, reported that he had collaborated with Israeli security services.
The PA failed to bring to justice those responsible for those killings.
State security and military courts continued to operate despite the fact that they
did not meet minimum international fair trial standards. At least thirteen persons
were sentenced to death, most of them on charges of collaboration after summary
trials.
The PA briefly reverted to a pattern of executions without due process. On January
13, the PA executed Allam Bani Odeh and Majdi Mikkawi after President
Arafat ratified their death sentences. Both men were accused of collaboration with
Israeli security services. Police firing squads carried out the executions after summary
trials before Palestinian Authority security courts without access to lawyers
and without the right to appeal. Bani Odeh was shot in front of a crowd of thousands
in Nablus. Speaking on Israel’s Channel 2 television station,Deputy Qadura
Fares, chair of the Human Rights Committee at the Palestinian Legislative Council said: “In different circumstances, in the future when we have a democratic country,
the defendants will receive all their rights in court, which will assure them a just
trial.”
As of this writing,President Arafat had not ratified eleven other death sentences,
and they had not been carried out.
At least five Palestinians died in custody in 2001, bringing to twenty-eight the
number of detainees known to have died in custody since the establishment of the
PA in 1994. Thirty-six-year-old Salem al-Akra, arrested by Palestinian intelligence
officers on February 6 on suspicion of collaborating with Israel, died in a hospital
on February 27 after being transferred from Nablus central prison. A witness in
Nablus who saw al-Akra’s body in the hospital morgue told Human Rights Watch
that it bore marks of torture: bruising on the wrists and ankles and head. An
autopsy was performed but the results were not made public.
The PA failed to take adequate action against those responsible for killings of
Israeli civilians. In January, three members of the Fatah organization’s Tanzim militia
shot dead sixteen-year-old Israeli Ofir Rahum after he was lured to Ramallah by
a Palestinian woman. Six days later, masked Palestinian gunmen apparently
belonging to Hamas abducted and killed two other Israelis, restaurateurs Motti
Dayan and Etgar Zeitouny, as they dined in Tulkarem. The PA condemned these
killings and said it would inquire into them, but no findings of any investigation
had been made public by November.
Palestinian militants used firearms and bombings against Israeli settlers traveling
on bypass roads and elsewhere.Children were often among the victims, as in an
attack in November 2000 near the Kfar Darom settlement in Gaza which killed two
adults and injured others, including five children, on a bus. On February 11, Fatah
gunmen in Beit Jala shot dead Israeli settler Tsahi Sasson as he drove across a bridge
near the Gush Etzion settlement, and continued firing when an ambulance arrived.
At least seventy Israelis were killed and over eight hundred injured in attacks by
Palestinian suicide bombers and other militants apparently belonging to groups
such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad. On June 1, a suicide bomber killed twenty-one
mostly young people and injured over one hundred others outside a Tel Aviv discotheque;
on August 9, another suicide bomber, apparently acting on behalf of
Hamas, caused an explosion in a Jerusalem restaurant leaving eighteen, including
six children, dead and many others wounded. These and other bombings and
attacks that targeted or disproportionately affected civilians constituted gross violations
of international humanitarian law.
The PA came under severe and repeated pressure from Israel, reinforced by military
attacks on PA installations, to arrest those responsible for planning or carrying
out suicide bombings and other attacks against Israelis.Under its “liquidations”
policy, Israel also directly attacked and killed some of those it said were responsible.
The PA took inadequate steps to identify and bring to justice those responsible for
attacks on Israeli civilians but it did make some arrests. For example, in October,
the PA arrested forty-five people associated with the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine (PFLP) after the PFLP claimed responsibility for the October 17
assassination of Israeli Tourism Minister Rehav’am Ze’evi, in retaliation for Israel’s
“liquidation” of PFLP Secretary General Abu Ali Mustafa a short time earlier. On November 14, the PA released two PFLP leaders after the High Court ruled that
there was no basis in law for the charge brought against them, harming the national
interests of the Palestinian people.Also in October 2001, the general director of the
Palestinian police issued six-month to one-year detention orders against one
Hamas and six Islamic Jihad members; this was the first use of administrative
detention by the PA since 1994.
PA police also clashed with Palestinian demonstrators and used excessive force.
For example, on October 8, 2001, Palestinian police fired on Islamist students and
other stone-throwing demonstrators in Gaza City, reportedly killing a thirteenyear-
old boy and a nineteen-year-old student and injuring others.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Israel for the most part permitted human rights organizations to collect and disseminate
information in areas under its control, but the policy of closures, blockades,
and curfews restricted their freedom of movement within the West Bank and
Gaza Strip areas. Palestinian lawyers were unable to visit clients held in prisons in
Israel.
Israeli security forces detained several Palestinian and also Israeli human rights
activists. The former included Hashem Abu Hassan, a B’Tselem field researcher, as
well as Adnan al-Hajjar of the Al-Mezan Center for Human Rights, and Daoud al-
Dirawi, a lawyer with the Palestinian Independent Commission for Citizens’Rights
(PICCR).
Israeli authorities arrested Abed Rahman al-Ahmar, a Palestinian Human Rights
Monitoring Group (PHRMG) researcher, on May 24, and detained him without
trial on the basis of secret GSS evidence.His lawyers said he was beaten and shackled
in custody. On November 14 , a military judge extended al-Ahmar’s detention
for a further six months.
On June 15, Israeli security forces arrested Sergio Yahni, director of the Alternative
Information Center (AIC), during a demonstration organized by Rabbis for
Human Rights and the AIC against the confiscation of Palestinian land in the Bethlehem
District.
The PA continued to allow human rights organizations to operate in the territory
under its jurisdiction, but continued to deny human rights workers access to
prisons. On March 24, Palestinian security forces arrested lawyer Nasir al-Rifa’i at
a court in Ramallah: he was reportedly held incommunicado at the Ramallah military
intelligence headquarters and lawyers were denied access to him.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
After visiting Israel and the Occupied Territories at the request of the October
2000 special session of the U.N.Commission on Human Rights (CHR),U.N.High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson issued her report on November
27. She pointed to a range of abuses, including excessive use of force, restrictions on
freedom of movement, and the impact of the conflict on children, and said “the
bleak human rights situation in the occupied territories” warranted urgent international
attention. She called too for an international monitoring presence to be
deployed in the territories and for the states that are high contracting parties to the
Geneva Conventions to take action “to reduce the terrible violence.”
At the behest of the October 2000 special session, the U.N. established a commission
of inquiry composed of three independent experts to investigate human
rights and humanitarian law violations in the territories; this reported to the CHR
in March. It said the “IDF, assisted by settlers on occasion” was responsible for most
violations but noted that Palestinians had also committed violations, either under
the authority of the PA or acting in their individual capacity. It too called for an
“adequate and effective international presence” to be established “to monitor and
regularly report on” continuing violations. Prior to the CHR, European Union
(E.U.) ambassadors in Israel jointly confirmed that “the issues and findings” in the
report “truly reflected facts on the ground” and said all its recommendations could
be fully endorsed by the E.U. However, the subsequent CHR resolution 2001/7,
while condemning and deploring Israeli human rights violations identified in the
inquiry’s report, omitted any reference to Palestinian violations; although the resolution
was adopted by the CHR in April, the United States and Guatemala voted
against, and twenty-two states, including the E.U. countries, abstained.
Earlier, in late 2000, the Security Council informally considered draft proposals
to establish a U.N. military and police observer force in the Occupied Territories
but did not proceed to a vote when the U.S indicated that it would exercise its veto.
In March 2001, the U.S. did veto a draft Security Council resolution calling for the
secretary-general to consult with the parties to the conflict and recommend “an
appropriate mechanism to protect Palestinian civilians, including through the
establishment of a U.N. observer force.” Explaining the veto, chief U.S. delegate
James Cunningham said the resolution prescribed a role for the secretary-general
that was not realistic, given Israel’s staunch opposition to a U.N. observer role, and
criticized its failure to call for the protection of all civilians.
In his October 4, 2001 report to the General Assembly, the U.N. special rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the occupied Palestinian territories also
raised the issue of an international monitoring presence. Noting that “International
monitors or peacekeepers have been employed in many less threatening situations
in the world,” he questioned the failure of “the international community to
persuade Israel to accept such a presence.”
In November, after reviewing Israel’s report on compliance with the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
the U.N. Committee against Torture welcomed the Israeli Supreme Court’s
1999 decision banning the application by interrogators of “moderate physical pressure”
against persons in custody but expressed concern that the court had not
expressly prohibited torture, that Israeli interrogators reportedly continued to use
banned methods, and that the authorities had mounted few prosecutions of alleged
perpetrators of torture or ill-treatment.
In its annual report to the General Assembly in September 2001, the U.N. Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) complained
that it had encountered serious problems in providing humanitarian assistance in
the July 2000 to June 2001 period due to Israeli restrictions on the freedom of
movement of its staff, denial of access to UNWRA staff members who Israel
detained, and threats by IDF personnel against UNRWA staff members, including
Commissioner General Peter Hansen.
On October 25, 2001, the Security Council issued a Presidential Statement that
reproduced and “supported all elements” of a statement that representatives of the
U.S., E.U., Russia, and the U.N. issued earlier in the day in Gaza. This urged the PA
to ensure “strict implementation of the ceasefire” and called on Israel to halt extrajudicial
killings, ensure greater restraint by the IDF, fully respect the ceasefire, and
“move swiftly to ease the closures.”
European Union
The E.U. continued to be the major donor to the Palestinian Authority. Total
project support by the European Commission for the year 2000 amounted to U.S.
$119 million; $80 million represented a “special cash facility” for the PA’s Ministry
of Finance. The E.U. increased its support to compensate in part for the PA’s loss of
$226 million—approximately 60 percent of its public revenue—in customs and tax
revenues withheld by Israel following the outbreak of the intifada. European Commission
funding to the PA amounted to U.S. $106 million from January to October
2001, but this was conditioned on the PA’s adoption of an austerity budget, a freeze
in public sector employment, and consolidation of all PA public revenues into a
single Ministry of Finance account. The E.U. also conditioned its assistance for the
judiciary on the PA’s implementation of a judicial reform draft law enacted by the
Palestine Legislative Council but still awaiting President Arafat’s approval. Other
large donors to the PA judiciary, notably Japan via the U.N.Development Program
and Saudi Arabia via the World Bank, did not insist on similar conditions.
Israel was not eligible for direct E.U. financial aid.According to press reports in
December, France declined to sell Israel tear-gas launchers and grenades that it had
requested.
The E.U. strongly criticized the PA’s execution of two alleged collaborators with
Israel in early 2001 and called for an end to such executions. Subsequently, the State
Security Court imposed further death sentences but they were not ratified by President
Arafat and the PA had carried out no further executions as of November.
The Swedish government, then holding the presidency, delivered the E.U.’s most
comprehensive statement on human rights violations by Israel and the PA at the
CHR in April. In this, the E.U. reaffirmed the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to the Occupied Territories as “binding international humanitarian
law,” praised the balanced nature of the high commissioner’s November 2000
report, and regretted Israel’s refusal to cooperate with the special rapporteur. The
statement criticized and called for an end to abuses by both sides.With regard to
Israel, the E.U. specifically criticized disproportionate and indiscriminate use of
force, extrajudicial executions, closures as a form of collective punishment, and the
retention of laws that discriminate against Palestinian Arab citizens of Israel.With
regard to the PA, the E.U. criticized torture, deaths in detention, use of the death penalty, and restrictions on freedom of expression. During the CHR session, the
E.U. abstained on a resolution that condemned Israeli human rights and humanitarian
law violations in the Occupied Territories but sponsored another that
expressed “grave concern” at continuing Israeli settlement activities “since all these
actions are illegal, constitute a violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time ofWar, and are a major obstacle to peace.”
In a May 17 resolution, the European Parliament expressed its “deep consternation”
at the number of civilian victims of the clashes, condemned excessive use of
force by Israel, Palestinian attacks against Israeli civilians, called for the U.N. Security
Council to authorize the dispatch of an observer mission, and regretted the
decision of some states not to support the CHR resolution condemning human
rights violations in the Occupied Territories. The parliamentary resolution also
urged the European Commission and E.U. member states to “avoid any indirect
complicity in illegal settlements” by strictly applying rules-of-origin regulations to
E.U. duty-free imports from Israel.
On November 24, a spokesman for the European Commission stated that the
E.U.’s executive arm had decided to advise the customs authorities of member states
to require Israeli exporters to deposit funds to cover duties that might be imposed
retroactively on imports that are determined to originate from illegal settlements.
Some member states, however, reportedly remained reluctant to implement this
decision on the grounds that it would impede E.U. efforts to persuade Israel to
resume peace negotiations with the PA.
On June 18, lawyers representing twenty-eight survivors of the 1982 Sabra and
Shatila massacres in Lebanon in 1982 filed a complaint against Prime Minister
Sharon, who was Israel’s defense minister at the time, accusing him of war crimes,
crimes against humanity, and genocide. The suit was filed in Belgium under legislation
allowing prosecution of such crimes in Belgian courts even if they were committed
elsewhere and neither the perpetrators nor the victims were Belgian
nationals. A court heard opening arguments from the Belgian prosecutor and
Sharon’s attorney on November 27 on the issue of whether a Belgian magistrate
could continue his investigation into the charges and start legal proceedings in Belgium.
Belgian officials expected a decision in late January.
On the day before the November 27 hearing, lawyers representing some thirty
Israelis filed a complaint in a Brussels court accusing President Arafat and other
Palestinian officials and leaders of “murder, crimes against humanity, and genocide.”
The complaint named Arafat as the “principal conspirator” in a number of
attacks on civilians carried out by Palestinians since 1966 in both Israel and other
countries.
In Denmark, there were protests after Israel named Carmi Gillon, former head
of the General Security Services, or Shabak, as its ambassador beginning in August.
On July 9, Gillon was reported in Denmark’s Jyllands Posten newspaper to have
acknowledged his direct involvement in a hundred interrogations of Palestinian
security detainees using techniques widely held to amounting to torture or illtreatment.
In a statement, the Danish Foreign Ministry, which had recently
accepted Gillon’s accreditation, said the government “strongly oppos[ed] all forms and acts of torture” but that it was a foreign government’s “own responsibility” to
decide who represented it in Denmark.
United States
Israel, the largest recipient of U.S. military and economic assistance, received an
estimated $1,980 million in military assistance and $840 million in Economic Support
Funds for fiscal year (FY) 2001, ending in September. The administration
requested $2,040 million in military aid and $720 million in support funds for FY
2002, beginning in October. According to the State Department, these funds “will
enable the Israeli government to meet cash flow requirements associated with the
procurement of U.S. origin systems such as F-16 fighter aircraft, the Apache Longbow
attack helicopter, field vehicles, and advanced armaments.”
The U.S. provided an estimated $85 million to the West Bank and Gaza in FY
2001; $75 million was budgeted for FY 2002.This assistance was channeled through
U.S. private voluntary organizations and Palestinian NGOs, and was not provided
directly to the Palestinian Authority.
The Clinton administration continued its efforts to broker peace talks between
Israel and the PA even in its final weeks. On December 23, 2000, President Clinton
orally presented “a series of options” to Palestinian and Israeli negotiators in Washington,
D.C.These proposals reportedly called for Palestinian refugees to be able to
return to their homeland, defined as a “viable and contiguous” Palestinian state
comprising approximately 95 percent of the West Bank and Gaza, while land
annexed by Israel would include 80 percent of the settler population. Further
Israeli-Palestinian talks in Taba, however, failed to reach agreement before President
Clinton (and Prime Minister Barak) left office.
The Bush administration conspicuously declined to replicate the same level of
involvement in trying to bring the two sides together and confined itself to promoting
the recommendations of the Sharm al-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee,
whose report was issued on April 30. The committee, a five-member international
body set up at the Sharm al-Sheikh summit in October 2000 and headed by former
U.S. senator George Mitchell, proposed sequential steps towards a resumption of
peace talks, starting with a ceasefire and “cooling-off”period.The committee, in its
introduction to the report, wrote that a resolution to the conflict required that
“agreed commitments be implemented, international law respected, and human
rights protected.” Although its recommendations were not framed in terms of
human rights and humanitarian law, many were broadly consistent with those
principles, such as adopting non-lethal IDF responses to unarmed demonstrators,
conducting impartial investigations into alleged unlawful deaths, and effective PA
steps to halt armed attacks against Israeli civilians.
Following the attacks of September 11, the Bush administration intensified its
efforts to secure a ceasefire and to restart political negotiations. On November 19,
in a major foreign policy speech, Secretary of State Colin Powell called on the PA to
“arrest, prosecute and punish the perpetrators of terrorist acts,” criticized Israeli
settlements, and said that “the occupation must end.” He announced that retired
Marine Corps Gen.Anthony Zinni would travel to the region as his special advisor to “get that ceasefire in place.” Powell later said that Zinni would remain in the
region “as long as it takes.” As of late November, however, the first steps toward a
ceasefire remained elusive.
The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000 was
comprehensive in its treatment of Israeli and PA human rights violations.However,
generally, the State Department’s criticism in response to specific violations was
couched in language that labeled them “provocative” or “unhelpful,” rather than as
violations of international human rights or humanitarian law. Former assistant
secretary of state Edward Walker, speaking about Israeli use of U.S. helicopter gunships
in residential areas, told the Baltimore Sun on May 27, shortly after he left
office,“It was a clear administration position that this was an excessive use of force.”
The public comments of the press spokesperson, however,were typically limited to
expressions of “concern,” although a press briefing given by State Department
spokesman Philip Reeker on October 23, 2001, was a notable exception, Reeker
stating: “We deeply regret and deplore Israeli Defense Force actions that have killed
numerous Palestinian civilians over the weekend. The deaths of these innocent
civilians under the circumstances reported in recent days are unacceptable, and we
call upon Israel to ensure that its armed forces exercise greater discipline and
restraint.”
Israeli use of U.S.-supplied weapons in the clashes, and in particular the use of
helicopter gunships in targeted killings of individual Palestinian militants, raised
questions among several members of Congress and in the public as to whether such
use violated the Arms Export Control Act (AECA). In a September press briefing,
State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said,“We’ve made it quite clear that
we are opposed to the use of heavy weaponry and in these circumstances, particularly
in populated areas where the risk of innocent casualties is very high,” but he
did not comment on this as a possible violation of the AECA on the grounds that
he wished to avoid “pushing this into a legalistic discussion.”
On September 9, the State Department released an August 17 response of Secretary
of State Colin Powell to U.S. Representative John Conyers, who had raised the
question of possible AECA violations in a public letter to Powell. “Based on our
assessment of the totality of the underlying facts and circumstances,”Powell wrote,
“we believe that a report [to Congress] under section 3c of the AECA is not
required.” The administration “has been monitoring Israeli actions carefully and
will continue to do so,” Powell added.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Israel: Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s
Schools, 12/01
Israel, the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and Palestinian Authority Territories:
Justice Undermined: Balancing Security and Human Rights in the Palestinian
Justice System, 11/01
Israel, the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and Palestinian Authority Territories:
Center of the Storm: A Case Study of Human Rights Abuses in Hebron District,
4/01
MOROCCO
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Selective acts of repression limited the liberalization process started by the late
King Hassan II and continued by his son, King Mohamed VI. Compared with previous
years, there was freer public discussion of Berber rights, the Western Sahara
conflict, and past human rights abuses.But with the occasional move to ban a newspaper,
forbid a rally, beat up protesters, or jail whistle-blowers, the government
remained the arbiter of how and when Moroccans could exercise their rights.
Speaking July 30 on the second anniversary of his accession to the throne,
Mohamed VI called for “a modern democratic state, founded on public liberties
and human rights.”But neither he nor Prime Minister Abderrahmane Youssoufi—
a former victim of repression and longtime human rights activist—proved forceful
advocates of human rights in the face of repeated violations.
The authorities frequently barred or broke up meetings or protests, using powers
provided by the Law on Public Assemblies to prevent gatherings deemed capable
of “disturbing public order,” even when they were peaceful. On January 12, the
Interior Ministry banned a demonstration called by human rights organizations
in front of Dar al-Mokri, a former secret detention center in Rabat. In June and
July, the ministry prevented Berber rights groups from holding a meeting and a
conference. It also banned a demonstration called for October 21 in Rabat against
the U.S. air strikes in Afghanistan. At other times, police sometimes tolerated,
sometimes broke up, sit-ins and rallies by workers and by groups representing the
unemployed.
Trials of over 160 demonstrators arrested when police violently dispersed rallies
on December 9 and 10, 2000 continued throughout much of the year. In the first
instance, human rights activists had planned a peaceful sit-in near the parliament
building in Rabat to demand accountability for past abusers,but police intercepted,
beat up, and arrested participants before they could reach the venue. They were
jailed overnight and on May 16 thirty-six of them were convicted and sentenced to
three months in prison and fined for holding an “unauthorized demonstration.”
The defendants, mostly members of the Moroccan Human Rights Association
(Association Marocaine des droits de l’Homme,AMDH) and the Forum for Justice
and Truth, remained free on appeal and on November 21 were acquitted.However,
none of the police who beat them without provocation were charged. Many
observers believed that the harsh suppression of the demonstration was prompted
by the AMDH’s public naming of fourteen alleged torturers, including still-serving
senior security officials and a member of parliament, and its demanding that the
justice minister bring charges against them.
On December 10, 2000, police in Rabat and at least six other cities forcibly dispersed
demonstrations staged by Islamists. Some 130 persons were arrested and
eventually charged in connection with the rallies. Some received terms of up to one year in prison, but as of this writing they were all free either because appeals courts
had reduced their sentences or had yet to issue a verdict.
Morocco’s private print media enjoyed considerable freedom, but mostly
avoided criticism of the military, as well as direct criticism of the king, his predecessors,
and the monarchy. For much of the year, newspapers were filled with revelations
about the “dirty war” carried out against dissidents during the 1960s and
1970s. Former inmates of the secret Tazmamart prison described the horrendous
conditions that led to the death of half of its inmates. Victims of torture and relatives
of the “disappeared” also told their stories in the pages of newspapers.While
torturers were accused by name, a taboo remained against implicating King Hassan
II in the repression of those years. In addition, the memoir ofMalika Oufkir, Stolen
Lives: Twenty Years in a Desert Jail, was banned in Morocco. The book, a best-seller
in the United States, described how her entire family was jailed for nearly two
decades in reprisal for a failed coup attempt by her father, Interior Minister
Mohamed Oufkir, in 1972.
Delving into sensitive past dossiers proved costly to the French-language Le
Journal, its Arabic sister publication as-Sahifa, and Demain. In December 2000,
Prime Minister Youssoufi of the Socialist Party banned the three weeklies, exercising
a power granted his office by article 77 of the press code. Le Journal and as-
Sahifa had just printed, and Demain commented on, a previously unpublished
letter dating from 1974, in which a Socialist Party leader of the time implicated
party leaders (including, from the letter’s context,Youssoufi himself) in an unsuccessful
coup attempt against Hassan II. Minister of Culture and Communication
Mohamed Achaari said the newspapers had “launched campaigns using false
reports against the political stability of Morocco and its democratic experience.”
After re-launching Le Journal under a slightly different name (Le Journal Hebdomadaire),
publication director Aboubakr Jamaï and general director Ali Amar
were sentenced on March 1 respectively to three months and two months in prison
and ordered to pay large fines. The verdict came in a defamation suit filed by Foreign
Minister Mohamed Benaïssa, citing articles published in 2000 that charged
him with squandering public monies in real estate transactions while serving as
ambassador to the United States. Amar and Jamaï remained free pending their
appeal,which got under way in November. On November 21,Ali Mrabet, editor of
Demain magazine, received a four-month prison sentence and a fine for “disseminating
false information likely to disturb the public order.” The charge related to
an article about the possible sale of a royal palace. Mrabet remained free as of this
writing.
The Council of Ministers on September 6 approved amendments to the press
code that retained the penalty of imprisonment for defamation.The bill,which still
required approval by parliament as this report went to press, also preserved the
executive branch’s power to seize or suspend publications. On several occasions,
authorities prevented, without explanation, the sale of issues of foreign publications
when they contained sensitive coverage ofMorocco.They seized, for example,
the May 17 issue of the French weekly Courrier International, which carried a feature
on Berbers in Morocco and a caricature of Mohamed VI.
Morocco had more than 2,150 cybercafes and between 300,000 and 400,000 Internet users, according to a September 13 letter from the Moroccan embassy in
Washington to Human Rights Watch. The letter also claimed that the government
did not censor or block any web content.However, the Islamist association al-’Adl
wa’l-Ihsan (Justice and Charity), which is tolerated but not legally authorized,
reported that authorities blocked its websites in April, including that of its organ
Risalat al-Futouwa (www.el-fotowa.com). The embassy declined Human Rights
Watch’s repeated requests for comment. Al-’Adl wa’l-Ihsan also claimed that the
paper edition of Risalat al-Futouwa was seized on occasion and that printers were
pressured by authorities not to print it.
The number of political prisoners,much diminished by a series of releases and
pardons in recent years, was further reduced with the freeing of fifty-six prisoners
on November 7. These included Mohamed Daddach, a Sahraoui who was arrested
in 1979 and was serving a life sentence for having deserted from the Moroccan security
forces.However,King Mohamed VI’s assertion, in an interview published in the
London-based daily ash-Sharq al-Awsat on July 24, that “there is today not a single
political prisoner in Morocco,” was misleading as there remained a small number
of prisoners, including Islamists and supporters of independence for the disputed
Western Sahara, who were being held for nonviolent expression.
One political prisoner, army captain Mustapha Adib,had been convicted in 2000
in a military court of disobeying orders and insulting the army, charges that were
clearly formulated to punish him for denouncing corrupt officers and then speaking
out about the retaliatory harassment he had suffered. He was arrested in
December 1999, one day after his complaints were quoted by the French daily Le
Monde. On February 21, 2001, the Supreme Court confirmed Adib’s sentence of
two and a half years in prison and a discharge from the army. He was due to be
released in June 2002.
In public forums,Moroccans made great strides in exposing the acts of repression
committed during the reign of Hassan II. On the government side, steps were
taken to acknowledge past wrongs and compensate some victims. Those official
steps, though modest, were unparalleled in the Middle East and North Africa.
An arbitration commission, created in 1999 at King Mohamed VI’s request
within the official Human Rights Advisory Board (Conseil Consultatif des droits de
l’Homme, CCDH), determined the amount to be paid to victims of prolonged illegal
detention and to the relatives of “disappeared” persons who had applied for
compensation. The CCDH announced in June that the arbitration commission
had since its creation paid out compensation to 712 persons in 376 cases.
Yet critics pointed out that the process of compensating victims was neither
transparent nor accompanied by any larger truth-seeking project. Some relatives of
persons who “disappeared” said they would accept no money so long as the fate of
their loved ones was not revealed.Other victims said they wanted the abusers either
identified or held accountable before they would seek compensation.
Critics also faulted the process for making “disappearances” and illegal detention
eligible for compensation while arbitrarily ignoring other types of abuse,
including torture and imprisonment on political charges. Another flaw to the
process was that the CCDH had recognized only 112 cases of “disappearance” and
said it had no information about other cases. Local human rights organizations have documented some two hundred unresolved “disappearances” in Morocco
and the Western Sahara and believe the number could be as high as six hundred.
The families of “disappeared” persons whose cases were not recognized by the
CCDH were left without any standing before the compensation commission or
any other government agency. In July, a delegation representing the families of
twelve “disappeared” Sahraouis visited Rabat in order to follow up on the dossiers
they had submitted to officials more than a year earlier. They were sent from ministry
to ministry but, as with their earlier initiative, received not a shred of information.
The year’s most sensational revelations about the past came from Ahmed
Boukhari, the first secret police officer to reveal the inner workings of King Hassan
II’s repression of dissidents in the 1960s and 1970s. In an exposé published June 29-
30 in Le Journal Hebdomadaire and the French daily Le Monde, Boukhari also purported
to answer one of the great mysteries of Moroccan political history: the fate
ofMehdi Ben Barka, the exiled opposition leader who was abducted in Paris in 1965
and never seen again.According to Boukhari,Ben Barka died in France while under
interrogation by Moroccan agents, who arranged secretly to fly his body back to
Morocco. There, police dissolved it in acid.
Instead of opening a judicial inquiry into the credible allegations of murder and
“disappearances” proffered by Boukhari, authorities instead jailed him on charges
of writing bad checks. His imprisonment on August 13 prevented him from complying
with a subpoena to testify in Paris before a French judge investigating Ben
Barka’s disappearance. The timing of Boukhari’s arrest and his pre-trial detention
left little doubt that he was being jailed to punish him for speaking out, and to
intimidate other would-be whistle-blowers. On August 27,Boukhari was convicted
and given a year in prison, a sentence that was reduced on appeal to three months.
The trials of Boukhari and Mustapha Adib illustrated the judiciary’s lack of
independence, despite pledges of reform from Minister of Justice Omar Azzimane.
In July, King Mohamed VI promoted Mohamed Mechbal, the military prosecutor
who had prosecuted Adib in 2000, to the rank of brigadier-general.
Travel restrictions,once commonly imposed on ex-prisoners and human rights
activists, were used sparingly. Some dissidents were allowed to travel abroad for
the first time in years. On January 17,Ahmed Marzouki was given his first passport
since his release from Tazmamart prison in 1991, enabling him to go to Europe to
publicize his new book, Tazmamart, Cell 10. In July, Lahcène Moutiq, a Rabatbased
Sahraoui member of the Forum for Truth and Justice, got his first passport
in years to attend a human rights course in France. However, Sahraoui human
rights activists Brahim Noumri and Mahmoud el-Hamed were turned back at the
Casablanca airport on March 24, as they were about to fly to Geneva to attend
the U.N.Commission on Human Rights.Authorities detained them at the airport
for several hours and confiscated documents containing data and testimonies
about abuses against Sahraouis. The documents had not been returned as of mid-
October.
In March, King Mohamed VI formed yet another commission to examine
reforming Morocco’s personal status code. On November 23, he publicly urged the
new commission to work both on proposals to improve the application of existing  laws and on a longer-term “substantial reform” of the code. Women’s rights
activists,who have long sought to amend the code’s sexually discriminatory provisions
(see Women’s Human Rights), criticized the commission for taking too long
to make recommendations.
Minister of Islamic Affairs Abdelkebir M’daghri Alaoui tacitly condoned verbal
attacks by state-administered mosque preachers against Hakima Chaoui, a poet
and member of the AMDH. The trouble began when the Islamist newspaper at-
Tajdid accused her of insulting the Prophet Muhammad in a poem in favor of
women’s rights that she had written and recited on March 8, International Women’s
Day. She subsequently received phone threats and in August was shouted down at
a public meeting.Minister Alaoui commented on the attacks on Chaoui,“While the
reputation and dignity of individuals are to be protected and respected, protecting
the person of the Prophet does take priority, as does upholding sacred, religious and
national principles.”
Prisoners in Morocco suffered from severe overcrowding, inadequate medical
care, unhygienic conditions, contagious diseases, and mixing of minors and adults.
These conditions were described in the first major report issued by the Moroccan
Prisons Observatory, an independent monitoring organization formed in 1999.
The group conducted several inspection visits during 2000 and said its access to
facilities and prisoners was unrestricted.
As of June, 1,479 Moroccan soldiers remained prisoners of the Polisario Front
in Tindouf, Algeria, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), which visited them regularly. Of these, 840 had been held by the Polisario
Front for over twenty years, bargaining chips in the long-festering conflict. King
Mohamed VI softened the late Hassan II’s stance of rejecting anything short of a
single repatriation of all Moroccan prisoners of war held by the Polisario, enabling
two batches of some two hundred imprisoned soldiers each to return to Morocco
during 2000.
During 2001, the ICRC urged the immediate repatriation of all prisoners of war.
Morocco was not believed to be holding any, although it held in prison a small
number of Sahraouis civilians convicted of pro-independence activities, and continued
to provide no information on the whereabouts of Sahraoui civilians who
had been forcibly “disappeared” during the years of conflict.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Morocco’s human rights movement generally enjoyed considerable freedom to
meet, collect information, and convey its perspectives in the print press.However,
this freedom was tempered by the brutal arrest and prosecution of activists who
demonstrated on December 9, 2000, the jailing of whistle-blower ex-policeman
Ahmed Boukhari, and the constant pressure facing rights defenders in the Western
Sahara.
In January, the International Federation of Human Rights held its world congress
in Morocco, the first time a major international rights group has done so in
the Arab world.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
Relations between the European Union (E.U.) and Morocco focused on economic
and social issues following the Association Agreement that came into force
in early 2000. Respect for human rights and democratic principles was an essential
element of the legally binding agreement, but the E.U. did not publicly raise any
human rights concerns at the time of the October 9 E.U.-Morocco Association
Council meeting. European Union policy continued to be guided by a desire to
curb migration, legal and illegal, from Morocco to member countries such as
France, Spain, and Belgium.However, the E.U. provided 1.2 million euros for projects
on freedom of expression, migration, promotion of women’s rights in
Morocco, as well as human rights education and prison reform.
United Nations
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in his April 24 report on the
Western Sahara conflict, urged the “parties to arrange the early repatriation of all
prisoners.” Security Council Resolution 1359 of June 29 asked the parties “to solve
the fate of people unaccounted for” and to “abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law to release without further delay all those held since the
start of the conflict.”
SAUDI ARABIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Saudi Arabia’s human rights record remained poor and there were no discernible
improvements in 2001. The government took no steps to ease restrictions
in the key areas of freedom of association and expression,women’s rights, and religious
freedom, or move toward a more open and tolerant society. The continued
absence of institutions independent of the government, such as political parties
and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), allowed the ruling royal family to
maintain its historic franchise on power, beyond public reproach and accountability.
A May 24 royal decree increased the members of the all-male Consultative
Council from ninety to 120, although the appointed body remained toothless with
respect to any substantive oversight of the executive branch of government.Workers,
including millions of foreigners, were not permitted to form trade unions,
strike, or engage in collective bargaining, and household servants—numbering an
estimated one million foreigners—continued to be excluded from protection
under the labor law.The kingdom also remained off-limits to international human rights organizations, and no one inside the country dared to break the long-standing
taboo on openly scrutinizing and reporting human rights abuses.
On October 1, the Council of Ministers approved a 225-article penal code,
scheduled to come into force ninety days after its publication in the official gazette.
The government said that the code prohibited “coercion, or infliction of physical or
moral harm on those arrested,” granted criminal suspects “the right to receive legal
assistance from a lawyer,” and prohibited “detention or imprisonment except in
jails or special secure units, and then only on the issuance of a court order.”The law
also set a five-day limit on detention by criminal investigators, specifying that
detainees “shall be released if there is no justification or if there is not enough evidence,”
although in cases of “serious crimes” the interior minister also had the right
to detain suspects.The council also approved on October 1 a forty-three-article law
regulating the legal profession.
The practical effect of these new laws, once in force, remained to be seen. Cases
during the year involving detained foreign nationals continued to illustrate fundamental
flaws in the Saudi judicial system that facilitate human rights violations,
including prolonged incommunicado detention, inadequate safeguards against
torture and ill treatment of prisoners during interrogation, denial of access to
lawyers, and the lack of transparency of legal proceedings. Several foreign governments
complained that Saudi authorities had not provided timely notification of
the arrest of their nationals and in some cases had denied consular officials access
to detainees for long periods.Twice during the year authorities used televised “confessions”
to brand suspects guilty of violent activities before they were charged or
tried, a practice at odds with the government’s affirmation in 2000 that “in the
Islamic shariah, presumption of innocence is the fundamental principle in criminal
proceedings.”
One person was killed and others injured in a series of bombing attacks in
Riyadh and Khobar between November 2000 and March 2001, which the authorities
said were a consequence of turf wars among expatriates involved in the illegal
but highly lucrative alcohol trade. (See below.) Two other attacks followed in Khobar:
on May 2, a U.S. citizen was seriously injured, and on October 6, a U.S. citizen
and another victim who was not identified were killed and four foreigners
wounded. Authorities announced on November 14 that the second person killed
was a Palestinian dentist who worked in Riyadh,whom they alleged was the perpetrator
of the bombing.
Three foreign residents of Saudi Arabia—Alexander Mitchell, British;William
Sampson,Canadian; and Raaf Schifer, Belgian—appeared on Saudi state television
on February 4,“confessing” to two separate car bombings in Riyadh that killed one
Briton and injured others in November 2000. The videotaped statements were
made after the detainees had been held incommunicado for over a month without
their respective consulates being informed and were aired before completion of the
criminal investigation or formal charging.According to the Canadian government,
the Saudi interior minister confirmed on February 13 that Sampson had not been
permitted to consult with a lawyer during the investigation stage of the proceedings.
By November, the three men continued to be held in solitary confinement and
a trial was several months away, according to one of their lawyers.
The videotaped “confessions” of three British citizens, who admitted involvement
in three bombings between December 2000 and March 2001,were shown on
Saudi television on August 13. James Lee, James Cottle, and Les Walker said they
had “received orders” to carry out attacks in Riyadh on January 10 and March 15,
and in Khobar on December 15. The Khobar bombing injured one person; the
March explosion injured two. As was the case during the February “confessions,”
the suspects did not disclose any motives for their actions, nor who had ordered the
violence. The British government said it was informed by Saudi authorities about
the “confessions” the day before the broadcast but was not told of the charges or a
trial date.These men were also held in solitary confinement, and as of early November
a trial was not expected for several months.
Two accused Chechen airplane hijackers, one of them a minor, were reportedly
brought to trial in September but denied legal representation. On September 5,
Okaz newspaper quoted Judge Sheikh Saleh bin Muhamed al-Luhaidan, chairman
of the Supreme Judicial Council and a member of the Senior Council of Ulema
(religious scholars), as saying: “A case such as this requires no defense lawyer
because the hijacking occurred and the hijackers are known and have confessed
their crimes.” The same day the Russian Foreign Ministry said that it had not
received “official confirmation”of the trial nor a response from Saudi authorities to
its request for the extradition of the two Chechens, named as Deni Magomerzayev,
nineteen, and Eriskhan Arsayev, sixteen. The teenagers were apprehended following
the abortive hijacking of a Russian passenger plane flying from Moscow to
Istanbul on March 16. The aircraft was forced to land in Medina; three people were
killed, including the third alleged hijacker, when Saudi forces stormed the plane to
release the passengers and crew.
Trials continued to be conducted behind closed doors. A Riyadh court on May
26 sentenced four British citizens to flogging and prison terms for illegal alcohol
trading, but British authorities said they were not notified until May 31. The court
sentenced Kelvin Hawkins to two and a half years of imprisonment and five hundred
lashes,while Paul Moss, David Mornin, and Ken Hartley received lesser terms
and punishment of three hundred to five hundred lashes each.
Relations between the government and the minority Ismaili Shiite community
remained tense in the wake of violent clashes with security forces that erupted in
Najran province in April 2000 and resulted in scores of arrests. In April 2001,
twelve Ismailis signed a petition to Crown Prince Abdullah, complaining about
official discrimination, unfair trials, and prolonged imprisonment, and an Ismaili
delegation delivered the petition and other documents to the palace in Jeddah on
April 29. The next day, a security official arrived in a special bus, which the delegation
understood to mean that the governor wished to see them. Instead, at least
six members of the delegation were taken to security headquarters in Jeddah and
imprisoned there; as of this writing, in November, it was unclear whether they
were still being held.
Death sentences by beheading were carried out throughout the year, mostly for
murder, rape, or drug-trafficking. By mid-November, at least seventy-five Saudis
and foreigners had been executed, according to Reuters. Foreign governments
rarely raised fair-trial concerns publicly when their nationals were sentenced to execution. However, a sharp rise in the number of Indians beheaded on drugrelated
offenses (from one in 1998 to twenty-four in 2000, according to the Indian
ambassador to Saudi Arabia) prompted some Indian officials to press for an Indian
government investigation of the duping of Indian migrant workers, mainly from
the state of Kerala, by drug dealers posing as job recruiters.
The government’s highly publicized ratification in 2000 of the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women prompted no initiatives
to give Saudi women equal rights with men.Women were not permitted
identity cards in their own name, only “family cards” in the name of their husband
or father, did not enjoy freedom of movement, were not permitted to drive, and
lacked equal rights with men with respect to the nationality of their children,
among other discriminatory practices. On April 26, Prince Nayef stated that the
government would not lift the ban on women driving: “It is not possible, and there
are no studies on the subject at all.”
The Saudi public gained access to the Internet in 1999 and the number of users
reached an estimated 500,000 in 2001. The government continued to block what
official censors viewed as objectionable web sites, ranging from pornography to
politics. Ibrahim al-Fareeh, Internet supervisor at King Abdul Aziz Center for Science
and Technology (KACST), which controlled access to the Internet, told the
Associated Press in April that KACST was about to launch a new campaign, with
advanced equipment, to block a further 200,000 sites, raising to 400,000 the number
of sites off-limits to Saudi users
Some seven million foreigners worked in the kingdom, many of them from
India, Egypt, Indonesia, Pakistan, the Philippines, and Bangladesh. Conditions
were particularly difficult for the estimated one million women who were
employed as domestic workers, a job category not covered by the labor law. Over
19,000 women domestics fled from their employers in 2000, a Labor Ministry official
acknowledged in April, citing mistreatment, nonpayment of wages, and other
grievances. The Philippines ambassador told his government that many Filipino
workers in Saudi Arabia were “subjected to poor living conditions, salary underpayment,
insufficient food, inhuman working conditions, and long hours of work
without rest or day off,” Business World (Manila) reported on March 2. He said
Saudi employers illegally “sold” Filipino workers to new sponsors for 2,000 riyals
(U.S. $533) when employment contracts expired or the workers were no longer
needed, although Saudi authorities had banned such transfers of sponsorship.
Some 370,000 Indonesians were employed in the kingdom, most of them
reportedly women domestic workers. In July, the Indonesian government temporarily
suspended sending workers to Saudi Arabia pending a formal memorandum
of understanding (MoU) under which Saudi authorities agreed to afford
greater legal protection to Indonesian migrant workers.Under the MoU, signed in
September, the Saudi embassy in Jakarta was to provide the Indonesian Labor Ministry
“a weekly list of laborers granted visas and the names of Indonesian recruitment
offices handling the process.”Also, all visa applications were to be processed
through certified labor recruitment offices in both countries, and efforts made to
prevent labor recruiters “from manipulating costs, official papers, medical reports
and sending unqualified manpower.”
The uncertain future of the remaining 5,200 Iraqi refugees in the Rafha desert
camp near the Saudi-Iraq border received publicity when dozens of refugees began
a hunger strike on June 23 to press demands for resettlement in third countries.
Those at Rafha were the last of some 33,000 Iraqi refugees who had been held at the
camp since the end of the Gulf war in 1991, of whom 25,000 were resettled in
Europe, North America, and Australia, while some 3,000 voluntarily returned to
Iraq. The suspension of resettlement programs for these refugees in 1997 left those
who remained at the camp no option other than repatriation to Iraq,but the majority
of them did not want to return there, according to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The government reportedly more than
tripled the grant it provided to returnees to 10,000 riyals (U.S. $2,666), but apparently
without effect. In July, the government said the Iraqi refugees were “treated
well,” and denied “allegations of rioting, detention of refugees, or incidents of beating,
insults or torture.” It added that although the Defense Ministry supervised the
camp, it was “UNHCR, not the Kingdom, that [was] in charge of resettlement
demands by the remaining 5,000 refugees.”
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Saudi Arabia remained one of the region’s embarrassing wastelands with respect
to an openly functioning network of independent human rights lawyers, other
activists, and institutions.As a result, victims of abuse and their supporters were left
isolated and vulnerable, and the timely documentation of rights violations was
exceedingly difficult. International human rights organizations were not granted
access during the year, and foreign journalists based in the country rarely investigated
and reported allegations of abuse.
In March, a seven-member delegation from the U.S. Commission on International
Religious Freedom (see below) visited Saudi Arabia and interviewed senior
government officials who, it reported,“expressed a desire to continue dialogue with
the U.S. government on religious freedom issues.”
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In January, the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child examined the kingdom’s
initial report on compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In its concluding observations, the committee criticized the Saudi authorities’“narrow
interpretations of Islamic texts,” asserting that this “imped[ed] the enjoyment
of many human rights protected under the convention.” It cited in particular provisions
of domestic law that discriminated against females and non-Muslims, and
allowed flogging as a judicial punishment.
The committee found “direct and indirect discrimination against girls and children
born out of wedlock, including in areas relating to civil status (e.g. lack of identity cards for females) and personal status (e.g. inheritance, custody, and
guardianship),” and expressed concern that the nationality law did not “grant equal
citizenship status to children of Saudi women married to non-nationals.”The committee
noted that the age of majority was not defined under Saudi law and commented
that as a result the death penalty could be imposed for offenses committed
when suspects were under eighteen years old, a violation of the convention. It further
commented that persons under eighteen “may be sentenced to a variety of
methods of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment such as flogging,
stoning and amputation, which are systematically imposed by judicial
authorities.”The committee urged the government to “end the imposition”of such
practices on “persons who may have committed crimes while under eighteen.”
The U.N. special rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers was
scheduled to conduct a fact-finding visit to the kingdom from October 11-19, pursuant
to an invitation that the government extended in 2000. The visit was postponed
because of security concerns; as of November 5 it had not been rescheduled.
In 1997, Saudi Arabia became a state party to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The kingdom’s
initial report to the U.N.Committee against Torture, submitted in February,
was scheduled to be examined by the committee at its November 12-23 session in
Geneva but the government asked for a postponement shortly before the session.
United States
Ties between the U.S. and Saudi Arabia were cemented by long-standing mutual
military and economic interests. The U.S. remained the world’s leading supplier of
defense equipment and services to the kingdom, with military exports in 2000
totaling almost U.S. $2 billion, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce.
The department also reported that Saudi Arabia was the twenty-fourth-largest
export market for U.S. companies, with merchandise exports of $6.2 billion in
2000, and that U.S. investment in the kingdom climbed to $4.8 billion in the same
year. Saudi exports to the U.S. were $14.2 billion in 2000 as oil prices increased.
Five U.S.-based multinationals were among the eight international energy
companies selected in May for three major natural gas exploration and development
projects and related water, power, and petrochemical facilities, with initial
foreign investment estimated at $20 billion. ExxonMobil, the kingdom’s leading
foreign investor, was chosen to lead two of the ventures: the largest in South
Ghawar,with Royal Dutch/Shell,BP, and Phillips Petroleum, and the Red Sea project,
with the participation of Enron and Occidental. Participants in the third project,
in the Rub al-Khali near Shaybah, were Royal Dutch/Shell, TotalFina Elf, and
Conoco. The government signed preparatory agreements with the companies on
June 3, with the Houston-based Marathon Oil Company replacing Enron, which
withdrew on June 1.
In addition to the State Department’s annual country report, which once again
bluntly described the broad pattern of rights abuses in Saudi Arabia, other reports
contributed additional information and analysis. For example, the U.S. Commission
on International Religious Freedom recommended to the State Department on August 16 the designation of Saudi Arabia as one of nine “countries of particular
concern.” In its accompanying report, the commission charged that Saudi Arabia
“suppresses religious views of both Saudi and non-Saudi Muslims that do not
conform to official positions,” including the minority Shiite and Ismaili communities.
The commission dismissed the government’s claim that non-Muslims were
permitted private worship. It said that the definition of the term was “vague,” and
that individuals engaged in such activity have been “arrested,imprisoned,deported
and harassed by the authorities.” The commission noted that “diplomatic personnel
from Western countries face difficulties in their religious practice” and that the
problems were “compounded for foreign guest workers who have no diplomatic
standing and little or no access to private religious services conducted at diplomatic
facilities.” The State Department’s 2001 international religious freedom report,
published on October 26, found that freedom of religion “does not exist” in Saudi
Arabia, but, as in 2000, the kingdom was not designated one of the countries of particular
concern.
The State Department’s Trafficking in Persons Report, published in July, identified
Saudi Arabia as one of the world’s destination countries for trafficked persons,
and noted that workers from India, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand,
Bangladesh, and the Horn of Africa “have reported being forced into domestic
servitude and sexual exploitation.” The report said that the Saudi government did
not acknowledge trafficking as a problem and authorities had not crafted legislation
or undertaken other “significant efforts” to combat it.
In its annual patterns of global terrorism report, released in April, the State
Department raised concerns that Saudi authorities were not enforcing consistently
their requirement that NGOs and private voluntary agencies obtain government
authorization “before soliciting contributions for domestic or international
causes,” and over allegations that “some international terrorist organization representatives
solicited and collected funds from private citizens in Saudi Arabia.”
Prior to the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, there were clear
strains in the U.S.-Saudi relationship over the Saudi government’s dissatisfaction
with what it considered the pro-Israel stance of the Bush administration. A White
House invitation to Crown Prince Abdullah to visit Washington in 2001 was
rejected twice, in May and in July. The Saudi government also postponed indefinitely
the Washington annual meeting of the joint Saudi-U.S. military committee,
scheduled for August.
Another source of bilateral tension was the June 21 U.S. federal grand jury
indictment of thirteen Saudis and one unnamed Lebanese for planning and carrying
out the June 1996 bombing of the Khobar Towers military housing complex in
Dhahran, which killed nineteen U.S. servicemen and injured another 372 Americans.
The defendants included Hani al-Sayegh, who was arrested in Canada in
March 1997, transferred to the U.S. in June 1997 on a pledge that he would cooperate
with U.S. investigators, and then deported to Saudi Arabia in October 1999 after
he allegedly reneged on his promise and was denied political asylum in the U.S.The
indictment named the Saudi defendants as members of the Saudi Hizballah organization
and identified most of them as Shi’a Muslims from Qatif. On June 21, U.S.
Attorney General John Ashcroft said the suspects had received support from unnamed Iranian officials. The indictment, he said, “explains that elements of the
Iranian government inspired, supported, and supervised members of the Saudi
Hizballah . . . .[T]he charged defendants reported their surveillance activities to
Iranian officials and were supported and directed in those activities by Iranian officials.”
Despite these serious allegations, no Iranian was named as a defendant in the
indictment.
The indictment apparently caught the Saudi government by surprise and senior
officials expressed irritation. Interior Minister Prince Nayef bin Abdel Aziz confirmed
that eleven of the suspects were imprisoned in Saudi Arabia and would be
tried in a Saudi court, but in an interview with the daily al-Riyadh, published on
June 23, he said: “The Americans never informed us or coordinated with us on this
issue.” He also disputed the existence of the Saudi Hizballah group mentioned in
the indictment, saying there was no such group, although some individuals might
be “linked to the Lebanese Hizbollah.” Prince Nayef said on June 30 that the suspects
in Saudi custody would never be sent to the U.S. for trial, adding: “We have
nothing whatsoever to do with the U.S. court, and we are not concerned with what
has been said or what is going to be decided by the U.S.”
Following the September 11 attacks on the U.S., Saudi officials announced “full
support” for international anti-terrorist initiatives, and pledged to keep stable oil
prices and supplies.But there were signs of further strain in U.S.-Saudi relations. In
September, the government withdrew its diplomatic recognition of Afghanistan’s
Taliban government for “defaming Islam by harboring and supporting terrorists,”
but senior officials said they would not permit the U.S. to use its military facilities
in Saudi Arabia to carry out offensive operations against Arab or Muslim states.
U.S.Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld visited the kingdom on October 4 and
met King Fahd,Crown Prince Abdullah, and Minister of Defense Prince Sultan but
he said nothing publicly about the Bush administration’s specific requests for Saudi
government assistance in its global anti-terror campaign.After meeting Rumsfeld,
Prince Sultan suggested that the U.S. had made no requests, and said that the question
of Saudi support “was not a point of discussion.” Rumsfeld, however, stated
that “there are any number of countries that are doing things that are public, there
are any number of countries that are doing things that are exactly the same privately,”
and said the U.S. appreciated the “public support” of Saudi Arabia and “the
things they are doing to assist us.”
But tensions were evident, particularly following the FBI’s September 27 press
release that described seven of the nineteen men suspected of the September 11
hijackings as “possible” Saudi nationals. In addition, the FBI list of twenty-two
“Most Wanted Terrorists,” issued on October 10, included Osama bin Laden, who
was stripped of his Saudi citizenship in 1994, and four other Saudi nationals implicated
in the 1996 Khobar Towers bombing.
By mid-October, Saudi officials began to voice complaints publicly. Prince
Nayef, quoted on October 15, said that the U.S. had provided no “material evidence”
that Saudi nationals were among the hijackers. He similarly criticized allegations
about private Saudi financing of terrorist groups and U.S. requests to freeze
assets, saying it was “unacceptable to take any action without providing the evidence
that there are some [suspicious] accounts in the kingdom.”He added that the government had previously “requested the United States, Britain and some European
countries to cooperate with us in this field, but found no [positive] response.”
The New York Times reported on October 25 that unnamed U.S. federal authorities
were “now sure”that fifteen of the nineteen hijackers were Saudi citizens, based
on “weeks of investigation” in the U.S. and Saudi Arabia, and that Saudi authorities
“assisted” the U.S. in confirming their identities. On October 31, the Washington
Post reported that eleven of the alleged Saudi hijackers had been issued U.S. visas in
Jeddah and four others received visas in Riyadh, citing U.S. State Department documents
made available to the newspaper.
TUNISIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Government critics and human rights activists were arrested or harassed and
hundreds of political prisoners were confined under harsh conditions.Mainstream
media allowed almost no criticism of the government, and genuine opposition parties
were either banned or actively impeded.
Nevertheless, civil society organizations, political prisoners, former prisoners,
and previously silent political figures increasingly challenged the status quo.
The most disturbing new trend was the resort to physical force by plainclothes
police against human rights defenders and critics of the government.But suspected
members of the banned Islamist movement, an-Nahda, remained the chief target
for repression. They comprised most of the country’s political prisoners, estimated
to number 1,000. The vast majority had been convicted on such charges as membership
in “unauthorized” organizations or holding “unauthorized”meetings, and
had not been linked to any act of violence.
Although the renewed activism within civil society did not lead to mass rallies or demonstrations—which remained banned by the authorities—it took new
forms. First, many spoke out against the candidature of President Zine el-Abidine
Ben Ali for a fourth term in 2004, which would require a constitutional amendment.
Second, rights activists focused as never before on the plight of persecuted
Islamists, eroding the government’s effort to portray them as violent extremists.
Third, in cooperation with allies overseas,Tunisian rights activists cited alleged torturers
by name and campaigned to hold them accountable.
Tunis Civil Court Judge Mokhtar Yahiaoui shattered the reserve of his profession
by denouncing the lack of judicial independence in an open letter, dated July 6, to
President Ben Ali.Yahiaoui decried that judges “render verdicts dictated to them by
political authorities and enjoy no discretion to exercise any objectivity or critical
scrutiny.”Yahiaoui was suspended without pay, but reinstated two weeks later after
wide protests.
The judge affirmed what human rights organizations had long contended: that
the justice system was a pillar of state repression. Judges routinely curtailed political
defendants’ right to fair trial, vetoing defense requests to subpoena witnesses
and preventing lawyers from questioning defendants on the stand, on the grounds
that the defendants’ statements to the police or the judge sufficed. Lawyers often
faced obstacles that prevented their obtaining timely access to their detained clients
and to case documents before the start of proceedings.
On November 24, 2000, Judge Tahar al-Yefreni insisted on proceeding with a
trial of eight men accused of belonging to an “unauthorized”Islamist organization,
even though defendants Abdellatif Bouhjila and Yassine Benzarti were semi-conscious
from a hunger strike and unable to respond to questions, and their lawyers
had walked out in protest. The judge sentenced the two men to seventeen and
eleven years in prison respectively, sentences that were confirmed on appeal in
March.
In separate cases, three Tunisians who lived abroad were arrested upon their
arrival in Tunisia, informed that they had previously been convicted in their
absence on political charges, then re-tried and imprisoned. Mehdi Zougah, a
French-Tunisian dual national, was arrested in August 2000 and told he had been
convicted for conducting Nahda activities ten years earlier while living in France.
(Tunisian law permits the prosecution of Tunisians for “illegal” political activities
abroad even when they are legal in the host country.) The charges, which Zougah
denied,were based on the testimony of an accuser who had reportedly retracted his
accusations but who was not brought to testify before the court. Zougah was convicted
again on February 22 and sentenced to two years in prison, one of them suspended.
He was freed March 30 and allowed to return to France, after French
President Jacques Chirac raised his case with President Ben Ali.
Law student Haroun Mbarek was arrested shortly after Canada deported him to
Tunisia on January 6. In a case much like Zougah’s, Mbarek was convicted and sentenced
to three years in prison in March. But on May 26, Mbarek was conditionally
released. In September, he returned to Canada, and on October 4, an appeals court
reduced his sentence.
Lotfi Farhat fared worse than Zougah,who had French nationality, and Mbarek,
who benefited from the solicitude of embarrassed Canadian officials.Visiting from
France in August 2000, Farhat was seized and held incommunicado in a cell at the Ministry of Interior headquarters. There, Farhat later told his lawyers, police beat
him, confined him in contorted positions, and suspended him by his feet while lowering
his head into a bucket filled with dirty water. Allegedly under these conditions,
he signed a confession that was the sole evidence against him when a military
court convicted him on January 31 to seven years in prison for plotting against the
government as a member of a terrorist organization operating abroad.The military
court, whose verdict was not subject to appeal, accepted Farhat’s “confession,” ruling
that his torture claim was “not proven.”
Tunisia’s media remained tightly controlled, despite repeated public prompting
by officials for more boldness. In an interview published in Tunisian papers on May
11,President Ben Ali exhorted journalists to “write on any subject you choose; there
are no taboos except what is prohibited by law and press ethics.” The parliament
adopted revisions to the press code that eliminated the offense of “defaming the
public order” and reduced the number of press offenses punishable by prison
terms.
Despite these welcome steps, cautious critical coverage could be found only in a
few low-circulation magazines. Privately-owned daily newspapers were indistinguishable
from the governmental ones, except for attacking even more scurrilously
the government’s critics.
Bolder publications were either banned or confiscated. Issues of Al-Maoukif
(The Platform), organ of the small, legal Progressive Socialist Rally, were seized at
the printers. Authorities refused to grant the necessary license to leftist journalist
Jalal Zoughlami to launch Kaws el-Karama (The Arc of Dignity).After Zoughlami
published the journal anyway he was assaulted on February 3 in downtown Tunis
by men wielding iron bars who were believed to be police agents. Then on February
6, men in plainclothes attacked Zoughlami and several supporters outside his
Tunis home, breaking bones and bloodying faces. On February 21, when staff
members of the French freedom-of-expression group Reporters sans Frontières
(RSF) handed out Kaws el-Karama in the streets of Tunis, plainclothes police seized
their copies and expelled two of the RSF workers to France. As of November 1,
Zoughlami was still denied a passport.
Issues of foreign newspapers that contained critical coverage of Tunisia were
banned from circulation. These included the April 6 issue of the Paris daily Le
Monde, which featured an interview with the new human rights minister, Slaheddine
Maâoui, vowing a new spirit of openness and reform.
Tunisian radio and television,which were state-run, shunned negative coverage
of government policies, other than tame criticism heard on some talk shows.
In a refreshing exception, government television aired a debate on democracy on
July 17 in which opposition politician Ismaïl Boulahia urged greater judicial
independence.
Hamma Hammami, the leader of the banned Tunisian Communist Workers
Party, entered his fourth year in hiding in February. In 1999, he had been sentenced
in his absence to nine years in prison for “maintenance of an association that incites
hatred,” along with other charges that were frequently used to stifle nonviolent
political dissent. Two of his convicted co-defendants also remained in hiding during
2001.
Mohamed Mouada, the former leader of the legal, once-strong Socialist Democratic Movement, was re-imprisoned on June 19.Mouada had been conditionally
released from prison in 1996 after serving one year of an eleven-year sentence on
trumped-up charges. His re-arrest came after he signed a joint manifesto on
March 20 with exiled Nahda leader Rachid Ghannouchi, in favor of public freedoms
and against a fourth term for President Ben Ali.Mouada went on to broadcast
his views on al-Mustakillah television, a London-based satellite station that
has given a regular platform to Tunisian dissidents. The pretext for the re-arrest of
Mouada,who is in his sixties, was unspecified violations of the terms of his conditional
release.
Political prisoners and ex-prisoners staged individual and collective hunger
strikes to protest harsh conditions, lack of medical care, and the harassment of their
relatives. Among the worst-treated prisoners were Nahda leaders such as Ali
Laaridh and Sadok Chorou,who have served more than ten years in isolation from
other prisoners and were often deprived of reading and writing materials. Generally,
prisoners were confined in overcrowded and unhygienic group cells, and political
prisoners were constantly shuffled among facilities without regard to the
proximity of their families.
In April, parliament adopted a prison reform law that, among other things,
required the separation of pre-trial and convicted prisoners and restricted the use
of force by guards. As of October, it was too early to tell whether the new laws had
improved conditions.No independent organization was authorized to inspect prisons.
However, liberal access was granted to the state-appointed Higher Committee
of Human Rights and Fundamental Liberties. The committee did not publicize its
findings but claimed, in a letter to Human Rights Watch dated August 30, that
its confidential reports to President Ben Ali contributed to improvements in conditions.
Suspected Islamists who were released from prison faced arbitrary measures
such as passport denials, onerous and disruptive requirements for signing in with
the police, and pressures on employers to refrain from hiring them. To protest his
ordeal as an ex-prisoner,Ali Sghaïer took some of his seven children to the market
in Douz in August 2000 and held up a sign that read, “I am prevented from working
and cannot feed my children, would anyone like to buy them?” Sghaïer was
promptly arrested and put back in prison for six months for refusing to obey an
extrajudicial order that he sign in regularly with the police.He was released in February
2001.
Since independence, Tunisian women have made considerable advances toward
equality with men—including in the way that their political and civil rights were
curtailed.At least four women human rights activists were assaulted by police during
the year and one was jailed. Police harassed the wives of suspected Islamists in
jail or in exile. The leading independent women’s rights group, the Tunisian Association
of Democratic Women, was occasionally prevented from convening public
meetings.
In February, a torture victim filed a complaint in the Geneva canton of Switzerland
against ex-interior minister Abdellah Kallel when he traveled there for a heart
operation. The complaint accused Kallel of ordering and supervising the torture of
the plaintiff in the Ministry of Interior headquarters in Tunis.The local prosecutor, citing Switzerland’s ratification of the U.N. Convention against Torture, deemed
the complaint sufficiently well-founded to open a preliminary investigation. Kallel
hastily departed the country.
In August, some human rights groups protested the designation of Habib
Ammar as head of the organizing committee of the Mediterranean Games that
were held in Tunis in September. They alleged that Ammar was implicated in torture
as an official of the Interior Ministry in the 1980s.
President Ben Ali stated publicly more than once that abusers in the security
forces would be held accountable. But the fact that plainclothes police repeatedly
brutalized human rights lawyers and activists in public places, even when victims
filed formal complaints and eyewitnesses were abundant, reflected the climate of
impunity. In an encouraging exception, four prison guards were given four-year
prison sentences in July for torturing a common-law suspect, and the state was
ordered to pay compensation.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
While authorities stopped short of stamping out human rights activity, they
sought to contain it through intimidation and harassment.Two outspoken activists
were jailed and a state-encouraged lawsuit kept the dynamic leadership of the
Tunisian Human Rights League (Ligue Tunisienne des droits de l’Homme, LTDH)
in legal limbo much of the year.
The suit against the LTDH was filed by four of its members, after the chief of the
ruling Constitutional Democratic Rally condemned the outcome of the LTDH’s
internal election in October 2000. The suit asked the court to nullify the elections
on the grounds of procedural irregularities.
In November 2000, a Tunis court issued an interim order suspending the newly
elected executive committee and evicting it from the LTDH’s offices. The committee
defiantly persisted in issuing communiqués critical of rights violations and in
meeting in private homes and offices. The police responded by preventing a number
of LTDH gatherings. The LTDH’s president and a vice-president were summoned
to court on charges of disobeying a court order.
On February 12, the court nullified the League’s election. But that ruling was
softened by a logically baffling decision issued by the appeals court on June 21. The
higher court upheld the nullification but assigned the task of ordering a new vote
to the executive committee whose election had been nullified. The league leadership
continued its activities, although it faced legal uncertainty and its meetings
were sometimes prevented by police actions.
The other key human rights organization was the National Council on Liberties
in Tunisia (Conseil National pour les Libertés en Tunisie, CNLT), which has been
denied legal recognition since its formation in 1998.CNLT co-founder Nejib Hosni
was jailed in December 2000 to serve the remainder of an eight-year sentence on
trumped-up charges of fraud. The pretext of Hosni’s re-arrest was that he had violated
the terms of his earlier release by resuming his law practice. In this instance,
as before, it appeared Hosni was jailed to punish his vigorous defense of political defendants, including Islamists. Supported by the Tunisian Bar Association and an
international campaign,Hosni was freed by presidential pardon on May 12.
Sihem Ben Sedrine, the CNLT’s spokesperson and editor of the online journal
Kalima, was arrested on June 26 upon her return from London,where she had condemned
judicial corruption in an interview on al-Mustakilla television. Questioned
by the court for disseminating “false” news and defaming a judge, Ben
Sedrine remained in prison until August 11. On September 6, she was arbitrarily
prevented from traveling abroad. As this report went to press, no trial date had
been set.
MoncefMarzouki, former CNLT spokesperson, was convicted on December 30,
2000 of involvement in an “unauthorized” association (the CNLT) and of spreading
“false” information in connection with criticism of a public charity’s lack of
transparency. When Marzouki refused to appeal his conviction and one-year
prison sentence, citing the lack of judicial independence, the prosecution appealed
the sentence as too lenient. Although provisionally at liberty, Marzouki, who had
been fired in 2000 for political reasons from his post as professor of medicine, suffered
constant harassment. His phone service was cut off most of the time. Police
kept him under surveillance and sometimes questioned visitors to his home in
Sousse. Barred from leaving the country, he could not take up a university post
offered to him in France. The travel ban continued even after an appeals court on
September 29 converted his one-year prison sentence to a suspended one and
maintained in place the deprivation of his civil liberties.
Other members of the CNLT, such as Sadri Khiari and Nejib Hosni,were among
the many Tunisians arbitrarily deprived of passports for all or part of the year.
CNLT member Omar Mestiri was twice—on December 15, 2000 and September 6,
2001—picked up by police as they were breaking up human rights gatherings,
forced into an unmarked car, and then dropped later in the day at a distant location.
Plainclothes police stationed outside the office of the CNLT in downtown Tunis
often turned away and sometimes assaulted persons attempting to reach it. CNLT
member Khedija Cherif was among several members punched and turned away on
March 1. On March 10, men in plainclothes again assaulted Cherif near a courthouse
and seized documents regarding the complaint she had filed about the earlier
assault.Human Rights Minister Maâoui claimed in Le Monde on April 6 that a
police agent had been sanctioned for the “intolerable” assault on Cherif. But Cherif
was never informed of any follow-up. Later in April, another woman activist,LTDH
vice president Souhayr Belhassen, was slapped and called a “traitor” by men in
plainclothes at Tunis airport, after customs officers had confiscated papers she was
bringing into the country.
President Ben Ali set the tone for branding human rights activists as “traitors.”
In an interview with Tunisian dailies published on May 11, he denounced “the use
of human rights as a pretext, particularly to feed malicious smear campaigns . . . by
. . . some who have mortgaged their conscience to serve certain quarters outside
their country.”
On September 29, police in Tunis assaulted two delegates from Amnesty International
who were on an official visit, and confiscated their research materials.
Jerome Bellion-Jourdan and Philip Luther were stopped by traffic police, then forced into a car without license plates by plainclothesmen who forcibly seized their
belongings. Bellion’s and Luther’s equipment was later returned to them, but not
their documents and film. As of early November, Tunisian authorities had not
responded to Amnesty International’s formal complaint about the incident.
Trials were generally open, and diplomats and foreign observers were free to
attend.However, French lawyer Eric Plouvier, sent by the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders to observe the LTDH trial, was refused entry to
the country on January 28. Also, Tunisia did not lift the de facto ban on visits by
Amnesty International researcher Donatella Rovera and International Federation
for Human Rights ex-president Patrick Baudoin.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
European Union
The European Union (E.U.) expressed concern about human rights violations
to the Tunisian government, but did not suggest that those violations could jeopardize
the three-year-old Association Agreement with Tunisia, the first such bilateral
pact to take effect between the E.U. and a Mediterranean country.
Romano Prodi, the first president of the European Commission to visit North
Africa,met in Tunis with Tunisian officials on January 12. In a public statement that
day, Prodi indicated that his talks focused on trade and cooperation. Rather than
use his public remarks to signal human rights concerns,Prodi praised Tunisia’s economic
reforms and declared, “The European Union respects Tunisia’s decisionmaking
autonomy and does not want to involve itself in the country’s internal
affairs.” Human rights were reportedly higher on the agenda of European Commissioner
Chris Patten when he met in Tunis with President Ben Ali and Prime
Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi on June 19.
The European Parliament adopted on December 14, 2000, a resolution urging
E.U. institutions to “use all the means provided by the Association Agreement” to
promote human rights, regretting that the pact’s “promotion of human rights as a
key element” had “not sufficed to encourage the Tunisian authorities to advance
along the path of democracy and human rights.”
France
France is Tunisia’s leading trade partner. Its U.S. $100 million in loans and grants
to Tunisia surpasses, on a per capita basis, the aid it gives to any other country.
Human rights issues began to strain the close alliance in 2000, as the French government
emerged from its public reserve. Pressure on Paris came partly from a
more assertive human rights community in Tunisia and its sympathizers in France.
In addition, France’s National Consultative Commission on Human Rights on January
25, 2001, urged the government to intervene more in response to the “degradation
of the state of public liberties and human rights in Tunisia.” The national
bureau of France’s Socialist Party—the party of Prime Minister Lionel Jospinissued in April 2001, a statement saying it “could no longer maintain normal relations”
with Tunisia’s ruling party as long as “democratic and human rights organizations
were effectively being silenced.”
In January and February alone, French authorities publicly criticized the conviction
of Moncef Marzouki, the pressures against the LTDH, the refusal to allow
French trial observer Eric Plouvier to enter Tunisia, the beating by “unknown”men
of Jalal Zoughlami, and “the growing resort to violence by Tunisian security forces
toward human rights defenders.”The French embassy also sent observers more frequently
to political trials.
Le Parisien of April 1, quoted Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine as saying that
“democratic frustration was growing in Tunisia” and that the country’s economic
“success” should enable the country “to advance more in terms of democratization.”
In a trip that was delayed over human rights disputes, French Minister of Cooperation
Charles Josselin became on May 31 the first French minister to visit Tunisia
in over a year.According to a report in Le Monde of April 5,Tunisian authorities had
threatened to curtail Josselin’s high-level meetings if he met also with a group of
human rights activists that included representatives of the CNLT, which lacked
legal “authorization.” (See above.) Josselin ended up meeting a smaller group of
human rights activists and was granted access to President Ben Ali and other top
officials, with whom human rights was reportedly discussed.
United States
Although Tunisia was not a focus of its foreign policy, the U.S. viewed it as an ally
in a turbulent region, pursuing market reforms and supporting U.S. initiatives.The
U.S. conducted several joint military exercises with Tunisia, but provided it with
minimal foreign assistance.There were few high-level bilateral meetings during the
year, and no public statements from Washington regarding human rights.
The main U.S. contributions to rights promotion were the frank chapter in the
State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices and a U.S. embassy
staff that actively monitored conditions on the ground. United States diplomats
met regularly with human rights activists and attended many political trials,
including those of human rights defenders and Islamists.
The embassy did not voice U.S. concerns through public statements, although
the embassy told Human Rights Watch it “uses many opportunities to discuss
human rights with the Tunisian government.”
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Tunisia: A Lawsuit Against the Human Rights League: An Assault on all Rights
Activists, 4/01
YEMEN
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The security forces continued to exercise wide powers and to commit abuses,
including arbitrary arrest, torture, and killings of civilians with virtual impunity.
The press came under increasing pressure and the number of executions increased.
Early in the year, unknown persons set off a series of bomb explosions in Aden and
al-Dhali’ province in the south, and kidnapping of both Yemenis and foreigners
remained a major security issue.
A nationwide referendum in February 2001, approved constitutional amendments
that strengthened the position of President Ali Abdallah Salih and his ruling
General People’s Congress (GPC).The parliamentary term was increased from four
to six years and the president’s right to decree laws when parliament was in recess
was abolished but the amendments lengthened the presidential term from five to
seven years, and authorized the president to appoint a 111-member Consultative
Council. Opposition activists expressed concern that this body would allow the
president to offset the role of the elected parliament, thus augmenting indirect
executive control over legislation.
Local council elections held at the same time as the referendum,were marred by
violence and opposition charges that voter registration lists had been rigged.Unofficial
sources reported that some forty persons died and more than a hundred were
injured in clashes with security forces and among supporters of different parties on
election day and in its aftermath; the government said eleven persons were killed
and twenty-three were injured. In one incident reported in the Yemen Times, security
and military forces responded to a vote-counting dispute between the GPC and
the Islah party representatives by opening fire indiscriminately, using heavy and
medium-caliber weapons, in villages in Ibb governorate.Local people returned fire,
which continued for more than three hours. Six persons died, seven were wounded
and thirty-five arrested. Due to disputes over irregularities in at least twenty percent
of the poll centers, final results were never officially announced. The General
People’s Congress claimed a comfortable majority in the councils, but opposition
leaders charged that the authorities had tampered with the results of both the referendum
and the local council elections.
Security forces attached to Central Security, under control of the Ministry of
Interior, and the Political Security Office (PSO) which reports directly to President
Salih, committed abuses with virtual impunity. In July,Abdallah Salih al-Maitami,
an unsuccessful independent candidate in the Ibb local council elections, was summoned
by Central Security, beaten, shackled, and had his head forcibly shaved.Two
days after his arrest, on July 7, government forces entered the old city of Ibb,
detained thirty-five persons apparently at random, searched nine houses without
warrants, and demolished the Maitami family’s house. At least fourteen of those
detained were later released, eleven were held without charges as of this writing. In August, al-Maitami and two others were brought to trial on charges of assault
against security officials. They were on trial in November 2001 and incarcerated at
Ibb central prison, where they were kept together with convicted criminals; al-
Maitami was subject to further mistreatment.
In October, the PSO detained Abd al-Salam Nur ad-Din Hamad and Ahmad
Saif, two visiting academics affiliated to the Centre for Red Sea Studies at Exeter
University in the United Kingdom.During the two-day detention, they were blindfolded
and beaten while being interrogated about “spying for foreign powers, and
maintaining a relationship with Osama bin Laden, Israel and the separatists,” the
latter referring to the 1994 southern Yemeni effort to declare an independent state.
Yemeni officials denied that they were ill-treated and justified the detentions as one
of their “preventive measures” following the September 11 attacks in the U.S.
Police and security forces detained suspected members of radical Islamist
groups throughout the year; thirty-five were arrested in December, another thirteen
in January, and fifteen in June. Further arrests were carried out in the aftermath
of the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, and by late
October, the Yemen Times reported, several hundred “Afghan Arabs”(Islamists who
had returned after spending time in Afghanistan) had been picked up for questioning
in Sana’a, Taizz, and Aden. Many were reportedly released within days,
however. At least eight suspects in the October 2000 attack on the USS Cole were
still held without charge in November, most of whom had been held well beyond
the maximum six-month period permitted under the criminal code of procedure.
Despite the general climate of impunity, three police officers of the Criminal
Investigation Department, Aqil al-Maqtari, Yahya al-Rub’, and Husain Ghanima,
were convicted in November 2000 in connection with the death in custody of
Sulaiman Salih in al-Hudaida. They received three-year prison terms and were
stripped of their rank and dismissed; relatives of the deceased lodged an appeal
seeking to have the sentences increased. In July, eight members of the Central Security
in al-Dhali’ province were charged with the premeditated murder of Hamdi
Salih Husain of the opposition Yemeni Socialist Party (YSP); the trial was pending
at this writing.
The press came under increased government pressure as the authorities
harassed journalists and embroiled opposition and independent newspapers in
court battles. In April, the Ministry of Information confiscated the first issue of
Huquq al-Insan (Human Rights), the monthly publication of “The Activists” (alnushata’)
human rights group ostensibly because the group had filed registration
documents one week prior to publication rather than the ten days required by the
press law. Yemen Times journalist Hasan al-Za’idi was detained by the PSO in both
June and September, each time for about fourteen days, reportedly for being a distant
relative of Al Za’idi tribesmen who had been involved in the kidnapping of two
foreigners.No charges were filed against him.
In June 2001, the prosecution office implemented parts of a 1997 judgment
passed against the opposition weekly al-Shura and its former editors, and suspended
the paper for six months. The paper continued publication under a new
license and name, but another defamation case was pending at this writing.
Defamation, which is loosely defined under Yemeni press law, was the most frequent
charge levied against independent and opposition papers, both by the government and by private citizens; by November, cases were pending against al-
Ayyam, Sawt al-Shura, al-Umma, al-Ra’i al-’Amm, al-Wahdawi, al-Shumu’ and as-
Sahwa. The press also came under attack for “inaccurate reporting.” In September,
the editor of Aden-based al-Haqiqa, Faris al-Yafi’i, was sentenced to a three-month
jail term and a fine of YR 5000 (U.S. $30) for “insulting an official” after he incorrectly
reported that the governor of Aden was about to resign.
The government took action against members of the opposition Yemeni Socialist
Party in al-Dhali’ province, arresting members of YSP-affiliated “popular committees”
after they mounted a peaceful demonstration against police and military
abuses in October 2000, but did not implement its threat,made in 2000, to dissolve
the party. Some YSP-affiliated journalists and military who had lived in exile since
1994 returned to the country and President Salih reportedly ordered the YSP headquarters
in Ma’alla in the city of Aden to be returned to the party. Those detained
in al-Dhali’ by Central Security and the PSO included YSP member Fadl al-Ja’adi
and journalists Ahmad Harmal and Muhammad Ali Muhsin: all three were
detained in November 2000, the first two for more than three weeks on incitement
charges. Authorities prevented access to lawyers during interrogation and denied
family visits.
A new law of associations took effect in February 2001, empowering the Ministry
of Labor and Social Affairs to supervise nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs). Registration was considered valid by default if the ministry failed to
process an application within one month. NGOs were allowed to receive foreign
funds upon notification of the ministry, and foreign-funded activities needed
explicit approval. A minimum of forty-one members was required to establish an
association. Penalties for violating any of the law’s provisions entailed prison sentences
of up to one year and penalties up to YR 100,000 (U.S. $600).
The government restricted access to the Internet indirectly by monopolizing
service and keeping prices prohibitively high. As in previous years, mobile phones
and pagers were rendered inoperable before major occasions like national holidays.
The media reported seventy-three executions for premeditated murder between
March 2001 and mid-October 2001, compared to fifty-two from mid-1998 to early
2001. A large number of other offenses carried the death penalty, among them
armed banditry, apostasy, rape, and treason.
Women continued to face discrimination in personal status law. Only a male
guardian could contract marriage for women who had no way to give meaningful
consent. In October 2001, the cabinet referred to the parliament an amendment to
the personal status law proposed by the governmental Women’s National Committee
to introduce a minimum age—eighteen years—for marriage. However, by
November the proposal, which lacked effective safeguards to protect women from
underage, forced, and polygamous marriage, had not been passed by the parliament.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Local human rights groups conducted training and awareness raising workshops
and lobbied successfully to remove some of the restrictions in the draft law on associations. Local chapters of Amnesty International operated in the major
cities.The government did not respond to reports of human rights violations monitored
by local groups.
The Women’s Affairs Support Center, a women’s rights group, ran workshops on
violence against women, media training, and other issues, and helped train local
rights activists. The Human Rights Information and Training Center and the Arabic
Sisters Forum also addressed issues related to the treatment of women by police
and in prison.
Four governmental human rights bodies—the Ministry for Human Rights, the
Supreme National Committee for Human Rights, and the human rights committees
of the Consultative Council and parliament—continued to operate. In early
October 2001, the parliamentary body, the Committee for General Liberties, published
a report criticizing the use of pre-trial detention by the CID and prison overcrowding.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United States
Relations between Yemen and the United States remained strained in the aftermath
of the October 2000 attack on the USS Cole in Aden harbor. The U.S. Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) reportedly wished to interview certain high-ranking
Yemenis but President Salih told the Qatar-based al-Jazeera satellite television station
on September 5 that “Yemen will not permit the Americans to interrogate any
Yemeni citizens, whatever his capacity.” The trial of eight persons arrested in connection
with the USS Cole attack continued to be postponed, reportedly at Washington’s
request.
Following the September 11, 2001, attacks in New York and Washington, however,
U.S. law enforcement sources reported that Yemen’s cooperation with U.S.
investigations had improved.
U.S. economic assistance to Yemen increased from none in fiscal year (FY) 2000
to almost U.S. $4 million in FY 2001 and $5 million in FY 2002. Expenditures on
training programs for Yemeni military officers in the U.S. doubled to $250,000 in
FY 2002. In its presentation to Congress requesting these funds, the State Department
characterized Yemen as “at the forefront of the Arab world in both democratic
and economic reform” and said the country had “taken significant strides toward
opening its multiparty political system to full public participation, including
women.” The State Department’s annual human rights country reports for 2000
stated that Yemen’s human rights record “continued to improve”but that problems
such as torture and arbitrary detention remained.“There are significant limitations
on citizens’ ability to change their government,” the report said.
UNITED STATES
During the first eight months of George W. Bush’s presidency, the promotion
of human rights occupied a low priority in the administration’s
domestic political agenda. The president and Attorney General John Ashcroft were
criticized for insufficient concern about violations of individual rights and liberties,
particularly in the criminal justice context. Questions about the government’s commitment
to protect basic rights increased markedly as it developed anti-terrorist
measures after the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington. New laws
permitting the indefinite detention of non-citizens,special military commissions to
try suspected terrorists, the detention of over 1,000 people, and the abrogation of
the confidentiality of attorney-client communications for certain detainees,
demonstrated the administration’s troubling disregard for well established human
rights safeguards as it sought to protect national security. Indeed, in taking steps to
defend the U.S. from terrorists, the government adopted measures that eroded key
values and principles it said it sought to protect, including the rule of law.
Human rights violations prevalent during previous years continued under the
new president. They were most apparent in the criminal justice system—including
police brutality, unjustified racial disparities in incarceration, abusive conditions of
confinement, and use of the death penalty, including the execution of mentally
handicapped and juvenile offenders. But extensively documented violations also
included violations of immigrants’ rights, workers’ rights (including those of
migrant workers), harassment of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender youth in
schools, and of gay and lesbian members of the armed forces.
ANTI-TERRORISM MEASURES IN THE UNITED STATES
By November, over 1,100 people, mostly Arab or Muslim men, had been
detained in connection with the government’s investigation into the September 11
attacks and its efforts to preempt further acts of terrorism. The government
stopped updating the tally of those detained so firm figures were unavailable.After
refusing to make any information about the detainees public, including their
names, location of detention, or the nature of charges against them,Attorney General
Ashcroft finally announced on November 27 that 548 detainees were being held
on immigration charges and that federal criminal charges had been filed against
104 people. Senior law enforcement officials acknowledged that only a small number
of those in custody were believed to have links to terrorism. The immigration
charges were primarily for routine immigration violations, such as overstaying a visa, and the criminal charges also were primarily for crimes that seemed unrelated
to terrorism, ranging from credit card fraud to theft. Another two dozen or so
people were being detained as material witnesses. An unknown number of individuals
were held in local and state facilities in relation to the investigation of the
September 11 attacks.
The government’s refusal to reveal all the locations where the detainees were
being confined and its failure to grant access to known places of detention to independent
monitoring groups left many questions unanswered about the detainees’
treatment. Individual detainees reported problems with obtaining prompt access
to legal counsel, harsh conditions of confinement, and verbal and physical mistreatment—
especially in local jails used by the federal government to house
detainees with criminal inmates—but by the end of November it was still too early
to determine if there was any pattern of mistreatment.
The apparent refusal of some detainees to answer questions about possible links
with the al-Qaeda network led to a debate in the media about the possible need for
torture, “truth serums,” or sending the detainees to countries where harsher interrogation
tactics were common. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) denied
press reports that it had discussed such possibilities. Former military officials, various
political and criminal justice analysts, and others publicly argued that
“extraordinary times require extraordinary measures.” As of late November there
were no reports of abusive interrogation measures used against the detainees, but
the public debate over such measures underscored the need for greater transparency
regarding the location and treatment of the detainees.
The administration successfully secured from Congress a new anti-terrorism
law, the U.S.Patriot Act of 2001, that gave the attorney general unprecedented powers
to detain non-citizens on national security grounds.Under the law, the attorney
general could certify and detain non-citizens if he had “reasonable grounds to
believe” they had engaged in any of a broad range of terrorist acts or otherwise
threatened national security. After seven days, such individuals had to be charged
with a crime or an immigration violation or else be released. Certified aliens who
could not be deported could be held in custody indefinitely until the attorney general
determined that the person in question no longer presented a threat to national
security.The government released no information about the number of people certified
under this law.
The possibility of indefinite administrative detention of non-citizens was also
raised by the terms of a new interim Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
rule issued on September 17. This increased from twenty-four to forty-eight hours
the period a non-citizen could be detained by the INS before it had to make a determination
whether the detainee should remain in custody or be released on bond or
recognizance and whether to issue a notice to appear and warrant of arrest. But “in
situations involving an emergency or other extraordinary circumstances,” the new
measure stated, the forty-eight hour rule is suspended and the determinations
must simply be made “within a reasonable period of time.”The language triggering
the exception was signally vague, the time limit for the exception was open ended,
and there was no provision for judicial review of the detention—raising the possibility that non-U.S. citizens could be subjected to arbitrary and prolonged indefinite
detention without charges or recourse.
On October 31, the Justice Department issued a new rule that permitted the federal
government to monitor communications between inmates in federal custody
and their attorneys. Inmates were defined to include not only persons convicted of
a crime but anyone held as “witnesses, detainees or otherwise.” Under the rule,
communications could be monitored when the attorney general had “reasonable
suspicion” that the inmate would use communications with counsel to “further or
facilitate” acts of terrorism. In abrogating the confidentiality of attorney-client
communications and subjecting those communications to government surveillance,
the rule directly infringed on the right to counsel. Nevertheless, the administration
contended the right to counsel was protected because the inmate would be
notified before the monitoring began and a court order would be required before
any non-privileged information could be used by investigators or prosecutors.
On November 13, President Bush issued a highly controversial military order
authorizing the use of special military commissions to try non-citizens accused of
supporting or engaging in terrorist acts. Citing the danger to national safety posed
by international terrorism, the president claimed it was “not practicable” to try terrorists
under “the principles of law and the rules of evidence”that apply in the U.S.’s
domestic criminal justice system. Military commissions—ad hoc tribunals not
subject to the rules governing regular military courts-martial and their due process
safeguards—could function swiftly and secretly. There need be no presumption of
innocence, nor protection against forced confessions. Under the president’s order,
persons convicted by such commissions would have no right of appeal to a higher
court, a key fair trial requirement under international law, and they could be sentenced
to death by a two-thirds majority of the presiding officers. The language of
the order suggested the president may also have sought to preclude habeas corpus
petitions. The precise rules under which the commissions would function had not
been publicly issued by the end of November.
The order authorized military detention and trial for violations of the laws of
war or other “applicable laws” of anyone who is not a U.S. citizen if the president
should determine that “there is reason to believe” such an individual is or was a
member of al-Qaeda; had engaged in, aided or conspired to commit acts of international
terrorism; or had harbored terrorists.Terrorism, however, was not defined
in the president’s order. The order permitted military jurisdiction over non-citizen
civilians in the U.S. who otherwise would be subject to regular criminal trials with
the full panoply of due process safeguards that accompany such proceedings.
Unlike the other domestic anti-terrorism measures, the order provoked strong
protests from across the political spectrum. Some members of Congress urged the
administration to rescind the order, and Judiciary Committee hearings were scheduled
for the end of November and December to assess the order as well as other
administration actions following the September 11 attacks.
OVERINCARCERATION, DRUGS, AND RACE
In 2000, the number of adults under the supervision of the criminal justice system—
behind bars, on parole or on probation—reached a record 6.47 million, or
one in every thirty-two adults. The rate and absolute number of confined persons
continued to grow, although less than in previous years, but the number of inmates
in state prisons fell slightly in the second half of 2000. The rate of incarceration in
prison and jail was 699 inmates per 100,000, making the U.S. the world leader in
incarceration, surpassing Russia’s rate of 644 per 100,000, and giving the U.S. an
incarceration rate that was five to eight times higher than those of European countries.
Including inmates locked in prison, jails, juvenile detention and immigration
facilities, the number of persons behind bars topped two million. One in every 143
Americans was incarcerated, with racial minorities disproportionately affected.
Blacks and Hispanics accounted for 62.6 percent of all state or federal prisoners
even though they represent only 24 percent of total U.S. residents. Almost 10 percent
of black non-Hispanic men aged from twenty-five to twenty-nine were in
prison in 2000, compared to 1.1 percent of white men in the same age group.
The continued growth in the prison population, despite years of falling crime
rates, reflected the impact of public policies that lengthened sentences, imposed
mandatory prison terms even for minor, nonviolent drug crimes, and restricted
opportunities for early release. Also to blame was the high number of parolees
returned to prison, many for technical parole violations. Fifty two percent of the
state prison population had been convicted of nonviolent crimes, including 21 percent
for drug crimes (nearly a quarter of a million persons). Slightly more than 1.5
million state and local arrests were made in 1999 (the most recent year for which
data is available) for drug abuse violations, 46 percent of which involved marijuana.
Four out of every five drug arrests were for possession of an illegal substance. Some
460,000 persons were behind bars for drug offenses, a tenfold increase over 1980.
Blacks constituted 57.6 percent of all drug offenders in state prison,Hispanics 20.7
percent, and whites 20.2 percent.
Confronted with bulging prison populations, soaring costs, and a high percentage
of low level nonviolent offenders among inmates, some states began to move
away from punitive mandatory sentences for nonviolent offenders. For example,
Mississippi enacted a law allowing nonviolent first offenders to seek parole after
serving 25 percent of their sentence instead of 85 percent. Louisiana, almost half of
whose state prison population was convicted on drug-related charges, ended
mandatory prison time for certain nonviolent criminals, including persons convicted
of simple possession of small drug amounts, and shortened the length of
mandatory sentences for drug sellers. In Indiana, lawmakers repealed mandatory
twenty-year sentences for many drug offenders, restoring sentencing discretion to
judges. In New York, legislators debated but did not pass reforms of the state’s draconian
drug laws that would reduce mandate sentences, increase judicial discretion,
and expand opportunities for alternatives to prison. In November 2000,
Californians approved a ballot initiative mandating treatment instead of incarceration
for those guilty of drug possession or use.
PRISON CONDITIONS
Although over 40 billion dollars a year is spent on incarceration, the burgeoning
prison population overwhelmed the ability of corrections authorities to provide
safe,humane,and productive conditions of confinement.Politicians,who had been
eager to enact sentencing laws sending more people guilty of marginal crimes to
prison for longer sentences, were less eager to pay for the costs of operating high
quality facilities.Corrections officials lacked the funds to recruit,properly train and
retain adequate numbers of staff, to provide work, training or educational programs
that would keep inmates occupied and help them learn new skills, or to provide
substance abuse treatment or other rehabilitative activities.Most prisons were
overcrowded, impoverished facilities; many were rife with violence and gangs.
Growing recognition of the importance of preparing inmates for reentry to their
communities—about 600,000 are released from prison annually—prompted more
public attention to the need for rehabilitation programs, but little new funding was
made available.
Inmate violence in prisons caused injury and death. There were more than
31,000 inmate upon inmate assaults, a quarter of which resulted in injuries requiring
medical attention in 1999 (the most recent year for which data was available).
According to the Department of Justice, 10 percent of state inmates reported they
had been injured in a fight while in prison.
Rape was a common as well as a psychologically and physically devastating form
of violence among inmates.Certain prisoners were targeted for sexual exploitation
upon entering a penal facility, particularly those who were young, small, physically
weak, white, gay, first offenders or convicted of a sexual offense against a minor. In
extreme cases, some prisoners became “slaves” of their rapists. Although no conclusive
national data existed regarding the prevalence of prisoner-on-prisoner
rape, the most recent statistical survey showed that 21 percent of inmates in seven
prisons had experienced at least one episode of pressured or forced sex since entering
prison. Some rapes were brutal, leaving victims beaten, injured and, in the most
extreme cases, dead. Staff generally ignored or even reacted hostilely to inmates’
complaints of rape. Indeed, in many cases, they took actions that made sexual victimization
likely. Most correctional authorities denied that prisoner on prisoner
rape was a serious problem and failed to implement reasonable prevention and
punishment measures.
The use of electric stun and restraint devices against prison and jail inmates
caused injury and even death. In Florida, an inmate died after being kept for a day
in a restraining chair that immobilized him. Autopsy results were not available. In
Virginia, prison officials suspended the use of the Ultron II stun gun, which delivers
50,000 volts of electricity, after an autopsy implicated the weapon in the death
in 2000 of Lawrence Frazier, an inmate at Wallens Ridge State Prison. Frazier, an
insulin dependent inmate, began struggling with corrections officers during a
period when his blood sugar was dangerously low. The officers discharged the stun
device three times at him and then placed him in restraints. Frazier lapsed into a
coma and died several days later. In February, criminal charges were filed against six correctional officers in Arkansas who beat handcuffed prisoners and shocked them
with a stun gun and a cattle prod on their buttocks and testicles.
Inmates in Virginia’s supermaximum and high security prisons were placed in
five point restraints—limbs tied to the four corners of a bed frame with an additional
strap across the chest, leaving them fixed in a spread-eagled position unable
to move or tend to normal bodily functions. Although U.S. law prohibits corporal
punishment and five point restraints should only be used in emergency situations,
officers subjected inmates to restraints in response to minor nonviolent offenses,
including publicly masturbating, kicking the doors, and swearing at officers. Some
were kept restrained on their backs for as long as two or three days and forced to
urinate on themselves. The Department of Corrections implicitly acknowledged
the improper practice, settled a lawsuit challenging the use of restraints in one of
the prisons, and instituted a changed restraints policy. The Federal Bureau of Prisons
agreed to pay nearly $100,000 dollars to settle a lawsuit filed by an inmate who
was tied to a bed for five days, forced to urinate and defecate on himself.
Plaintiff inmates in class action lawsuits claimed abusive conditions in supermaximum
security prisons in Illinois, Ohio, Wisconsin, and Virginia. A lawsuit
filed on behalf of Connecticut inmates housed at Virginia’s Wallens Ridge State
Prison alleged that excessive force was endemic. According to the inmates’ lawyer,
prison records revealed that guards shocked the Connecticut prisoners with stun
weapons thirty-three times, and placed them in five point restraints seventy-nine
times over a nineteen month period. In a one-year period, thirty-seven Connecticut
inmates were hit when guards fired rubber rounds. In Wisconsin, inmates filed
a suit challenging conditions in that state’s two-year-old ultra-high security prison
in Boscobel—including round the clock confinement for all but a few hours a week
in small windowless cells, exercise limited to solitary activity in tiny, unheated
rooms without exercise equipment, and twenty-four-hour video surveillance that
allowed female guards to watch male inmates shower and urinate. In the most
restrictive level of the prison, personal possessions for inmates were limited to one
religious text, one box of legal materials, and twenty-five personal letters. Inmates
were not permitted to possess clocks, radios, watches, cassette players, or televisions,
were subject to extreme seasonal temperature fluctuations, and had to conduct
visits other than with lawyers through video screens. They had little natural
light and no access to the outdoors.Those confined at the Boscobel prison included
eight inmates aged under eighteen. Plaintiffs claimed that the conditions of social
isolation, idleness, and limited sensory stimulus aggravated the symptoms of mentally
ill inmates. In October, a federal judge ordered the Wisconsin Department of
Corrections to remove five seriously mentally ill inmates from the prison, to
arrange for an independent psychiatric examination of all inmates with certain
characteristics suggesting mental illness, and to remove from the prison any inmate
revealed to be seriously mentally ill. The Department of Corrections said that it
would not appeal this order.
Mental health claims were also part of a lawsuit filed by inmates at Ohio’s supermax
prison, a facility that confines only 1 percent of the state’s inmate population
but which in a two year period had three suicides, accounting for 15 percent of all
suicides in the state’s prison system.
In recent years,many states enacted laws criminalizing custodial sexual misconduct
and corrections departments adopted programs to address this abuse. But the
problem remained widespread, and investigation and prosecution of such cases
was frequently hampered by lack of commitment or resources. In Alaska, a jury
awarded nearly $1.4 million to five women in a civil action arising from their being
sexually assaulted by a guard. In Indiana, a woman who cooperated with the
authorities after serving her sentence, was subsequently prosecuted for prostitution
because she acknowledged during her testimony that a corrections official had
given her cigarettes even as he engaged in custodial sexual misconduct. Such
response violated the spirit of the law on custodial sexual misconduct that explicitly
excluded consent as a defense and was likely to deter women from reporting
sexual misconduct.
POLICE BRUTALITY
There were thousands of allegations of police abuse, including excessive use of
force, such as unjustified shootings, beatings, fatal chokings, and rough treatment,
but overwhelming barriers to accountability remained, enabling officers responsible
for human rights violations to escape due punishment.Victims seeking redress
faced obstacles that ranged from overt intimidation to the reluctance of local and
federal prosecutors to take on police brutality cases. During fiscal year 2000,
approximately 12,000 civil rights complaints, most alleging police abuse,were submitted
to the U.S. Department of Justice, but over the same period just fifty-four
officers were either convicted or pled guilty to crimes under the civil rights statute
stemming from complaints during 2000 and previous years.
In April, a white police officer, Stephen Roach, shot dead an unarmed black man
wanted on misdemeanor warrants in Cincinnati, Ohio. The response to the shooting
of Timothy Thomas revealed deep distrust of the police among some in
Cincinnati, leading to protests and rioting. Police made hundreds of arrests and
dozens of people were injured in three days of violence and property damage.
In September, Roach was acquitted by the county judge, in a non-jury trial that
he requested, on misdemeanor charges in relation to the Thomas shooting. In
another case, after a jury deadlocked, county prosecutors in Ohio simply dropped
charges of involuntary manslaughter against another police officer arising from the
asphyxiation death of suspect Roger Owensby, while another officer was acquitted
of assault charges in the same case. Prosecutors announced they would not pursue
charges against Cincinnati officers who fired beanbag projectiles against persons
attending the Thomas funeral.
In October, the Justice Department issued a preliminary findings letter stemming
from its inquiry into police policies and practices in Cincinnati. It called for
sweeping changes to the police department’s policies on the use of force, training of
officers in appropriate use of force, and in its record-keeping and mechanisms for
investigating allegations of police abuse.
In November 2000, the Los Angeles City Council approved the consent decree
negotiated between the Justice Department and city officials following the Justice Department’s inquiry into police policies and practices in the city. In June 2001, a
federal judge approved the agreement, making Los Angeles’s police department
only the third city force to be required to operate under a federal consent decree following
Justice Department “pattern or practice” civil rights inquiries. (Police forces
in Steubenville, Ohio and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania operated under similar consent
decrees, as did the New Jersey State Police.) The decree established an outside monitor
to ensure that the department collects data on the race of people subjected to
vehicle and pedestrian stops and implements a computerized system for tracking
complaints, disciplinary actions, and other data regarding officers’ performance,
among other reform requirements.
In New York City, however, it was reported in May 2001 that a Justice Department
“pattern or practice” inquiry into the use of excessive force that began after
the August 1997 assault on Abner Louima was dropped by the Justice Department,
while a separate inquiry into alleged racial profiling by the department’s force
stalled. Information about progress in approximately fifteen other pending
inquiries into other police departments’ policies and practices was not made public.
In the District of Columbia, city officials and the Justice Department came to an
agreement to make reforms in the city’s police department after the police chief
requested the Justice Department’s assistance in dealing with officers’ use of excessive
force and the department’s poor accountability systems.
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
issued its first report reviewing U.S. compliance with the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD). The committee commended
the “detailed, frank and comprehensive”U.S. compliance report despite its
being submitted five years late, and noted U.S. progress in some areas in addressing
racial discrimination and the extensive constitutional and legislative framework for
the protection of civil rights.
The committee also expressed many concerns about continuing racial discrimination
and the U.S. failure to live up to key provisions of CERD, noting that the
U.S. had failed to implement the treaty and had too limited an understanding of the
scope of the treaty’s protections. In particular, the committee pointed to the obligation
on the U.S. to prohibit racial discrimination in all its forms, including practices
and legislation that, while not discriminatory by intent, may be so in effect.
The committee recommended that the U.S. review existing laws and policies to
ensure effective protection against discrimination and the elimination of any
unjustifiable disparate impact, as required by CERD.
Other areas of concern highlighted by the committee included police brutality,
notably against minority groups and foreigners; disproportionately high incarceration
rates of African-Americans and Hispanics and the need to ensure equal
treatment in the criminal justice system; racial disparities in the application in the
death penalty; felony disenfranchisement, particularly affecting minorities after
they have served criminal sentences; treatment of indigenous peoples; and racial
discrimination and disparities in housing, employment, education, and health care. The committee also noted that officials at the federal, state, and local level
failed to collect statistics necessary to determine the extent of discrimination and
official response to it.
Responding to questions put by the committee,U.S. officials failed to accept the
scope and obligations of CERD: they repeated the contention that intentional discrimination
is prohibited by U.S. law, while ignoring the disparate impact provisions
of CERD. For example, the written response of the U.S. to the committee’s
questions, dismissed concerns about disparate incarceration rates by pointing to
various causes for those disparities but without offering any clear plan to comply
with the treaty’s provisions regarding disparate impact.
The U.S. response also stated that there was no need to enact legislation to
implement CERD domestically, arguing that U.S. law was already in compliance
with its provisions. It acknowledged that the U.S. had no centralized data system for
recording complaints of racial discrimination at the local, state, or federal levels,
and at the same time insisted that there was no pervasive discrimination problem
without providing any data to support this contention.
In September, the U.S. abruptly and publicly withdrew its delegation from the
United Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR) in Durban, South Africa, citing concern
about references to Zionism in draft documents before the conference.However, it
was clear that the Bush administration also felt serious unease about calls made
within the WCAR context for reparations for slavery and other forms of severe
racial discrimination in the United States.The administration had already signaled
its lack of support for the conference through its failure to contribute significant
funding or to identify goals it hoped to achieve other than preventing examination
of past practices in the U.S. By not participating, the administration missed an
important opportunity to review both the positive and negative aspects of its
record on racial discrimination and plans to address continuing shortcomings.
Many U.S. nongovernmental civil rights groups attended the WCAR, however, and
contributed to its declaration and program of action to intensify the struggle
against racial, ethnic, and other forms of discrimination.
HATE CRIMES
Following the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, private individuals
committed xenophobic acts of harassment and aggression against Muslims,
Sikhs, and people ofMiddle Eastern and South Asian descent. By November,monitoring
groups around the country had received almost 1,000 complaints alleging
crimes apparently motivated by bias and hate, including four murders. Violent
assaults, death threats, shootings, and vandalism at mosques and Sikh temples were
reported; at several U.S. universities foreign students from the Middle East and
South Asia were attacked; and members of the affected communities feared to leave
their homes, go to work, or wear traditional clothing in public for fear of attack.
Investigations into, and prosecutions of, those responsible for various attacks
against members of the affected minority groups were pending in November.
The initial response of key political leaders was commendable. President Bush, Attorney General Ashcroft,New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, and other officials
urged the public to reject national or religious stereotyping that would blame
whole communities for the acts of terrorism committed by a few, simply because
they shared the same religious, ethnic, or national identity.
IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The anti-immigration sentiment that led to the enactment of the stringent 1996
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act seemed to have
weakened prior to the September 11 attacks. Many public figures commented
favorably on the contribution of immigrants to U.S. economic and cultural life, and
President Bush announced that he would seek to regularize the status of the more
than three million undocumented Mexican workers residing in the U.S.
Immigrants’ activists gained ground not only in the political arena but also
before the U.S. Supreme Court. In June, the country’s highest court ruled that the
government could not continue to imprison deportable immigrants whose home
countries either would not accept them or no longer existed: the decision most
immediately affected more than 3,400 non-citizens then subject to indefinite
detention by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). Supreme Court
Justice Stephen Breyer, for the majority, wrote: “Freedom from imprisonment—
from government custody, detention, or other forms of physical restraint—lies at
the heart of the liberty that [the constitution] protects. The serious constitutional
problem arising out of a statute that, in these circumstances, permits an indefinite,
perhaps permanent, deprivation of human liberty without any such protection is
obvious.”
In June, the Supreme Court also issued a ruling that affirmed the right of legal
immigrants to have their cases reviewed by a court before facing deportation. The
court also ruled that immigration laws passed in 1996—making deportation automatic
for an expanded group of immigrants—could not be applied retroactively.
Detention practices following the September 11 attacks were especially troubling.
As noted, law enforcement officials detained at least 1,100 people in connection
with the investigation into the September attack. In late November, the
government announced that 104 were being held on federal criminal charges and
548 were being held on immigration charges.While it released the names of persons
charged with federal crimes, it continued its refusal to release the names,
places of detention, or specific violations of those held on immigration charges.
Human Rights Watch and other U.S.-based civil and human rights group filed a
Freedom of Information Act request in October to seek information about the
detainees.Human Rights Watch also sought direct access to detainees in custody in
relation to the investigation of the September 11 attacks. By late November, INS
officials had denied the Human Rights Watch request to visit one New Jersey jail
holding INS detainees and authorities had failed to respond to other, similar
requests for access at other facilities.
Some attorneys representing detainees reported difficulty in locating and advising
their clients; others said that the authorities did not properly advise their clients of their rights. It took days for some families to find out where their detained relatives
were being held.
In recent years, the number of people in INS detention has grown dramatically
to an average nationally of 22,000 per day, compared to 6,700 per day in 1995. This
increasing population continued to seriously impact the capacity of the INS to provide
humane and safe detention conditions, and a lack of adequate space in federal
facilities caused the INS to disperse some detainees to local jails. In 2001,more than
half of all INS detainees were held in prisons or local jails intended for criminal
inmates, exposing them to treatment and conditions inappropriate to their administrative
detainee status and hampering their access to legal assistance. Asylumseekers,
who by conservative estimates made up at least 5 percent of the detainee
population, continued to be detained as the rule, not the exception, in breach of
international standards relating to the treatment of asylum-seekers. In its own
facilities, the INS implemented some standards regarding treatment and conditions,
but INS detainees assigned to jails were under the direct control of jail officials
and INS monitoring of such jails was minimal.
The INS continued to detain unaccompanied children for lengthy periods
before releasing them to family members or appropriate guardians, and acknowledged
that it held about 5,000 children in its custody annually. Rights groups criticized
the INS for denying full access to independent monitors and lawyers who
represented the detained children in a successful class-action lawsuit challenging
the conditions of confinement for youth in INS custody. In a positive development,
Senator Dianne Feinstein proposed legislation that would correct these and other
abusive conditions for unaccompanied children in the United States.
The 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act’s
expedited removal proceedings, intended to process and deport individuals who
enter the United States without valid documents with minimum delay, imperiled
genuine asylum seekers and resulted in immigrants being detained in increasing
numbers. Asylum seekers with questionable documents were sent to “secondary
inspection”where they had to convey their fears regarding return to their country
of origin. The expedited process was characterized by excessive secrecy, making it
virtually impossible to monitor the fairness of INS officials’ decisions at each stage
of the initial review.
The September 11 attacks sparked several legislative proposals to tighten control
of U.S. borders by employing more Border Patrol agents, whose number had
already increased rapidly to over 9,000,more than double the 1993 total.This rapid
increase raised concern that serious oversight deficiencies that have affected the
Border Patrol, particularly its capacity to investigate complaints of abuse by Border
Patrol agents, would become more acute. As in previous years, in 2001, Border
Patrol agents shot a number of border-crossers in questionable circumstances, in
some cases fatally wounding them. Agents, who were not required to wear protective
gear although this would reduce their risk of injury, said they shot migrants
who they feared were about to throw rocks at them.
Migrants who sought to enter the U.S. illegally by crossing the border with Mexico
continued to die of exposure or drowning in high numbers. In the first half of
2001, 188 perished; in 2000, 499 died. In 1996, the first year for which there was comprehensive data, there were eighty-seven deaths.As a result of the current INS
strategy of concentrating border control in urban centers, many migrants opted to
cross the border at remote locations that required them to traverse particularly hazardous
desert terrain and to depend on smugglers.Many also crossed through private
ranches, to which local ranchers responded by carrying out armed patrols
along the border, in some cases beyond their own property, and organizing volunteer-
based “missions” to hold border crossers. This resulted in the death or injury
of several migrants at the hands of ranchers, and an inadequate response by the
authorities to abuses committed against migrants by ranchers. In August, a rancher
charged in connection with the death of a Mexican border crosser who had entered
his property a year before to ask for water, but whom he shot dead, was convicted
on a misdemeanor deadly conduct charge, given a 180-day suspended sentence and
fined $4,000.
DEATH PENALTY
By November, the U.S. had carried out sixty-two executions since the beginning
of 2001 (compared to a total of eighty-five in the whole of 2000) and 3,717 men and
women were on death row. In Texas, the authorities carried out fifteen executions
compared to forty in 2000, and Virginia executed two prisoners compared to eight
in the same period of 2000.Against this trend, Oklahoma executed sixteen inmates,
a record number for the state.
Public confidence in the fairness and reliability of the death penalty continued
to erode, despite strong support for the June 11 execution of Timothy McVeigh,
convicted of the 1995 bombing of the Oklahoma City federal center that killed 168
people. Polls showed support for the death penalty fell to its lowest point in years—
63 percent—and dropped even further to 46 percent—when life in prison was
offered as an option. Flaws in the death penalty process were highlighted by the revelation,
five days before McVeigh was originally scheduled to be executed, that in
one of the most prominent cases of the decade, the FBI had failed to turn over thousands
of pages of documents to McVeigh’s lawyers, forcing the U.S.Department of
Justice to delay his execution for a month.
The mishandling of the McVeigh case, the first federal execution since 1963,
exemplified the fallibility of the capital punishment process that continued to be
documented in reports from around the country of judicial error, false testimony,
incompetent defense lawyers, and poor laboratory work in capital cases. In May,
following an Oklahoma City Police Department report on multiple errors by local
police chemist Joyce Gilchrist, the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation
launched an investigation into all the cases—including twenty-three capital
cases—in which she had been involved. Oklahoma death row inmate Alfred Brian
Mitchell’s death sentence was overturned because of what the court called
Gilchrist’s “untrue” testimony.
Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, long considered a supporter of
the death penalty, publicly expressed her concern that “the system may well be
allowing some innocent defendants to be executed. “ She cited statistics showing that defendants in Texas who were represented by court-appointed counsel, were
far more likely to be convicted and to receive a death sentence than those who
retained their own attorneys. By September, five men had been exonerated and
released in 2001 after years on death row, bringing the total of innocent persons
released from death row since 1973 to ninety-eight.
The fairness of the federal death penalty system, particularly in relation to racial
and geographic disparities, was also called into question. A September 2000 report
issued by the Justice Department documented stark racial and geographic disparities
in the prosecution of federal capital cases, leading President Bill Clinton to issue
a temporary reprieve for Juan Raul Garza,who faced execution in December 2000.
In June 2001, the Justice Department issued a supplemental report concluding
that there was no evidence that minority defendants were subjected to bias in federal
capital cases. That conclusion was not supported by the data in the report,
which acknowledged the impossibility of acquiring the necessary data during the
review period allowed. The June report, however, did put forward several explanations
for the disproportionate number of minorities on death row, though none of
these appeared adequate when closely examined by Human Rights Watch and
others. Acknowledging the shortcomings of the June report, the Justice Department
stated that it would undertake a comprehensive study of racial and geographic
disparities in the application of the federal death penalty, but by November
the report had not been released.
The June report concluded that there was no racial inequity in the administration
of the federal death penalty because there was no evidence of discriminatory
intent or actual bias on the part of prosecutors.Under the CERD, however, the U.S.
is obligated to prohibit practices that have either the purpose or effect of discriminating
on the basis of race. Commenting in its August report on the U.S., the U.N.
committee observed: “there is a disturbing correlation between race, both of the
victim and the defendant, and the imposition of the death penalty.”
The continued use of the death penalty by U.S. federal and state authorities was
strongly criticized by European countries, notably European Union (E.U.) states, as
inconsistent with human rights principles. In April, as in previous years, the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution sponsored by the E.U. that
urged the U.S. to move toward abolition of the death penalty, and called particularly
for the U.S. to cease executing juvenile offenders and prisoners with any form
of mental disorder. In June, the Council of Europe voted to remove the observer status
of the U.S. and Japan if they did not end their use of the death penalty by January
1, 2003. Prominent former U.S. diplomats also spoke out on the issue in the
press and in a court brief, stating that the U.S. executions of prisoners with mental
retardation hampered U.S. diplomatic relations and damaged the country’s reputation
as a leader in human rights and its foreign policy interests.
In June, the World Court ruled that the U.S. had violated the Vienna Convention
on Consular Relations in the case of two German nationals executed by the state of
Arizona in 1999. Karl and Walter LaGrand had not been informed of their right
under the Vienna Convention to seek assistance from the German consulate;
Amnesty International reported that fifteen other foreign nationals executed in the
U.S. since 1993 had also not been informed of their consular rights. In June, Oklahoma Governor Frank Keating granted a thirty-day reprieve to a Mexican national,
Gerardo Valdez,who had not been told of his right to contact his consulate. In September,
the state’s highest court granted Valdez an indefinite stay of execution. As
of November 2001, 119 foreign nationals remained on death row.
In March,Human Rights Watch reported that at least thirty-five men with mental
retardation had been executed in the U.S. since 1976, even though their mental
impairment limited their moral culpability and harmed their ability to protect their
legal rights.Mounting domestic and international criticism of executing the mentally
retarded spurred five states to enact legislation this year prohibiting such executions.
In Texas, where at least six prisoners with mental retardation have been
executed, and where others remained on death row, the legislature passed a similar
bill, only for Governor Rick Perry to veto it. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the
appeal of North Carolina death row inmate Ernest McCarver,who sought to obtain
a ruling that the U.S. constitution prohibited the execution of prisoners with mental
retardation as “cruel and unusual” punishment, and then agreed to substitute
the case of Daryl Atkins, a Virginia death row inmate, when McCarver benefited
from North Carolina’s enactment of legislation barring the execution of prisoners
with mental retardation. Previously, in 1989 the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S.
constitution did not bar the execution of prisoners with mental retardation, noting
the absence of a national consensus against such executions.At that time, only two
states prohibited such executions, but that number had increased by November
2001 to eighteen states, as well as the federal government, while a further twelve
permitted no executions at all. The Atkins case was awaiting consideration by the
Supreme Court in November 2001. In June, the Supreme Court overturned the
death sentence of Johnny Paul Penry, because the sentencing instructions that the
trial court gave to the jury did not permit it to give due consideration to his mental
abilities.
Prompted by a request from Human Rights Watch, the McAlester Regional
Health Center decided to cease providing the Oklahoma Department of Corrections
with the drugs used in lethal injections. The health center agreed that assisting
the state in the implementation of the death penalty was inconsistent with its
mission as a hospital.
The United States was virtually alone in imposing sentences of death on those
who were children at the time of the crimes for which they were convicted. Eightyfive
juvenile offenders were on death rows in fifteen U.S. states as of July 1, 2001.
With thirty-one juvenile offenders on its death row, Texas accounted for over onethird
of the national total. In all, twenty-three U.S. states continued to allow the
death penalty to be imposed for crimes committed by those below the age of eighteen.
Two juvenile offenders received last-minute stays of execution after their attorneys
presented new evidence or raised constitutional issues on appeal. On August
15,Napoleon Beazley, convicted in Texas for a murder he committed at age seventeen,
came within hours of execution when the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals
issued a stay to enable it to consider whether his first appellate attorney provided
ineffective assistance. Earlier, in March, Missouri death row inmate Antonio
Richardson received a stay from the U.S. Supreme Court. Sixteen at the time of his crime, Richardson may have mental retardation; his case was on hold pending the
Supreme Court ruling on the constitutionality of imposing the death sentence on
persons with mental retardation.
LABOR RIGHTS
There were continuing labor rights violations affecting workers in many sectors.
One particularly vulnerable group was the more than 4,000 migrant domestic
workers with special temporary visas. These special visas, termed A-3, G-5, and B-
1, allowed migrant domestic workers, most of whom were women, to work for
U.S.-based foreign diplomats and officials of international organizations, as well as
for other foreigners temporarily in the United States and U.S. citizens who resided
abroad but were temporarily in the United States. In a report published in June
2001, Human Rights Watch detailed how these special visa programs were conducive
to and facilitated violations of the workers’ human rights.
In the worst cases, domestic workers were victims of trafficking—deceived
about the conditions of their employment, brought to the United States, and held
in servitude or performing forced labor. They worked excessive hours for wages
significantly below the statutory minimum, were rarely allowed to leave their
employers’ premises, and were subject to psychological, physical, and sometimes
sexual abuse. As their visas were employer-based, however, workers who left their
employer even to escape abuse lost their legal immigration status in the U.S. If,
alternatively, a worker lodged a legal complaint, it was unlikely that her rights
would be protected as none of the relevant authorities—the Department of State,
the INS and the Department of Labor-monitored employer treatment of these
workers or kept effective records on them and their employers. Also, there was no
guarantee that the INS would allow a complainant to remain in the U.S. to seek legal
redress or that her rights would be protected under U.S. law, as live-in domestic
workers were excluded from important U.S. labor legislation. This included the
overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standard Act, the National Labor Relations
Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, and, in practice, Title VII protections
against sexual harassment in the workplace.
GAY AND LESBIAN RIGHTS
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in many U.S. schools were another
vulnerable group whose rights were violated. They were harassed and targeted for
violence by their peers, including physical attack, mock rape, unwelcome sexual
advances, taunts, obscene notes or graffiti, and the destruction of personal property.
Adding to the problem, as Human Rights Watch showed in a report based on
research in seven states that it published in May, school officials and teachers often
failed to intervene to stop the harassment or to hold the abusive students accountable,
and, in the worst cases, participated in acts of harassment. Teachers who were
lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender were themselves reluctant to openly acknowledge their sexual orientation at school for fear of losing their jobs.The problem was
further exacerbated by the failure of federal, state, and local authorities to enact
laws expressly protecting students from discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation
or gender. The discrimination, harassment, and violence inflicted on students
interfered with their right to obtain an education.The emotional impact may
have been a factor contributing to the disproportionately high incidence of alcohol
abuse and drug addiction as well as suicide attempts among lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender youth.
Anti-gay harassment was also pervasive in the military. Seven years after the
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy was codified as law and implemented, the military’s
own surveys and investigations found that training on how to implement the law
was deficient and that anti-gay harassment remained widespread. Many military
personnel who faced verbal or physical harassment and feared for their safety made
statements declaring that they were gay, knowing that it would mean the end of
their careers but also that if they complained officially about anti-gay harassment
they would probably face an intrusive inquiry and discharge. Harassers, however,
were rarely punished.
Although the “Don’t Ask,Don’t Tell”policy was ostensibly intended to allow gay,
lesbian, and bisexual service members to remain in the military, discharges
increased significantly after the policy’s adoption. From 1994 to 2000, more than
6,500 servicemembers were discharged under the policy, with a record number of
1,231 separations during 2000. Women were discharged at a disproportionately
high rate,while the policy provided an additional means for men to harass women
servicemembers by threatening to “out”those who refused their advances or threatened
to report them, thus ending their careers.
The U.S. was increasingly out of step internationally in maintaining restrictions
on homosexuals serving in the military.Most of its North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and other allies either allowed homosexuals to serve openly or had
no policy on the issue. In September 1999, the European Court of Human Rights
rejected a United Kingdom ban on homosexuals serving in the military—the ban’s
justifications were nearly identical to those used to support the “Don’t Ask, Don’t
Tell” policy.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Hidden in the Home: Abuse of Domestic Workers with Special Visas in the United
States, 6/01
Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,Gay, Bisexual,
and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
Beyond Reason: The Death Penalty and Offenders with Mental Retardation, 3/01
ARMS
The arrival of the Bush administration in the White House in January ushered
in an approach to U.S. foreign policy that could only be described as a
reflexive unilateralism. It seemed there was not a single multilateral treaty that the
new government was willing to join or retain. Treaty negotiations soon ran up
against freshly drawn “red lines,” that is, baseline positions that, it was made clear,
were essentially nonnegotiable. As a result, these negotiations were either scuttled
or resulted in watered-down documents that reflected a common denominator
heavily colored by what the United States presented as its vital national interests.
This was true especially for negotiations involving issues of international arms
control. In 2001, these included talks on the 1972 bilateral Anti-Ballistic Missile
Systems (ABM) treaty, the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), and small
arms and light weapons (at a U.N. conference in July).The review of the 1980 Conventional
Weapons Convention (CCW) was scheduled for December; negotiations
at preparatory committee meetings (“prepcoms”) took place in April and September.
In mid-September, States Parties to the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty met to review
that treaty, as they had every year since 1997; as a non-signatory, the U.S. was not
involved in this review.
After the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington,D.C., the U.S. government
no longer could hew to a strict unilateralist line. It suddenly was faced with
the need to build a broad international coalition to respond to the attacks. However,
in the middle of November it remained unclear whether this would bring a
renewed U.S. commitment to multilateral treaties.Moreover, one victim of the new
U.S. preoccupation with its self-proclaimed fight against terrorism was the effort to
curb the proliferation of small arms and small weapons.While this remained an
issue of pressing concern for those who suffered directly from the impact of the
spread of small arms, especially those living in zones of armed conflict in Africa and
elsewhere, the fear was that supplier countries would turn their attention away
from the urgent need to impose stricter export controls.
Consistent with its emphasis on small arms and light weapons, in 2001,Human
Rights Watch was engaged primarily in the U.N. conference on small arms, and in
the review of the Mine Ban Treaty.
ANTIPERSONNEL LANDMINES
Important strides were made in 2001 in the effort to eradicate antipersonnel
landmines, despite the reality that antipersonnel mines continued to be laid and to
take far too many victims. It was evident that the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty, and the ban movement more generally, were making a significant difference. A growing number
of governments joined the Mine Ban Treaty and there was a decreased use of
antipersonnel mines, a dramatic drop in production, an almost complete halt to
trade, and progress in the rapid destruction of stockpiled mines. There were also
fewer mine victims in key affected countries and more land was demined.
Between November 2000 and November 12, 2001, the number of States Parties
to the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,Production, and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and On Their Destruction (Mine Ban Treaty)
grew to 122. Among the new adherents were Romania and Chile, both major producers
and exporters in the past, and Eritrea,which was using antipersonnel mines
in combat as recently as June 2000. An additional twenty countries had signed but
not yet ratified the Mine Ban Treaty. The foreign ministers of Greece, Turkey, and
Yugoslavia pledged to ratify or accede to the treaty shortly.
Fifty-two countries had not yet joined the treaty.This included most of the Middle
East, most of the former Soviet republics, and many Asian nations.Major producers
such as the United States, Russia, China, India, and Pakistan were not part
of the treaty. Yet virtually all of the nonsignatories had endorsed the notion of a
comprehensive ban on antipersonnel mines at some point in time, and many had
already at least partially embraced the Mine Ban Treaty. United Nations General
Assembly Resolution 55/33v calling for universalization of the Mine Ban Treaty was
adopted in November 2000 by a vote of 143 in favor,none opposed, and twenty-two
abstentions.Nineteen nonsignatories voted for the resolution.
The Mine Ban Treaty intersessional work program,with week-long meetings in
Geneva in December 2000 and May 2001, successfully fulfilled its intended purpose
in helping to maintain a focus on the landmines crisis, in becoming a meeting place
for all key mine action players, and in stimulating momentum to fully implement
the Mine Ban Treaty. The four intersessional Standing Committees on Victim
Assistance,Mine Clearance, Stockpile Destruction, and General Status and Operation
of the Convention helped to provide a global picture of priorities, as well as to
consolidate and concentrate global mine action efforts. Compliance with all key
articles of the convention became an overall focus of the second intersessional year.
A Universalization Contact Group was formed, coordinated by Canada, with participation
by a number of States Parties, the International Campaign to Ban Landmines
(ICBL) and International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In addition
to many bilateral efforts to promote adherence to the Mine Ban Treaty, there were
important regional conferences aimed at universalization, notably in Bamako,Mali
in February.
The Third Meeting of States Parties to the Mine Ban Treaty was held in Managua,
Nicaragua in September. States Parties, in close cooperation with the ICBL,
developed an action plan for the year and issued a strong final declaration.
Just prior to the Managua meeting, the ICBL released the 1,175-page Landmine
Monitor Report 2001, its third annual report looking at the landmine situation in
every country of the world. The report, the product of a network of 122
researchers from ninety-five countries, cited many positive developments, including
more than 185 million square meters of land cleared of mines in 2000; a revised
estimate of new mine casualties of 15,000–20,000 per year, compared to previous estimates of 26,000 per year; destruction of another five million stockpiled
antipersonnel mines, bringing the total to 27 million in recent years; no known
significant exports of antipersonnel mines; and a reduction in the number of producers
from fifty-five to fourteen (with Turkey and Yugoslavia being removed
from the list in the past year).However, the Landmine Monitor also identified use
of antipersonnel mines in twenty-three conflicts by fifteen governments and more
than thirty rebel groups in this reporting period (May 2000 to mid-2001). It
reported a “strong possibility” of use by Mine Ban Treaty state party Uganda in
June 2000 in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and called on states parties to
seek clarification urgently.
The Second Annual Conference of States Parties to Amended Protocol II (Landmines)
of the Convention on Conventional Weapons (CCW) was held in Geneva
in December 2000, and there were preparatory meetings in December 2000, April
2001, and September 2001 for the Second CCW Review Conference, to be held in
December 2001. Proposals presented and discussed at these meetings included:
extension of the treaty’s scope, compliance issues, antivehicle mines,wound ballistics,
and the explosive remnants of war.
In the United States there were indications in late 2000 that the Clinton administration
would announce several significant steps toward a ban on antipersonnel
mines prior to departing office, but this did not materialize. Decisions were left to
the incoming administration on controversial issues such as procurement of
RADAM (a new “mixed” system combining existing antitank and antipersonnel
mines) and a “man-in-the-loop”munition developed as an alternative to antipersonnel
mines but which contains a feature to revert the munition to mine status.
The Bush administration had not made a formal policy statement on antipersonnel
mines by mid-November, and key developments were on hold pending completion
of a comprehensive review of landmine policy and actions that began in
June.The U.S. continued to be the leader in contributions to global mine clearance,
devoting nearly U.S. $100 million in both FY 2000 and FY 2001.
SMALL ARMS AND LIGHT WEAPONS
The United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, mandated in December 1999 by the General Assembly,
was held in July 2001 in New York. Flawed both in concept and in execution, it was
considered a near-total failure by the human rights and humanitarian communities.
While participating states did manage to produce a conference document (the
program of action) despite a long list of contentious issues, the document was
weak. The program of action ascribed primary responsibility for dealing with the
black-market trade in small arms to states, yet did not allude to, much less prescribe,
any measures to curb the flow of weapons to abusive actors through the irresponsible
arms trade practices of governments themselves. The document did not
codify any standards for the arms trade based on international humanitarian law or
human rights, and made only a few vague references to the humanitarian urgency
of the unchecked proliferation of small arms. It did not establish a transparent universal system for marking and tracing weapons, or record-keeping and reporting
mechanisms (such as an international public register of small arms transfers).
Finally, the program of action was not legally binding, nor did it mandate the negotiation
of other legally binding documents, such as a treaty on measures to regulate
the activities of independent brokers.
Confusion over the conference mandate hampered progress from the beginning,
and the scope of the conference was still being debated by the third and final
prepcom in March. The conference title referred specifically to the “illicit” trade in
small arms, but by adding the phrase “in all its aspects,” the door was left open for
states to tackle a critical facet of the problem: the legal, government-sponsored
trade. However, while many states were adamant that battling the illicit trade in
small arms was the responsibility of governments (as opposed to nongovernmental
organizations, which were marginalized throughout the process), the same
states insisted that the conference should not address government responsibility for
creating the problem. Ignoring the fact that virtually every illicitly traded weapon
was first traded legally, and that weapons were routinely traded “legally” to abusive
forces, the conference rejected demands from civil society and some government
delegations to develop stronger export controls and international standards governing
the arms trade practices of states.
From the beginning, it was expected that major arms exporters, including most
of the Permament Five members of the U.N. Security Council, would try to water
down any program of action. The surprise was the emergence of the United States,
rather than Russia or China, in this respect. The U.S. had itself boasted relatively
decent arms trade control mechanisms, including curbs on exports to human
rights abusers and measures to ensure transparency.Yet with the change in administration
following immediately after the second prepcom in January, the U.S. delegation
began taking a blatantly obstructionist approach. An uncompromising
U.S. position was articulated in an opening statement to the conference which
shocked most observers and reflected the Bush administration’s disdain for multilateral
arms control and multilateralism in general.The statement set down several
positions which were said to be nonnegotiable, rejecting a mandatory Review Conference,
the participation of nongovernmental organizations, and all “measures
that would constrain legal trade and legal manufacturing of small arms.” It was
clear throughout the conference that the domestic gun lobby wielded heavy influence
in the U.S. delegation, imposing on the conference a belief that talk of international
arms trade control would lead to the demise of the putative constitutional
right of U.S. citizens to own guns. Other states antagonistic to the conference’s
objectives were all too willing to let the U.S. dismantle the conference.
Other factors also hampered progress at the conference. Lack of interest in the
process in general, and in the humanitarian dimension in particular, was evident in
the make-up of most delegations.Many states refused to send senior Foreign Ministry
representatives to the conference, and most delegations were staffed primarily
by arms control experts (where staffed with any expertise at all) who were unfamiliar
with human rights and international humanitarian law. Further distracting
states from turning their focus to the humanitarian and human rights implications
of small arms, where it belonged, were debates over peripheral issues, such as nonstate actors, self-determination, and self-defense, as well as myriad disputes over
definitions.
Civil society was effectively excluded from participating in the conference. Limitations
on NGO access were not officially agreed until the beginning of the conference
itself, where it was decided that NGOs would be allowed to watch plenary
proceedings from the gallery but could be sent out at any point if delegates opted
for a closed session. (NGOs were also allowed one three-hour session to address
delegates at each prepcom and during the conference.) States also debated whether
or not to include language calling for civil society participation in the program of
action. The U.S. in its opening statement opposed this, claiming that such participation
was not “consistent with democratic principles,” and other delegations
insisted that implementation of the program of action was the exclusive realm of
states. The document did, however, contain language on civil society cooperation
in some areas.
In addition, negotiating the program of action was a consensus-driven process
that allowed rejectionist states such as the U.S. to hijack the outcome by simply
refusing to compromise on key issues, resulting in a document based on the lowest
common denominator that was predictably weak, even on those issues that were
not cut from the final draft. One positive outcome was the commitment to a review
conference after five years, making this the only red-line position on which the U.S.
delegation was eventually willing to back down.The conference also served to raise
the profile of small arms proliferation internationally, and allowed civil society
organizations to rally around a specific event and develop momentum and focus
for future work.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Landmine Monitor Report 2001: Toward a Mine-Free World, 9/01
Crisis of Impunity: The Role of Pakistan, Russia, and Iran in Fueling the Civil War
in Afghanistan, 07/01
ACADEMIC FREEDOM
Extremism thrived in countries where assaults on academic freedom fostered
a climate of ignorance and intolerance. In Afghanistan, the ruling Taliban’s
first actions were to shut down most higher education and ban women and
girls from attending school. But in less extreme forms, governments around the
world justified violations of human rights by casting all critical thought as an attack
on public morality, national security, or cultural purity. In the wake of the attacks
on New York City and Washington, several academics in the United States and
Canada came under official or public pressure for questioning various aspects of
their governments’ past or projected policies.With another international conflict
simmering, violations of academic freedom were likely to increase around the
globe.
Even before September 11, 2001, academic groups were growing increasingly
aware of the importance of international cooperation and coordination in support
of their colleagues’ freedom. The international Network on Education and Academic
Rights (NEAR) was created in June 2001 to serve as a repository and clearinghouse
for information about academic freedom cases. With initial funding from
UNESCO, the network promised to expand on the existing contact and cooperation
between academics and academic groups. As the network’s name indicated,
NEAR’s understanding of academic freedom embraced not just the civil and political
rights of scholars and their students, but also the social, economic, and cultural
rights associated with the fundamental human right to education.
The right to education and academic freedom suffered numerous violations
around the globe.Oppressive governments punished academics for exercising their
right and responsibility to question and criticize their societies. In a troubling
development, several armed opposition groups also resorted to this method of
silencing their critics. Ideological controls over the nature and content of academic
material were apparent around the world, and students who in many countries
served as leaders in social development were targeted and persecuted. Many governments
also blocked the access of vulnerable and disenfranchised segments of
their population to education through their acts or omissions.
REPRESSION OF ACADEMICS
The Chinese government’s detention of several academics was the year’s most
publicized example of an assault on academic freedom and the subject of an international
campaign by Human Rights Watch. The arrest, conviction, and eventual
release of several of the detained scholars, and the broad international support on their behalf, demonstrated both the importance of concerted action in defending
academic freedom and the fragility of this right. An undetermined number of
scholars were detained during this crackdown;while some were released after a few
days, others remained in detention for over a year. Those released all said that they
had been warned by the Chinese government against publicizing the details of their
incarceration.
Xu Zerong, a political scientist at the Guangdong Academy of Social Sciences as
well as at Zhongshan University, was detained on June 24, 2000, and formally
arrested a month later. Others seized were Li Shaomin, a business professor at the
City University ofHong Kong detained on February 11, 2001, and Gao Zhan, a sociologist
pursuing her research at the American University in Washington, D.C.,
detained on February 11, 2001. Several of the detainees studied at universities in the
United States or the United Kingdom and resided outside China for significant
lengths of time. Li, a naturalized U.S. citizen, studied at Harvard and Princeton
Universities, in the U.S.; Gao, a resident of the U.S., studied at Syracuse University
and worked at American University, both also in the U.S., and Xu studied at Oxford
University in the U.K.
The detention of these scholars prompted a worldwide campaign on their behalf
by Human Rights Watch and academic groups in the U.S. and abroad. Because of
their personal links to the United States, Gao and Li’s cases received significant
international attention. Some of the greatest media scrutiny focused on an
unprecedented petition signed by over four hundred China scholars from some fifteen
countries asking the Chinese government either to release the detained scholars
or to immediately address the charges against them in a court in accord with
international standards of due process. Partly in response to this pressure, and
partly in an effort to improve its relations with the United States, China eventually
expelled these scholars from the country after summarily convicting them of ”espionage.”
The trials were widely criticized for falling short of international and
domestic standards; each lasted only a few hours, and the defendants did not have
any meaningful time to prepare for their defense.
While the release of some of the detained scholars showed the effectiveness of a
well-coordinated international response from the academic community, Xu, along
with an unknown number of other scholars, remained in detention. Furthermore,
many China scholars publicly stated that they curtailed their research activity to
avoid subjects potentially offensive to the Chinese government.
The same pattern of persecuting academics in order to curb their intellectual
activity recurred around the world. In Iran, a number of prominent academics were
arrested in March and April as part of a broader campaign of stifling dissent apparently
aimed at countering the widespread support for reform of Iran’s political system.
In the weeks immediately preceding Iran’s presidential elections, authorities
arrested at least ten scholars among a group of forty-two figures associated with the
liberal Iran Freedom Movement, a banned but previously tolerated political party.
Among the scholars arrested were Gholam-Abbas Tavassoli, a sociologist at Tehran
University and formerly chancellor of Isfahan University, Hadi Hadizadeh, a
prominent physicist, Ghaffar Farzadi,Mohammad Mehdi-Jafari, Habibollah Peyman,
Reza Raisdoosti, and Mohammad Maleki. Tavassoli was released two days
after his arrest, but several other academics remained in jail.
In response, more than one hundred faculty members from Iran’s universities
signed an appeal to the government requesting the release of their colleagues.
Widespread student protests in support of the detained academics also occurred at
universities in Tehran and other cities, and were met by heavy handed police reaction.
These attacks on academic freedom formed the backdrop to a critical rise in the
“brain drain” phenomenon among Iran’s academics and university graduates.
According to a report issued by the Iranian government in May 2001, tens of thousands
of academics and professionals left Iran for Western countries in the preceding
twelve months. Commenting on this report, chancellors from several Iranian
universities blamed the mass exodus of educated Iranians on the “continual psychological
insecurity on the campuses.”
In Egypt, Saad Eddin Ibrahim, a prominent sociologist and a critic of the government,
went on trial on charges of impugning Egypt’s international reputation
(having reported on Egypt’s flawed October 2000 parliamentary elections), accepting
foreign funds without authorization (based on a grant from the European
Union), and ”embezzlement.” On May 21, 2001, Ibrahim and twenty-seven colleagues
from his think tank, the Ibn Khaldun Center for Development Studies,were
convicted in a trial criticized by observers from Human Rights Watch as having predetermined
its ruling. Twenty-one defendants (nine of whom were tried in absentia)
received one-year suspended sentences and six others (one tried in absentia)
received sentences ranging between two and five years’ imprisonment with labor.
The six serving custodial sentences at the time of writing were: Saadeddin Ibrahim,
Khaled Ahmed Mohamed al-Fayyad,Usama Hashem Mohamed ‘Ali and Mohamed
Hassanein ‘Amara (held at Tora Mazra’at Prison), and Nadia Mohamed Abdel Nour
and Magda Ibrahim al-Bey (held at the Women’s Prison in Qanater. Ibrahim was
sentenced to seven years in prison.
A flawed trial surrounded the death sentence handed down in the case of
Dr.Yunas Shaikh, a physiologist who taught at Nishtar Medical College in Pakistan.
Dr. Shaikh was accused of ”blasphemy”by students affiliated with the Majlis Tahaffuz
Khatm-i-Nabuwat (The Committee for the Protection of the Finality of
Prophethood), a fundamentalist religious organization, based on his remarks during
class that the Prophet Mohammad may not have followed Islamic hygienic precepts
before he received the revelation that called him to prophethood. According
to eyewitnesses, dozens of members of the Majlis Tahaffuz appeared at his trial in
an effort to intimidate the court during the proceedings. Dr. Shaikh’s conviction
came under a law that allows any citizen to initiate a prosecution for blasphemy,
although this law has been widely criticized by political and religious leaders. Dr.
Shaikh appealed the verdict.
In Tunisia,Human Rights Watch issued a joint statement with several academic
groups to protest the escalating attacks on academics advocating democratic
reforms and the rule of law.The statement ofMarch 2001 noted two attacks against
Khedija Cherif, a sociologist at the University of Tunis and a prominent advocate
of women’s right. On March 1, Cherif was beaten, sexually harassed, and verbally
abused as she was attempting to attend a meeting of the National Council on Liberties
in Tunisia (Conseil National des Libertes en Tunisie,CNLT). In the same incident,
the unidentified assailants also attacked Abdel Kader Ben Khemis, a professor at the University of Sousse. The Tunisian government also continued its harassment
of Dr. Moncef Marzouki, the CNLT’s former spokesperson. In December
2000, he received a one-year sentence, later suspended on appeal, on trumped-up
charges of “belonging to an illegal organization” and “disseminating false information,”
stemming from his former activity with the CNLT. Marzouki had already
been improperly dismissed from his position teaching public health at the University
of Sousse and barred from any other type of employment, which resulted in
extreme economic hardship.He is under constant surveillance and is only allowed
intermittent telephone contact. At this writing it is unclear whether he will be
allowed to leave the country to assume a teaching position abroad; an attempt in
March 2001 to leave for a two-year faculty post in France was thwarted at the airport
despite assurances from judicial authorities that he could leave.
Dayan Dawood, rector of Syiah Kuala University in Banda Aceh, capital of the
restive Aceh province of Indonesia, was killed on September 5 by unidentified men.
He was the second Acehnese rector to be killed in as many years.Aceh has witnessed
increased violence in recent years as pro-independence guerrillas battle counterinsurgency
forces of the Indonesian military and police. Both groups have been
responsible for political assassinations and both sides have accused the other in
Dawood’s murder. Dawood met with Human Rights Watch in December 2000 and
discussed his hope that the university could play a role in forming a nonviolent resolution
to the conflict in Aceh.
Attacks by army-linked paramilitaries on academics were rampant in Colombia,
where over two dozen scholars and students were killed over the last eighteen
months. Most of the attacks were carried out by paramilitary groups contesting
what critics described as the left-wing academic environment of Colombia’s thirtytwo
public universities. As set out in a 2001 report by Human Rights Watch, these
groups enjoyed tacit, and at times explicit, support from certain Colombian military
units. In May,Miguel Angel Vargas, the president of a regional university teachers
union, was assassinated by gunmen in the northeastern Colombian city of
Valledupar, the home of the Universidad Popular de Valledupar.His brother Lisandro
Vargas, also a professor, was gunned down two months ago in Barranquilla, the
capital of Atlantico province. The University of Atlántico witnessed the greatest
number of attacks: In October 2000, forty-six-year-old Alfredo Castro, a critic of
corruption at the university, was shot by unidentified assassins in front of his family.
On August 26, 2000, Luis Meza, also from the university, was killed by gunmen.
Similar tactics were used by the militant Basque separatist movement, Euzkadi
Ta Askatasuna (ETA). The group took taken credit for several attacks on universities
and academics in the Basque region of Spain after the beginning of the 2000
academic year. ETA admitted that it had left a parcel bomb in an elevator in Lejona
Campus of the University of the Basque Country on December 18, 2000.The bomb
misfired, narrowly missing Edurne Uriarte, an outspoken critic of ETA’s tactics. She
subsequently stopped teaching out of fear of further assassination attempts.Mikel
María Azurmendi and José María Portillo also stopped teaching at universities in
the Basque region and moved abroad after attempts on their lives.
CENSORSHIP AND IDEOLOGICAL CONTROLS
In many countries where academics were not physically assaulted or barred
from carrying out their responsibilities, governments attempted to muzzle scholars
through restrictive regulations on the substance of their work. Censorship and
pre-publication previews of scholarly work is still the norm in China,North Korea,
Iran, and, to varying degrees, in much of the Arab world from Iraq to Morocco.
In May and June, a Human Rights Watch investigation in Turkey found that universities
there were subject to a strict system of centralized control established by
the military after the 1980 coup d’etat. This system was administered by a central
body known by its Turkish acronym,YOK,which controlled every aspect of higher
education in Turkey, including budgets and academic placement at every level.The
organization had fostered a climate of fear and self-censorship in Turkey’s universities
by accusing any critical academics of harboring leftist, religious, or separatist
tendencies—and sometimes all at the same time.
Human Rights Watch interviewed some forty academics from more than a
dozen universities around Turkey who had been punished under YOK’s ideological
controls. Aside from being subject to criminal sanctions, academics could be
banned from teaching for life, or internally exiled to any academic institution in the
country.While it was academics with religious tendencies who at this time faced the
brunt of the repression, YOK targeted any academic work that contained “leftist”
ideas or that acknowledged the existence of problems for ethnic minorities in
Turkey. In one particularly egregious example last year, YOK attempted to shut
down a private university, Fatih University, because of allegations that it was sympathetic
to religious political groups.This claim was rejected by the judicial system,
but YOK continued to harass Fatih University.
Ideological controls returned, or increased, in several states of the former Soviet
Union. In Belarus, Yury Bandazhevsky was convicted in June 2001 of ”accepting
bribes” from students and was sentenced to eight years of imprisonment.He was a
leading researcher into the health effects of radiation fallout from the Chernobyl
disaster, a subject that was highly politicized in Belarus. Amnesty International
named Bandazhevsky a prisoner of conscience in August 2001.
In Central Asia, the government of Turkmenistan continued its campaign
against academic freedom and intellectual activity. In January, the country’s largest
library shut its doors; the library had served as a haven for academics and was the
country’s last window to foreign scholarship. By June, the last operating Islamic
school was also closed.
Russian scholars and their colleagues elsewhere expressed alarm about a new set
of regulations issued by the Russian Academy of Sciences governing all contact and
cooperation between the country’s 53,000 scientific researchers and outside institutions.
These regulations required greater monitoring, and possible restriction of,
such contact.While some academics feared that this signaled a return to Soviet-era
policies, it was not clear how broadly these regulations would be implemented.
Anecdotal reports suggested that scientists working in areas of “hard” science—
physics, biotechnology, chemistry—had decreased cooperation with foreign counterparts
due to the new requirements that they inform their superiors of any contact with foreign scholars or institutions and that all research proposals must be
vetted by the Russian Academy of Sciences.
India also instituted regulations governing attendance of foreigners at international
academic meetings held in India. The Indian Home Ministry issued a circular
ordering security clearance before holding such gatherings, singling out
participants from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, China, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Similarly,
the ministry issued an edict requiring prior approval for all international academic
meetings.
India’s governing Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party continued its policy
of “Hinduizing” education at all levels. India’s University Grants Commission
earmarked funds for university courses in astrology, a move that sparked strong
opposition from India’s academic community. A lawsuit brought by a group of
academics contesting the new university program was before the Supreme Court
of India.
SUPPRESSION OF STUDENT ACTIVISM
University students, typically among the most politically active groups of civil
society, were frequent targets of government repression. Some of the worst abuses
occurred in the Horn of Africa, where the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea
both cracked down on student.With the end of the ruinous border war between
these two countries, students were among the first groups to register public dissatisfaction
with their governments’ conduct.
Ethiopian security forces used excessive force in dealing with student protests in
April 2001, and used the protests as an excuse for attacking civil society. Students at
the university were at the forefront at a nation-wide movement for greater political
freedom.Students at Addis Ababa University were engaged in ongoing negotiations
with Minister of Education Genet Zewde over their request to resume publication
of a banned campus magazine and the removal of security troops currently stationed
on campuses. A number of attacks by security forces culminated in an effort
on April 17 to force the students to end their protests.
Heavily armed members of the Special Forces branch of the security forces
raided the Addis Ababa University campus, confronting students and civilians as
protesters disaffected with government policies joined the clashes in support of
the students.At least forty people were killed by security forces in the ensuing disturbances,
and eyewitnesses testified that security forces fired live ammunition at
protesters and beat unresisting bystanders, including children. More that two
thousand students were detained during the raids; while most were released
within a few days, an undetermined remained in jail. Some one hundred students
escaped the government crackdown by going to Kenya, and seventy escaped to
neighboring Djibouti. These students were being held at internment camps under
harsh conditions.
Across the border, in Eritrea, students also expressed their disillusionment with
government policies after the war with Ethiopia. A broad clampdown on civil society
and critical political voices was apparently triggered by an increasingly tense
standoff between the government and university students demanding greater academic freedom and social liberties.The focus of student protest at the University of
Asmara, the country’s only university, was a mandatory summer work program
during which students performed public service around the country during their
holidays. In 2001, the students protested the appalling conditions of previous
camps. On July 31, the police arrested the president of the Asmara University student
council, Semere Kesete, and he remained in jail without charge.
On August 10, four hundred students protesting Kesete’s arrest were rounded up
and sent to a work camp in Wia, a desert site near the Red Sea where daytime temperatures
hovered at about 38 degrees Celsius (100 degrees Fahrenheit). Eventually
some 1,700 other students were taken to the camps.The government acknowledged
that at least two students died of heatstroke. Parents of students who were protesting
the treatment of their children were also arrested. The students were ultimately
allowed to return to the university, but at this writing at least twenty members of
the student union remained in detention.
In Papua, Indonesia’s easternmost province, students played an important part
in the broad civilian independence movement that emerged alongside a decadesold
armed insurgency. In a spiraling cycle of violence, police killed three students
and beat up and tortured dozens of others following a December 2000 rebel attack
on a police post in Abepura, near the provincial capital Jayapura.
ACCESS TO EDUCATION
As pointed out by the U.N.Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
academic freedom was rooted in the fundamental human right to education.
Another key component of this right was that governments must educate their citizens
without discrimination through their acts or their omissions.
A groundbreaking report by Human Rights Watch based on its research in South
Africa demonstrated that the high incidence of rape and sexual assault against girls
in schools constituted a serious obstacle to the education of girls in that country.
Irrespective of their race or social class, thousands of girls suffered gender-based
violence at the hands of their teachers and classmates. The report found that the
government of South Africa,which had one of the highest rates of rape in the world,
has been remiss in addressing this violence: school officials were often unaware of
or unwilling to enforce disciplinary procedures against violators, and many girls
were discouraged by their schools or families from pursuing criminal sanctions.
The release of Human Rights Watch’s report, Scared at School, in March 2001
prompted a widespread and heated national debate. South African authorities
pledged to take concrete steps to coordinate appropriate responses between educational
and judicial authorities and to develop a national plan to protect South
African girls and provide them with an adequate education.
In a letter to Iran’s Guardian Council, the body dominated by religious clergy
that must approve all new laws, Human Rights Watch denounced the decision to
block a parliamentary bill that would have extended to Iranian women the same
rights as men to study at universities abroad. Women could study abroad—but
only with permission from a male guardian, and only men could receive financial
assistance for studying overseas. In January 2001, the Guardian Council overturned the decision of Iran’s parliament, which voted by a two-to-one margin to
amend a law that prohibited women from studying abroad without the permission
of a male guardian.While the percentage of girls and women participating at
all levels of education rose over the past two decades since Islamic rule began in
Iran, women still faced significant legal discrimination in personal status matters,
in the ability to travel freely, and in choosing freely how to pursue higher education.
As a result of the massive public outcry, the law eventually passed with some
slight amendments.
Discrimination based on race, ethnicity, and sexual orientation too often kept
students from receiving an adequate education.A 2001 Human Rights Watch investigation
found that Israel provided its Palestinian Arab citizens with a markedly
inferior education when compared with their Jewish peers. Discrimination based
on caste status was also a concern, as evident in the widespread cases of discrimination
against members of India’s Dalit community, which belong to the lowest
rung of the traditional caste hierarchy. (See Children’s Rights.)
Human Rights Watch also criticized Israel for interfering with the ability of university
students in the Palestinian-governed areas of the West Bank to pursue their
education. Since September 2000,Bir Zeit University, located outside Ramallah, has
faced a military blockade that often prevented students from attending classes and
at times shut down the university completely. On March 7, 2001, a few hours after
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon took office, the Israeli Defense Forces cut the only road
connecting Bir Zeit University to Ramallah, located about five miles away. An IDF
checkpoint, frequently supported by an armored personnel carrier, had since then
stopped traffic on the road, obstructing access to the university.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Israel: Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s
Schools, 12/01
Indonesia: Violence and Political Impasse in Papua, 7/01
Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,Gay, Bisexual,
and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01
Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African Schools, 3/01
BUSINESS AND HUMAN RIGHTS
INTRODUCTION
Voluntary standard-setting, enforcement, legal actions, and other efforts characterized
efforts to ensure corporate responsibility in relation to human rights in
2001. In previous years, the debate focused on whether corporations and business
generally should have any responsibility for human rights. In 2001, significant progress was made toward defining the appropriate roles of business and corporations.
The debate also expanded into assessing the appropriate roles of government,
and the range of actors expanded significantly. Discussion of the relationship
between business and human rights was no longer limited to just corporations and
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), as multilateral financial institutions, the
United Nations, and governments began to address these issues more consistently.
However,much more remained to be done, including to ensure the application of
existing standards and to develop binding standards of corporate responsibility.As
in previous years, the apparel and footwear and extractive industries were the main
focus of scrutiny.
THE APPAREL AND FOOTWEAR INDUSTRY
Three key monitoring initiatives being undertaken by the Fair Labor Association,
Social Accountability International, and the Workers’ Rights Consortium
continued to make progress toward developing viable monitoring programs.
Fair Labor Association (FLA)
The FLA, a voluntary monitoring initiative developed by NGOs and apparel
companies,began to accredit independent external monitors and monitor factories
in 2001. By October, the FLA had ten member companies: Adidas-Salomon AG,
GEAR For Sports, Levi Strauss & Co, Liz Claiborne, Nike, Patagonia, Polo Ralph
Lauren, Reebok, Eddie Bauer, and Phillips-Van Heusen; as well as approximately
160 affiliated colleges and universities. At the same time, nine independent monitoring
firms: Cal Safety Corporation, COVERCO, Global Standards, Intertek Testing
Services, the Kenan Institute, LIFT-Standards, Merchandise Testing Labs,
Phulki, and Verite were accredited by the FLA to conduct external monitoring in
member company factories. In August, external monitoring began at member factories
in Bangladesh, China, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, and
the United States.The FLA expected that around one hundred external inspections
of factories would be carried out in 2001, most of them in Asia.
Social Accountability International (SAI)
SAI, an organization that oversees the implementation of its SA-8000 workplace
standard, continued to certify factories in 2001.By October, SAI had certified eighty
factories in twenty-one countries and had eight agencies that were accredited to
monitor factories’ compliance with the standard. The organization also managed a
“Signatory Membership”program for companies that allows companies to join SAI
after committing to progressively implement the SA-8000 standards in some of its
facilities. By October, eight companies and one U.N. agency had joined the signatory
membership program: Amana, Avon Products, Cutter&Buck, Dole Food,
Eileen Fisher, Otto Versand, Toys R Us, Vogele, and the United Nations’ Office for
Project Services (UNOPS).
Workers Rights Consortium (WRC)
The WRC monitors compliance with the apparel manufacturing codes of conduct
of approximately eighty-eight colleges and universities and undertook two
investigations in 2001, one in Mexico and the other in the U.S.
In January,WRC representatives investigated conditions at the Kukdong International
Mexico S.A. de C.V. factory in Atlixco, Mexico, which manufactures college
and university sweatshirts for Nike and Reebok. The factory management had
been accused of labor rights violations including unlawful employment of children,
physical and verbal abuse of workers, failure to provide maternity leave and
benefits, firing workers engaged in union activities, refusing to reinstate workers
who participated in a work stoppage earlier in January, and a failure to honor the
terms of a binding agreement between Kukdong management and its workers.The
WRC concluded that many of the allegations were well-founded and launched a
campaign to seek redress for the workers.As a result, and due to pressure from Nike
and Reebok, in late September, Kukdong (now renamed Mexmode International)
agreed to a new collective bargaining agreement with workers and to make improvements
in working conditions.
In July, the WRC investigated conditions at the New Era Cap Company’s factory
in Derby,New York state following allegations by workers that the company was not
in compliance with various college and university codes of conduct. Specifically,
workers complained that the company had violated health and safety provisions,
engaged in age discrimination, and had breached workers’ rights of freedom of
association and collective bargaining, including by firing or transferring union
activists. The investigation was still in progress in October.
THE ENERGY INDUSTRY
There was a continuing focus on the energy industry. In some cases, standardsetting
efforts (see below) brought improvements in companies’ practices, but in
several others those seeking to remedy companies’ behavior did so through resorting
to lawsuits. The management of revenues by oil producing governments and
the consequences of the Bush Administration’s renewed focus on energy security
were also serious areas of concern, particularly after the September 11 attack on the
U.S. when the Bush Administration appeared to be willing to overlook the poor
human rights records of oil-rich, but abusive and undemocratic governments as it
sought to find allies in its war against terrorism.
Angola
On April 3, 2000, as part of a larger agreement on economic reform, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Angolan government reached an agreement
to monitor oil revenues. Known as the “Oil Diagnostic,” it would be
supervised by the World Bank and implemented by KPMG, an international
accounting firm that also had the Angolan central bank as a client. It was an effort by the IMF and World Bank to assess the percentage of government oil revenues
being deposited in the central bank. The Angolan budget had previously been
opaque, raising concerns among multilateral financial institutions, NGOs, companies,
and foreign governments that oil revenues were being used secretly to finance
arms purchases and that future oil production was mortgaged against immediate
oil-backed loans. Some oil revenues bypassed the Ministry of Finance and the central
bank and went directly to the state-owned Sociedade Nacional de Combustiveis
de Angola (Sonangol) company, or to the Presidency to procure weapons. The Oil
Diagnostic continued to progress, but the government of Angola encountered serious
problems with the IMF over its non-compliance with the terms of the IMF’s
overall program and its continuing lack of transparency. (See below.)
The government was also embarrassed by an arms-for-oil scandal. In December
2000, French authorities arrested Pierre Falcone, a Franco Brazilian businessman
whose company, Falcon Oil, held an equity stake in Angolan deepwater oil block
thirty-one. He was accused of tax fraud and other offences in connection with his
alleged involvement in brokering an arms-for-oil deal with the Angolan government
in the early 1990s.Charges were also brought against Jean Claude Mitterrand,
the son of former French President Francois Mitterrand.Charges against both men
were dropped in June 2001 though a new investigation was opened against Mitterrand
in October.
According to theWashington Post, another Falcone company, Brenco International,
had brokered arms deals involving the sale of surplus Russian military
equipment to the Angolan government.The first deal, the newspaper reported, was
worth approximately U.S. $47 million and took place on November 7, 1993, while
a second deal, worth some U.S. $563 million, took place in 1994. In both cases, the
weapons purchases were said to have been paid for with Angolan proceeds from oil
sales—with Sonangol, for example, paying some of the money for the 1994 transaction
to French bank accounts controlled by a Czech firm, ZTS OSOS, that provided
some of the weapons.
In February,Angolan President José Eduardo dos Santos acknowledged that the
arms deals between ZTS OSOS, Falcone, and the government had taken place, but
said that the deals were legitimate.Dos Santos went further, praising Falcone for his
efforts which, he said, had helped to preserve “democracy and the rule of law” in
Angola. He described Falcone’s actions as a “gesture of confidence and friendship
on the part of the French State” toward the Angolan government that had helped
facilitate the “spectacular growth in cooperation with France in the petroleum sector”
and in other economic activities. Dos Santos also questioned why the French
authorities were investigating and had arrested Falcone since the arms were not
bought from French companies or in France, but from companies in Eastern
Europe.
Although the government has committed itself to improving human rights,
it remained hostile to public inquiry or criticism of its use of oil revenues. For
example, on January 24, 2001, police beat and arrested eight members of the opposition
Party for Democracy and Progress in Angola (PADPA) who staged a peaceful
hunger strike outside the Luanda residence of President dos Santos, calling
for him to resign on grounds of economic mismanagement and corruption. The protestors also called for disclosure of the details of the French arms-for-oil deal,
and criticized the government’s discontinuation of peace negotiations with the
rebel National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). Following
this incident, the state Rádio Nacional de Angola broadcast an official statement
warning people not to demonstrate against the government. Two of the eight
demonstrators were quickly released. The six others were charged with holding an
“illegal protest,” but the charges were dismissed when they appeared in court on
January 29.
The Bush Energy Strategy
President Bush released the report of the National Energy Policy Development
Group, a White House panel led by Vice-President Richard Cheney, on May 17.The
report was intended to “develop a national energy policy designed to help the private
sector, and, as necessary and appropriate, State and local governments, promote
dependable, affordable and environmentally sound production and
distribution of energy for the future.” Remarkably, the report’s 170 pages and 105
recommendations did not once acknowledge the impact energy development may
have on human rights. Instead, the report suggested making energy security an
even greater priority in U.S. relations with some of the worst violators of human
rights around the world, while proposing no strategy to keep necessary oil investment
from perpetuating dictatorships or fueling conflicts, as it had in countries
such as Angola,Nigeria, Sudan, and Iraq.
The report recognized the need for “more transparent, accountable, and responsible
use of oil resources” in Africa.However, it only addressed this issue regarding
energy development in Africa, and only in the context of enhancing “the security
and stability of investment.” The report did not address the misuse of oil revenues
in other parts of the world, and ignored the detrimental impact this has had on
human rights and democratic development in countries such as Azerbaijan and
Kazakhstan. The report omitted any reference to the need for U.S. energy corporations
to adopt the highest human rights standards when operating in other countries.
By October, it was still not clear how forcefully the Administration would
pursue the strategy proposed in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks on
the U.S
ExxonMobil
On June 11, 2001 the International Labor Rights Fund (ILRF), a U.S.NGO, filed
a lawsuit on behalf of seven anonymous plaintiffs against ExxonMobil in a U.S.
Federal Court in the District of Columbia.The suit alleged that the Indonesian military
provided “security services” for the company’s joint-venture operation in
Indonesia’s conflict-ridden Aceh province, and that the Indonesian military had
committed “genocide, murder, torture, crimes against humanity, sexual violence,
and kidnapping”while providing security for the company from 1999 to 2001. The
plaintiffs alleged that these activities violated the U.S. Alien Tort Claims Act, the
Torture Victims Protection Act, international human rights law, and the statutory and common law of the District of Colombia. The suit held that ExxonMobil was
liable for the alleged abuses because it provided “logistical and material” support to
the military, and because the company was aware of widespread abuses committed
by the military but had failed to take any action to prevent those abuses. Exxon-
Mobil vigorously denied the allegations and said the lawsuit “recently filed by the
International Labor Rights Fund (ILRF) containing these allegations is without
merit and designed to bring publicity to their organization.”
Unocal
In October, the court case filed in the U.S. against the Unocal Corporation
because of its operations in Burma was still under appeal to the Ninth Circuit Federal
Court of Appeals. Plaintiffs in the case alleged that Unocal was complicit in
human rights violations committed by Burmese military forces who had been
assigned to guard the company’s Yadana gas pipeline. U.S. Federal District Judge
Ronald Lew dismissed the case on August 31, 2000.He ruled that there was insufficient
evidence to show that Unocal had actively participated in or conspired with
the Burmese military to commit human rights violations and that Unocal, as part
of a joint-venture arrangement (along with TotalFina-Elf, the Myanma Oil and Gas
Enterprise, and the Petroleum Authority of Thailand), was not a state-actor and so
could not be liable for human rights violations by the Burmese military. The plaintiffs
filed a parallel case in the California Superior Court, however, as Unocal is
based in California, and there, Superior Court Judge Victoria Gerrard Chaney ruled
on August 20 that the case could proceed.
THE ROLE OF MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS
Multilateral institutions, particularly the IMF, and to a lesser extent, the World
Bank and the United Nations sought to ensure that both companies and governments
act in a responsible manner. Despite the different degrees of progress, these
institutions all made clear that issues related to business and human rights were
critical components of their activities.
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
The IMF took strong measures to ensure that governments manage crucial
resources such as oil in a transparent and accountable manner, indicating that if it
were to act consistently throughout the world, it could help significantly to improve
governance standards among opaque and unaccountable governments. The IMF
demonstrated this particularly in its relations with the Republic of Congo (Congo-
Brazzaville), the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Angola.
Republic of Congo (Congo-Brazzaville)
In April 2001, the IMF sharply and repeatedly criticized the government of
Congo-Brazzaville, warning that there would be no further IMF lending as long as “the petroleum sector lacks transparency.” Despite IMF requests, the government
had yet to audit the state-owned Congolese National Petroleum Company or the
petroleum sector as a whole. The IMF again criticized the government in June for
excessive spending, massive customs fraud, and the slow pace of reforms, and
declared that the country would not qualify for debt relief until the government
began to seriously address these problems.
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
A Staff Monitored Program (SMP) began to monitor reforms by the government,
which assured the IMF in June in a memorandum of intent that it would
ensure good governance and complete transparency in the mining and diamond
sector. The government also committed to eliminate “abuses of authority by individuals
and nontax administrations involving intimidation, arbitrary arrests and
dishonest profit seeking . . . .” The agreement, scheduled to run until March 2002,
appeared to provide a good basis for reform of the DRC’s precarious economy and
public administration.
Angola
The IMF allowed the SMP that it had agreed with the government to expire in
June 2001. The government had committed to make ten major reforms but had
only implemented two. It had also failed to publish the quarterly Oil Diagnostic
studies that began at the start of 2001 and were intended to ascertain whether all oil
revenue were being deposited in the central bank, rather than siphoned off for
secret arms purchases or alleged corruption. On August 14, the IMF stated publicly
that it would not cooperate further with the government until the latter complied
with the requirement of the conditions of the previously agreed SMP and significantly
increased transparency by publishing data on oil and other government revenues
and expenditures, and conducting an audit of the central bank. Despite the
SMP’s expiry, the Oil Diagnostic as a contractual arrangement whose completion
was a requirement of further IMF cooperation would continue. The government,
however, did little to increase transparency.
World Bank
The World Bank began a process to assess its impact on human rights in the oil,
gas, and mining industries. In July, it appointed Dr. Emil Salim, Indonesia’s former
state minister for population and environment, as the “Eminent Person” who
would lead the bank’s extractive industries review and “discuss its future role in the
extractive industries with concerned stakeholders.” This review had been
announced by World Bank President James Wolfensohn at the September 2000
annual meetings of the World Bank and IMF held in Prague in response to repeated
NGO criticism of the bank’s lending policies and the negative human rights and
environmental impacts of the oil, gas, and mining industries. The review represented
a compromise between the bank and NGOs opposed to its lending to these
industries and was due to be completed within some twelve months, during which
regional and international consultations would be held to assess the bank’s performance
in the extractive industry. A parallel process to review the bank’s performance in these industries by the bank’s own Operations Evaluations Department
and Operations Evaluations Group was also announced.
A final report, drawing in both reviews and making recommendations to the
World Bank’s board of directors is due to be submitted by November 2002. In October
2001, it was too early to tell whether the assessment would lead to human rights
considerations playing a larger part in the bank’s lending policies in the extractive
industries.
United Nations
The U.N. took a two-track approach toward corporate responsibility in 2001.
The highly publicized Global Compact (G.C.) had a disappointing impact in 2001
but the Sub-Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights
made some progress towards developing a set of U.N. principles on the conduct of
corporations.
The G.C., a voluntary initiative to encourage corporations to adopt nine key
principles on human rights, labor rights, and the environment, was launched by
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan in July 2000. Its impact was limited in 2001,
however, by two key shortcomings: the lack of any system for monitoring corporate
compliance and the failure of the U.N. to apply these same standards to its own
agencies and their procurement. Instead of addressing these problems, the G.C.
preferred to convene meetings between corporations, trades unions, and NGOs to
discuss issues such as the role of companies in conflict zones. The G.C. also developed
a “Learning Forum” to discuss best practices.
In August, the Sub-Commission for the Protection and Promotion of Human
Rights agreed to extend until 2004 the mandate of its working group on the impact
of transnational corporations on human rights. Established in 1999, the group had
already developed draft principles on the conduct of corporations which, once
refined, could lead to the adoption of a new U.N. standard or global guidelines for
the conduct of corporations and provide a basis for assessing their performance.
LAWSUITS UNDER THE ALIEN TORTS CLAIMS ACT (ATCA)
New lawsuits were brought to compel improvements in corporate behavior. In
addition to those against ExxonMobil, suits under the ATCA were brought against
several U.S. corporations on account of their alleged complicity in human rights
violations and several earlier lawsuits continued to wind their way through U.S.
courts.
A lawsuit alleging that local Colombian bottlers for the Coca Cola company
maintained “open relations”with Colombian paramilitaries as “part of a program
to intimidate trade union leaders” was filed on July 21 in the U.S.District Court for
the Southern District in Miami, Florida. The suit also alleged that a manager at one
of the bottling plants “ordered” the murder of trade unionist Isidora Segundo Gil
after he had allegedly threatened to kill trade unionists because of their union activities,
and that five members of SINALTRAINAL, the Colombian union representing
Coca Cola workers, had been “subjected to torture, kidnapping, and/or unlawful detention in order to encourage them to cease their trade union activities”
by the paramilitaries. These events allegedly occurred between 1995 and 2000. The
case was filed by the International Labor Rights Fund (ILRF), the United Steelworkers
Union, SINALTRAINAL, the estate of Isidro Segundo Gil, and the five
trade unionists who were allegedly subjected to human rights abuses. Coca Cola
and the other defendants strongly denied the allegations, Coca Cola also noting
that “[w]hile we continue to conduct a detailed review of these allegations,we have
no reason to believe and no information that demonstrates either bottler named in
the suit has in anyway instigated, condoned or encouraged the criminal activities
alleged . . . [t]he information we have gathered has reinforced our belief that the
claims in this suit are either totally inaccurate, based on distortions of actual events
or omit information that,when provided, clarifies that the bottlers had no involvement
in the actions attributed to them.” In October, Coca Cola filed a motion to
dismiss the suit in the Florida courts.
In September, the ILRF and the Massachusetts-based law firm of Cristobal Bonifaz
filed a suit in a District of Columbia court against Dyncorp, a Virginia-based
company, on behalf of eight Ecuadoran plaintiffs. The plaintiffs alleged that they
had suffered adverse health effects after a Dyncorp plane sprayed pesticides over
their land when it crossed the Ecuadoran border as it was engaged in cocoa eradication
in Colombia, and accused Dyncorp of violating both U.S. and international
laws including the ATCA, the Torture Victims Protection Act, and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The company did not make any public
statements about the case other then to state that it was company policy not to
comment on issues of active litigation.
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENTS
Several governments and multilateral bodies became more actively involved in
corporate social responsibility issues, primarily promoting voluntary initiatives by
corporations and NGOs to adhere to high standards. Such increased governmental
involvement was a necessary precursor to developing binding standards on corporations
that governments could adopt, but some governments took steps that
would limit possibilities for holding corporations accountable.
European Union (E.U.)
The European Commission presented a “green paper”—a nonbonding document
to stimulate public comment—titled “Promoting a European Framework for
Corporate Social Responsibility” in July. It urged companies to voluntarily pursue
social responsibility in their operations around the world and throughout their
supply chains, called for increased voluntary social auditing, the development of
ethical labeling, and the promotion of socially responsible investment.However, it
did not envision any binding regulatory role for the E.U. that would ensure companies
act responsibly.
In June, the European Commission proposed new regulations for its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) that included a more expansive definition of labor
rights violations that could be actionable under the GSP enforcement mechanisms.
Currently, the E.U. can penalize countries by withdrawing their GSP trade benefits
only in cases of forced labor or exports made with prison labor.Under the new proposal,
trade preferences could be withdrawn due to a “serious and systematic violation”
of freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining, of prohibitions
on child labor, discrimination in employment, or forced or compulsory labor
(including prison labor exports). At the same time, the commission proposed to
restrict the labor rights compliance mechanism that triggers investigations of violations
of the GSP labor provisions by eliminating the standing of nongovernmental
bodies to submit a complaint. Currently, complaints can be submitted to the
commission by any interested party, defined as “a Member State, or any natural or
legal person, or association not endowed with legal personality,which can show an
interest in such withdrawal.” Although the complaints mechanism has been used
only twice, both times by the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
(ICFTU) to submit complaints against Burma and Pakistan in 1995, the new proposal
omitted the language that defined who could submit a complaint, effectively
limiting this only to E.U. member states. An E.U. official told HRW that the E.U.
“want[ed] to avoid to address the issue of standing, on purpose.”
United States and United Kingdom
On December 20, 2001, the governments of the United States and United Kingdom
launched the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights. Beginning
in February 2000, the principles were formulated as a result of discussions between
the U.S. Department of State, the U.K. Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
transnational oil and mining companies, human rights organizations, unions, and
business organizations. The companies involved in the process included BP, Royal
Dutch/Shell, Chevron, Texaco, Rio Tinto Zinc, and Freeport McMoRan. Human
Rights Watch, Amnesty International, the Lawyers’ Committee for Human Rights,
and International Alert were among the human rights organizations involved in the
process. The International Federation of Chemical, Energy, Mine, and General
Workers’Unions was the representative for trade unions.The Prince ofWales’Business
Leaders Forum and Business for Social Responsibility were the participating
business organizations. The drafting of the principles formed part of a limited, but
positive ongoing effort to ensure that corporate security arrangements fully respect
human rights. Several meetings were held in 2001 to discuss the implementation of
the principles and to encourage other governments and companies to adopt them.
In October, it was still too early to assess whether the principles would have a lasting
and positive effect on human rights.
CHILD SOLDIERS CAMPAIGN
Global efforts to end the use of child soldiers continued to advance during
the year. Following the United Nations’ adoption in May 2000 of a new
treaty to end the participation of children under the age of eighteen in armed conflict
(an optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child), the number
of countries signing the treaty grew to eighty-seven, and the number of
ratifications increased to ten.Having achieved the ten ratifications needed, the protocol
will enter into force on February 12, 2002.
The Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers continued its campaigning
efforts to achieve broad ratification and implementation of the protocol.Coalition
members, including national campaigns in many countries, lobbied governments
to sign and/or ratify the protocol in advance of the session. Campaign activities in
Australia,Bangladesh,Belgium,Colombia,Germany, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Nepal,Pakistan,Paraguay,Peru, Philippines,Russia, Sierra Leone, the United Kingdom,
and the United States included public education, exhibitions, media campaigns,
petition drives, symposia, street theater, children’s demonstrations,
marches, meetings with governments, and parliamentary initiatives.
In several countries campaign efforts resulted in changes of laws regulating
recruitment. In Italy, sustained campaigning saw the adoption of new legislation
raising the minimum age of recruitment to eighteen. In Israel, after persistent NGO
efforts, the Israeli Defence Forces announced that it would end the deployment of
under-eighteens and stop accepting conscripts before their eighteenth birthday. In
East Timor, the National Council adopted military legislation setting eighteen as
the minimum age for military recruitment. In Greece, after petitioning by coalition
members, a new law was adopted in 2001 that annulled previous legislation that
allowed the conscription of under-eighteens. Legislation to prohibit the voluntary
recruitment of under-eighteens was also under discussion in the Greek Parliament.
In the Netherlands, coalition members worked with members of parliament to
introduce a draft bill that would raise the minimum age for recruitment into the
Dutch Armed Forces to eighteen.
Support for the efforts to end the use of child soldiers also came from Pope John
Paul II,who devoted February 2001 to prayer for an end to the exploitation of children
in armed conflict under the theme “Never Again Child Soldiers,” and from the
World Veterans Federation, which adopted a resolution in December 2000 calling
for universal ratification of the protocol.
The Amman Conference on the Use of Child Soldiers was held in Amman, Jordan
from April 8-10, 2001 under the patronage of Her Majesty Queen Rania Al-
Abdallah. This was the fifth in a series of regional conferences organized by the
coalition in order to highlight the worldwide exploitation of children as soldiers
and build momentum and effective strategies for a global ban on such abuse.
The conference was attended by representatives of the governments of Algeria,
Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey. Participants also included representatives from the Palestinian Authority
and more than seventy representatives of local and international NGOs from across
the region, national human rights and children’s rights institutions, international
agencies, and U.N. bodies. At the conclusion of the conference, participants
adopted the Amman Declaration on the Use of Children as Soldiers,which strongly
condemned the military recruitment and use of children by governments and
armed groups across the region, called for prompt ratification and implementation
of the new Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and other international standards, and
included a large number of concrete recommendations for follow up in the region.
Prior to and following the Amman conference, the coalition held consultations
in Israel with the deputy minister of defense, representatives of the Israeli Defence
Forces,Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials,members of the Knesset and with nongovernmental
organizations to discuss military recruitment policy and issues
related to the use of children as soldiers in the Middle East.
In June 2001, the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers published the firstever
global survey of child soldiers, documenting military recruitment by government
armed forces, civil militia, paramilitaries, and non-state armed groups in 180
countries. It found that more than half a million children were recruited into government
forces and armed groups in more than eighty-seven countries, and that at
least 300,000 of these children were actively fighting in forty-one countries.
The coalition released the report at press conferences in Johannesburg and in
New York, where it was also presented to NGO and government delegates to the
final preparatory meeting for the U.N. Special Session on Children.National coalitions
also released the report from various locations around the world, including
Bangkok,Karachi, and Kathmandu;Amman and Beirut; London, Paris,Rome, and
Stockholm; and Asuncion and Bogotá.
During the year, the coalition also developed several country programs to
strengthen national and regional initiatives by nongovernmental organizations to
address the participation of children in armed conflict. In Colombia, national
coalition members held a series of successful workshops in conflict zones of the
countries, the first series focusing on recruitment prevention with key local actors
and the second focusing on indigenous and Afro-Colombian children at risk of
recruitment. In Southeast Asia, regional and national NGOs organized a national
workshop for the Philippines in Mindanao, bringing together nearly forty NGOs
and local government agencies. The workshop assessed trends in the New People’s
Army, and in Mindanao’s separatist and indigenous people’s conflicts; prepared a
strategic plan for influencing the evolving peace process between the government
and armed groups in the country; and created a loose NGO coalition for follow-up.
Additional workshops were scheduled to take place before the end of the year in
other countries of South and Southeast Asia.
Through its international, regional and national partners, the Coalition also
launched a number of targeted campaigning actions during the year, including on
the use of child soldiers during the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea; deaths of
underage military conscripts in Paraguay; the establishment of a Special Court to
try war crimes (including child recruitment) in Sierra Leone; recruitment policy and practice by the United Kingdom; and child recruitment by government forces
and armed groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo and neighboring countries
that are party to the conflict.
HIV/AIDS AND HUMAN RIGHTS
In July, Human Rights Watch established its own program dedicated to
addressing the problem of HIV/AIDS and human rights. The program will
document violations related to HIV/AIDS and advocate for legal and policy protections.
The program will work in partnership with NGOs around the world to
produce original research on AIDS-related human rights abuses, including in the
areas of women’s rights, children’s rights, rights of migrants and refugees, discrimination
on the basis of HIV status, and rights of prisoners.
The prominence of the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (HIV/AIDS) pandemic on the global policy and aid agendas
reached a peak in 2001, but the world’s appreciation of AIDS as a human rights crisis
still had a long way to go. Human rights abuses that aggravate the HIV/AIDS
epidemic were highly prevalent across the globe in 2001, as they have been since the
early days of the disease. Addressing AIDS-related human rights abuses remained
an undersupported part of national HIV/AIDS programs, compromising the overall
effectiveness of national programs. By December 2000, HIV/AIDS had claimed
22 million lives globally, and 36 million persons were infected with the disease, over
70 percent of them in sub-Saharan Africa.
HIV/AIDS is fueled by discrimination and repression in many ways. The subordinate
status of women and girls in many settings makes them unable to refuse
unsafe or coercive sex.They frequently have less access than their male counterparts
to appropriate and accurate information about HIV transmission and the care of
persons with AIDS. They also face a variety of legal and cultural impediments to
treatment of sexually transmitted disease other than AIDS,which in turn increases
their biological vulnerability to HIV transmission. The United Nations Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) concluded in a 2001 statement that the HIV/AIDS epidemic
would never have attained its catastrophic proportions, especially in Africa, without
discrimination against and subordination of women.
Discrimination against gay men, injecting drug users, and sex workers in many
countries has marginalized these groups from the preventive services (condoms,
clean syringes for drug users, HIV testing and counseling, for example) and treatment
they need. Laws and policies favoring obligatory HIV testing and identification
of sex partners among some socially marginalized groups have served to drive
underground those who most need services. Drug users attempting to reduce their
risk of acquiring HIV by participating in needle exchange programs have faced
repression and violence in some countries.Prisoners in many parts of the world are
subject to sexual violence and are denied services that would help protect them
from HIV transmission through drug use.
HIV/AIDS has had particular impact in depriving children of their rights.AIDS
preferentially claims the lives of sexually active adults in the prime of their productive
lives, many of whom are parents. In Africa alone, over 13 million children
under age fifteen have lost a mother or both parents to AIDS, according to the
United Nations. This social crisis also has severe human rights consequences as
children orphaned by AIDS and those with ill parents are often forced to leave
school and become breadwinners, sometimes in hazardous jobs, and frequently
face abandonment, disinheritance and abuse as AIDS also ravages the extended
family members who would otherwise support them.
The course of the AIDS epidemic continues to be determined by people’s ability
to realize their right to treatment and preventive services. AIDS is no longer a leading
cause of death for young adults in North America and Western Europe, largely
because of access to costly antiretroviral drugs in these regions. The same treatment
remains largely out of reach in developing countries.
KEY GLOBAL DEVELOPMENTS
Following the historic U.N. Security Council session in January 2000 on
HIV/AIDS as a security threat, the General Assembly committed itself to holding a
special session on HIV/AIDS in 2001.The special session in June 2001 was an occasion
for highlighting the human rights dimension of the AIDS crisis, to which the
conference’s final declaration referred in general terms. The process of composing
the declaration, however, graphically illustrated human rights challenges that
remain. In the deliberations over the wording of the declaration, a number of countries,
principally Middle Eastern countries and the United States, objected to the
naming of men who have sex with men, injecting drug users, and sex workers as
high-risk groups with respect to HIV/AIDS. In spite of support from many other
countries for explicit inclusion of these groups to highlight the need for programs
to reach them, in the end they were not named in the final document. The declaration,
therefore, became an unwitting example of the stigmatization that persons in
these groups face every day and that impedes their access to services and support.
The year 2001 saw a dramatic strengthening of the global civil society movement
in favor of the right to treatment for HIV/AIDS. Pressure from non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) across the world was credited with contributing to the withdrawal
in April of a lawsuit brought against the government of South Africa by
thirty-nine multinational pharmaceutical companies. The drug companies had
challenged the implementation of a 1997 South African law that would have facilitated
the country’s production and importation of cheaper generic antiretroviral
drugs.While the dropping of the suit did not stir the government of South Africa
to increase AIDS drug access, legislative action followed quickly in Kenya and was
pending in several other countries, to enable a greater flow of cheaper drugs to persons
with AIDS.
The government of Brazil was in the global spotlight in 2001 as its national program
on AIDS continued to make locally produced antiretroviral drugs widely
available in the country. AIDS activists in Brazil pointed out that flaws remained in
the program, but the dramatic reduction in deaths from AIDS in the country and the more widespread use of preventive services because people knew that treatment
was available were testimony to the effectiveness of the government’s approach.The
legal foundation of Brazil’s AIDS program is a national law by which patents are not
honored in the country if the holder of the patent does not begin manufacturing
the product in Brazil within three years of the awarding of the patent. In May 2000,
the United States initiated an action against Brazil in the World Trade Organization
(WTO), asking the WTO to review Brazil’s patent laws.Under considerable public
pressure, just two months after the withdrawal of the pharmaceutical industry’s law
suit in South Africa, the office of the U.S. Trade Representative announced in June
2001 that it would drop its action against Brazil if Brazil agreed to notify U.S.-based
patent holders when it planned to manufacture generic versions of their drugs.
Brazil presented a resolution to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in
March, asserting the human right of all persons with HIV/AIDS to treatment that
includes antiretroviral drugs. The resolution passed unanimously over the abstention
of the U.S. The WTO ministerial meeting in Qatar in November resulted in a
consensus of member states that the WTO agreement on global patent rules “does
not and should not prevent members from taking measures to protect public
health.” Although developing countries had sought a statement of even stronger
support for putting public health before patents, treatment access advocates
praised the Qatar consensus as a step forward and said they would work in 2002 for
more concrete language on patents and public health emergencies.
In April and May,United Nations Secretary-General KofiAnnan spearheaded an
effort to establish a global fund to which public and private donors could contribute
as part of a strengthened multilateral response to HIV/AIDS. Some treatment
access advocates had been pushing for an international funding mechanism
to draw in new resources to improve AIDS drug access for the poor. It was unclear
whether the new global fund would serve this purpose as its mandate will include
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, and the United States, among others, has
expressed its preference that the AIDS focus of the fund be mainly prevention.
Many questions remained about how the fund would be administered, how the
interests of persons with AIDS would be represented in its decision-making, and
especially whether the fund would ever have the U.S. $7 to $10 billion per year in
resources envisioned by KofiAnnan.The Bush Administration’s pledge ofU.S. $200
million to the fund was widely criticized as inadequate. Pledges to the fund totaled
about U.S. $1.4 billion in October 2001.
CHALLENGES BY REGION
Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa is the epicenter of HIV/AIDS. The disease constitutes a
humanitarian emergency, having killed about 18 million persons since the mid-
1980s, more than all of Africa’s wars over that period.With historically unimaginable
numbers of deaths of adults in their productive years, health and education
services and economic productivity overall have deteriorated as a result of AIDS, along with the erosion of the extended family and community-based institutions.
Silence and denial have characterized the response of many African leaders to this
catastrophe. Although more African leaders are beginning to speak out about
HIV/AIDS, including those who gathered for an African summit on AIDS in Abuja,
Nigeria in April 2001, programs, policies and resources remain inadequate to the
task of stemming the crisis.
Africa is the only region where women and girls outnumber men and boys
among persons living with AIDS. In nearly all of the heavily affected countries of
eastern and southern Africa, the rate of HIV infection among girls aged fifteen to
nineteen years is four to seven times higher than that of boys. In most countries,
girls are also more likely than boys to be pulled out of school when a parent
becomes ill, and they frequently have to become the breadwinners of the family.
AIDS-affected children, including large numbers of girls, continued to swell the
numbers of street children in certain countries, with NGOs reporting that girls
orphaned by AIDS increasingly find themselves having to engage in prostitution to
survive, putting them at high risk of HIV transmission. The subordinate status of
women and girls in the region had clearly facilitated the epidemic’s rapid spread
and destructive impact.
Lack of access to treatment has been a defining feature of the African AIDS crisis.
In August, Nigeria and Cameroon both contracted with Cipla, an India-based
generic drug manufacturer, to supply large-scale treatment programs for persons
with AIDS. The humanitarian NGO Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) also
launched large pilot treatment programs in seven African countries. These initiatives
will be examined closely for lessons on good practices to ensure wider-scale
treatment access on the continent.
Eastern Europe
The fastest growing AIDS epidemic in the last few years has been in eastern
Europe and the former Soviet states. It is fueled largely by the widespread use of
injected drugs, a phenomenon that has grown with poverty, high unemployment
and other aspects of the economic transition in the region as well as the easy availability
of narcotic drugs. Access to services such as needle exchange and treatment
for opportunistic infections remains very limited in many parts of the region.
According to the Open Society Institute, which has been a leader in establishing
AIDS-related services in the region, injecting drug use is highly prevalent among
sex workers, homeless youth, and prisoners—–groups likely to face stigmatization,
marginalization and even abuse by the authorities in some settings.
Asia
It is feared that the numbers of persons infected and living with AIDS in Asia will
surpass even the huge totals in Africa in the coming years. The epidemic in India,
already well established in some states, is facilitated by subordination of women
and discrimination against gay men and sex workers. Extremely high rates of infection
among injecting drug users and sex workers in parts of Southeast Asia are driving a rapidly accelerating epidemic. Steep rises in infection rates in some parts of
China, in some cases apparently fueled by the use of unsterilized needles in health
facilities or blood sales centers, came to light in 2001. Public alarm over local media
accounts of AIDS “outbreaks” reportedly led to incarceration of HIV-positive persons
by local authorities and other drastic measures.
Caribbean and Latin America
The Caribbean basin contains several countries that have the highest rates of
HIV infection outside sub-Saharan Africa. Policies and legal protections against
AIDS-related discrimination have not caught up with the pace of the epidemic in a
number of Latin American countries. Discrimination against HIV-positive gay
men and sex workers and many instances of forced HIV testing of these groups and
others have been reported in the media. In addition, with a fairly well developed
capacity for generic drug production in some countries, the right to AIDS drugs has
become a focus of civil society action. The national AIDS program in Brazil set a
high standard in making locally produced generic drugs widely available to persons
with AIDS. The proposed Free Trade Agreement for the Americas discussed at the
regional summit in Quebec, Canada in May would afford even greater protection
to patent-holding drug companies than they already enjoy under the terms of the
WTO’s intellectual property rules.
WIDENING RANGE OF ABUSES
Even as some aspects of the fight against AIDS have become better established,
the range of human rights abuses linked to all stages of HIV/AIDS epidemics
around the world has widened. In eastern and southern Africa, where HIV infection
is so prevalent that it is no longer meaningful to stigmatize minority or “highrisk”
groups, stigmatization of persons seeking AIDS-related care, especially
women and girls, continues to drive the epidemic.Women have reported to health
workers in several countries that they are aware of the risk of transmitting HIV to
their infants through breastfeeding, but feel they have to take that risk because not
breastfeeding will highlight their HIV-positive status and subject them to hostile
and even violent reprisals from their husbands or partners. Denial of AIDS as a
cause of death remains the rule rather than the exception even in the highest-prevalence
countries, contributing to the stigmatization of those courageous enough to
speak openly about their illness.
Children have a right to, and a life-and-death need for, access to good information
on HIV transmission and care for persons with AIDS. Formal education, especially
at the primary level, is an ideal vehicle for meeting this need. In many
countries, however, AIDS education in school has been strongly opposed by religious
groups and others who have alleged that sex education in schools encourages
promiscuity. In Africa, this denial of children’s and young people’s right to information
is compounded by the inability of many AIDS-affected children to stay in
school.When a parent or other adult in the household is ill with AIDS, children are withdrawn from school to provide care, to earn income for the family, or because a
family encumbered by the cost of treating a sick person can no longer afford to keep
a child in school. A Human Rights Watch investigation in Kenya in February and
March showed that children are further disadvantaged and entrenched in poverty
by a lack of protection of their inheritance rights. Kenya is not the only country in
Africa in which the state authorities have failed to institute legal to protect the rights
of the hundreds of thousands of children who now find themselves without relatives
to help protect their property.
Human rights protections continue to be the weakest part of generally feeble
responses to AIDS on the part of many African governments. Kenya again illustrates
an alarming pattern. The head of state did not even mention HIV/AIDS in
public until late 1999, by which time about 14 percent of the adult population was
already infected. In July 2001 he announced that he would urge parliament to institute
capital punishment for persons who transmit HIV intentionally and portrayed
this measure as an effective means of protecting women from AIDS.While intentional
transmission of HIV,where it can be demonstrated, should be punishable by
law, Kenya is one of many countries where an estimated 90 to 95 percent of HIVpositive
persons do not even know their HIV status. It is unlikely, therefore, that
focusing on “intentional” transmission would do much to curtail the epidemic.
Meanwhile, policies and programs that could go a long way to improving access of
women and girls to information and services remain non-existent or grossly underfunded.
HIV/AIDS in war was the object of international attention during the year. Soldiers
in many armed conflicts were thought or in some cases known to have very
high rates of HIV infection. To the extent that sexual coercion and sexual violence
directed toward the civilian population are instruments of war, HIV/AIDS renders
them more lethal. In January, as part of a Security Council session on HIV/AIDS,
the United Nations Joint Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the U.N.’s
Department of Peacekeeping Operations undertook a joint project to reduce the
likelihood that U.N. peacekeepers would contract or transmit HIV as part of their
operations.The declaration of the U.N. special session on HIV/AIDS called on governments
to improve HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention activities targeted at
their armed forces.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
In the Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Children’s Rights in Kenya, 6/01
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African Schools, 3/01
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL
The Human Rights Watch International Film Festival was created in 1988 to
advance public education on human rights issues and concerns using the
unique mediums of film and video. Each year, the festival exhibits the finest films
and videos with human rights themes in theaters throughout the United States and
several other countries, a reflection of both the scope of the festival and its increasingly
global appeal. The 2001 festival featured thirty-eight provocative films
(twenty-one of which were premieres), from fifteen countries.The festival included
feature-length fiction films, documentaries, and animation. In 2001, selected films
from the festival showcased in twenty-eight cities throughout the U.S.
In selecting films for the festival,Human Rights Watch concentrates equally on
artistic merit and human rights content.The festival encourages filmmakers around
the world to address human rights subject matter in their work and presents films
and videos from both new and established international filmmakers. Each year, the
festival’s programming committee screens more than five hundred films and videos
to create a program that represents a range of countries and issues. Once a film is
nominated for a place in the program, staff of the relevant divisions of Human
Rights Watch also view the work to confirm its accuracy in the portrayal of human
rights concerns.Though the festival rules out films that contain unacceptable inaccuracies
of fact,we do not bar any films on the basis of a particular point of view.
The 2001 festival was presented over a two-week period in New York as a collaborative
venture with the Film Society of Lincoln Center.The festival reached out
to a broader audience by co-presenting selected films with four important New
York festivals: the African Film Festival, Margaret Mead Film and Video Festival,
New York Latino Film Festival, and the New Festival/New York Lesbian and Gay
Film Festival, as well as several independent media organizations: the Association
of Independent Video and Filmmakers, DoubleTake, the Educational Video Center,
MediaRights.org, Pixelpress.org, and POV/The American Documentary. A
majority of the screenings were followed by discussions with the filmmakers,media
activists and Human Rights Watch staff on the issues represented in each work.
The festival’s presence on-line expanded greatly this year. In collaboration with
MediaRights.org, a community web site created by media activists,we co-presented
our first on line festival,“Media That Matters Online Film Festival.”This series featured
twelve short films and videos on U.S. (domestic) human rights issues for the
entire month of June. Audiences from around the world were able to view these
short works via the Internet and to then take immediate action by engaging in several
campaigns made available on-line.
In association with Pixelpress.org, the film festival sponsored the multimedia
presentation Juvenile Justice-a photograph and web site project which explores the
lives of five adolescents and their struggle with the California criminal justice system.
Award winning photographer Joseph Rodriguez drew on his own personal
history as an incarcerated youth and contrasts this with the lives and stories of his subjects in Northern California.Many of these youth are being judged in court as
adults. Juvenile Justice has encouraged on-line dialogue about several current
human concerns and issues and the power of art (as an agent for change), between
teens, parents, teachers, human rights activist, and artists.
The 2001 opening night celebration presented the U.S. premiere of the rerelease
of Hector Babenco’s, Kiss of a Spider Woman, the first independent film to
win an Academy Award for Best Actor and to be honored with four top Academy
nominations, including Best Picture.After a critically acclaimed, yet limited release
in 1986, the film virtually disappeared and was not again available to audiences
until June 2001. Babenco’s groundbreaking film set in a Latin American metropolis
in the mid-1970’s, explores the unlikely relationship that develops between two
prisoners: one political revolutionary, the other a flamboyant homosexual convicted
and imprisoned on “morality” charges. The film’s emotional drama remains
as strong today as fifteen years ago.
As part of the opening night program, the festival annually awards a prize in the
name of cinematographer and director Nestor Almendros, who was also a cherished
friend of the festival and Human Rights Watch. The award, which includes a
cash prize of U.S.$5,000, goes to a deserving and courageous filmmaker in recognition
of his or her contributions to human rights through film. The 2001 festival
awarded the Nestor Almendros Prize to the three Italian filmmakers of the documentary
Jung(War): In the Land of the Mujaheddin: Fabrizio Lazzaretti, Giuseppe
Pettito, and Alberto Vendemmiati. These filmmakers demonstrated enormous
courage filming in northern Afghanistan during war time, and their compassion for
the people of Afghanistan is strikingly evident in this intimate, accomplished film.
Responding to the tragedy on September 11, the festival began to distribute Jung
(War): In the land of the Mujaheddin on VHS format, free of charge, for community
organization and festival screenings. To date the festival has responded to over one
hundred requests with thirty screenings confirmed across the U.S. and Canada,
including a theatrical run at the Cinema Village in New York City which began at
the end of November.
In 1995, in honor of Irene Diamond, a longtime board member and supporter
of Human Rights Watch, the festival launched the Irene Diamond Lifetime
Achievement Award, presented annually to a director whose life’s work demonstrates
an outstanding commitment to human rights and film. Previous recipients
have included Costa Gavras, Ousmane Sembene, Barbara Kopple, and Alan J.
Pakula.This year, the award was presented to Haitian filmmaker Raoul Peck. Peck’s
exceptional body of documentary and fiction films focuses on the human rights situation
in Haiti over the past forty years. His newest work, Lumumba, a dramatic
portrait of legendary African leader Patrice Lumumba (and the first prime minister
of the Congo following its independence) premiered at this year’s New York festival
and continues to screen theatrically throughout the U.S. to sold out audiences.
Highlights of the 2001 festival included the world premiere of Stephanie Black’s
Life and Debt, an extraordinary documentary exploring the complexities and dangers
of economic globalization for Jamaica and developing countries around the
world. Musician Ziggy Marley gave a special musical introduction for our audiences
before the film screenings. Other highlights included; Promises, a moving 
insight into the Middle East conflict as seen through the eyes of seven children,both Palestinian and Israeli, growing up in Jerusalem today. The festival hosted its first
day of all youth programming-media by and for youth- about human rights issues.
Trembling Before G-d, Sandi Simcha Dubowski’s landmark documentary film
about Hasidic and Orthodox Jews who “come out” as gays and lesbians, closed this
year’s festival.
Each year the festival holds a series of special film screenings for high school students
and their teachers in an effort to encourage dialogue about human rights in
the classroom.Daytime screenings are followed by discussions among the students,
their teachers, visiting filmmakers, and Human Rights Watch staff. In 2001, in conjunction
with our newly launched San Francisco festival, we hosted a special
screening for public high school students of the documentary,Public Enemy,which
focuses on four key members of the Black Panthers. Bobby Seale, a protagonist in
the film and a co-founder of the Black Panthers, spent two hours in lively, heated,
and passionate post-screening discussion with the youth audience.
In 1996 the festival expanded to London. The 2001 London festival produced
with the Ritzy Theater in Brixton showcased the United Kingdom’s premiere of
Julian Schnabel’s magnificent and lush Before Night Falls. The film chronicles the
life of Cuban writer Reinaldo Arenas, one of the major artists to emerged from the
Latin American literary boom of the 1960s. Running afoul of the Castro regime as
both a political dissident and openly gay man, Arenas was harassed, imprisoned,
and physically abused-all the more so because he managed to smuggle out and publish
his works abroad. Schnabel capture’s Arenas’s extraordinary life with remarkable
honesty.
The London festival featured the timely screening of Caravan of Death, journalist
Isabel Hilton’s documentary on Judge Juan Guzman’s attempts to put former
Chilean military ruler General Augusto Pinochet on trial for crimes he committed
twenty-seven years ago. The festival also featured a special United Kingdom premiere
of Bamboozled, Spike Lee’s latest film, a blistering satire of network television’s
pitfalls and prejudices.
In a further effort to expand the festival’s scope, a selected package of traveling
films from the festival was created in 1994.The Traveling Festival is presented annually
in a growing number of sites and cities.As of November 2001, the showcase had
been presented in Salt Lake City, Utah; Portland, Oregon; Denver, Colorado; Seattle,
Washington; Chicago, Illinois; and Riverside, California. In an effort to expand
its capacity to raise awareness about human rights issues in the United States and
abroad, the film festival created a web site with numerous support materials and
links to Human Rights Watch’s work on a variety of topics.We have facilitated filmmaker
appearances at a number of traveling festival sites, which further enhances
the audience’s ability to discuss the films screened and analyze the issues they raise.
In addition, we produced full-scale film festivals in both Boston and the San Francisco
Bay Area for the first time where came together and discussed human rights
issues in a community-based setting. These two festivals were unique in their geographical
scope: the Boston festival was hosted at the Museum of Fine Arts in midtown,
the Coolidge Corner theater in Brookline and the International Institute in
downtown Boston. The Bay Area festival venues were equally broad: playing at The
Pacific Film Archive in Berkeley, the Yerba Buena Center in downtown San Francisco,
and the Rafael Film Center in Rafael, California.
INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN
TO BAN LANDMINES
The International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL), launched in 1992 by
Human Rights Watch and five other nongovernmental organizations,
brought together over 1,400 human rights, humanitarian, children’s, peace, disability,
veterans, medical, humanitarian mine action, development, arms control,
religious, environmental, and women’s groups in over ninety countries who
worked locally, nationally, regionally, and internationally to ban antipersonnel
landmines. The ICBL was coordinated by international committee of thirteen
organizations, including Human Rights Watch, which remained one of the most
active campaign members.The ICBL and Jody Williams (a member of the Advisory
Committee of the Human Rights Watch Arms Division) were jointly awarded the
1997 Nobel Peace Prize.
Progress toward the complete eradication of antipersonnel mines continued at
an impressive pace, and the ICBL continued its intense global activity. Perhaps
most notable were the further development of the ICBL’s groundbreaking Landmine
Monitor system, and the ICBL’s extensive involvement in the “intersessional”
work program of the 1997 Mine Ban Treaty. The ICBL engaged in numerous major
events, including Ban Landmines Week and the ICBL General Meeting in Washington
D.C. in March, the meetings of the Intersessional Standing Committees of
the Mine Ban Treaty in December 2000 and May 2001, as well as a series of ten
regional ICBL and Landmine Monitor meetings. In addition, the ICBL participated
in several other regional and thematic meetings; undertook ICBL advocacy missions;
sent a variety of letters to decision-makers; issued numerous Action Alerts;
published activity reports; and issued quarterly Landmine Updates. Much of this
information was disseminated via the ICBL website.
Campaign priorities were universalization of the Mine Ban Treaty—convincing
recalcitrant nations to accede to the treaty—and ensuring effective implementation
of the treaty. Particular targets were states of the former Soviet Union and the
Middle East/North Africa, as well as the United States. Key issues of concern
included: how to respond to violations of the ban treaty; antivehicle mines with
antihandling devices which were prohibited by the treaty; joint military operations
between States Parties and nonsignatories using mines; and continued stockpiling
and transit of mines by nonsignatories in the territory of States Parties.Other priorities
included: promoting increased funding for sustainable and appropriate
mine action programs; promoting increased funding for comprehensive victim
assistance programs and greater involvement of mine victims and mine-affected
communities in the planning and implementation of such programs; and exploring
ways to encourage non-state actors to commit to the banning of antipersonnel
mines.
Four permanent working groups and one ad hoc working group of the ICBL led
these efforts to address the various aspects of the humanitarian landmines crisis.
They were the Treaty Working Group (chaired by Human Rights Watch), the Working Group on Victim Assistance, the Mine Action Working Group, and the Non-
State Actors Working Group, as well as the ad-hoc Ethics and Justice Working
Group.
The Third General Meeting of the ICBL, a biennial meeting of representatives of
its national campaigns and member organizations, met in Washington D.C., on
March 6-7, 2001. Some 160 participants from eighty country campaigns of the
ICBL and representatives of international organizations attended the General
Meeting, as well as twenty NGO observers from an additional ten countries. The
meeting adopted an “ICBL 2004 Action Plan” that laid out a detailed universalization
and implementation strategy for its members. It could be followed by country,
by region, by year and/or by mine-related issue (i.e., mine action, survivor assistance,
etc).
The General Meeting was held during Ban Landmines Week in Washington D.C.
Two hundred mine survivors, deminers, and campaigners from ninety countries
came together in Washington,D.C., marking the first time that the ICBL converged
in the U.S. Simultaneously, two hundred activists from forty-six of the fifty states,
including members of Students Against Landmines from schools nationwide, met
in Washington for a U.S. Campaign to Ban Landmines national conference and
four days of activities including over three hundred meetings with their Congressional
representatives. Also during this week was the global meeting of Landmine
Monitor researchers for review and submission of their draft reports for Landmine
Monitor Report 2001.
The campaign committed to significant ICBL participation in the intersessional
work program established in May 1999 at the First Meeting of States Parties. ICBL
Working Groups took the lead in liaising with the four Standing Committees. The
intersessional work program was aimed at consolidating and concentrating global
mine action efforts, and highlighting the role of the Mine Ban Treaty as a comprehensive
framework for mine action. The Standing Committees served to facilitate
the implementation of provisions of the Mine Ban Treaty,with extensive input, recommendations,
and action points from the ICBL. The four Standing Committees
on Victim Assistance; Mine Clearance; Stockpile Destruction; and General Status
and Operation of the Convention met during week-long sessions in Geneva in
December 2000 and May 2001. The intersessional work proved to be an important
mechanism to both spur and measure progress made in the full implementation of
the Mine Ban Treaty. In September 2001 the Third Meeting of States Parties was
held in Managua, Nicaragua, resulting in an extensive action program for the
coming year.
Just prior to the Managua meeting, the ICBL released the 1,175-page Landmine
Monitor Report 2001, the third annual report to emerge from the Landmine Monitor
system. The Landmine Monitor network grew to 122 researchers in ninety-five
countries, and the system and the annual report were widely recognized as a crucial
element in addressing the landmine crisis.
The ICBL held day-long campaign seminars in conjunction with a new series of
Landmine Monitor regional researcher meetings.At each ICBL session, campaigners
strategized on work in the region, discussing campaign priorities, sharpening
advocacy and media skills, as well as conducting events to raise public awareness.
These meetings also provided an opportunity for regional campaigners to discuss
and contribute to the ICBL 2004 Action Plan.The series of meetings began in October
2000 in Yalta for campaigners from Former Soviet Union/Central Asia. In
November, a regional meeting in the Americas was held in Buenos Aires before the
Second Hemispheric Conference on Banning Landmines. In Buenos Aires, the
ICBL also challenged the region’s signatories of the Mine Ban Treaty to complete
ratification, and challenged States Parties to complete destruction of stockpiles and
submit outstanding article 7 transparency reports by the Third Meeting of States
Parties.At the conclusion of the seminar, the government co-chairs from Argentina
and Canada issued these calls as the “Managua Challenge.” In Djibouti a meeting
was held, also in November, in conjunction with a Regional Conference on Landmines
for the Horn of Africa and Gulf of Aden. Tokyo was the venue for another
regional meeting of campaigners in November, held to coincide with stockpile
destruction and a fundraising marathon run to generate funds for demining in
Cambodia. Another regional meeting was held from November 28-30 in Lomé,
Togo, for Francophone African campaigners. European campaigners met in
Geneva during the Intersessional Standing Committee meetings, and they also
held a regional campaign meeting in Geneva in May 2001 to further strategize and
coordinate advocacy plans for the region. Campaigners from the Middle East and
North Africa met in Beirut in January 2001, where activities included an advocacy
session, and a public event where Lebanese mine action organizations showcased
their work. Campaigners from Southern Africa met in Johannesburg in January
while those from Southeast Asia met in Bangkok. There they participated in a
stockpile destruction ceremony and held a roundtable to present their research to
diplomatic representatives in Bangkok. Their neighbors from South Asia met in
Kathmandu in Nepal, where they also held roundtables, an advocacy seminar, and
a media briefing.
The ICBL also participated in numerous workshops, seminars, and conferences.
Among them was the Seminar on Universalization and Implementation of the
Ottawa Convention in Africa, held in Bamako, Mali from February 15-16, 2001.
The Bamako meeting, co-hosted by the governments of Mali, Canada, and France,
marked the first time since May 1997 that countries from all ofAfrica came together
to discuss the landmine ban.Members of the ICBL, including landmine survivors,
deminers, and campaigners from throughout the continent, participated in this
conference. The ICBL participated in the Seminar on the Destruction of the PFM1
mine which was held in Budapest from February 1-2, 2001, and in March 2001, the
ICBL participated in the U.N. Asia Pacific Regional Disarmament Conference in
Wellington,New Zealand, and also in a symposium on the Impact of Landmines in
Sri Lanka.
National seminars or workshops were held in countries including Afghanistan,
Angola, Australia, Colombia, Georgia, Germany, India, Japan, Lebanon, Nepal,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, South Africa,Yemen, and the U.S.New campaigners began
activities in Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Mongolia, Nagorno-Karabakh, Peru, and
Turkey.
Additionally, ICBL Ambassadors, staff, and members undertook a number of
advocacy and awareness-building missions, including to Australia, Canada, Fiji, France, Guatemala, Greece, India, Japan, South Africa, Spain, Taiwan and Belgium
(for the European Council and Parliament).The ICBL sent letters to heads of state,
issued media releases, and engaged in other advocacy activities on the occasions of
international events such as the Asia-Europe Summit, the U.N. General Assembly
in New York, government summits such as of the European Union, the Francophonie,
the Organization of American States, the Organization of African Unity, the
Assembly of African Francophone Parliamentarians, the Rio Group,MERCOSUR,
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. Letters
to heads of state and media releases were also issued on the occasions of bilateral
visits of heads of state. Letters to heads of state were also sent to mark Mine Ban
Treaty anniversaries of December 3 and March 1 urging governments to accede to
or ratify the treaty. Letters were also sent congratulating new ratifications, and urging
all signatories to ratify before the Third Meeting of States Parties in September
2001. Letters were also sent prior to the two meetings of the Standing Committee
on the General Status and Operation of the Convention highlighting issues of concern
to the ICBL in preparation for the meetings.
As in previous years, the third anniversary of the opening for signature of the
Mine Ban Treaty galvanized campaigners into action worldwide. On December 3,
2000, which coincided with the International Day for Disabled Persons, activities
were held around the globe, from exhibits, to concerts, film screenings and hockey
on prosthetics matches. Similarly the first anniversary of the entry into force of the
treaty on March 1, 2001 further spurred action worldwide. A concerted campaign
effort in anticipation of Ban Landmines Week targeted the United States, urging the
newly-elected President Bush to join the treaty.The ICBL also issued regular Action
Alerts, including several Ratification Campaign Action Alerts, prior to March 1,
2001 and again in May 2001, in anticipation of the Third Meeting of States Parties
to be held in September.
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
INTRODUCTION
The components of the emerging system of international justice took further
shape in 2001.The apprehension of Slobodan Milosevic by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the rapidly growing number of
states parties to the International Criminal Court treaty demonstrated the effectiveness
of and growing commitment to international justice. International prosecutions
helped to open national court systems that had previously been inaccessible
to victims in Chile, Argentina, and Chad. The attacks in the United States on September
11 underscored for many states the need to strengthen mechanisms of
international justice.
While new trends for greater accountability developed,progress was uneven and
in some instances there were setbacks. The establishment of the mixed nationalinternational courts for Sierra Leone and Cambodia, originally seen as a possible
alternative to Security Council-created ad hoc tribunals, stalled. International
prosecutions suffered a setback when Senegal’s Cour de Cassation dismissed
charges against Hissene Habre and challenges confronted Belgium’s progressive law
on universal jurisdiction.
INTERNATIONAL COURTS
International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
During 2001, as the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
secured custody of senior officials, including former Bosnian Serb President Biljana
Plavsic and Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, it continued to contribute to
the jurisprudence of international criminal law.
In its developing case law, the tribunal issued a highly significant ruling in the
Foca case, convicting three men for rape, torture, and enslavement as crimes against
humanity.The Foca case was the first indictment by an international tribunal solely
for crimes of sexual violence against women as crimes against humanity and
resulted in the first conviction by the ICTY for rape and enslavement as crimes
against humanity. The tribunal ruled that the defendants had enslaved women and
that enslavement did not necessarily require the buying or selling of a human being
as had been traditionally required.
On October 23, the Appeals Chamber overturned the Trial Chamber’s convictions
in Prosecutor v. Zoran Krupeskic and Others. The Appeals Chamber found
that the lower chamber, which had convicted all of the defendants, failed to do so
with sufficient evidence for every count. This decision sent a clear message that the
interests of the accused to a fair trial were paramount.
Slobodan Milosevic
Indicted in May 1999 for crimes against humanity and war crimes in Kosovo,
Yugoslavia’s handing over of Slobodan Milosevic to the tribunal was an historic
milestone for international justice. U.S. law had imposed an April 1 deadline for
Yugoslavia’s cooperation with the tribunal in order to continue the flow of U.S. economic
aid.While Milosevic’s arrest was linked to U.S. government economic support
for Yugoslavia, it was carried out by Serbian officials who were increasingly
open to confronting the past.Milosevic’s apprehension on corruption charges was
a first step toward justice for the victims of the Balkan wars. Given the severity of
the crimes charged in the ICTY indictment, Human Rights Watch insisted that
Milosevic be surrendered to The Hague.
Even more importantly for Belgrade than the bilateral U.S. economic aid was the
prospect of more than $1 billion in assistance that an international donors’ conference
would pledge for Yugoslavia.After Milosevic’s arrest on April 1,U.S. Secretary
of State Colin Powell certified that the required threshold of cooperation had been
met, but announced that U.S. support for the international donors’ conference
would depend on “continued progress” by Yugoslavia.Human Rights Watch urged that specific benchmarks in this regard include the transfer of Milosevic and other
indictees to the tribunal.
With Milosevic in custody, some argued that rather than turning him over to the
ICTY, he should have been tried in Yugoslavia on corruption charges or possibly for
war crimes. In Belgrade splits emerged between Republic of Serbia officials,
Yugoslav President Kostunica, and Yugoslav Cabinet members over cooperation
with the tribunal. President Kostunica repeatedly denigrated the tribunal and
stated that he would never surrender Milosevic, a former head of state, to it.
Increasingly, Kostunica sought to deflect international pressure by insisting that
Yugoslavia could not surrender any ICTY indictee until it first adopted an enabling
law. This stance patently ignored Yugoslavia’s overriding international law obligation,
mandated by numerous Security Council resolutions, to cooperate.
The opposition of pro-Milosevic deputies in the Yugoslav Parliament made it
politically impossible to enact a cooperation law. After several unsuccessful
attempts to pass legislation, on June 23 the Yugoslav Cabinet adopted a decree
authorizing transfer of Yugoslav nationals. Milosevic filed a challenge before the
Constitutional Court of Yugoslavia contesting the lawfulness of that decree. The
court, composed ofMilosevic appointees, unanimously suspended the decree. Serbian
Prime Minister Zoran Djindic, citing the primacy of international law obligations,
stated that Milosevic’s transfer would go ahead even if the Constitutional
Court struck down the decree. On June 28, one day prior to the international
donors’ conference and before the Constitutional Court had issued its ruling, the
Serbian authorities surrendered Milosevic to The Hague.
Slobodan Milosevic’s transfer to the United Nations war crimes tribunal was a
victory for the victims of the Balkan wars and a transformative moment for international
justice. The prosecution of a former head of state, indicted when he was a
sitting president by an international tribunal was a groundbreaking precedent.
More than a crude “payoff” for international economic support, Milosevic’s surrender
strengthened those authorities in Belgrade who sought to confront the
crimes committed in the name of the Serbian people.After Milosevic’s arrest in Belgrade
and his surrender to The Hague, police began to uncover gravesites in Serbia
containing the bodies of ethnic Albanians murdered in Kosovo and reburied in Serbia
to avoid detection.
Many senior ICTY indictees, including former Bosnian Serb military commander
General Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, formerly president of the
Bosnian Serb Republic, remained at large. These two were charged with genocide
in connection with the massacre of 7,000 Bosnian men at Srebrenica in July 1995.
It was believed that at least eleven other indictees were living in Yugoslavia, however,
Yugoslav officials had continued to stonewall all of the tribunal’s requests for
cooperation.
Foreshadowing some of the difficulties in prosecuting former heads of state in
international fora, Slobodan Milosevic’s initial court appearances in The Hague
underscored the realities of a lengthy and difficult trial.Choosing to represent himself,
Milosevic had denounced the tribunal’s legitimacy and had not presented, as
of mid-November, a legal defense. While it was necessary for the proceedings to
move in an efficient and orderly way, it was vitally important that Milosevic’s right
to conduct his defense be scrupulously respected. At an August 30 status conference, Judge Richard May announced the appointment of three amici curiae to
“assist the court” in the trial. These lawyers were not Milosevic’s attorneys and it
was crucial that they did not interfere with his right to a defense.
On October 9, the Prosecutor submitted a new indictment against Milosevic for
events in Croatia in 1991-1992. It contained thirty-two counts of crimes against
humanity, violations of the laws or customs of war, and war crimes. On November
23, the tribunal announced an indictment stemming from the 1992-1995 war in
Bosnia that charged Milosevic with twenty-nine counts, including crimes against
humanity and genocide.
MIXED NATIONAL-INTERNATIONAL COURTS
Sierra Leone
Despite the urgent need for accountability in Sierra Leone, progress in establishing
the Special Court for Sierra Leone stalled in 2001. In 2000, the United
Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone agreed to create a court that combined
national and international components to try those individuals most responsible
for serious crimes. This hybrid model was seen as an alternative to another
Security Council-created ad hoc tribunal. The court would be based in Freetown,
Sierra Leone, and would have both international and Sierra Leonean judges, prosecutors
and staff.
The delay was due largely to the months-long impasse over the court’s budget.
There were several factors at work, including, dissatisfaction with the Security
Council’s decision to fund the court through voluntary, as opposed to assessed,
contributions; a lack of confidence and commitment to this particular kind of
hybrid court among some states; and disagreement between potential donor states
and the United Nations Secretariat.
A group of “interested states”supporting the Special Court’s early establishment
were critical of the Secretariat’s initial budget proposal,which totaled $114 million
for three years of operations. These delegates regarded the U.N. Secretariat’s estimates
as excessive and sought to economize on the court’s operations without
affecting the quality of justice.As a result of a series of meetings between the Secretariat,
the “interested states,” and the Security Council, the Secretariat issued a
revised budget on June 14. Under this budget, $16.8 million was required for the
first year and $40 million for the next two years.
In mid-July Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced his decision to go forward
with the Special Court’s establishment despite a shortfall in pledges. As of
mid-November, the small number of states that had pledged contributions
included Canada, the Czech Republic,Denmark, Germany,Mauritius, the Netherlands,
Lesotho, Finland, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United
States.
There was further delay when the government of Sierra Leone proposed in late
August to extend the court’s temporal jurisdiction back in time to 1991, a position
Human Rights Watch had long supported. This proposal was opposed by the
United Nations Secretariat, the United States, and the United Kingdom. Human Rights Watch sent a letter to the Security Council stressing the importance of a 1991
start date as well as the urgent need to get the court going.At this writing, the issue
had not been resolved.
In early November, the court’s Management Committee, mandated to oversee
administrative and budgetary matters, held its first meeting in New York with the
U.N. Secretariat and scheduled a planning mission to Freetown for January 2002.
The mission was tasked to inspect conditions and prepare a detailed blueprint on
the court’s establishment for the secretary-general.
Cambodia
There was little progress in establishing the mixed national-international tribunal
for Cambodia.While the authorities in Phnom Penh approved the statute, they
failed to address serious concerns raised by the U.N. (See Cambodia.)
East Timor
As part of creating an East Timorese court system after the devastation of September
1999, the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) decided to establish an international panel of the Dili district court to
investigate international crimes that had occurred during 1999. In January 2001,
the court handed down its first conviction, sentencing a pro-Indonesia militia
member to twelve years in prison. Many low-ranking militia members had been
detained, some for more than a year. It was a source of great frustration inside East
Timor that justice proceeded so slowly. Inadequate training of investigators,
changes in administrative structure, and a profound lack of resources and personnel
plagued the court’s investigative process.
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (ICC)
On July 17, 1998, when the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
was adopted, only the most optimistic people imagined that it might take less than
five years to garner the required sixty ratifications necessary for its entry into force.
In the first half of 2001 it became a near certainty that this would happen as early
as the first half of 2002. And the commitment to bringing the court into being as
quickly as possible came from every region of the world.
At the General Assembly General Debate of the 56th Session of the United
Nations in November 2001,many heads of state and foreign ministers made special
mention of the ICC in their interventions, demonstrating the growing worldwide
support for the ICC. Among those who highlighted the significance of the court
were Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Ireland,
and Mexico.
From October 2000 to November 2001 twenty-six countries ratified the Rome
Statute, bringing the total to forty-six. There were ten ratifications from the Americas,
ten from Africa,five from the Asia/Pacific region and twenty-one from Europe.
Many other countries are poised to ratify in the coming months.
A small number of states adopted domestic legislation to implement the Rome
Statute.These include the Canada,New Zealand and the United Kingdom.As of the
end of October 2001, a number of other countries, including Argentina,Australia,
Germany, and South Africa had advanced in the process of drafting such law.
Importantly, an increasing number of other states were recognizing the importance
of comprehensive implementing law and were beginning the process of preparing
it.Human Rights Watch saw the adoption of good implementing law as key to the
effective functioning of the ICC and, in the past year,we made formal and informal
submissions on draft implementing law in a number of countries, including
Argentina,Australia, South Africa, and the United Kingdom.
The breadth of support for the ICC became evident in the final months of the
year 2000 when states rushed to sign the Rome Statute before the December 31,
2000 deadline. Nineteen states signed during the last three weeks of December,
bringing the total number of signatories to one hundred and thirty-nine countries.
Iran, Israel, and the U.S. all signed on the very last day.
International Criminal Court Campaign Developments
The worldwide campaign for the ratification of the Rome Statute was assisted by
many regional, subregional and national meetings. These meetings brought government,
civil society, and legal experts together to discuss the complex task of
preparing for ratification and developing national law implementing the Rome
Statute. For example, in June, the government of Argentina,Human Rights Watch,
and the Coalition of NGO’s for the ICC co-convened an Iberoamerican conference
in Buenos Aires for more than seventy governmental and nongovernmental actors
working on the ICC.
In addition, national level conferences and workshops were held in many countries
around the world, including Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia, Ecuador,Mexico,
Paraguay, and the Philippines. Subregional meetings were held in Namibia for
Southern Africa, in Hong Kong for East Asia, in Bangkok for South East Asia, in
Ghana for West Africa, and in Peru for the Andean States.These meetings were crucial
to raising awareness about the ICC and helped to develop the expertise necessary
for ratification and implementation into national law of the Rome Statute.
Human Rights Watch actively participated in many such meetings.We also continued
to visit target countries around the world to advocate directly with governments
for ratification and implementation of the Rome Statute.
As happened last year, regional organizations, such as the Organization of
American States (OAS), Economic Community ofWest African States (ECOWAS),
the Rio Group, the Southern African Development Cooperation (SADC) organization,
the European Union (E.U.), and the Council of Europe, took the opportunity
of their annual assemblies and other meetings to reaffirm their commitment
to the ICC and to call on their member states to ratify without delay. For example,
in June 2001, in a move long anticipated by Human Rights Watch, the E.U. adopted
a Common Position on the ICC. The Common Position, which binds the member
states, was unequivocal in its support for the ICC and lists the means by which the
E.U. and its member states would work for the early establishment of the ICC.
Americas
The number of ratifications in the Americas more than doubled over the year
with the ratifications of Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Costa Rica, Dominica,
Paraguay, and Peru. Important advances toward ratification were made in key states
in the region including Brazil and Mexico, both of which will require a constitutional
amendment as part of the ratification process. Argentina established an
inter-ministerial commission to prepare comprehensive draft legislation to implement
the Rome Statute into domestic law.Many other states in the region expressed
the political will to be among the first sixty countries to ratify the Rome Statute.
Europe
Twenty European states ratified the Rome Statute, including twelve members of
the European Union. The United Kingdom adopted comprehensive legislation
implementing the Rome Statute, but it unfortunately did not include provision for
the exercise of universal jurisdiction over the ICC crimes it incorporated into its
domestic law.
In addition to adopting the Common Position, the European Union also sent a
demarche to the U.S. government in June calling on the U.S. to be a partner in the
establishment of the ICC rather than opposing it.
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, both subject to the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, ratified this year.
Poland became the third Eastern European state to ratify. However, in many Eastern
European states the question of compatibility of the Rome Statute with
national constitutions continued to loom large, delaying ratification in a number
of countries, including the Czech Republic and Slovenia.
Africa
Following South Africa’s ratification in November 2000, the momentum for ratification
and implementation continued to grow among African countries in 2001.
Both Nigeria and the Central African Republic ratified in September/October and
others states, such as Angola, Benin, Congo/Brazzaville, and Cote d’Ivoire were
making good progress towards ratification.There was more awareness of the issues
involved in ratifying and implementing the Statute, particularly constitutional
issues, and some states that ratified last year, including Botswana, Lesotho, Mali,
Namibia, and South Africa, began work on implementation.
Middle East/North Africa
Countries in this region were slow to ratify: no state had ratified at the time of
writing.However, eight states in the region signed the Rome Statute in the last year,
bringing the total number of signatories from the region to eleven.
Asia/Pacific
Countries in the Asia/Pacific region continue to be the most wary of the ICC and
this was reflected in the low numbers of ratifications in the region. Tajikistan was
the only Asian state to have ratified.However, several began to examine the implications
of ratification, including the Philippines and Thailand. In addition, the Cambodian prime minister publicly stated his support for the ICC and sent the ratification
bill to the National Assembly for its approval. A number of states in this
region signed the treaty in the last year, including Iran and the Philippines.
In the Pacific,New Zealand,Nauru, and the Marshall Islands joined Fiji as states
parties. New Zealand adopted comprehensive implementing legislation covering
its obligation to cooperate with the ICC and incorporating the ICC crimes into
national law so that national courts could prosecute them. Importantly, New
Zealand also provided for the exercise of universal jurisdiction over the ICC crimes.
Australia had completed its draft implementing legislation and invited public comment
on it. It was expected to ratify in 2002. Human Rights Watch testified before
an Australian Parliamentary Committee inquiry into the ICC in February 2001.
United States
In a very welcome move, President Clinton authorized signature on December
31, 2000, the last possible day for signing the Rome Statute. In his accompanying
statement, he referred to continued concern about key elements of the Statute.He
asserted the United States’ commitment to bringing perpetrators of genocide, war
crimes, and crimes against humanity to justice, but he firmly maintained that the
signature did not signal U.S. approval of all aspects of the Rome Statute.Nonetheless,
he explained that signature was essential for the U.S. to continue to work with
other states to influence the evolution of the ICC.
Upon taking office, the Bush Administration announced that it would undertake
a review of U.S. policy toward the ICC, which, at the time of writing had not
been finalized. It was clear that the Bush administration did not support the ICC
and would not refer the Rome Statute to Congress for ratification.
The United States Congress had expressed its hostility to the court more directly
with the passage by the House of Representatives of the misnamed “American Servicemembers
Protection Act” (ASPA). This legislation would prohibit any U.S.
cooperation with the Court and would attempt to penalize countries that ratify the
treaty. It had been characterized as “The Hague Invasion Act” because it also
authorized the U.S. to use all means necessary to liberate any U.S. or allied persons
detained on behalf of the proposed ICC.
The American Citizen’s Protection and War Criminal Prosecutions Act of 2001
was presented by Senator Dodd to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.Dodd
planned to introduce this more reasonable bill to the Senate as an alternative to the
ASPA.
The Bush administration expressed its support for the ASPA amendment in a
State Department letter to Senator Helms on September 25, 2001. The administration’s
hostility to the ICC contrasted with its efforts to create a coalition to combat
terrorism in the wake of the September 11 attacks.Almost all major U.S. allies were
among the strongest supporters of the ICC and some had responded with alarm to
the administration’s support for Helms’ legislation.
Throughout the year, Human Rights Watch continued to make known our
opposition to the attitude of the U.S. towards the court. In particular,we met with,
and wrote to, administration officials and legislators.
Preparatory Commissions
The Preparatory Commission for the ICC met twice in the past year.Meetings
were held at U.N. headquarters in New York. The seventh session in March 2001
included discussion on a number of supplementary instruments included in the
mandate of the commission.At the eighth session of the Preparatory Commission
(September 24 - October 6, 2001) four of these instruments were adopted. They
were the Relationship Agreement between the U.N. and the ICC, Rules for the
Assembly of States Parties, the Financial Rules and Regulations for the ICC, and the
Agreement on Privileges and Immunities.Negotiations are expected to continue in
early 2002 on the Headquarters Agreement between the Host State and the ICC, the
First Year Budget for the ICC, and the elaboration of the crime of aggression.
Importantly, the commission also adopted a “road map,”which detailed a timetable
for the completion of a number of practical matters essential for the establishment
of the ICC and which must be undertaken in advance of the entry into force of the
Rome Statute. These included establishment of an interlocutor between the host
state, the Netherlands, and the ICC and preparing documents for the first Assembly
of States Parties.
The Preparatory Commission would stay in existence until the end of the first
meeting of the Assembly of States Parties.This was expected to take place soon after
the sixtieth ratification and entry into force of the Rome Statute. In expectation of
the Rome Statute’s entry into force by the middle of 2002, the General Assembly’s
Sixth Committee session in November 2001 approved two Preparatory Commissions
for 2002, to take place in April and July, as well as authorizing the First Assembly
of States Parties.
UNIVERSAL JURISDICTION
Habré Case
In February 2000, a Senegalese court indicted Chad’s exiled former dictator,
Hissène Habré, on charges of torture and crimes against humanity, and placed him
under house arrest. It was the first time that an African had been charged with
atrocities by the court of another African country. In March 2001, however, Senegal’s
Court of Final Appeals ruled that he could not be tried in Senegal for crimes
allegedly committed in Chad. Habré’s victims then sought his extradition to Belgium.
The United Nations Committee against Torture and high U.N. officials subsequently
requested Senegal not to let Habré leave the country except via
extradition, and Senegal had agreed to hold him. In the meantime, the case opened
new possibilities for justice in Chad itself.
Habré ruled Chad from 1982 until he was deposed in 1990 by current president
Idriss Déby and fled to Senegal.Habré’s one-party regime, supported by the United
States and France, was marked by widespread abuse and campaigns against the ethnic
Sara (1984), the Hadjerai (1987), and the Zaghawa (1989). In 1992, a truth commission
accused Habré’s government of 40,000 murders and systematic torture.
Chadian victims had sought to bring Habré to justice since his fall.With many ranking officials of the Déby government, including Déby himself, involved in
Habré’s crimes, however, the new government did not pursue Habré’s extradition
from Senegal.
In 1999, with the Pinochet precedent in mind, the Chadian Association for the
Promotion and Defense of Human Rights requested Human Rights Watch’s assistance
in bringing Habré to justice in Senegal. The Chadian Association of Victims
of Political Repression and Crime (AVCRP) representing hundreds of Habré’s victims,
helped prepare the evidence.Meanwhile, a coalition of Chadian, Senegalese,
and international NGOs was quietly organized to support the complaint.
In a criminal complaint filed in Dakar on January 26, 2000, the plaintiffs accused
Habré of torture and crimes against humanity, providing details of ninety-seven
political killings, one hundred and forty-two cases of torture, one hundred “disappearances,”
and seven hundred thirty-six arbitrary arrests, most carried out by
Habré’s dreaded DDS (Documentation and Security Directorate). A 1992 report by
a French medical team on torture under Habré was also submitted to the court.
After a number of victims gave closed-door testimony before the Investigating
Judge, the judge called in Habré on February 3, 2000 and indicted him on charges
of crimes against humanity and torture and placed him under house arrest.
After Abdoulaye Wade was elected president of Senegal in March 2000, the state
prosecutor supported Habré’s motion to dismiss the case. President Wade also
headed a panel that removed the Investigating Judge. Habré reportedly spent lavishly
to influence the outcome of the case.
On July 4, 2000, an appeals court dismissed the charges against Habré, ruling
that Senegal had not enacted legislation to implement the Convention against Torture
and therefore had no jurisdiction to pursue crimes that were not committed in
Senegal. The United Nations special rapporteurs on the independence of judges
and lawyers and on torture made a rare joint and public expression of their concern
to the government of Senegal over the dismissal and the surrounding circumstances.
The victims appealed the dismissal to the Cour de Cassation, Senegal’s
Court of Final Appeals.
On March 20, 2001, following repeated declarations by Senegal’s president that
Habré would never be tried in Senegal, Senegal’s Cour de Cassation affirmed the
appeals court decision. The effort to prosecute Habré continued, however.
In November 2000, Chadian victims had already filed a criminal complaint
against Habré in Belgium, which has expansive jurisdictional laws, to create the
possibility of extradition to stand trial there. That case was being actively investigated.
The Belgian judge was seeking to visit Chad and it was hoped that in due
course he would issue an international arrest warrant against Habré.
In addition, the victims filed a complaint against Senegal before the United
Nations Committee against Torture (CAT) for violation of Senegal’s obligations
under the Torture Convention to prosecute or extradite Habré, asking the committee
to recommend that Senegal amend its laws and either reinitiate the investigation
against Habré or directly compensate the victims for their loss.
In April 2001, President Wade abruptly announced that he had asked Habré to
leave Senegal.While this represented an important acknowledgement of the victims’
efforts, they feared that Habré would move to a country out of reach of an
extradition request or a final U.N. ruling and asked the CAT to issue an interim ruling to preserve their ability to bring him to justice. The CAT responded by asking
Senegal “not to expel Mr.Hissène Habré and to take all necessary measures to prevent
Mr. Hissène Habré from leaving Senegalese territory except pursuant to an
extradition.” After the same request was made by high U.N. officials including,
according to Wade, Kofi Annan, Wade announced that he would hold Habré.
Habré’s supporters had since then made clear that he was looking to escape.
The victims and their supporters continued to wage an international campaign
to deny Habré a safe haven, even if he were able to leave Senegal.Madagascar,Mauritania,
and Pakistan, countries reportedly contacted by Habré, stated publicly that
they would not grant refuge to Habré after NGOs brought the issue to public attention.
In the meantime, the case opened up new avenues for justice in Chad itself. Just
as Pinochet’s arrest in Britain broke the spell of Pinochet’s impunity in Chile, the
Habré indictment in Senegal had an immediate impact back in Chad. The victims
who had initiated the case gained a new stature in Chadian society, having accomplished
something no one had thought possible, and announced their intention to
file criminal charges in Chadian courts against their direct torturers. President
Idriss Déby met with the Association of Victims’ leadership to tell them that “the
time for justice has come” and that he would support their cases. Déby also promised
to clean up the administration by removing all former DDS agents, Habré’s
political police, and to grant full access to the files of the Truth Commission to the
International Committee.
On October 26, 2000, seventeen victims lodged criminal complaints for torture,
murder, and “disappearance” against named members of the DDS. The case was
initially thrown out by the Investigating Judge who ruled that Chadian civil courts
had no jurisdiction to hear complaints against the DDS because a 1993 statute had
provided for a special criminal court to try “Habré and his accomplices,” though
that court never existed. The victims appealed and the appeals court turned to the
Constitutional Court for advice,which ruled that the 1993 statute was unconstitutional.
In May 2001, after the cases were reinstated, a new investigating judge began
to hear witnesses.More than twenty victims filed new cases.
The victims’ actions were a direct challenge to the continuing power of Habré’s
accomplices,who began to respond violently.The victims’Chadian lawyer, Jacqueline
Moudeina, had a grenade thrown at her by security forces commanded by one
of the ex-DDS defendants and was evacuated to a hospital in France, her leg full of
shrapnel.
Belgian Law
Belgium’s law providing Belgian courts with universal jurisdiction authority
over genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes is a model. The law had
provided important opportunities in the struggle against impunity.
Rwandan Genocide Trials
In April, the Cour d’Assizes in Brussels began a trial of four Rwandans accused of involvement in the 1994 Rwandan genocide.None of the four were government
officials at the time of the genocide.Two of the defendants were nuns.Most unusually
and importantly, a jury of Belgian citizens heard the case, and in June, found all
four of the accused guilty.The jury trial validated the involvement of citizens in the
pursuit of international justice. In the course of the proceedings, more than fifty
witnesses traveled from Rwanda to appear in the courtroom.The trial and the conviction
were covered extensively by radio in Rwanda.
Ariel Sharon
Controversy mounted in Europe in 2001 over Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon’s responsibility for the 1982 killings in the Palestinian refugee camps of
Sabra and Shatila. The Israeli Government’s Kahan Commission that had investigated
the massacre in 1983 concluded that the then minister of defense, Sharon,
bore “personal responsibility” and that he should “draw the appropriate personal
conclusions arising out of the defects revealed with regard to the manner in which
he discharged the duties of his office.” The findings of the Kahan Commission,
however authoritative in terms of investigation and documentation, could not substitute
for proceedings in a criminal court in Israel or elsewhere that would bring
to justice those responsible for the deliberate killing of hundreds of innocent civilians.
In June, after the airing of a BBC documentary on the massacre, survivors
lodged a complaint against Ariel Sharon in a Belgian court.
When Prime Minister Sharon visited the United States in July, Human Rights
Watch urged that a criminal investigation be launched into his role in the massacre
and asked that the U.S. government encourage Sharon to cooperate with any investigation.
As prime minister, Sharon could invoke immunity from prosecution.
However, this should not preclude an active criminal investigation either in Israel
or elsewhere.
Democratic Republic of Congo v. Belgium
at the International Court of Justice
In a potentially serious challenge to universal jurisdiction, the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) filed a case on April 11, 2000 with the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) contesting the lawfulness of a Belgian arrest warrant issued
against the DRC’s then acting foreign minister, Abdoulaye Yerodia Ndombasi. A
Belgian investigating judge had charged Yerodia with genocide, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity. The accusations were based on public calls Yerodia had
made for the Congolese population to kill members of the Tutsi ethnic group at the
start of the rebellion against Congolese President Laurent Kabila in August 1998.
The arrest warrant was based on a 1999 Belgian law giving Belgian courts the
authority to prosecute individuals accused of atrocities regardless of the crimes’
connection to Belgium or the accused’s presence on Belgian soil. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo contended that the law violated its territorial integrity and
that the international arrest warrant was invalid as its acting foreign minister
enjoyed diplomatic immunity.
The DRC sought provisional remedies from the court to have the arrest warrant
invalidated. After several days of oral arguments in November 2000, the court
denied the DRC’s request for provisional measures. On October 15, 2001, the ICJ
heard arguments on the substantive claims. The DRC dropped the challenge to the
fundamental lawfulness of universal jurisdiction in its pleading to the ICJ.
Internal Challenges
An increasing number of cases were filed in Belgian courts under its universal
jurisdiction law.Many of these charged current and former heads of state with serious
crimes, including Fidel Castro, Ange Felix Patasse, Yasir Arafat, and Hashemi
Rafsanjani. Because of the provisions of Belgian law, these cases were initiated even
when the accused was not present on Belgian territory. This proliferation of cases
prompted some in the Belgian government to reconsider its universal jurisdiction
law. In July,when Belgium assumed the rotating presidency of the European Union,
the Belgian cabinet considered amending the law in Parliament, but was unable to
reach agreement. Belgium’s Chambre d’Accusation was to determine the admissibility
of several cases filed against current heads of state, including, the case of Ariel
Sharon and the Ivory Coast’s Laurent Gbagbo. Through these cases the court was
to decide whether to reinterpret the law to require the defendant’s presence on Belgian
soil before a case could move forward. In late November 2001, the International
Commission of Jurists, the International Federation of Human Rights
Leagues (FIDH), and Human Rights Watch issued a joint press release expressing
support for the Belgian law. Shortly thereafter the court announced that it would
likely issue its decision in January 2002. Whatever the decision, it would be
appealed to Belgium’s highest court, the Cour de Cassation.
Dutch Courts and Colonel Desi Bouterese
Of course,Belgium was not the only state with universal jurisdiction legislation.
Over several years trials of low and mid-level accused had taken place in Switzerland,
Denmark, and Germany on the basis of universal jurisdiction, but efforts to
invoke universal jurisdiction were not always successful.
In March 2001, an Amsterdam Appeals Court issued an important ruling allowing
Dutch prosecutors to investigate the “possible involvement” of former Suriname
dictator Desi Bouterse in serious human rights crimes in 1982. The Appeals
Court authorized the retrospective application of Dutch legislation implementing
the Convention Against Torture. The judges found that because the acts had been
prohibited by preemptory norms of international law, it was permissible to apply
the 1988 Dutch enabling legislation to acts that had occurred six years prior to the
law’s enactment. In September, however, the Dutch Supreme Court reversed the
Appeals Court decision.
INCREASED ACCESS TO NATIONAL COURTS
Despite the failure to hold Augusto Pinochet to account in Chilean courts, the
synergy between justice at the international level and increased access to national
courts continued most clearly in the Americas.Most of the results were positive.
Ricardo Miguel Cavallo
In August 2000,Mexican authorities arrested Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, a former
Argentine navy lieutenant, at the request of Spanish investigating judge Baltasar
Garzon. In February 2001, Mexican Foreign Minister Jorge G. Castaneda authorized
Cavallo’s extradition to face charges in Spain for human rights violations in
Argentina during that country’s “Dirty War.”Cavallo’s lawyers filed an amparo petition
(recurso de amparo) before a federal court (the Juzgado Primero “B” de Distrito
en Materia de Amparo) challenging the constitutionality of the foreign
minister’s decision. A decision from the court was still pending. Should it reject
Cavallo’s petition, he would have the option of filing a judicial appeal,which would
ultimately be considered by the Mexican Supreme Court.
Argentine Amnesty Law
On March 6,Argentine Federal Judge Gabriel Cavallo struck down as unconstitutional
two laws that had barred prosecution of those responsible for human
rights crimes: the “Full Stop” and “Due Obedience” laws. This ruling would clear
the way for trials of military officials accused of human rights crimes during the
“Dirty War.” The ruling was issued in a 1978 murder-kidnapping case and was an
important step in ending more than two decades of impunity. In November, the
Buenos Aires Federal Court upheld Judge Cavallo’s decision by rejecting the defendant’s
appeal.Argentina’s Supreme Court would review the case.
Alfredo Astiz
On July 1, former Argentinean naval officer Alfredo Astiz surrendered to Interpol
in Buenos Aires. He was arrested on orders of Argentine Federal Judge María
Servini de Cubría,who received a formal request for his extradition from an Italian
court. Captain Astiz, notorious for human rights abuses committed during
Argentina’s military dictatorship (1976-1983), was charged in Italy with the kidnapping
and torture of three Italian-Argentines. Human Rights Watch had called
on President Fernando De la Rúa of Argentina to extradite Astiz to Italy. In a setback
for international justice, the Argentine Foreign Ministry decided to release
him on August 21.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Making the International Criminal Court Work: A Handbook for Implementing
the Rome Statute, 9/01
LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, AND
TRANSGENDER RIGHTS
Although the visibility of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people
throughout the world continued to rise in 2001, their increased visibility
was accompanied by attacks based on sexual orientation and gender identity.
Human rights activists who sought to use the human rights framework to call to
account states that participated in these rights abuses or condoned them also came
under attack. In virtually every country in the world people suffered from de jure
and de facto discrimination based on their actual or perceived sexual orientation.
In some countries, sexual minorities lived with the very real threat of being
deprived of their right to life and security of person. A small number of countries
continued to impose the death penalty for private sexual acts between consenting
adults. In several others, sexual minorities were targeted for extrajudicial executions.
In many countries, police or other members of the security forces actively
participated in the persecution of lesbians, gay, bisexual, and transgender people,
including their arbitrary detention and torture. Pervasive bias within the criminal
justice system in many countries effectively precluded members of sexual minorities
from seeking redress.
These attacks on human rights and fundamental freedoms also occurred in
international fora where states were gathered to promote, not attack,human rights.
For example, in New York in June at the U.N. General Assembly Special Session on
HIV/AIDS, delegates attempted to ban nongovernmental representative Karyn
Kaplan from the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission
(IGLHRC) from speaking at an official roundtable. Delegates from Sudan, Syria,
Pakistan, Libya,Malaysia,Egypt, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco criticized in their
verbal statements any recognition of sexual minorities.Although the U.N. General
Assembly eventually voted in a closed plenary session to allow Kaplan to speak at
the roundtable, the final document did not include any explicit reference to lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender people despite the fact that sexual minorities were at
increased risk of HIV infection in many countries.
The rights of sexual minorities also came under attack at the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights where delegates objected to the inclusion of cases of extrajudicial
executions of sexual minorities in the report of the U.N. special rapporteur on
extrajudicial, summary, and arbitrary executions.Delegates argued that the special
rapporteur overstepped her mandate by addressing these crimes. The resolution
renewing her mandate was stripped of language explicitly recognizing that sexual
minorities were vulnerable to extrajudicial executions.
Other intergovernmental bodies played a strong role in upholding the rights of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people. Under article 13 of the Treaty of
Amsterdam, which entered into force in 1999, the European Union could adopt
measures to combat discrimination based on sexual orientation, among other
grounds. In addition, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union,
adopted in December 2000, included sexual orientation among the prohibited grounds of discrimination.However, the European Union’s governing bodies could
only act to implement these provisions within their area of competence,which generally
excluded criminal law, family law, and education. In a directive that entered
into force in December 2000, the European Council called upon member states to
take steps within three years to ban sexual orientation discrimination in employment.
The European Union was also required to assess the respect for human rights,
including the principle of equality, in the twelve countries with which it had opened
negotiations for accession to membership. The twelve countries were Bulgaria,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,Malta, Romania,
Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia. (In addition, Turkey was a candidate for membership
in the European Union but was not currently in negotiations.) Five of the thirteen
countries that had applied for membership—Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia,
Hungary, and Lithuania—maintained discriminatory provisions in their criminal
laws, according to the European branch of the International Lesbian and Gay Association.
In July, the Romanian government adopted a decree decriminalizing gay
relationships between consenting adults, effectively nullifying a law that allowed
sentences of up to five years imprisonment for homosexual relationships “occurring
in public or which provoke a public scandal.”
After a European Parliament intergroup on gay and lesbian rights held a hearing
in June 2001, E.U. Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Verheugen confirmed
that “full attention”would be given in the accession review process to issues related
to discrimination based on sexual orientation. The European Parliament, which
must approve applications for membership in the European Union, stated in 1998
that it would not give its consent to the accession of a country that violated the
rights of lesbians and gay men.
PERSECUTION
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people were vilified by officials of several
countries.They were denied equal enjoyment and protection before the law in
a significant number of countries. They were arrested and tried, sometimes under
national security laws, for private consensual acts. In Namibia, President Samuel
Nujoma continued to vilify gay men and lesbians, stating, “The Republic of
Namibia does not allow homosexuality, lesbianism here. Police are ordered to
arrest you, and deport you, and imprison you too.”The nationally televised speech
came just two weeks after the Namibian Supreme Court overturned a lower court
ruling recognizing the right of one member of a same sex couple to confer permanent
residency on the other. Soon after the speech, the Rainbow Project, a nongovernmental
human rights organization working with sexual minorities, started
receiving reports of harassment and beatings by the Special Field Forces, a security
unit reporting directly to the president.Nujoma later clarified his statement,“Traditional
leaders, governors, see to it that there are no criminals, gays and lesbians
in your villages and regions.We . . . have not fought for an independent Namibia
that gives rights to botsotsos [criminals], gays and lesbians to do their bad things
here.”
In November, Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad also verbally
attacked gays, announcing that he would expel any gay British government minister
if he came to Malaysia with a partner.Mahathir explained in an interview with
BBC radio, “the British people accept homosexual ministers. But if they ever come
here bringing their boyfriend along, we will throw them out. We will not accept
them.”
In February, confusion reigned about the fate of two women who were reportedly
sentenced to death for “unnatural behavior” in the city of Boosaaso in the selfdeclared
autonomous region of Puntland, northeast Somalia. The news of the
sentence was first published in a local weekly and was subsequently picked up by
the national and international press in Mogadishu.When the reports of the case
generated significant international attention on Puntland, the authorities denied
the reports and instead accused journalists of inventing the story to discredit the
government. The authorities also accused the editor of the weekly paper of making
false assertions and published statements. Lost amid all the debate about the politics
of the government’s relationship with the press was any clarification regarding
the two women named in the report.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people faced arrest for consensual sexual
activities and many of those arrested reported being tortured by the police. In
Egypt, a sixteen-year-old boy was convicted of “debauchery” on September 18 for
allegedly engaging in sexual relations with men. The boy received a sentence of
three years’imprisonment with labor followed by three years of probation.His sentence
was on appeal at this writing. The youth said that police extracted a confession
from him after subjecting him to painful beating on the soles of the feet. He
did not have access to a lawyer during his interrogation, and he was not allowed to
contact his family during the first two weeks of his detention. Press and spectators
were allowed to attend and report on the September and October hearings, and the
boy’s name, photo, and accounts of the charges and sentence have appeared in
Egypt’s semi-official press.
The boy was one of fifty-three people detained and charged with similar offenses
after a crackdown in May against men presumed to be gay. The others, all adults,
were arrested and subjected to violations of standard arrest procedures according
to their defense attorneys. There were reports that the men were beaten and subjected
to forensic examinations in order to ascertain if they had engaged in anal sex.
They were prosecuted before an Emergency State Security Court, which reached a
verdict on November 14. Twenty-three were sentenced to between one and five
years of hard labor; twenty-nine were acquitted. Because the trial took place before
an Emergency State Security Court, those convicted could not appeal their sentences.
Despite urgent appeals from the U.N. special rapporteurs on the independence
of judges and lawyers, and torture and the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention,
the Egyptian authorities not only went through with the prosecutions of the men,
but a day after the sentencing in the first case,police arrested and charged four more
men on the same grounds. They too were reportedly tortured. As Egypt did not
expressly outlaw homosexual acts, the charges included “habitual practice of
debauchery” and “contempt of religion.”
In March, two men in Lebanon were convicted by a military court of defaming
the Vice Squad (Police des Moeurs) and fined U.S. $200. In July, on appeal to the
Military Court of Cassation, the conviction of one of the men was overturned. The
case began in April 2000 when two plainclothes police officers from the Vice Squad
entered the office of Destinations, an internet service provider (IPS), seeking the
identities of the person who had financed and installed a website with gay related
content, including the need for legal reform within Lebanon. Ziad Mugraby, the
manager of the IPS refused to cooperate with the warrantless search. He was subsequently
order to appear the next day for questioning. After repeated threats and
interrogations, Mugraby turned to Multi-Initiative on Rights, Search, Assist and
Defend (MIRSAD), a human rights nongovernmental organization in Lebanon for
support. In July, director of MIRSAD Kamal el Batal was also questioned by the
police. The two men were subsequently tried in a military court for defamation
based on their publicizing the circumstances of the case. Batal’s conviction was
overturned.
On July 7, police raided the offices of the Bharosa Trust and the Naz Foundation
International in Lucknow, organizations that worked on HIV/AIDS prevention,
arresting several staff members. Although subsequently released on bail, the staff
members were charged under article 377 of the Indian Penal Code, a provision that
prohibited “carnal intercourse against the order of nature.” Article 377 had been
used repeatedly to justify discrimination and police brutality against gay, lesbian,
and bisexual individuals.
Members of sexual minorities also faced detention in psychiatric hospitals in
several countries. In April, the National Human Rights Commission of India
missed a significant opportunity to address this violation when it announced that
it did “not want to take cognizance” of a case brought before the commission
objecting to involuntary aversion therapy and other forms of psychiatric abuse
aimed at ”converting”homosexuals.The commission explained its decision by stating,
“sexual minority rights did not fall under the purview of human rights.”
More than a year after the murder of transgender activist Dayana (Jose Luis
Nieves), transgender people living in Venezuela continued to face unrelenting
police harassment.The Commander of Police in the state of Carabobo announced,
“homosexuals and prostitutes are to be ruled by the police code.They cannot move
freely in the streets.”Activists reported that this attitude by the police had led to an
atmosphere of fear and intimidation within the transgender community.
Another transgender activist, Diane Sacayan in Argentina, who had publicly
denounced police harassment and abuse of transvestites, was arrested in the city of
Don Bosco in February and charged with robbery.As of this writing, she was still in
detention and had not had the evidence against her presented at a preliminary
hearing. Sacayan reported being tortured by the police and alleged that that she was
arrested not for robbery but for refusing to pay a bribe to the local police. Stigmatization
of transgender people made them particularly vulnerable to abuse by the
authorities. Transvestites in Argentina were arrested under a law prohibiting the
wearing of the clothes of the opposite sex, a prima facie violation of freedom of
expression.
The persecution of transgender people in Argentina led to a historic meeting of activists with U.N.Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression Dr.Abid Hussain.
The meeting followed the issuing of a joint statement by six U.N. experts urging lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender activists to send them information regarding
human rights violations based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
DISCRIMINATION
Although lesbian, gay,bisexual, and transgender people continued to experience
de jure and de facto discrimination in virtually every country in the world, several
significant changes occurred in 2001. Netherlands became the first state to allow
same sex couples to marry. Just three years after implementing a domestic partnership
law, the legislature, by a significant majority, passed a law to end discrimination
in marriage. The law went into effect on April 1. The law required that at least
one partner be a Dutch citizen or resident, as required for heterosexual couples who
marry.
In another groundbreaking decision, Colombia’s Supreme Court issued a decision
on October granting conjugal visits to a lesbian in prison and her partner. The
decision in the Montoya case not only ended the practice of gender and sexual orientation
based discrimination regarding conjugal visits for prisoners. The ruling
could also could resolve the ongoing case of Marta Alverez, who faced similar discrimination
and brought the first sexual orientation-related case ever presented to
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. The case was heard by the
commission in October 1999.After the hearing, the parties entered into settlement
negotiations. The law, prior to this decision, granted conjugal visits to heterosexual
male inmates but limited conjugal visits to the spouses of heterosexual female
inmates. The government admitted that its practice was discriminatory but argued
that the restrictions on conjugal visits promoted security, discipline, and morality
in the prisons. The government also argued that Latin American cultures did not
tolerate homosexuality.
In September, Judge Kathleen Satchwell, a judge in South Africa, won the right
for her female partner to enjoy the same benefits as those previously reserved for
“spouses”of married heterosexual judges.Although South Africa continued to take
the lead on human rights protections for gays and lesbians, Minister of Justice
Penuell Maduna fought the Satchwell case to the bitter end, revealing deep-seated
reservations about the constitution’s equality clause. Also in September, a South
African Court ruled that gay and lesbian couples could adopt children. The judgment
was appealed to the Constitutional Court.
The issue of bias remained a serious concern for sexual minorities worldwide.A
report released in February by the Judicial Council of California, revealed that antigay
bias was a major problem in the court system statewide in California.Over half
of all gay men and lesbians interviewed regarding their court experiences reported
hearing anti-gay comments or experiencing anti-gay actions when sexual orientation
became an issue. Nearly a third of all court employees believed that it was
unsafe for them to be openly identified as gay or lesbian in the workplace. This bias
remained even though California was one of the United States’ most progressive
states regarding lesbian and gay equality.
In Finland, a new law allowed gays and lesbians to register as couples and obtain
some of the same benefits previously reserved for married couples or relatives, such
as the right to inherit property and to visit if one partner was hospitalized. However,
unlike in South Africa, gay and lesbian couples were still banned from adopting
children or taking a common surname.
Seven years after the military’s “Don’t Ask,Don’t Tell”policy was codified as law
and implemented, the United States military’s own surveys and investigations
found that training on how to implement the law was deficient and that anti-gay
harassment remained pervasive in the military.Many military personnel who faced
verbal or physical harassment and feared for their safety made statements acknowledging
they were gay, knowing that it would mean the end of their careers, but also
aware that if they complained officially about anti-gay harassment they would
probably themselves face an intrusive inquiry and discharge. They also knew that
harassers were rarely punished.
Although the “Don’t Ask,Don’t Tell”policy was ostensibly intended to allow gay,
lesbian, and bisexual service members to remain in the military, discharges
increased significantly after the policy’s adoption. From 1994 to 2000, more than
6,500 servicemembers were discharged under the policy, with a record number of
1,231 separations during 2000. Women were discharged at a disproportionately
high rate,while the policy provided an additional means for men to harass women
service members by threatening to “out” those who refused their advances or
threatened to report them, thus ending their careers.
The U.S. was increasingly out of step internationally in maintaining restrictions
on homosexuals serving in the military. Most of its NATO and other allies either
allowed homosexuals to serve openly or had no policy on the issue. In September
1999, the European Court of Human Rights rejected a United Kingdom ban on
homosexuals serving in the military; the justification for that ban had been similar
to that used to defend the U.S. military’s “Don’t Ask,Don’t Tell” policy.
Each day was a test of survival for many lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
students in U.S. public schools. Our 2001 report, based on interviews in rural and
urban areas of seven U.S. states, documented rampant discrimination against those
who failed to conform to rigid rules of how boys and girls should behave.We found
that harassment often began at an early stage and escalated rapidly in middle and
high school. Teachers, administrators, and counselors not only neglected to defend
students from harassment but in some cases participated in discriminatory behavior
themselves.
As a result,many lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender students remained closeted,
unable to express a fundamental aspect of their identity. Students who were
more vocal about their sexual orientation or gender identity were targeted for physical
and psychological violence. Girls in general and lesbians in particular were
especially vulnerable to the compounded effects of sexism and homophobia,which
they frequently suffered in silence, ignored by school authorities. The physical and
psychological toll of unaddressed verbal and physical abuse was often profoundly
dehabilitating, affecting students’ schoolwork and their mental well-being; some
students dropped out of school, sank into depression, or even attempted suicide.
In response to increasing evidence of harassment of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender students in U.S. schools, Senator Paul Wellstone introduced legislation to conduct a federal study of the level of sexual harassment against sexual minority
students by peers and school officials.The study would include analysis of the effectiveness
of guidelines issue by the Office of Civil Rights at the U.S. Department of
Education in 1997 that specifically addressed the safety of gay and lesbian students.
As of this writing, the bill was in committee.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
United States: Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01
PRISONS
Prisoner numbers continued to rise in countries all over the world, resulting
in severe overcrowding of prisons and other detention facilities. Even
where legislation permitted alternatives to incarceration as a criminal sanction,
authorities in most countries neglected them in preference to confinement.
While conditions of detention varied greatly from country to country and facility
to facility, standards in most countries were shockingly low, and in some case
horrific. Prisons and jails in even the richest and most developed countries were
plagued by massive overcrowding, decaying physical infrastructure, inadequate
sanitation, lack of medical care, guard abuse and corruption, and prisoner-on-prisoner
violence. In many countries abysmal prison conditions were life threatening,
leading to inmate deaths from disease, malnutrition, and physical abuse.With few
exceptions, neither the public nor political leaders were willing to commit the
financial resources needed to improve prison conditions. By barring human rights
groups, journalists, and other outside observers access to their penal facilities,
prison officials in many countries sought to shield substandard conditions from
scrutiny.
ABUSIVE TREATMENT OF PRISONERS
Violence was rife in many prisons. In some countries, including Brazil, Kenya,
Venezuela, and Panama, prison homicides were so frequent as to seem routine.
Inmates were usually killed by other inmates rather than by guards, but
inmate-on-inmate violence was often the predictable result of official negligence.
By neglecting to supervise and control the inmates within their facilities, by failing
to respond adequately or at all to incidents of violence, by corruptly allowing the
entry of weapons and drugs into the prisons, and by generally abetting the tyranny
of the strongest prisoners over the weakest, prison authorities were directly complicit
in the violence against their charges. In some countries, for example Mexico,
inmates were able to control fellow inmates with little interference from prison authorities, and to engage in violence, sexual abuse, drugs and arms trafficking,
coercion, and influence peddling.
Incidents of collective violence, particularly in South America, also led to inmate
deaths and injuries. In May, clashes between rival inmate gangs at two prisons in
Venezuela, El Rodeo and Tocuyito, left twelve inmates dead and at least thirty-three
wounded.During 2000, 276 Venezuelan prisoners were killed during gang fights or
riots. In a February uprising coordinated by a prison gang, 20,000 prisoners took
some 7,000 hostages, including at least twenty-seven guards, in over two dozen
prisons in Sao Paulo state in Brazil.During the seventeen-hour revolt, sixteen prisoners
were killed and seventy-seven wounded; four police agents were also
wounded. It was unclear how many of the prisoners were killed by the police, but
they apparently shot at least three prisoners in the back. Three other prisoners suffocated
to death after guards left them locked in a sweltering van. The Sao Paulo
prison system is notorious for under-staffing, extreme overcrowding,deaths in custody,
use of torture, and lack of medical and sanitation facilities. More uprisings
followed in other Brazilian states in March. In a juvenile detention center in
Alagoas, four inmates died after other prisoners set them on fire. In Colombia, ten
prisoners died and twenty-three were wounded in a July gun battle among inmates
in Bogota’s Modelo prison. After quelling the violence, authorities found small
arms, grenades, machine guns, and ammunition inside the prison. The Procuracy
opened an investigation against various prison officials for failing to maintain security
and prevent the violence.
Physical abuse of prisoners by guards remained another chronic problem. The
U.N. special rapporteur against torture reported in April that torture and ill-treatment
were widespread in Brazil’s prisons and detention centers. There and elsewhere,
unwarranted beatings were so common as to be an integral part of prison
life in many prison systems, including Angola, Armenia, Brazil, the Democratic
Republic of Congo,Egypt, Iran, Iraq,Malaysia,Mexico, South Africa,Thailand, and
Vietnam, among other countries. In Indonesia, officers punished inmates with
electric shock batons and by stapling their ears, nose and lips. In the United States,
electronic stun devices were used to control inmates. Some countries continued to
permit corporal punishment and the routine use of leg irons, fetters, shackles, and
chains. The heavy bar fetters used in Pakistani prisons, for example, turned simple
movements such as walking into painful ordeals. Some prisoners contracted gangrene
and required amputations. In Iraq, some prisoners in two prisons were
reportedly locked in metal boxes the size of coffins that were opened for only thirty
minutes each day.
Women prisoners were vulnerable to custodial sexual abuse. The problem was
widespread in the United States, where male guards outnumbered women guards
in many women’s prisons. In some countries, Haiti being a conspicuous example,
female prisoners were even held together with male inmates, a situation that
exposed them to rampant sexual abuse and violence.
In contravention of international standards, juvenile inmates were often held
together with adults.Many of Pakistan’s jails and police lockups mixed juvenile and
adult prisoners, as did certain detention facilities in Nicaragua, Kenya, South
Africa, Sudan, Turkey, the United States, and Zambia, among other countries.
Male inmate on inmate rape was common in many prison systems. In the United States, rape was a widespread problem facilitated by staff indifference and even, in
some instances, complicity, as well as by a lack of effective prevention and punishment
systems. In South Africa, the Office of the Inspecting Judge reported that fellow
prisoners sodomized an estimated 70 to 80 percent of arrested suspects.
Corruption and extortion accompanied the low salaries generally paid to guards
and their inadequate training and supervision. In exchange for contraband or
special treatment, inmates in many countries supplemented guards’ salaries with
bribes. Powerful inmates in Colombian, Indian, and Mexican prisons, among
others, enjoyed cellular phones, rich diets, and comfortable lodgings, while other
inmates were held in squalor. Prisoners in many countries complained that they
must buy their food,medicine and other necessities from guards or bribe guards to
allow goods to be brought into the facility.
Increasing levels of overcrowding—prevalent in most countries for which information
was available—compounded substandard conditions. Inadequate living
space, poor or nonexistent ventilation, limited sanitation facilities, low levels of
cleanliness and hygiene, and inadequate food and medical supplies made prisons
life-threatening in many countries, including Armenia, Burma, Kenya, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Peru, Russia, Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia. In the central prison in
Karachi, Pakistan, there were four times as many prisoners as the prison was
designed to hold, and only two toilets available per hundred prisoners. In Uzbekistan,
ten to fifteen inmates were reportedly confined in cells designed for four. In
Peru’s Lurigancho men’s prison, 6,000 inmates were held in a facility built to
accommodate 1,500. The La Loma prison in Mexico, built to hold two hundred
prisoners, housed nearly 1,200. In Bolivia, cells were “sold” to incoming prisoners
by previous occupants or other prisoners; in the poorest areas, cells measured three
by four by six feet and lacked ventilation, lighting, or beds. The crowding in some
prisons is so bad that prisoners must sleep sitting up. In Angola,whose prison population
is five times larger than the prison system’s capacity, many prisons lacked
financial support from the government.
In many countries, prison authorities failed to provide basic necessities to prisoners,
who were obligated to depend on families, friends or international relief
organizations for food, blankets, mattresses, toiletries, and even toilet paper. Insufficient
food or poor diet leading to many cases of malnutrition, semi-starvation
and even death, was a serious problem in countries such as Angola,Armenia,Azerbaijan,
Burundi, Cambodia, Colombia, Cuba, Ethiopia, Haiti, Mexico, Mozambique,
Pakistan, Peru, Russia, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Turkmenistan, Uganda, and
Uzbekistan.
Another common problem was governments’ continued reliance on antiquated
and physically decaying prison facilities.Nineteenth-century prisons needing constant
upkeep remained in use in Italy,Mexico,Russia, the United Kingdom, and the
United States, among other counties, and more modern facilities were often in
severe disrepair due to lack of maintenance.Many prisons lacked adequate sanitation
facilities, a problem compounded by overcrowding. Some cells lacked toilets
or latrines, requiring prisoners to “slop out,” that is, defecate in buckets that they
periodically emptied. In the United Kingdom, for example, there were still five prisons
in Scotland where inmates still had to slop out although the Committee for the
Prevention of Torture condemned the practice as “inhuman” more than a decade ago. Inmates at Makala prison in the Democratic Republic of Congo had no toilets
and had to urinate and defecate on the floor.
Detained migrants awaiting deportation were also frequently confined in
appalling conditions. In Greece, for example, migrants held at the Alexandras
Avenue police station in Athens were confined for long periods in grossly overcrowded
conditions. The detainees had little access to medical care, exercise, and
fresh air. They lacked adequate food and sleeping conditions, and were kept in a
dirty and roach infested environment.
A different set of concerns was raised by the spread of ultra-modern
“super-maximum” security prisons. Originally prevalent in the United States,
where politicians and state corrections authorities promoted them as part of a
politically popular quest for more “austere”prison conditions, the supermax model
was increasingly followed in other countries. Prisoners confined in such facilities
spent an average of twenty-three hours a day in their cells, enduring extreme social
isolation, enforced idleness, and extraordinarily limited recreational and educational
opportunities. While prison authorities defended the use of super-maximum
security facilities by asserting that they held only the most dangerous,
disruptive, or escape-prone inmates, few safeguards existed to prevent other prisoners
from being arbitrarily or discriminatorily transferred to such facilities. In
Australia, the inspector of custodial services found that some prisoners were being
held indefinitely in special high security units without knowing why or when their
isolation would end.
Beginning in December 2000, the Turkish government opened six “F-type”prisons
for prisoners held for offenses tried in the state security courts. Concerned
about conditions in the new prisons,where they were to be held in cells rather than
communal wards, hundreds of prisoners began a hunger strike in October 2000.By
November, thirty-eight prisoners or former prisoners and four prisoners’ relatives
had died in the hunger strike, and at least 399 prisoners had been released because
of poor health. Twenty-eight prisoners were killed on December 19, 2000 when the
government sent soldiers into twenty prisons to break the protest and transfer
inmates to the new facilities. Some prisoners deliberately burned themselves to
death. Inmates in the F-type prisons were initially held in small group isolation,
locked in shared cells and deprived of opportunities for exercise, work, education
or other social activities.However, new legislation was passed in May to enable outof-
cell activities, in which some prisoners were permitted to engage. Prisoners
reported being subjected to “disciplinary” beatings.
Fiscal constraints and competing budget priorities were to blame for prison
deficiencies in some countries, but as the supermax example suggests, harsh prison
conditions were sometimes purposefully imposed. In Peru, notably, a punitive
motive was evident in the decision to hold top-security prisoners in the high-altitude
Challapalca and Yanamayo prisons, whose remote locations and miserable
conditions led the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to declare in
2000 that they were “unfit” to serve as places of detention. The European Court of
Human Rights ruled in April that conditions in the segregation unit of Koridallos
prison in Greece constituted treatment in violation of article 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. The inmate who brought the case for several
months had been practically confined continuously to his bed in a small cell shared with another inmate; the cell had no ventilation, no windows and no privacy for the
in-cell toilet.
With few means to draw public attention to violations of their rights or to secure
improved conditions, prisoners around the world resorted to riots, hunger strikes,
self-mutilation, and other forms of protest. In Guatemala, over 1,000 prisoners
temporarily took control of the country’s main detention facility in Guatemala
City, to demand improved conditions. In Venezuela, inmates at El Rodeo prison in
June held 250 visitors and guards hostage for three days until officials agreed to
study prison conditions and ways to address agonizingly slow pace of legal cases.
In Bolivia, nearly 3,000 prisoners went on strike to demand inclusion in a new
amnesty law. Three women prisoners had themselves tied to slabs of wood with
cord and sheets and raised to the highest point at the prison so that they could be
seen, as if crucified, by the public. Four other women had their lips sewn together
in an effort to obtain amnesty. About 950 male inmates of an Argentine prison in
Buenos Aires began a mass hunger strike in January, demanding the shortening of
their sentences. Protests and violent mutinies, in which guards and visitors are
often taken hostage, have become commonplace in Argentina’s crowded, filthy and
violent prisons. In Nepal, jail inmates demanding better conditions started attacking
the guards, who opened fire, killing one and injuring about a dozen more.
UNSENTENCED PRISONERS
Although comprehensive figures were impossible to obtain, the available statistics
showed that a large proportion of the world’s prisoners had not been convicted
of any crime, but were instead being detained pending trial. In countries as varied
as Bangladesh, Burundi, Chad, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Haiti, India, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Rwanda, Uganda, and
Venezuela, unsentenced prisoners made up the majority of the prison population.
In South Africa, 64,000 people—more than one third of the country’s prisoners—
were incarcerated awaiting trial. Fifty-nine percent of the inmates in Central American
prisons were unsentenced, with Honduras having the highest percentage: 87
percent.Worse, such detainees were in many instances held for years before eventually
being acquitted of the crime with which they were charged. Prisoners also
continued to be held after the expiration of their sentences in some countries. In
many countries, prisoners awaiting trial were confined together with sentenced
prisoners.
HEALTH
Health care in most prisons was poor to non-existent. Even in developed countries,
medical services for prisoners were often seriously inadequate. In April, the
British Medical Association warned that limited medical resources, medical staff
shortages and poor prison management were contributing to a prison health care
crisis in England and Wales.
The spread of communicable diseases in numerous prison systems was the predictable
result of overcrowding, malnutrition, poor ventilation, lack of potable
water, inadequate sanitation, and lack of medical care. Tuberculosis (TB) continued
to ravage prison populations around the world, including those of Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Brazil, Cuba, India, Peru, Russia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
and Venezuela. Twelve percent of the prison population in Kazakhstan had tuberculosis.
Penal facilities around the world reported grossly disproportionate rates of HIV
infection and of confirmed AIDS cases. A November 2000 government study estimated
that the HIV infection rate among prisoners in Canada was at least fifteen
times higher than in the general population. The corresponding figure in the
United States was about six times higher, and similar disparities were evident elsewhere.
While overcrowding and a lack of appropriate services facilitated the spread
of many infectious diseases in prison, HIV/AIDS resulted particularly from the failure
of prison authorities both to protect inmates from sexual violence and to offer
even simple and cheap services such as access to condoms. Segregation of HIV-positive
prisoners, in some cases causing their marginalization from basic services,
remained common in several countries and was practiced in three U.S. states
(Alabama,Mississippi and South Carolina). Regular access to services such as needle
sterilization or needle exchange in prisons was a distant dream in most countries
outside ofWestern Europe.
Access to antiretroviral drugs contributed to lower death rates from AIDS
among prisoners in Western Europe, North America and some Latin American
countries, but they were unavailable elsewhere, including in Eastern Europe,which
has the fastest growing AIDS epidemic in the world. The Centers for Disease Control
of the U.S. government reported late in 2000, however, that U.S. prisoners have
a higher rate of drug-resistant strains of HIV than the general population due to
irregular supplies of drugs and because inmates have medicines taken away from
them when they are processed in and out of the prison system.
In 2001, there was increasing awareness that hepatitis C had joined HIV/AIDS
and tuberculosis as a major scourge of prisoners. The hepatitis C virus (HCV), like
HIV, can cause liver failure and death and is transmitted through needle sharing,
tattooing with used needles, and sharing of shaving equipment. Canada estimated
that HCV was fifty times more prevalent among its prisoners than in the general
population. In 2001, inmates brought legal actions against several U.S. states for
failure to provide adequate HCV treatment.
DEFENDING PRISONERS’ HUMAN RIGHTS
Struggling against governmental tendencies toward secrecy and silence on
prison abuses, numerous local human rights groups around the world sought to
obtain access to prisons, monitor prison conditions, and publicize the abuses they
found.. In some countries, government human rights ombudspersons, parliamentary
commissions, and other official monitors also helped call attention to abuses.
In the United Kingdom, notably, the chief inspector of prisons continued his vigorous investigation and forthright criticism of conditions in the country’s penal
facilities. In many countries, however, authorities permitted no outside scrutiny of
penal conditions.
At the regional level, prison monitoring mechanisms were active.The European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) continued its important work,
inspecting penal institutions in Georgia,Greece,Malta,Moldova, the Russian Federation
(Chechen Republic), Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United
Kingdom and publishing reports on penal conditions in Austria, Croatia, France,
Greece,Hungary, Lithuania, the former Yugoslav Republic ofMacedonia,Northern
Ireland, Portugal, and Turkey.
In Africa, the special rapporteur on prisons and conditions of detention, an
adjunct to the African Commission on Human and Peoples’Rights, visited prisons
in Malawi,Namibia and Mozambique. The General Assembly of the Organization
of American States adopted a resolution endorsing efforts to draft an Inter-American
Declaration on Persons Deprived of Liberty.
UNITED NATIONS MONITORING EFFORTS
The vast scale and chronic nature of human rights violations in the world’s prisons
have long been of concern to the United Nations, as demonstrated by the 1955
promulgation of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Indeed, the international community’s failure to adopt these standards in practice,
even while it has embraced them in theory, has inspired the United Nations’
most recent prisons effort.
For nearly a decade, a U.N. working group has been hammering out a draft
treaty that would establish a U.N. subcommittee authorized to make regular and ad
hoc visits to places of detention in states party to the treaty, including prisons, jails,
and police lockups.As described in the draft treaty—conceived as an optional protocol
to the Convention against Torture—the primary goal of the subcommittee
would be to prevent torture and other ill-treatment. Based on the information
obtained during its periodic and ad hoc visits, the subcommittee would make
detailed recommendations to state authorities regarding necessary improvements
to their detention facilities.
The working group’s most recent session, in October 2000, ended without any
progress being made toward the completion of a draft treaty. The session revealed
the wide gap that remains between countries on such fundamental issues as which
places should be subject to visits,whether prior consent must be obtained,whether
reservations to the optional protocol should be allowed, and the impact of national
legislation on the nature and scope of visits.
Other U.N. bodies pressed countries to improve their prison conditions. The
U.N. Special Rapporteur on torture,whose mandate was renewed for another three
years by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, reported findings of widespread
torture in Brazil and Azerbaijan, based on his visits to those countries in 2000.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
Beyond Reason: The Death Penalty and Offenders with Mental Retardation, 3/01
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
AND RELATED INTOLERANCE
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Ethnicity,often combined with religion, fueled and shaped conflict and systemic
human rights abuse in many countries around the globe in the year of the third
United Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR). Caste discrimination—based on
descent—held an estimated 250 million people locked in conditions of oppression
and intolerance.National and local leaders propagated hate and intolerance, seeking
political advantage in the discriminatory animus of racist movements. Across
the world, racism and related intolerance skewed the administration of justice and
denied or limited minorities and other marginalized groups’ access to education
and employment, to health care and housing—and to protection against exploitation.
The widespread fear generated by the attacks on the United States (U.S.) on September
11—and aspects of the global antiterrorism campaign that followed—
added a new dimension to xenophobia and intolerance in many parts of the world.
New antiterrorism measures introduced in the United States and under consideration
in many other countries reduced safeguards against arbitrary arrest on discriminatory
grounds and posed particular challenges to the rights of asylum
seekers and migrants.
In Africa, ethnicity remained a potent engine of conflict in years-long wars of
secession, inter-communal violence, and in partisan struggles for power as political
leaders played the ethnic card to mobilize supporters and to demonize their
rivals. Inter-ethnic clashes remained a pervasive feature of conflicts in the Great
Lakes region and other parts of Africa. In the Democratic Republic of Congo’s
(DRC) eastern provinces, spiralling conflicts involved both troops of the regular
armies of Uganda and Rwanda and militias sponsored by both regional powers. In
Rwanda and Burundi longstanding internal conflicts continued; those leading
Rwanda’s rebel forces included former leaders of the 1994 genocide. Sudan’s long
internal war was fueled not only by the ethnic and religious divide between north
and south but also by ethnic divisions between the southern rebels. Renewed conflict
in Liberia also followed largely ethnic lines; government forces perceived ethnic
Mandingo citizens indiscriminately as opposition supporters, and subjected them to violent attacks because of their ethnicity. Clashes spurred by ethnicity and
religion in Nigeria cost thousands of lives. (See Africa Overview.)
Determining who should be considered a national and who a foreigner also generated
xenophobia and violence in some African countries. In Côte D’Ivoire, as
Human Rights Watch detailed in a report it published in August, officials incited
xenophobic violence around elections in October and December 2000. They promoted
intolerance based on ethnic and religious differences that led gendarmes
and civilian supporters to attack Ivorians from the largely Muslim north of the
country—and others held to be “foreigners.” The report documented more than
two hundred killings, as well as torture, rape, and arbitrary detentions, committed
with impunity.
In Brazil, indigenous people were moved off their land, threatened, and killed in
land disputes in circumstances that suggested the acquiescence of public authorities.
Indigenous leader Francisco de Assis Santana was murdered on August 23 in
Pesqueira, Pernambuco, apparently in connection with his struggles for Xucuru
land rights in the territory. Members of the Guarani community were reportedly
fired on in November 2000 by police allegedly hired by a rancher who had taken
over their land. In February, several cases were reported of alleged sexual abuse by
army soldiers against Yanomami women in the Surucucus region of the Amazon.
(See Brazil.)
In Asia, the full complexity of the inter-ethnic and sectarian struggles in Afghanistan
burst belatedly upon the international consciousness only after the attacks of
September 11 and the launching of the U.S.-led military campaign against the Taliban.
Earlier, Human Rights Watch documented a series of incidents in which
largely ethnic Pashtun Taliban forces committed gross abuses, including summary
executions and the destruction of homes against civilians belonging to minorities
it associated with its rivals—Aymaqs, Hazaras, and Uzbeks, suspected of supporting
forces linked to the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance. (See Afghanistan.)
In Burma (Myanmar), government troops burned villages and forcibly displaced
tens of thousands of villagers in areas affected by ethnic-based insurgencies.
Hundreds of thousands were internally displaced in the ethnic minority states
while others fled to Thailand. (See Burma.)
In Indonesia, ethnicity and religion were factors shaping regional conflicts—
sometimes accentuating divisions between internal migrants and indigenous populations.
The conflict in Aceh and communal violence in West Kalimantan resulted
in many civilian casualties,while little progress was shown in the resolution of conflicts
in the Moluccas, Central Sulawesi, and Papua.Well over one million people
were reported displaced, half of them from the Moluccas.
Sri Lanka’s civil war, too, continued to claim a steady toll of civilian deaths. Both
the government and Tamil secessionist forces were responsible for serious abuses
and internal displacement created enormous hardship. (See Sri Lanka.)
In Europe, the question of who belongs in the nation state continued to impact
harshly upon displaced populations in the former Yugoslavia and many parts of the
former Soviet Union, as well as migrants and refugees seeking a better life in an
increasingly hostile Western Europe. Across the region, Roma were victimized by
discrimination in every aspect of their lives.
In Bulgaria, discrimination against Roma persisted in virtually every aspect of
public life. Roma were beaten by police and private individuals beat and shot at
Roma on numerous occasions with impunity. An Open Society Institute study
released in September detailed discrimination against Roma in the provision of
housing, social services and health care. (See Bulgaria.)
In the Czech Republic, de facto discrimination against Roma affected access to
justice, education, housing, employment, and public services. Racist attacks on
Roma continued, but police and prosecutors frequently failed to adequately investigate
and prosecute Roma complaints. (See Czech Republic.)
The Greek government took steps to address discrimination with an action plan
for Roma, designed to address health, education and housing needs. The resettlement
of a Roma community under the plan was marred, however, by discrimination
against the community’s children, whose attendance at local schools was
opposed by other residents. One school closed in November 2000 rather than admit
thirty-two Roma children. (See Greece.)
In Hungary, Roma faced continuing discrimination in employment, education,
and the criminal justice system, as well as physical attacks and the firebombing of
their homes. The French government granted asylum to fifteen Hungarian Roma
who were part of a group who fled from the Hungarian village of Zamoly to Strasbourg
during 2000 to escape threats, physical attacks and the destruction of their
homes.Anti-Semitic programming continued on state radio and anti-Jewish statements
by the vice-president of the parliamentary Hungarian Truth and Life Party
were widely disseminated. (See Hungary.)
In Serbia and Montenegro, too, police brutality against Roma was common,
although the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia acceded to the Council of Europe’s
1994 Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities on May 11.
Roma, Serbs, and other minorities faced continued violence in post-war
Kosovo. Organized violence targeting minorities, including attacks on Serb homes,
churches, and cultural sites, persisted, while convoys escorted by peacekeepers of
the multinational Kosovo Force (KFOR) were attacked by gunmen: eleven people
were killed and dozens injured in the most serious attack. United Nations (U.N.)
police had at the time of writing failed to bring the perpetrators to justice. (See Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.)
Ethnically-motivated violence also continued to shake Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In Republika Srpska and, less frequently, in the Croat parts of the Federation,
attackers shot at returnees because of their ethnic identity and destroyed houses
reconstructed for them. (See Bosnia and Herzegovina.)
Although European Union (E.U.) states vigorously demanded that Eastern
European countries take measures to combat discrimination against Roma, the
steps they took themselves to restrict immigration and bar access to their territories
and asylum determination procedures for asylum seekers were often discriminatory.
The deployment of British immigration officials to Prague’s Ruzyne Airport
in July followed a wave of asylum claims by mostly-Roma Czech citizens. British
officials there barred 120 travellers—the majority of them Roma—before protests
at their targeting of Roma led to the temporary suspension of the pre-flight screenings.
(See Czech Republic.)
In Greece, following the September 11 attacks in the U.S., authorities fearing a
large influx of Afghan refugees refused to allow many asylum seekers even to apply
for refugee status, issuing expedited expulsion orders instead. (See Greece.) In
Spain, officials equated the global campaign against international terrorism with
the fight against illegal immigration.
Some states’ concepts of nationality also resulted in severe restrictions of minority
rights, even to the extent of denying minorities official recognition or restricting
the use of their language. In February, Sotiris Blatsas of the Society for
Aromanian (Vlach) Culture was tried in Greece and convicted of “disseminating
false information” because he had published a list of minority languages spoken in
Greece. He had distributed a publication of the E.U.’s European Bureau for Lesser
Used Languages (EBLUL) at an Aromanian festival in July 1995.He was sentenced
to fifteen months in prison.
In Turkey, state policies that denied recognition of the Kurdish minority were
enforced through censorship and imprisonment. Controls on freedom of expression
continued to prevent broadcasting and education in Kurdish. Local governors
prohibited the use of Kurdish street names and banned plays, cassettes, and films in
Kurdish on the grounds that they were “separatist.”Those that challenged or tested
state policies on ethnicity in their statements or writings—Kurds and non-Kurds
alike—faced prosecution and imprisonment.
In Morocco, there was freer discussion of the rights of the Berber minority, but
authorities twice barred the holding of meetings to address the issues. Authorities
seized an issue of the French weekly Courrier International which carried a feature
on Berbers in Morocco. (See Morocco.)
The United Kingdom’s (U.K.’s) response to the September 11 attacks on the
United States included proposed emergency measures that threatened to undermine
civil liberties and the rights of refugees and migrants. Draft anti-terrorism
legislation provided for the indefinite detention of foreigners with limited judicial
review and restricted the rights of suspects to seek asylum. September 11 was also
followed by a dramatic rise in attacks on Muslims living in the U.K. The attacks
were condemned by the government—with measures to toughen enforcement of
hate crimes legislation—but new government calls for anti-terrorist measures,
more restrictive immigration and asylum controls, and for halting the flow of
Afghan refugees into Europe contributed to an increasingly hostile climate toward
refugees and migrants in the U.K.
In the United States, longstanding patterns of discrimination in the criminal
justice system persisted,with the U.N.Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
highlighting police brutality, notably against minority groups and foreigners;
disproportionately high incarceration rates of black and Hispanic
Americans; racial disparities in the application of the death penalty; and the effect
of felony disenfranchisement on minorities.Measures introduced in the aftermath
of the September 11 attacks raised concerns that minorities and foreigners distinguished
by their ethnicity would be subject to new forms of abusive discriminatory
treatment.New laws and other measures permitted the indefinite detention of noncitizens
and over 1,000 people were detained, mostly Arab or Muslim men.
The September 11 attacks were followed in the United States by a wave of racist attacks against Muslims, Sikhs, and people of Middle Eastern and South Asian
descent—with almost 1,000 reported by November. President Bush and other officials
condemned the violence and urged the public to reject national or religious
stereotyping that would blame whole communities for the acts of terrorism committed
by a few, simply because they shared the same religious, ethnic, or national
identity. (See United States.)
WHO BELONGS?
In an era of “ethnic cleansing,” ethnic and religious pogroms, genocide, and
massive displacement across borders, the question “who belongs?” in a community
or in a nation came to assume life and death proportions. In some cases the designated
outsiders faced oppression and exploitation at home—for example India’s
Dalits or Europe’s Roma—locked in a subordinate status and vulnerable to violence
by private citizens and authorities alike. In others, as in parts of Indonesia,
Africa’s Great Lakes region, and West Africa (and in the 1990s, the former
Yugoslavia), minorities became outsiders overnight, caught up in political movements
of terror and exclusion whose leaders were bent upon the physical destruction
or expulsion of those not of the dominant ethnicity or religion.
Although “who belongs?” was often defined in terms of citizenship, this too
became an increasingly mutable concept as new independent states emerged and
multiethnic states broke down. The denial or deprivation of citizenship could turn
solely on the basis of ethnicity or national origin—particularly in conflict situations
and periods of political transition. In some cases, however, whole communities
of “nationals without nationality” had long been denied citizenship on
discriminatory grounds.
States that defined citizenship in terms of racial or national Apurity@ often discriminated
both on grounds of ethnicity and national origin and on the basis of
gender. As citizenship was restricted to the children of male nationals, female citizens
were discouraged from marrying men of another nationality because their
children would be denied citizenship. Naturalization policies, too, were often
wholly or largely founded on discriminatory grounds, while shielded from criticism
as a sovereign prerogative of states.
Racial and gender discrimination intersected where citizenship was restricted to
the children of male nationals, the norm in many countries of the Middle East,
North Africa, and parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. Ethnic Kurdish women who were
classified as stateless “foreigners” in Syria could marry Syrian citizens with prior
authorization from the interior ministry, but ethnic Kurdish men with this status
were not permitted to marry female Syrian citizens. If they did so, the marriages
were not legally recognized and both spouses were described as unmarried on their
identity cards.“[I]n the case that a Syrian female should have the audacity to marry
any foreigner . . . that marriage is considered illegal,”the government stated in 1996.
“As a result, neither it nor the children that ensue will be registered in the civil registers.”
In Kuwait, authorities continued to deny citizenship to some 120,000 of the minority Bidun, many of whose families had lived in Kuwait for generations and
had no claim to citizenship of another country.
Denial of citizenship affected minority populations that were indigenous to a
country or had been present for generations—as well as majorities. The end of the
apartheid regime in South Africa spelled an end to denationalization taken to an
extreme: a “homelands” policy whose advocates aimed to make black South
Africans citizens of “bantustans”—and no longer citizens of South Africa.Moves to
strip the citizenship of more than a million Zairean nationals of the Banyarwanda
ethnic group after 1991 spurred domestic and interstate conflict there. Ethiopia
summarily denationalized and expelled some 70,000 Ethiopian citizens of Eritrean
origin after war broke out with Eritrea in May 1998—while Eritrea carried out
summary expulsions to Ethiopia on a lesser scale.Progress in post-war negotiations
offered hope of a review of the administrative measures by which Ethiopians of
Eritrean origin were summarily stripped of their citizenship.
The military junta ruling Burma excluded hundreds of thousands of members
of Burma’s minorities from citizenship with a 1982 citizenship law. In the 1990s
more than 250,000 Rohingya Muslims fled to neighboring Bangladesh. In 2001,
most Rohingya remained without full citizenship rights.
In Southeast Asia, the government of Thailand had issued special identity documents
to some 300,000 members of the country’s ethnic minority hill tribes, but
these indigenous people were denied a nationality or full citizenship rights. Hundreds
of thousands of other hill tribe villagers were unregistered and officially considered
illegal immigrants. This particularly affected hill tribe women who were
victims of trafficking to Japan and who, once free of their traffickers, could not gain
readmission to Thailand.
In South Asia, the government of Bhutan stripped of citizenship and expelled
more than 100,000 Bhutanese of ethnic Nepali origin in the early 1990s, the majority
of whom were still refugees. Bhutanese refugees spent a tenth year in exile in
camps in southeast Nepal, deprived of their right to return home.Despite the start
in early 2001 of a joint Nepal-Bhutan verification program to determine the status
of these refugees, no refugees had returned as of late November.
In the Americas, racial discrimination and related intolerance colored the treatment
of migrants as well as the implementation of laws concerning nationality.
Over half a million Haitians and Dominicans of Haitian descent lived in the
Dominican Republic, where certain government policies reflected racial discrimination
and xenophobia. Because the Dominican government made it difficult for
Haitians to obtain legal residency documents, the vast majority were undocumented.
In violation of the Dominican constitution, Haitians’ Dominican-born
children were frequently denied Dominican citizenship. Haitians’ precarious legal
status left them vulnerable to economic exploitation, arbitrary expulsion, and violations
of basic rights.
In Europe, the disintegration of the Soviet Union led to discriminatory norms
for citizenship in several newly independent countries. In the breakup of the former
Yugoslavia, the terrorizing and physical expulsion of minorities coincided with
measures to deny citizenship to members of ethnic minorities residing there or
seeking to return to their homes. Elsewhere in Europe, citizenship laws enacted by Slovakia and the Czech Republic after the division of Czechoslovakia served
directly to exclude Roma citizens from citizenship in the new republics: international
pressure led to reforms of the relevant laws, although obstacles remained,
and Roma continued to suffer discrimination.
UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE
AGAINST RACISM
The third United Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance was held in Durban, South Africa
from August 31 to September 8, 2001. The first such conference since the end of
apartheid, this WCAR provided governments with an opportunity to combat both
the overt and more subtle forms of racial discrimination that existed abroad and at
home—a potential, sadly, that was largely unrealized. A great failing of the conference
was the inability of participants—governments and nongovernmental organizations
alike—to forge a common front to combat racism and related intolerance
in the spirit and within the framework of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
The WCAR was plagued by a series of acrimonious disputes over the
Israel/Palestine question; the issue of reparations for slavery and colonialism; and
other issues. Both the United States and Israel withdrew at an early stage, citing
anti-Israel sentiment, and there was divisiveness and intolerance within the NGO
community itself on this and other issues.Yet in some respects, including on questions
such as the protection of migrants and refugees, repairing the legacy of slavery,
and equal nationality rights for women, significant progress was made.
The WCAR process led to an unprecedented mobilization of victims of racism
from communities around the world, which served to reinforce and reinvigorate
many community, national, and regional anti-racism movements. Groups seeking
to break the bonds of discrimination forged new alliances across continents with
hitherto unknown partners—not least as the United States civil rights movement
and black Latin Americans found common cause with South Asia’s Dalit movement.
The heightened international profile given to caste discrimination—despite
India’s successful efforts to prevent the WCAR from addressing the issue head on—
was a significant outcome.
U.S. government participation in the WCAR process was marked with scarcely
veiled hostility—although hundreds of U.S. NGOs participated actively and enthusiastically
in the preparatory meetings and NGO forum. The administration
warned NGOs and governments that the conference should not lead to any new
programs to combat racism, any new legal standards, any additional money to fund
anti-racism efforts, or any follow-up. It warned the conference not to call for reparations
for slavery and the trans-Atlantic slave trade or to adopt language specifically
criticizing Israel.
In the end, attending governments did reach compromise language on the Middle
East, which included specific reference to “the plight of Palestinian people
under foreign occupation,” but no specific reference to Israel’s or any other government’s human rights practices. Compromise language was also reached on
reparations, calling for governments to take “appropriate and effective measures to
halt and reverse the lasting consequences of [racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance].”
The U.S. government’s decision to withdraw from the conference meant that the
administration lost a paramount opportunity for the administration to join and
shape the collective voice of the international community in moving forward
together in the struggle against racism. The U.S. lost a chance to lead by example,
while appearing to duck the international spotlight thrown on its own problems of
racial discrimination—to the dismay of the large NGO delegation attending from
the United States.
The summit called for far-reaching programs to address intolerance and discrimination
against the 150 million migrants in the world, including education
campaigns and prevention of workplace bias. It asked countries to combat intolerance
against refugees, and included a reference reminding governments of the standards
agreed in the 1951 U.N.Refugee Convention. It called on states to protect the
more than 30 million people displaced in their own countries, referring to the U.N.
guidelines on the internally displaced. It asked countries to monitor and ensure
accountability for police misconduct and to eliminate “racial profiling.” The conference
called on countries to fund anti-racism efforts and public awareness campaigns
in schools and the media and to promote tolerance and openness to
diversity. It urged governments to collect data disaggregated by race, as a first means
of identifying and then addressing discrimination in access to health care and the
provision of government services.
The conference acknowledged that slavery and the slave trade “are a crime
against humanity and should always have been so,”and said that states had a “moral
obligation” to “take appropriate and effective measures to halt and reverse the lasting
consequences of those practices.”This was an historic recognition of the criminality
of slavery and the moral obligation to repair its lasting damage.
In a significant step pressed by its women’s caucus, the conference urged countries
to allow women the right, on an equal basis with men, to pass on their nationality
to their children and spouses, a right denied in many countries. The
conference program of action also acknowledged the multiple and unique ways in
which racism and sexism interact to deny women their human rights.
Discrimination by reason of caste was a constant theme of the conference, not
least through public demonstrations and effective lobbying by the International
Dalit Solidarity Network (IDSN) and by India’s National Campaign on Dalit
Human Rights (NCDHR). Caste or “work and descent” discrimination was
referred to in many plenary speeches by government delegates. Reflecting the
emphasis on caste in the WCAR’s preparatory process, the Sub-Commission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in August 2001 passed by consensus a
decision to continue a study on work and descent-based discrimination.
India’s actions to keep caste out of the final conference documents served effectively
to stimulate international press coverage of the issue and to heighten pressure
for scrutiny through the international machinery of human rights. The conference
did not formally extend the desired recognition that caste-based discrimination
blighted the lives of hundreds of millions—but the attendant awareness generated by the conference sent a clear message that international programs were required
to remedy its consequences and to establish practical measures to facilitate its abolition.
Despite the conference’s failings and lost opportunities, South African Foreign
Affairs Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma described the final agreements as “a
new road-map for the fight against racism.”But the conference was only a first step;
the real test is whether governments will deliver on what they agreed. Human
Rights Watch, for its part, will be working to ensure that they do.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
The fight against racism, racial discrimination, and related intolerance was an
integral part of Human Rights Watch’s regional and thematic research and advocacy
program. In the context of the WCAR, the organization focused especially on
caste discrimination; the protection of migrants and refugees; discrimination in
the denial of citizenship rights; on racial discrimination in criminal justice and in
the administration of state institutions, services, and resources; and the link
between racial or ethnic and gender discrimination. In the run-up to the conference,
Human Rights Watch also pressed for the WCAR to adopt a policy on reparations
for past abuses to address the most pressing needs arising from slavery, the
slave trade, certain especially racist aspects of colonialism, and other extreme official
racist practices. Our program of action included the publication of a series of
short reports, campaign action with partner nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), and participation in official and informal preparatory meetings and the
conference itself.
Caste Discrimination
In much of Asia, parts of Africa, and in the South Asian diaspora caste was coterminous
with race in the definition and exclusion of groups distinguished by their
descent Over 250 million people worldwide suffered under a hidden apartheid of
segregation, modern-day slavery, and other extreme forms of discrimination
because they were born into a marginalized, subordinate caste.Although India was
home to the largest affected community—some 160 million people—caste-based
abuse was also rampant in Nepal, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Japan, and parts
ofWest Africa—and in the South Asian diaspora.
Caste discrimination was within the scope of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which defined racial discrimination
to include discrimination by reason of “race, colour, descent, or
national or ethnic origin . . .”(emphasis added).The Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination affirmed that caste discrimination was founded on
descent—and constituted racial discrimination in the terms of the convention. It
did so most expressly in a 1996 comment on India’s report on compliance with the
convention—India had denied that caste discrimination was a form of racial discrimination
that it must address to meet its treaty obligations.
Human Rights Watch helped ensure that the WCAR brought caste discrimination to international attention and to overcome the efforts to exclude its discussion
by the very governments which displayed complacency about caste discrimination
at home. India’s government argued that efforts to raise the caste issue were part of
an “external agenda”—echoing what South Africa’s former white minority government
long contended when the international community spoke out against
apartheid.
In Caste Discrimination: A Global Concern,Human Rights Watch challenged the
efforts of certain governments to keep caste discrimination a shameful secret—
excluded even from the World Conference. The report, which documented the
global scope of caste discrimination, cited the language of international law and
intergovernmental human rights bodies that brought caste discrimination—a
form of discrimination by reason of descent—squarely within the current of the
international fight against racism.
Refugees and Migrants
Xenophobia toward migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers became a global
trend over the past decade,while a barrage of new, restrictive policies in industrialized
countries emerged even before the events of September 2001. But the antiterrorism
measures instituted in many countries after the September attacks promised
to further restrict access to asylum determination procedures and to curtail the civil
liberties of migrants.New measures under the antiterrorism rubric threatened further
grave consequences for migrants and refugees—compounded by the strains of
the burgeoning world economic crisis.
In its work to combat discrimination against refugees and migrants, Human
Rights Watch pressed for countries to ratify and implement the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, identify measures to reinforce the international refugee protection
regime, and develop an international monitoring system by which to better detect
and remedy discriminatory treatment of migrants and refugees. (See Refugees,
Asylum Seekers,Migrants, and Internally Displaced Persons.)
Citizenship Rights
We sought to win recognition of the problem of denial or deprivation of citizenship
on racial and related grounds, and the intersection of race and gender in
discriminatory citizenship laws and practices. To this end, we encouraged U.N.
committees created by the treaties on women’s rights and on children’s rights to put
this issue on their agendas, and for the U.N.High Commissioner on Human Rights
to set in motion a study of potentially discriminatory norms by which states determined
who was a citizen or naturalized citizen.We said international measures of
conflict resolution and early warning should address questions of citizenship and
denationalization founded on discriminatory grounds. These issues should be recognized
as major factors in the generation of massive human rights abuse, including
genocide, and armed conflict, and the generation of refugee flows.
In some countries with large populations of “citizens without citizenship,”
where particular ethnic groups were singled out as less than citizens, although they
were not mere aliens, a remedy to this discriminatory practice was within ready
reach even under existing law.Members of Syria’s native Kurdish population who
were denied official Syrian nationality were not permitted to own land, housing, or
a business, or to register a motor vehicle—and their children faced major obstacles
to formal education. Yet the Syrian government’s 2000 report to the U.N. Human
Rights Committee made clear that the nationality law specifically provided for the
granting of citizenship to all Kurdish children born in Syria, irrespective of the legal
status of their parents, if the Syrian government should choose to invoke it. An
important first step against discrimination in citizenship rights was to implement
international norms to combat statelessness.
As an immediate bulwark against the discriminatory denial of nationality, we
encouraged the WCAR to promote the ratification of international agreements on
statelessness, and for children’s rights activists to demand the implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child’s strong safeguards against statelessness.
We urged the Committee on the Rights of the Child to call on states to describe their
safeguards against racial, ethnic, and gender discrimination in citizenship laws and
practices in their regular reports to the committee. Populations with longstanding
claims to nationality in their country of residence whose children remained stateless
required particularly urgent attention. Similarly, we encouraged the Committee
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women to consider the discriminatory
manner in which race, ethnicity, and national origin intersected with gender in citizenship
and naturalization policies, and request states to address these issues when
reporting to these committees.
Discrimination in Criminal Justice
and Public Administration
Discrimination in the administration of justice—whether in policing, criminal
prosecutions, trials, sentencing, or imprisonment—caused extraordinary harm to
individuals and societies alike.Members of racial, ethnic, and other minorities or
vulnerable groups often faced harassment, arbitrary detention, and abusive treatment
by the law enforcement apparatus and disparate treatment by prosecutors
and the courts.
Police disproportionately targeted members of marginalized groups for arrest in
many countries. Members of these groups also faced disproportionate prosecutions,
unfair trials, and disproportionately severe sentences on criminal charges.
Humiliating treatment, beatings, sexual abuse, and shooting deaths of members of
marginalized groups often contrasted starkly with treatment accorded to others
and members of these groups often had little recourse to legal remedies to abuse.
Ostensibly race- or descent-neutral laws could have a disparate impact on vulnerable
minorities—or even majorities—as a consequence of prosecutorial discretion
or sentencing policies or the nature of the law itself. The resulting impact on
particular descent-based groups could be vastly disproportionate to the actual
involvement of members of these groups in the overall pattern of criminal activity.
For example, although there were more white drug offenders than black in the
United States, blacks constituted 57.6 percent of all drug offenders sent to state
prison. In racial profiling, stop and search provisions were abused to target suspects
on discriminatory grounds: A 1998 study of police stop and search patterns in England
and Wales by the British Home Office found that blacks were 7.5 times more
likely to be stopped and searched than whites. A 1997 Australian study, in turn,
found that Aboriginal people in Australia were 9.2 times more likely to be arrested,
23.7 times more likely to be imprisoned as an adult, and 48 times more likely to be
imprisoned as juveniles than non-Aborigines.
Criminal penalties that were accompanied by temporary or permanent disenfranchisement
further excluded members of groups already facing discriminatory
treatment from participation in political life and accentuated and perpetuated their
economic, social, and political marginalization. In 1998 it was reported that an estimated
3.9 million U.S. citizens were disenfranchised, including over one million
who had fully completed their sentences. This hit black men in particular, with 13
percent—1.4 million—disenfranchised.
The discriminatory effect of public policy and administrative practice often prevented
the enjoyment of fundamental human rights even in the absence of overt
discriminatory intent. This was often most evident in the administration of social
services, education, and public housing to exclude or marginalize members of particular
groups.
The denial of equal access by minorities to education was a major concern in
several regions. In certain countries in Asia, including Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Japan,
children whose parents belonged to lower-caste or shunned, descent-based social
groups faced widespread discrimination in access to education and had markedly
lower literacy rates and school attendance rates than the general population. In
India, children of Dalits who attended school were largely restricted to the worst
government schools,where they faced discriminatory and abusive treatment at the
hands of their teachers and fellow students.
In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
issued “concluding observations” following review of China’s report on its implementation
of the convention.The committee expressed concern about discrimination
in education, particularly in Tibet.
In Europe, Romani children suffered extreme discrimination in their access to
education, through relegation to segregated schools, routine assignment to
“special” facilities intended for children with learning disabilities, or no schooling
at all. In schools that were not segregated, Romani children faced harassment from
students—and sometimes by teachers—as well as racial slurs and lowered expectations,
contributing to a high dropout rate.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Human Rights Watch investigation identified concern
at discrimination in schools—including a discriminatory grade-school curriculum—
as a major impediment to the return of minority displaced families to
their pre-war homes.
A 2001 Human Rights Watch investigation found pervasive and systematic discrimination
against nearly one-fourth of Israel’s 1.6 million schoolchildren—
Palestinian Arab citizens—who were educated in a public school system that was
wholly separate from the Jewish majority. The Israeli government spent less per Palestinian Arab child than per Jewish child, and Arab schools were inferior to Jewish
schools in virtually every respect.Among Palestinian Arabs, the Negev Bedouin
and children in villages denied legal status by the Israeli government fared worst in
every respect. In its 2001 report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, Israel
acknowledged the gap between Arab and Jewish education, but despite a commitment
to closing the gap it had failed to take necessary steps to equalize the two systems.
(See Children’s Rights.)
Human Rights Watch encouraged the WCAR to give a new impetus for states to
systematically collect and report data on law enforcement and the administration
of justice,with a view to identifying and remedying any discriminatory purpose or
effect; and to monitor the administration of public affairs in such areas as education,
health care, housing, and the enforcement of labor rights,with a view to identifying
and remedying any discriminatory purpose or effect in public policy and
programs.
Reparations
In advance of the World Conference, Human Rights Watch called for governments
to make reparations to counter the most severe continuing effects of slavery,
segregation, racist aspects of colonialism, and other extreme forms of racism in the
past.We said efforts should focus first on groups that continue to suffer the most
severe hardships, with long-term commitments to correct the damage done to the
groups left most seriously disadvantaged.We encouraged the WCAR to adopt proposals
in favor of providing reparations to the descendants of past victims. To this
end we pressed for priority to be given measures to address the social and economic
foundations of today’s victims’ continuing marginalization—through means such
as investment in education, housing, health care, or job training.
Human Rights Watch argued that the descendants of a victim of human rights
abuse should be able to pursue claims of reparations—that the right to reparations
was not extinguished with the death of the victim. Reparations would consist of
compensation, acknowledgment of past abuses, an end to ongoing abuses, and, as
much as possible, restoration of the state of affairs that would have prevailed had
there been no abuses. To establish priorities for reparations,Human Rights Watch
proposed the establishment of national panels as well as one or more international
panels to look at the effect of the slave trade and other international forms of systemic
abuse. These panels would focus on tracing these effects not for particular
individuals but for groups. The panels would serve as a form of truth commission
aiming to determine how a government’s past racist practices had contributed to
contemporary deprivation domestically and across world regions. They would
educate the public, acknowledge responsibility, and propose methods of redress
and making amends.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Israel: Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s
Schools, 12/01
Under Orders: War Crimes in Kosovo, 10/01
Crimes Against Civilians: Abuses by Macedonian Forces in Ljuboten,August 10-12,
2001, 9/01
Caste Discrimination: A Global Concern, 8/01
The New Racism: The Political Manipulation of Ethnicity in Cote D’Ivoire, 8/01
Unequal Protection: The State Response to Violence Crime on south African Farms,
08/01
The War in Aceh, 8/01
Violence and Political Impasse in Papua, 7/01
Hidden in The Home: Abuse of Domestic Workers with Special Visas, 6/01
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
The “Dirty War” in Chechnya: Forced Disappearances, Torture, and Summary
Executions, 3/01
Uganda in Eastern DRC: Fueling Political and Ethnic Strife, 3/01
Massacres of Hazaras in Afghanistan, 2/01
REFUGEES, ASYLUM SEEKERS,
MIGRANTS, AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PERSONS
INTRODUCTION: THE YEAR IN PROFILE
Fiftieth Anniversary of the 1951 Refugee Convention
2001 was a critical year for refugee protection. The year marked the fiftieth
anniversary of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (Refugee
Convention)—the foundation of the international refugee protection regime. A
series of global consultations on international refugee protection organized by the
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was due
to culminate in December 2001 at the first ever meeting of state parties to the
Refugee Convention to reaffirm their commitment to the treaty. The Inter Parliamentary
Union, the Council of Europe, the Organization of American States, and
the Organization of African Unity all adopted resolutions and recommendations
reaffirming their commitment to the convention in 2001.
Nevertheless, the Refugee Convention came under relentless attack—not least
by the same industrialized states that were responsible for its formulation. Many
states failed to accede to the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol.Asian
countries, including Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, India, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Nepal, Pakistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam, were particularly
remiss in this regard.
United Nations World Conference Against Racism
In August and September 2001, governments met in Durban, South Africa for
the third U.N. World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR).Although the protection of refugees and
migrants featured prominently on the agenda, discussions regarding refugee protection
were contentious and some governments argued for the removal of references
to the Refugee Convention from the conference documents.
Fiftieth Anniversary of UNHCR
and New High Commissioner, Ruud Lubbers
The year 2000 also marked the fiftieth anniversary of UNHCR—the international
agency mandated to protect and assist refugees. At the end of 2000 Sadako
Ogata stood down after serving for ten years as high commissioner for refugees.
Ogata was replaced by former Dutch Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers who took up
his new position in January 2001. Lubbers’ principle challenge as the new high
commissioner was to revitalize UNHCR’s core protection mandate and to take a
strong stance with governments, particularly in Western Europe, that were undermining
fundamental international refugee protection standards and seeking to
erode the 1951 Refugee Convention.
Within the first months of taking office, Lubbers was tested with two of the most
chronic and complex refugee crises in the world,Guinea and Afghanistan. Lubbers’
first mission was to the West Africa sub-region in February 2001 where the conflicts
in Liberia and Sierra Leone spilled over both countries’ borders and threatened to
destabilize Guinea, displacing thousands of refugees and Guineans and killing hundreds.
In April and May, Lubbers visited Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan to assess
the world’s second largest refugee emergency.
In both cases he was criticized for his handling of the situation and made controversial
proposals about possible solutions. Human rights and humanitarian
groups criticized Lubbers’ proposal to establish “safe passages” to enable refugees
fleeing the turmoil in Guinea to return to Sierra Leone through rebel-controlled
territory, citing widespread abuse by Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels in
these areas. NGOs also criticized Lubbers for placing too much attention on the
repatriation of Afghan refugees during his visits to the region, and argued that conditions
inside Afghanistan were not conducive to return.
Impact of September 11 on Refugees and Migrants
Having sorely neglected the Afghan refugee crisis for years, the September 11
attacks on the United States focused international attention on the dire humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan and the chronic refugee situation across its borders in
Pakistan and Iran. At the same time, anti-immigration measures were the centerpiece
of many governments’ efforts to combat terrorism in the aftermath of September
11. Many countries, including the U.S. and the United Kingdom, rushed to
push through emergency anti-terrorism legislation that curtailed the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, and migrants. Human Rights Watch argued that states
must balance legitimate security concerns with respect for the rights of refugees,
asylum seekers, and migrants, and should not use counter-terrorism measures as a
guise to roll-back well-established refugee and human rights protection standards.
REFUGEE PROTECTION POST SEPTEMBER 11
Protecting Afghan Refugees
Humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan
Before U.S.-led attacks began in October 2001,Afghanistan had already suffered
over twenty years of foreign invasion and civil war, political turmoil, human rights
abuses, coupled with a devastating three year drought. More than five million of
Afghanistan’s estimated 27 million people were displaced—four million as refugees
and one million internally displaced.The severe drought brought many parts of the
country to the verge of famine,while Taliban restrictions on relief agencies severely
hampered the delivery of assistance and civilian access to basic services. Some five
million people inside Afghanistan were entirely dependent on international aid,
according to the World Food Programme (WFP).
The U.S. led bombing campaign, fears of forced conscription by the Taliban,
fears of reprisals by and conflict between both the Taliban and Northern Alliance
forces, general insecurity, the rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation, and the
onset of winter caused hundreds of thousands more Afghans to flee their homes in
the weeks after September 11.
Conditions inside Afghanistan further deteriorated after September 11 when
international relief staff were forced to withdraw after the Taliban declared that it
could no longer guarantee their security.As the U.S. led attacks on Afghanistan progressed,
aid agencies warned of an impending humanitarian disaster. The U.N.
reported that the Taliban had confiscated food supplies from the U.N. and relief
agencies. In addition, several relief agencies, including the warehouses of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the compound of a U.N.-affiliated
demining agency Afghan Technical Consultants (ATC), were hit during the
U.S. bombing offensive, killing and injuring staff.
By mid-November, significant advances by Northern Alliance troops and the
withdrawal of the Taliban from major cities, including Kabul, had enabled aid
agencies to resume some of their assistance operations and allowed some international
staff to return to Afghanistan. Nevertheless, security remained precarious
and there continued to be reports of looting by both Taliban and Northern Alliance
forces.Aid agencies warned that time was running out to get aid through to the millions
of starving Afghans if they were to survive the winter.
Treatment of Refugees in Neighboring Countries
Most Afghan refugees during the past two decades have fled to the country’s
immediate neighbors—over two million to Pakistan, and between one and a half
and two million to Iran. Faced with such numbers and receiving little help from the international community, both these countries tightened their policies and officially
closed their borders to Afghan refugees in 2000. Tajikistan also closed its borders
to Afghan refugees in September 2000.
After September 11,Afghanistan’s three other neighbors,Turkmenistan,Uzbekistan,
and China, also closed their borders to Afghan refugees citing security concerns
as well as their inability to absorb more refugees.
These governments’ actions directly undermined core refugee protection standards,
in particular the right to seek and enjoy asylum, set out in article 14 of the
1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), and the principle of nonrefoulement—
the right of refugees not to be returned to a country where their lives
or freedom could be threatened, as stipulated under article 33 of the Refugee Convention.
Iran, China, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan are all parties to and so bound
by the 1951 Refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol. Although Pakistan and
Uzbekistan are not parties to the convention, the obligation of non-refoulement
now constitutes a generally accepted principle of customary international law, and
is binding on these states also.
Iran and Pakistan: Camps Inside Afghanistan Risk Safety of Refugees
Instead of allowing refugees to enter their territories, both Pakistan and Iran
called instead for the establishment of camps on the Afghan side of their borders,
in violation of their international obligations. These camps posed serious risks for
the security of the refugees and aid workers who were in danger of being caught
between warring factions in Afghanistan. Access to the camps by relief agencies was
extremely limited.
The Iranian Red Crescent Society assisted with the establishment of two camps
in northwestern Afghanistan close to the Iranian border. Mile-46, with a population
of some 1,000 displaced persons, was established in an area under the control
of the Northern Alliance forces,while Makaki camp with a population of 6,000 was,
until Northern Alliance advances in mid-November, in a Taliban controlled area.
Close to the Pakistan border, the Spin Boldak camp,with a population of over 3,000
displaced Afghans, was established in an area under strong Taliban control.
On November 12,UNHCR reported that Makaki camp was caught between Taliban
troops,who still controlled the camp and advancing Northern Alliance troops
pushing to take control of the area, forcing aid workers to withdraw and endangering
civilians inside the camp. On November 14, the area fell to the Northern
Alliance.
The lack of security in the camps made it difficult for aid agencies to operate
safely, and by early November there were reports that several thousand Afghans
were camped in the open around Makaki camp which was already filled beyond
capacity. Aid agencies expressed concern about the health of displaced people in
and around Makaki camp as winter approached.
Despite this, Iran continued to keep its borders shut to fleeing Afghans.The interior
minister,Abdolvahed Musavi-Lari, stated that “it is better and more efficient to
provide the refugees with assistance within their homes for humanitarian reasons,”
an assertion belied by conditions on the ground inside Makaki camp and elsewhere
in Afghanistan.
Border Closures Endangers Refugees Lives
Despite the official closure of Pakistan’s 1,560 mile border, UNHCR estimated
that at least 150,000 Afghan refugees crossed unofficially into the country between
September 11 and mid-November 2001.Many refugees traversed through dangerous
mountain passes and were forced to pay exorbitant fees to smugglers or large
bribes to border control guards in order to enter Pakistan. In mid-October,Pakistan
agreed that particularly “vulnerable” refugees, including the elderly, sick, and some
women and children would be allowed to enter, but most refugees fleeing Afghanistan
were not admitted.Many who could not afford to pay the high smuggler fees
and bribes to border guards were trapped on the Afghanistan side of the border.
Lack of Security Inside Pakistan
With an existing population of over two million Afghan refugees, Pakistan had
tightened its refugee policies throughout the previous year. In November 2000 the
government instituted a policy to detain and deport newly arrived Afghans in the
North West Frontier Province (NWFP) and all Afghans who were already residing
in Pakistan without official documentation. Between October 2000 and May 2001,
according to the government, it forcibly returned some 7,633 Afghans, mostly men
and boys. Other new arrivals were placed at Jalozai refugee camp but the government
did not permit UNHCR to register them in order to determine whether or not
they were in need of refugee protection. In August, however, the government and
UNHCR agreed to jointly screen all the refugees at Jalozai camp and at the longer
established Nasirbagh camp in order to determine which refugees could stay in
Pakistan and which would be returned to Afghanistan, but the screening was suspended
following the September 11 attacks.
Despite maintaining an official position of closed borders, the Pakistan authorities
announced shortly after September 11 that they would set up new refugee
camps in the event of a mass influx from Afghanistan. The sites were located in the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas close to the Afghanistan border in the NWFP,
that were unstable and insecure, difficult to reach, and lacked an adequate water
supply and infrastructure. The location of refugee camps so close to the Afghanistan
border was contrary to international standards which stipulate that camps
must be located at a “safe distance” from international frontiers to protect against
cross border attacks or military incursions.
Fifteen camps were established by mid-November but they were mostly empty
as refugees who entered Pakistan unofficially feared to report to camp authorities
and risk deportation, and preferred to stay with family or friends in Peshawar,
Quetta, and other urban areas. Many of these so-called “invisible refugees” were
Hazaras, Uzbek, or Tajik ethnic minorities. They lived in a state of legal limbo,
undocumented and unassisted, and constantly at risk of being picked up by the
police, detained, and returned to Afghanistan.
In early November, UNHCR and the Pakistan government agreed to move
refugees from Killi Faizo, an insecure and overcrowded temporary staging camp
near the Chaman border crossing in Baluchistan province, to Roghani camp, sixteen
kilometers away. Under the same agreement, UNHCR began the transfer of
refugees from the new Jalozai camp in Peshawar to Kotkai camp in Bajaur agency The new camp was located in a strongly pro-Taliban area only five kilometers from
the Afghan border, raising fears for the security of the refugees,many of whom were
from ethnic minorities and of forced recruitment by the Taliban. However, as the
Pakistan authorities said that they would close new Jalozai camp, many refugees,
especially those most dependent on relief assistance including women who were
heads of household and widows, felt obliged to move to the camps despite their
fears.
Eroding Refugee Protection in Iran
Iran steadfastly kept its 560 mile border with Afghanistan closed, and also
deported thousands of Afghan refugees. On November 9, UNHCR reported that
Iranian authorities had deported at least 350 refugees in a matter of days.
Iran’s tough policies toward Afghan refugees pre-dated September 11.Out of the
one and a half to two million Afghans living in Iran, the government estimated that
as many as half a million were undocumented. Very few Afghans in Iran lived in
camps.Most eked out a miserable existence in the cities where their lack of documentation
and the government’s increasingly tough policies towards them meant
they were excluded from the formal labor market and had little or no access to education,
health care, or other benefits.
In 1999, the U.S. Committee for Refugees estimated that Iran had forcibly
returned some 100,000 Afghan refugees. In an attempt to prevent further forced
deportations, UNHCR and the government of Iran agreed to a joint repatriation
program in April 2000.Under this program Afghans could either receive a repatriation
package from UNHCR and return to Afghanistan, or present their claims for
continued protection in Iran at a screening center. UNHCR also set up repatriation
centers to facilitate the repatriation of documented and undocumented Afghans
wishing to return to their homes. Many NGOs charged that it was premature for
refugees to return to drought and conflict-ridden Afghanistan.Despite the screening
program, the U.S. Committee for Refugees estimated that as many as 50,000
returns were involuntary in 2000.
In mid-November 2001, UNHCR and Iran agreed to resume the screening program
in order to repatriate Afghans without refugee status, a move that UNHCR
hoped would stem summary deportations. Some NGOs cautioned that a flawed
process could result in the forced return of hundreds of thousands of refugees.
At the same time, UNHCR reported a rise in spontaneous returns of refugees,
particularly ethnic Uzbeks,Tajiks, and Hazaras, to areas of Afghanistan captured by
the Northern Alliance.
Refugees Stranded on Tajikistan Border
Tajikistan closed its frontier with Afghanistan in September 2000 and thousands
of Russian Federal border guards controlled the border. By September 11, there
were already over 10,000 internally displaced Afghans on small islands in the Pyanj
River, which divides the two countries, waiting for an opportunity to cross into
Tajikistan, who were subject at times to crossfire between Northern Alliance and
Taliban forces. Their numbers steadily increased prior to and during the U.S.-led
military offensive in Afghanistan. Some were receiving assistance from aid agencies. On September 20, President Emomali Rakhmonov stated that Tajikistan
would not allow any Afghan refugees to enter for fear of infiltration by Islamic militants
and for economic reasons.
The Need for International Assistance and Action
By refusing to allow refugees entry into their territory and calling for the establishment
of camps instead within Afghanistan, deporting refugees, and setting up
refugee camps in dangerous and insecure areas, neighboring countries breached
their international obligations toward Afghan refugees and threatened their safety
and security.At the same time, the wider international community had an obligation
to assist these countries to cope with large refugee influxes through financial
and logistical support, as well as helping to find long-term solutions, including
through third country resettlement.There was an urgent need for donor states and
international agencies, such as UNHCR, to call on neighboring countries to keep
their borders open, provide full and safe protection to refugees, and cease summary
deportations. NGOs criticized UNHCR and donor states for not being sufficiently
proactive in pushing neighboring countries to abide by their
international obligations.
A Global Backlash Against Refugees and Migrants
Security concerns in the wake of the September 11 attacks prompted governments
around the world to introduce emergency legislation and tighter immigration
controls. In many countries, such measures were introduced in an existing
climate of growing hostility and restrictions on the rights of refugees, asylum seekers,
and migrants. Several governments introduced measures that seriously eroded
their obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention and undermined the fundamental
right to seek and enjoy asylum, as stipulated in the UDHR. It was ironic that
in the year marking the fiftieth anniversary of the Refugee Convention, the very
same governments responsible for its establishment sought to depart from their
obligations under this treaty.
Not only did doors close to Afghan refugees in neighboring countries, but also
further afield. According to UNHCR, Afghan refugees arrived in countries as distant
and geographically dispersed as Australia, Cambodia, Cuba, and Iceland in
2000. In 1999 and 2000, the number of Afghans who sought asylum in Europe
nearly doubled, with Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom receiving
the largest numbers of applications. Fears of a mass influx of Afghan refugees
after September 11, prompted several countries to introduce harsh policies.
United States
The United States was one of the first countries to respond to the events of September
11 with emergency anti-terrorism legislation that severely curtailed the
rights of non-citizens and permitted their indefinite detention. Despite vigorous
protest by human rights, civil liberties, and immigrants’ rights organizations, the
“USA Patriot Act”was passed on October 26.The procedures leading to the passage of the anti-terrorism bill were flawed and rushed.Congress was unable to meet and
fully consider the legislation as it was amended, meaning that problematic provisions
of the legislation were never fully considered and debated by members of
Congress.
The legislation granted unprecedented broad powers to the attorney general to
“certify” and then detain any non-citizen, including an asylum-seeker, legal permanent
resident, or a refugee, who he had “reasonable grounds to believe” was
engaged in terrorist activities or other activities that endangered national security.
A certified immigrant who had been charged with an immigration violation but
who could not be deported would remain in custody until the attorney general
determined that he or she no longer met the criteria for certification.While judicial
review of the detention would be permitted, there were no meaningful, prompt, or
periodic reviews to ensure the detention was warranted.
The overly broad and vague criteria for subjecting a non-citizen to detention
could allow the attorney general to certify and detain any non-citizen in the U.S.
who had any connection, however tenuous or distant in time, with any group that
had ever unlawfully used a weapon to endanger a person. Given the focus of the law
enforcement efforts in the wake of September 11, there were concerns that such language
created the risk of arbitrary application and could disproportionately impact
individuals from certain countries or religious groups, including asylum seekers
and refugees. The legislation contravened the prohibition against prolonged, arbitrary,
or unlawful detention in international human rights law and UNHCR’s
guidelines on the detention of asylum seekers.
In October, the U.S. government also announced that for national security reasons
it had suspended all resettlement of refugees to the U.S., including Afghan
refugees who were waiting to leave Pakistan. In 2000, the U.S. took 90 percent of the
4,000 Afghan refugees resettled out of Pakistan. The moratorium affected some
20,000 refugees from countries across the world who had been cleared by the Immigration
and Naturalization Service (INS) for resettlement to the U.S. Refugee
organizations criticized the moratorium, arguing that it was unnecessary and only
increased the suffering of refugees from war-torn countries like Iraq, Sierra Leone,
and Somalia, many of whom had spent years in desperate refugee camps waiting to
be resettled.
Western Europe
In a worrying trend throughout Europe, governments linked anti-terrorism
measures with the fight against illegal immigration and introduced measures that
severely curtailed the rights of refugees and migrants. Spain’s foreign minister, for
example, voiced concerns that international terrorists could be smuggled into
Spain and said that “[t]he strengthening of the fight against illegal immigration is
also a strengthening of the anti-terrorist fight.”
In Hungary, all Afghan asylum seekers were transferred from open reception
centers to facilities with heightened security measures. In Greece, Afghan refugees
who arrived after the September 11 attacks received a hostile reception as the government
refused to allow them to apply for asylum, violating its obligations under the Refugee Convention. In the wake of vociferous international pressure, the government
subsequently permitted some refugees to apply for asylum.
In Germany, advocacy groups reported that efforts to include adequate human
rights safeguards for refugees in proposed asylum legislation suffered a serious setback
in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks with many viewing the new legislation
as a necessary measure to strengthen national security. More positively,
however, the German government announced in November that it would introduce
legislation to reverse its practice of excluding victims of persecution by nonstate
agents from refugee protection, such as asylum seekers from Somalia,Algeria,
and Afghanistan.
European Union
After September 11, there were concerns that E.U. efforts to safeguard internal
security could result in the exclusion or expulsion of refugees and migrants from
member states without adequate safeguards.
United Kingdom
Following September 11, the British Home Secretary David Blunkett proposed
far-reaching measures to restrict entry into the U.K. and strengthen national security.
Outlined in a new Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill, these proposals
were before parliament at the time of writing.
Civil liberties, refugee advocacy, and human rights NGOs were concerned that
the bill would permit the unlawful indefinite detention of foreigners suspected of
terrorism-related activity without access to effective appeal procedures and deny
some asylum seekers individual determination of their asylum claims without
recourse. The bill’s broad and overly inclusive definition of terrorism would
include any person with “links” to an international terrorist group, suggesting that
this could lead to “guilt by association” and the targeting of individuals based on
their political, national, ethnic, or religious affiliation. The bill’s provisions seriously
undermined the fundamental right to seek asylum and the purpose and
intent of the Refugee Convention, and represented a departure from well-established
refugee protection standards.
Racist attacks against Afghans and other Muslims living in the U.K. increased
dramatically after September 11.These included damage to property, bomb threats
against mosques, physical and verbal abuse of Muslim women wearing headscarves,
and gang assaults targeting Arab and South Asian men. In one attack an
Afghan taxi driver was beaten so severely he was paralyzed from the neck down.
Both Prime Minister Tony Blair and Home Secretary David Blunkett condemned
the attacks and called for tolerance.
Australia
Australia faced a barrage of international criticism for its excessively harsh and
restrictive immigration and asylum policies. In August, the government turned
back a boatload of mainly Afghan asylum seekers who had been rescued at sea by a
Norwegian freighter, the Tampa, from a sinking Indonesian ferry, and refused to let
them land on Australian territory.Most of the 438 asylum seekers were eventually sent to the Pacific island state of Nauru; others were sent to New Zealand. Following
the September 11 attacks, Defense Minister Peter Reith justified Australia’s
actions, arguing that it should reserve the right to refuse entry on security grounds
to “unauthorized arrivals”.
Following the Tampa incident and the September 11 attacks on the U.S., the government
adopted new and unprecedented immigration legislation in an expedited
manner on September 26.Under the legislation, it “excised” various Australian territories,
such as Christmas Island, Ashmore and Cartier Islands, and the Cocos
Islands, from its “migration zone” and refused to consider asylum applications
from anyone arriving at those places. Instead, the asylum seekers were transported
to other non-Australian Pacific island states while their refugee claims were
assessed, or simply sent back to sea. Human rights, refugee, and advocacy organizations
charged that by forcing boats of asylum seekers back into international
waters, Australia was endangering the lives of asylum seekers, undermining the
right to seek asylum, and potentially violating non-refoulement obligations.
The new legislation also required the detention of asylum seekers arriving at an
“excised offshore place” without any right to judicial review. Australia’s policy of
mandatory detention for all unauthorized arrivals continued to be widely condemned.
Between August and November,Australia turned back several boatloads of asylum
seekers from Afghanistan, Iraq, and other countries in the Middle East and
South Asia, and returned them to international waters.Many of the boats arrived
in Australia via Indonesia, which was not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention
and lacked laws and procedures for determining refugee status.
THE CRISIS IN GUINEA
Host to one of Africa’s largest and most unstable refugee populations in 2000—
an estimated half a million Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees—Guinea was
faced with a national security crisis as the violence from its conflict-ridden neighbors
spilled over and threatened to destabilize the country.Blaming the refugees for
much of the insecurity,Guinea repeatedly closed its borders to Sierra Leonean and
Liberian refugees between August 2000 and mid-2001, in violation of its international
obligations not to return refugees to a country where their lives or freedom
could be threatened. While acknowledging the serious security problems facing
Guinea, Human Rights Watch called on the government not to violate its international
obligations to refugees and urged donors to provide the necessary support
and assistance to help Guinea cope with the crisis.
Between August and mid-2001, a combination of Sierra Leonean Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) rebels and armed Liberian forces repeatedly attacked and
burned refugee camps and Guinean villages along the border, killing, injuring,
abducting, and forcing their residents to flee. The Liberian government also
launched cross-border attacks, accusing Guinea of providing support and hosting
a Liberian rebel group, the Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD).
Tens of thousands of refugees and local Guineans living in the border regions were forcibly displaced by the conflict and hundreds were killed. Faced with a nowin
situation, some refugees fled back into RUF-controlled parts of Sierra Leone to
escape the violence and suffered similar abuses at the hands of RUF rebels to those
that originally caused their flight, including rape,murder, forced recruitment, and
abduction for forced labor. Others fled inland into Guinea where they also faced
abuses, including beatings, strip searches, extortion, sexual assault, arbitrary arrest
and detention, and widespread intimidation, at the hands of the Guinean authorities
and local militia groups.
Security was not only volatile for the refugees, but also for relief agencies and aid
workers. In September 2000, the head of the UNHCR office in the town ofMacenta
on the Liberian border, was murdered by unidentified attackers, and in December
the UNHCR office in Gueckedou was destroyed in fighting between government
troops and rebels,during which hundreds of civilians were reportedly killed and led
thousands of refugees and local people to flee. By December, assistance to the Parrot’s
Beak region, bordering RUF-held areas of Sierra Leone, was largely cut off due
to the deteriorating security situation, leaving hundreds of thousands of refugees
without access to food or protection.
After six months of violence, UNHCR and the Guinean government agreed in
February to relocate the border refugee camps further inland and to assist Sierra
Leonean refugees who wanted to return home to do so by boat from Conakry, but
continuing violence in the border region delayed the relocation until April.By May,
some 60,000 refugees had moved inland and an estimated 35,000 refugees had
returned to Sierra Leone. However, tens of thousands of refugees in the border
region remained unaccounted for. By mid-2001, the situation in Guinea seemed
significantly calmer.
The problems in Guinea were exacerbated by the failure of the international
community to provide sufficient funding and support for the refugees. Aware that
the refugee camps were located dangerously close to the borders with Sierra Leone
and Liberia, UNHCR sought funding to move the camps further inland in 1999.
However, little or no funds were forthcoming due in part to the international attention
then on Kosovo, and thus the camps in the border region remained vulnerable
to attack and military incursions. If funds had been provided earlier to move the
camps, some of the problems faced by the refugees in 2000 and 2001 could have
been averted.
COMBATING RACISM AND XENOPHOBIA
AGAINST REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
United Nations World Conference Against Racism
After two years of regional and expert preparatory meetings, the third U.N.
World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance (WCAR), was held in Durban, South Africa, from August 31 to
September 8, 2001. Lobbying on refugee and migrants rights was organized
through an effective NGO caucus of immigrant and refugee advocacy groups.
Despite efforts by some governments to exclude any reference to the 1951
Refugee Convention, the WCAR affirmed the convention’s importance and states’
obligation to comply with it; recognized racism and ethnic intolerance as among
the root causes of refugee flows; called for greater efforts to combat racism and
xenophobia against migrants, asylum seekers, and refugees; urged states to seek
durable solutions to refugee crises, including voluntary return to countries of origin,
third country resettlement, and where appropriate and feasible, local integration;
upheld the right of return for refugees; and called for a more equitable
international response to refugee crises.
The conference also called on states to promote and make use of the U.N.Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement, though otherwise the WCAR gave little
consideration to the problems of internally displaced persons.
While not legally binding, the WCAR Declaration and Program of Action was
an important affirmation of international standards and principles relating to
refugees, migrants, and asylum seekers and a useful vehicle for coalition building
among NGOs concerned with the rights of migrants and refugees.
Racism and Refugees: The Interface
Throughout 2001, refugees, asylum seekers, and migrants were victims of
repeated racial discrimination, racist attacks, xenophobia, and ethnic intolerance.
Racism was both a cause and a product of forced displacement, and an obstacle to
its solution. Refugees fled countries such as Afghanistan, Burma, Burundi,Macedonia,
Sri Lanka, and Turkey to escape racism and ethnic intolerance, but often
then encountered further discrimination, xenophobia,or racist attacks in their host
countries.At the same time, millions of refugees were unable to return to their own
countries because of racial and ethnic discrimination.
Industrialized states continued to introduce a barrage of restrictive policies and
practices targeting asylum seekers, refugees, and migrants.Negative and inaccurate
portrayals of these groups in the media and inflammatory, xenophobic rhetoric by
politicians and public officials in many Western countries contributed to a climate
of hostility. There was also an alarming rise in racist and xenophobic violence
against asylum seekers, refugees, and migrants in many industrialized countries, as
well as in traditionally generous host countries in the developing world.
Xenophobic Rhetoric: The Case of Australia
Many governments manipulated and incited xenophobic fears for short-term
political gain. In Australia, for example,Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs Phillip Ruddock made a series of inflammatory and xenophobic
statements about immigration and asylum between November 1999 and August
2001, suggesting that mandatory detention policies protected the Australian public
against communicable diseases brought in by illegals and that whole villages of
Iraqis and others were preparing to travel to Australia. The refusal by Australia to
allow boatloads of mostly Afghan and Iraqi refugees and migrants entry to its territory
came in the run-up to a general election campaign, in which the government
sought to demonstrate a tough stance on asylum and immigration and fuelled xenophobic fears among the public with inflammatory accounts of
“floods” of refugees on the move to Australia. The rhetoric and tough policies
paid off, as John Howard’s government won a third term in office at the mid-
November elections.
Racist Attacks in Europe
There was a high incidence of racially motivated attacks and violence against
refugees, asylum seekers, and migrants in European countries. In the U.K., the dispersal
of asylum seekers to remote or deprived areas resulted in increased attacks.
In August, Firsat Dag, a Kurdish asylum seeker, was stabbed to death in an unprovoked
racial attack in Glasgow. Days later an Iranian asylum seeker was also
stabbed, and a Kurdish asylum seeker in Hull had his throat slashed. NGOs,
UNHCR, and the inter-governmental European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance, amongst others, linked the attacks to the negative portrayal of asylum
seekers by politicians and the media, particularly during the May general election
campaign.
In Russia, there were attacks on African students in Moscow, including many
refugees, by mobs of youth, often wielding weapons or bottles.Most victims feared
to report such attacks to the police; those that did generally found the police unwilling
to investigate.
Racism as a Barrier to Safe Return: The Case of Bhutan
Racism and ethnic discrimination prevented the safe return of millions of
refugees. Despite the commencement of a joint verification process by the
Bhutanese and Nepalese governments in early 2001 to ascertain the status of
100,000 Bhutanese refugees in camps in Nepal, by November no refugees had
returned to Bhutan.
The refugees, mostly ethnic Nepalese, were expelled from southern Bhutan in
the early 1990s. Many were arbitrarily stripped of their nationality prior to their
expulsion after Bhutan amended its nationality laws in the late 1980s to deny
nationality rights to most southern Bhutanese.
After nine rounds of ministerial talks between Bhutan and Nepal, the Bhutanese
government still refused to accept the refugees back, claiming that they were not
bona fide Bhutanese citizens. At the tenth round of talks in December 2000, following
concerted pressure by the U.S., the E.U., and the U.N., the two governments
finally agreed to start a joint verification of the refugees. This would determine the
refugees’ nationality status, with a view to their ultimate repatriation to Bhutan.
However, international NGOs were concerned about the Bhutanese government’s
refusal to allow UNHCR to monitor the verification process, the lack of
independent scrutiny, and the excruciatingly slow progress of the process that continued
to deny thousands of refugees the right to return to their own country.
CONCLUSION: THE CHALLENGES AHEAD
As the year ended, core refugee protection principles were under serious threat
across the globe and the future for millions of refugees, asylum seekers, and migrants was uncertain. In the aftermath of September 11, governments faced a
critical challenge to address legitimate national security concerns without undermining
long-enshrined refugee protection and human rights standards and further
eroding the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, and migrants. Governments hosting
large, long-term refugee populations faced the challenge of continuing to provide
protection and keep their borders open, while the international community had a
heightened responsibility to provide sufficient funding and support and to seek
effective solutions to chronic refugee crises. The fiftieth anniversary of the Refugee
Convention provided states with an opportunity to ratify and accede to the convention
and its 1967 Protocol, to fully and unequivocally reaffirm their commitment
to the convention as the centerpiece of refugee protection, and to repeal
legislation, policies, and practices that undermined the spirit and letter of the convention.
Finally, the conclusion of the third WCAR challenged states to put into
practice the directives outlined in its final declaration and program of action. In
particular, governments were challenged to address racism and discrimination as
root causes of refugee flows; reverse policies and practices that discriminate against
migrants, asylum seekers, and refugees; avoid inflammatory and xenophobic portrayals
of asylum seekers, refugees, and migrants; take vigorous action to investigate
and bring to justice perpetrators of racist violence against migrants and refugees;
and seek long-term solutions to refugee situations, particularly where refugees are
blocked from returning to their home country or integrating into a host country
because of discrimination and racism.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Guinea: Refugees Still at Risk: Continuing Refugee Protection Concerns in Guinea,
7/01
Uprooting the Rural Poor in Rwanda, 5/01
UNHCR at 50: What Future for Refugee Protection? 12/00
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Violations of children’s rights were all too common in 2001. Children were
beaten and tortured by police, forced to work long hours under hazardous
conditions, or warehoused in detention centers and orphanages.Millions crossed
international borders in search of safety or were displaced within their own countries.
Hundreds of thousands served as soldiers in armed conflicts.
In documenting human rights abuses, Human Rights Watch has traditionally
focused its efforts on monitoring state compliance with civil and political rights.
But the denial of economic and social rights, such as the right to education, health,
or shelter, often bars individuals from the effective enjoyment of their civil and
political rights.
Children are especially vulnerable to this dynamic. They frequently do not benefit
from the progressive realization of economic and social rights—to the contrary,
they often suffer discrimination in basic education, health care, and other services.
In particular, girls are often subjected to intentionally discriminatory treatment or
disproportionately affected by abuses.The deprivation of these fundamental rights
prevents children from realizing their full potential later in life.With limited capacity
to participate as equals in civil society, they are ill-equipped as adults to defend
their rights and to secure these rights for their own children.
In recognition of these facts,Human Rights Watch examined children’s access to
education, focusing on violence and discriminatory treatment in schools—often at
the hands of other students with official acquiescence or encouragement, in
extreme cases perpetrated by teachers and other staff members.We also began to
examine the devastating effect of the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) pandemic on children around the
world.At the same time,we continued to monitor the human rights abuses suffered
by child soldiers, children in conflict with the law, children who were refugees,
migrants, stateless, or deprived of the benefits of citizenship, and children who
labored under hazardous conditions.
Effective remedies for these children must include a reaffirmation of their civil
and political rights. No girl or boy should be made a child soldier or a bonded
laborer. No child should be excluded from school because of her caste, color, religion,
or gender.At the same time, real protection from such abuses requires measures
to ensure that children enjoy access to education and health services and
protection for their other economic and social rights.
VIOLATIONS OF THE RIGHT TO EDUCATION
“Children do not lose their human rights by virtue of passing through the
school gates.”
United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child,
General Comment No. 1, The Aims of Education, April 2001
The Convention on the Rights of the Child establishes that children enjoy the
right to an education.Article 29 of the convention specifies five goals of education,
including “the development of the child’s personality, talents and mental and physical
abilities to their fullest potential,” “the development of respect for the child’s
parents, his or her own cultural identity, language and values, for the national values
of the country in which the child is living, the country from which he or she may
originate, and for civilizations different from his or her own,” and “the preparation
of the child for responsible life in a free society, in the spirit of understanding,
peace, tolerance, equality of sexes, and friendships among all peoples, ethnic,
national and religious groups and persons of indigenous origin.”
Children have the right to freedom from discrimination in education.This right
flows from the nondiscrimination provisions of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. It is explicitly
guaranteed in the Convention against Discrimination in Education,which had
ninety states party as of July 2001.
As with other economic, social, and cultural rights, the right to education may
be achieved progressively. A state party to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights agrees “to take steps . . . to the maximum of its
available resources” to realize the right to education. But the prohibition on discrimination
in education is not progressive.As the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights has observed, the right to freedom from discrimination in education
“is subject to neither progressive realization nor the availability of resources;
it applies fully and immediately to all aspects of education and encompasses all
internationally prohibited grounds of discrimination.”
Instead of facilitating the healthy development of children and providing them
with equal opportunities for education, schools were too often sites of intolerance
and discrimination. In some cases, school officials failed to protect students from
harassment or attacks by classmates. In others, they themselves participated in
harassment or violence against particular youth because of their gender, race, ethnicity,
religion, nationality, sexual orientation, social group, or other status.
In many parts of the world, children from minorities and other socially disadvantaged
groups were denied education or segregated in inferior educational programs
that limited their opportunities for growth and restricted their access to
higher education and employment.
A 2001 Human Rights Watch investigation found pervasive and systematic discrimination
against nearly one-fourth of Israel’s 1.6 million schoolchildren—
Palestinian Arab citizens—who were educated in a public school system that was wholly separate from the schools of the Jewish majority. The Israeli government
spent less per Palestinian Arab child than per Jewish child, and Arab schools were
inferior to Jewish schools in virtually every respect.Arab schools offered fewer facilities
and educational opportunities than were offered other Israeli children, and
some lacked basic learning facilities like libraries, computers, science laboratories,
and recreation space. Palestinian Arab children attended schools with larger classes
and fewer teachers than those in the Jewish school system,with some children having
to travel long distances to reach the nearest school. Palestinian Arab children
with disabilities were particularly marginalized.Many Palestinian Arab communities
lacked kindergartens for three- and four-year-old students, despite legislation
making such schools—and attendance—obligatory. Jewish three-year-olds
attended kindergarten at four times the rate of their Palestinian Arab counterparts;
Jewish four-year-olds at three times the rate.
Palestinian Arab students studied from a government-prescribed Arabic curriculum
that was derived from the Hebrew curriculum: common subjects were
developed with little or no Palestinian Arab participation, and they were translated
years after the Hebrew language material was published. The government devoted
inadequate resources to developing the subjects unique to Arab education, and
Palestinian Arab teachers had significantly less choice in textbooks and teaching
materials than did Jewish teachers. The curricula’s content often alienated students
and teachers alike, particularly the study of Jewish religious texts, which was
required in secondary-level Hebrew language classes.
Palestinian Arab students dropped out of school at three times the rate of Jewish
students and were less likely to pass the national exams common to the two systems
for a high school diploma. Only a handful made it to university. Among
Palestinian Arabs, the Negev Bedouin and children in villages not recognized as
legal by the Israeli government fared the worst in every respect. In its 2001 report to
the Committee on the Rights of the Child, Israel acknowledged the gaps between
Arab and Jewish education, but as of October 2001 it had failed to take necessary
steps to equalize the two systems.
In countries throughout Europe, Romani children, sometimes known as Gypsies,
received substandard education when they attended schools at all. In November
2000 the parents association of Greece’s Halastra Public School closed the
school to prevent enrollment of thirty-two Romani children. The Romani children
were split up and sent to different schools, often quite far from their homes. Segregation
also took the form of educational tracking, in which Romani children were
arbitrarily sent to “special schools”for children with cognitive deficits or behavioral
problems.According to the European Roma Rights Center, Romani children in the
Czech Republic were fifteen times more likely to be placed in remedial education,
placement that greatly restricted their secondary school opportunities. When
Romani children did attend integrated schools, they often faced harassment by
other students and lowered expectations from teachers, factors that contributed to
their high dropout rates.
In many countries in Asia and Africa, including Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Japan,
children whose parents belonged to lower-caste or other shunned descent-based
social groups faced widespread discrimination in access to education and had
markedly lower literacy rates and school attendance rates than the general population. In India, Dalit children, also called “untouchables,” were largely segregated
from others and restricted to the worst government schools,deficient in basic infrastructure,
classrooms, teachers, and teaching aids, where they faced abusive, discriminatory
treatment at the hands of their teachers and fellow students.Half of all
Dalit children did not complete primary school, and less than one-quarter completed
secondary school, despite state assistance in primary education and constitutional
provisions guaranteeing free, compulsory primary education for all
children up to age fourteen. Those children who did stay in school were typically
enrolled in vernacular schools,whose graduates suffered serious disadvantages in a
job market that favored English-language school graduates.
Children in detention were frequently denied their right to an education on
equal terms with their peers.We found that, with the exception of the few juvenile
institutions, Pakistan’s prisons did not provide education to children in juvenile
wards. Religious foundations provided religious instruction; secular subjects were
rarely available and when they were,were taught by adult prisoners not necessarily
trained as teachers. Children in the three detention facilities specifically designed
for youth receive education through the eighth grade, but educational facilities
were understaffed and provided with few or no teaching aids. In Kenya, we found
that some juvenile detention centers provided secondary school instruction only to
boys, while other facilities offered no secondary education at all. Palestinian children
detained in Israel’s Telmond Prison continued to be denied an education
equivalent to that of detained Jewish children. In the United States,Human Rights
Watch’s investigation of detention facilities in the states of Louisiana and Maryland
found that the education offered was in many cases seriously deficient; some facilities
offered no classes whatsoever for some or all of their juvenile detainees.Detention
officials implemented changes only after the release of our reports, pressure by
local groups, and investigations by the U.S. Department of Justice or the U.S.
Department of Education.
Noncitizen children were often denied any education at all when states set
impossibly high barriers to education for refugee, asylum seeker, immigrant, and
stateless children. Many countries required schools to report on students’ or parents’
legal status, knowing that undocumented migrants’ fear of deportation would
lead them to keep their children at home. In February 2001, the Greek parliament
considered draft legislation that would have required migrant children to provide
documentation showing their legal status in Greece in order to enroll in public
schools. The requirement of such documentation would have effectively barred
school attendance for children of undocumented or irregular migrants. The provisions
were dropped from the final bill following protests by Greek nongovernmental
organizations, migrants groups, and Human Rights Watch (see Greece).
A 2000 Human Rights Watch report found that Kuwaiti government officials
frequently denied children of Bidun residents the birth certificates and other official
documents needed to attend public and private schools, claiming they were
“illegal residents” even when their families had lived in Kuwait for decades, or even
generations.Human Rights Watch’s 2000 report on Rohingya refugees from Burma
found that Malaysian officials frequently expelled Rohingya children from primary
schools when they could not prove legal residency, despite a provision in Malaysia’s constitution that granted citizenship to children born on its territory who, like
these refugees, would otherwise be stateless.
Children born in the Dominican Republic to Haitian parents were routinely
denied identity documents even though the Dominican constitution conferred citizenship
on all persons born within the country. Lacking legal documentation,
children of Haitian descent were frequently denied access to Dominican schools.
Although primary schools tended to be flexible with regard to the admission of
undocumented children, policies varied from district to district. Undocumented
children were generally denied high school diplomas, and, in many cases, were not
allowed to take the mandatory national examinations that were a prerequisite for
entry into secondary school. In July 2001, the Dominican vice president announced
that public schools would be instructed to admit all children, regardless of documentation,
but as of this writing it was not clear that this decision was being implemented.
Children in conflict zones braved tremendous dangers to reach those schools
still in operation. Following the September 29, 2000 renewal of violent clashes in
the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip (see Israel, the Occupied West Bank
and Gaza Strip, and Palestinian Authority Territories), Palestinian children were
frequently blocked from attending school by widespread road closures, curfews,
and attacks by armed Israeli soldiers and settlers. Those who did reach school did
not always find safety. In dozens of reported incidences, schools have been tear
gased, hit by live ammunition, or damaged by artillery shell fragments. Some Jewish
Israeli children living in illegal but government-sponsored settlements in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip faced difficulties in reaching schools as armed Palestinians
increasingly targeted for attacks Israelis traveling or living in these areas. For
example, on November 20, 2000, five Israeli children from the Kafr Darom settlement
in the Gaza Strip were injured, three seriously, when Palestinian militants
detonated a roadside bomb as a caravan of military and civilian vehicles passed.
The children were on their way to a school in a nearby settlement. A teacher and a
school worker traveling with them were killed.
Human Rights Watch investigations during the clashes found that in the Israelicontrolled
H-2 section of Hebron, Palestinian schools serving some 12,000 children
were closed for almost five months during almost continuous curfews
imposed on Palestinians. Israel announced in January 2001 that schools in the area
would be allowed to operate during curfews, but Israeli soldiers continued to prevent
some teachers and students from reaching these schools, and three major
schools serving 1,845 students remained closed because Israel had turned their
grounds into military bases. Children living in the H-2 area who transferred to
schools in Palestinian-controlled areas were still subject to the curfew, and Israeli
soldiers often prevented them from returning home at night if a curfew was reimposed.
Palestinian primary school students in Hebron told Human Rights Watch
that they were frequently cursed, stoned, or beaten by armed settlers while on their
way to or from school. Israeli soldiers or police rarely intervened, they said, except
to beat or arrest Palestinian children who struck back.
In Northern Ireland, parents and politicians complained that police failed to
adequately protect Catholic minority school children from attacks in September 2001 by Loyalist protesters. (Some Unionists—those who want to maintain the
union between Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom—call themselves “Loyalists,”
some of whom support the use of violence for political ends.) The protesters
sought to keep the children from reaching the Holy Cross Primary School, a
Catholic school located near a Protestant-dominated enclave in the Ardoyne section
of Belfast. Loyalist protesters spit, cursed, and threw bottles and stones at the
children and their parents. A Loyalist paramilitary organization took responsibility
for a petrol bomb explosion outside the school while children and parents were
approaching. Loyalist paramilitaries warned parents to keep their children away
from the school and police informed some parents that death threats had been
issued against them.
In eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, a December 2000 investigation by
Human Rights Watch found that schools were a common site of child recruitment
by rebel groups backed by Rwanda. Frequent targeting of schools for such recruitment
caused some parents to keep their children from attending school and some
schools to be shut down. Because soldiers are known to abduct children from
school, the mere appearance of soldiers in the vicinity of a school can cause the children
to panic. In December 2000, soldiers approached a secondary school near
Goma one morning while classes were underway; the students scattered and ran.
The school suspended classes for some time afterward as parents and pupils were
not prepared to risk further raids by soldiers bent on seizing students to serve as
child soldiers.
Elsewhere in the region, a Burundi rebel group abducted more than 150 students
from two schools in November 2001 and burned several classrooms.
Worldwide, children of many social groups were all too often subject to violence
and harassment that undermined their opportunities to learn, caused them to drop
out of school, or resulted in psychological trauma, physical injury, and even death.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in many U.S. schools were subjected
to unrelenting harassment from their peers. A 2001 Human Rights Watch
report found that harassment and violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
youth took many forms, including brutal physical attacks, mock rapes,
unwelcome sexual advances and other acts of sexual harassment, taunts, obscene
notes or graffiti, and the destruction of personal property.
Over time, verbal harassment often escalated into physical violence. These
abuses were compounded by the failure of federal, state, and local governments to
enact laws that would provide students with express protection from discrimination
based on their actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity.
Such abuses were not limited to the United States. Researchers studying lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in Australia, Canada, France, New Zealand,
and the United Kingdom, among other countries, reached similar conclusions
about the pervasiveness of antigay violence in schools. The Europe Region of the
International Lesbian and Gay Association concluded that teachers and other
adults were “more likely to reject than support” gay and lesbian youth. Amnesty
International reported that gay youth elsewhere in the world suffered torture and
ill-treatment because of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
Discrimination, harassment, and violence hampered students’ ability to get an education and took a tremendous toll on their emotional well-being. Perhaps
because so many lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth experienced abuses
on a daily basis, these youth were more likely than their heterosexual peers to use
alcohol or other drugs, engage in risky sexual behaviors, or run away from home.A
disproportionate number of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth
attempted or considered suicide—youth who report attractions to or relationships
with persons of the same sex were more than twice as likely as their heterosexual
counterparts to attempt suicide, a 1998 study found.
The abuse of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth was frequently predicated
on the belief that girls and boys must adhere strictly to rigid rules of conduct,
dress, and appearances based on their sex. That is, homophobia was linked to
stereotypical gender roles. Boys were expected to be athletic, strong, stoic, and
dominant relative to girls. Girls were expected to be attentive to boys and to accept
a subordinate status to them.Regardless of their sexual orientation or gender identity,
youth who violated these rules ran the risk of punishment at the hands of their
peers and at times by adults. Transgender youth were the most vulnerable to violence
by peers and harassment by adults.
Discussions of antigay violence in schools often focused on the youthful perpetrators
of these acts and failed to consider the responsibility of teachers and other
school officials to maintain a safe learning environment for all youth.
Despite the pervasiveness of the abuse, few school officials intervened to stop the
harassment or to hold the abusive students accountable. The most common
response to harassment, according to the students we interviewed, was no response
at all.More disturbing, some teachers and administrators actually took part in acts
of harassment.
In addition, teachers and administrators were themselves subjected to harassment,
often with few legal recourses. In every one of the seven U.S. states that
Human Rights Watch visited—California, Georgia, Kansas, Massachusetts, New
York, Texas, and Utah—teachers were reluctant to be open about their sexual orientation
at school because they feared losing their jobs.Of the states we visited,only
California and Massachusetts prohibit discrimination in private employment on
the basis of sexual orientation. Nationwide, only eleven state and the District of
Columbia offer protection against sexual orientation-based discrimination in private
employment; eighteen states and the District of Columbia prohibit such discrimination
in private employment.
Corporal punishment was permitted as a method of school discipline in at least
sixty-five countries, according to EPOCH (End Physical Punishment of Children)
Worldwide. Children were spanked, slapped, caned, strapped, or beaten by teachers
as a result of misbehavior, poor academic performance, or sometimes for no
reason at all.
Human Rights Watch investigated the use of corporal punishment in Kenyan
schools in 1999, visiting twenty schools and interviewing more than 200 children.
We found that schoolchildren were routinely subjected to caning, slapping, and
whipping by their teachers, sometimes on a daily basis. Such school “discipline”
regularly resulted in bruises, cuts, and humiliation and in some cases serious injury
or death.
Corporal punishment was used against Kenyan students for a wide range of disciplinary
infractions, some of which were serious and others extraordinarily minor.
For example, children were physically punished for coming to school late, missing
school without permission (even for illness), or having a dirty or torn school uniform.
They were also punished for unsatisfactory performance or for not being able
to afford school fees.
In a welcome development in April 2001,Kenya’s minister of education formally
banned corporal punishment in the schools as a matter of policy and proposed to
Parliament the elimination of the sections of the Education Act of 1968 that provided
for such punishment.However, the official notice did not establish penalties
for teachers who continued to carry out acts of corporal punishment or provide for
training in alternative methods of discipline.Many teachers expressed dissatisfaction
with the ban, asserting that they would be unable to maintain order in the
classroom without resorting to corporal punishment.
Girls constituted nearly two-thirds of the 130 million children out of school in
the developing world, according to 1998 estimates by the United Nations Children’s
Fund. In part, this disparity reflected the serious obstacles girls faced at school.
Gender-based violence—rape, sexual assault, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment—
was chief among these obstacles.
In 2000, Human Rights Watch investigated gender-based violence in South
Africa’s schools, Based on interviews with dozens of students, teachers, and government
officials, we found that South African schoolgirls of every race and economic
group encountered sexual violence and harassment on a daily basis. Girls
reported that they were raped in school bathrooms, in empty classrooms and hallways,
and in hostels and dormitories. Girls were also fondled, subjected to aggressive
sexual advances, and verbally degraded at school. They suffered such abuses at
the hands of both teachers and other students.
Too often, school authorities concealed sexual violence and delayed disciplinary
action against those who committed such acts. Some school officials failed to
respond adequately because they simply did not know what to do; some responded
with hostility and indifference toward girls who complained of sexual violence and
harassment. Others were afraid to assist their students. In many instances, schools
actively discouraged the victims of school-based sexual violence from alerting anyone
outside the school.
The South African government has recognized publicly the problems faced in
prosecuting cases of violence against women and girls in its criminal justice system.
Human Rights Watch’s research confirmed that coordination in such cases between
the education and justice systems was often ineffective, ill-conceived, or nonexistent.
School officials, police, and prosecutors were often confused about their
responsibility for resolving such cases, and the tendency of all actors to shift responsibility
meant that cases of violence against girls were regularly ignored.
In some countries, school officials used the threat of denial of education to
intimidate or punish students whose behavior or religious belief was seen to challenge
mainstream norms or dominant political trends. Girls were frequent targets
of such policies. For example, beginning in 1994, and increasingly after 1997,
female Muslim students of all ages in Uzbekistan faced harassment and even expulsion for wearing hijab, a religious head covering, to government schools. Turkey
prevented girls from attending most government schools if they chose to wear
hijab, and after 1997 enforced this policy increasingly energetically. Girls who continued
to wear religious attire to school could be charged with “interrupting education,”
a criminal offence punished by incarceration for up to two years. Turkish
law also allowed schools to expel girls deemed to be “unchaste,” an accusation officials
often made against girls who challenged conservative social norms. A 1995
Ministry of Education circular provided for high school students’“expulsion from
the formal education system” based on “proof of unchastity,” and in July 2001 Minister
of Health Osman Durmus decreed that “virginity tests” could be performed
on medical high school students “known to be having sex or engaging in prostitution.”
Banned since 1999, such gynecological exams involved intimidation and pain
and violated girls’ right to bodily integrity. Prior to the ban, some girls attempted
suicide rather than submit to this abusive examination.The minister of health indicated
that the implementation of such examinations was not planned, but the circular
remains in force.
Girls in Taliban-controlled areas of Afghanistan were often banned from receiving
all but elementary levels of education. Some girls were able to attend homebased
schools secretly, but these schools were forcibly closed upon discovery. A
teacher told Human Rights Watch that she and her students, girls in grades one
through seven, were beaten in June 2001 by members of the Taliban’s Religious
Police. “The Taliban have paralyzed half of society—half of society is dead in
Afghanistan because the women are prevented from working or studying,” another
woman explained to Human Rights Watch in September 2001 (see Afghanistan and
Women’s Rights).
The rapid spread of HIV/AIDS posed a particular and complex threat to children’s
realization of their right to education, especially in sub-Saharan Africa where
the epidemic has been most destructive. In December 2000 UNICEF made its first
global call for free and compulsory primary education at the African Development
Forum on leadership and HIV/AIDS.
Reaching children with appropriate information on HIV transmission and care
for those with AIDS is arguably the most effective means of combating the epidemic
over the long term, yet schools in Africa were called upon to be part of the
solution to AIDS at a time when the epidemic itself had left them weaker than ever.
In many countries in eastern and southern Africa, teachers died of AIDS at rates
much higher than those of the general population. The government of Zambia, for
example, began reporting in 1998 that teachers in government primary and secondary
schools were dying faster than they could be replaced. In many countries
rural and marginal areas were particularly affected by teacher shortages when
teachers ill with AIDS chose to be near the larger and better equipped hospitals in
urban areas. In Botswana, the country with the highest HIV prevalence rate in the
world, some government schools closed for lack of qualified staff.
Education too often became unaffordable for children in AIDS-affected families
when the illness caused the incapacitation and death of breadwinners as well as
expenditure of scarce household resources on medical services.As ill or dying parents
became unable to pay school fees, children were called upon to leave their studies and earn income or become heads of household. A study in a heavily AIDSaffected
region of Zimbabwe in 2000 found that 48 percent of primary school-age
orphans had dropped out, and none orphaned by AIDS in secondary school were
unable to continue their studies. In many countries, government statistics confirmed
that, particularly among primary school-aged children, girls in AIDSaffected
families were more likely than boys to be withdrawn from school when
parents were short of resources or needed help caring for the family.
The belief that schools themselves were a locus for HIV transmission served as
a barrier to children’s exercising their right to education. A 1999 Oxfam study in
Mozambique reported that parents cited the fear that their daughters would contract
HIV at school as the principal reason for keeping their daughters out of
school. Children themselves, including many of those interviewed by Human
Rights Watch in Kenya in 2001, described stigmatization and ostracism of AIDSaffected
children or orphans in school.
HIV/AIDS AND CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
HIV/AIDS continued to pose an acute threat to children’s human rights in general.
Unlike many virulent epidemics in history that have killed mainly young children
and the elderly, AIDS for the most part infects and kills adults aged eighteen
to forty years, in or near the most productive years of their lives. Globally, most persons
in this age group are parents. Thus, for children, the epidemic too often represents
both the loss of a parent or parents and exposure to the stigma and
discrimination that go hand in hand with AIDS throughout the world.
In heavily affected countries, for each child who had lost a parent to AIDS, one
or two school-age children were likely to be caring for an ill parent, acting as breadwinners
for the household, or otherwise unable to attend school because of AIDS.
Children who were not orphaned were also affected when orphans were brought
into their homes or when they themselves were infected with HIV. Thus, AIDSaffected
children comprised a much larger population than just orphans.
In sub-Saharan Africa—the most heavily AIDS-affected region of the world—
AIDS orphaned children at a rate unprecedented in history. The United Nations
conservatively estimated that by December 2000, about 13 million children under
age fifteen in sub-Saharan Africa had lost their mother or both parents to AIDS. In
July 2000, the United States Bureau of the Census,which keeps data on AIDS independent
of the United Nations, estimated that there were about 15 million children
under age fifteen who had lost at least one parent to AIDS in Africa and that by 2010
this number would be at least 28 million, including over 30 percent of all children
under age fifteen in five countries of eastern and southern Africa. The percentage
of the child population represented by orphans will remain very high in some
African countries for decades, according to the Census Bureau.
AIDS’s impact on children was felt far beyond Africa as the epidemic’s devastation
spread to other regions of the world. In Thailand, the estimated 300,000 deaths
from AIDS since the beginning of the epidemic have resulted in many orphans, of
which a large percentage are thought to be in the care of a grandparent or other relative. The most rapid spread of HIV/AIDS was experienced in Eastern Europe and
the former Soviet states, where widespread use of injected drugs drove the epidemic.
Children were affected both as they were drawn into drug use at a young age
and as they lost their parents. Globally, access to services such as syringe exchange
or simple materials for syringe sterilization, which would reduce the likelihood of
HIV transmission, was limited, partly due to the stigmatization of drug users and
their families. Numbers of children orphaned and otherwise made vulnerable by
AIDS also grew rapidly in the heavily affected countries of the Caribbean basin.
But African children saw the worst of it. The United Nations estimated in
December 2000 that 92 percent of children orphaned by AIDS were in sub-Saharan
Africa, where AIDS ate away at communities already wracked by poverty, war, and
corruption. In the African countries hardest hit by HIV/AIDS, the extended family
was traditionally the source of support and care for orphans and other children
needing special protection. In the face of enormous numbers of children without
parental care, the extended family became increasingly overextended, if not completely
unraveled, and unable to provide its traditional level of protection and support.
The pattern was all too commonly seen: a parent became ill, the loss of his or
her labor in the household or income generated outside the household and
increased medical expenses impoverished the family, and school fees became unaffordable.
Children were withdrawn from school and required to care for sick
household members and young children, engaged in income-generating activities,
or some combination of these.
Unskilled children who had to become the family breadwinners were particularly
vulnerable to exploitation and being forced into the worst forms of child labor,
a situation greatly exacerbated by the stigma of AIDS. The United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) reported in July 2001 that AIDS was pushing large numbers
of children into hazardous labor in Kenya, Uganda, Mozambique, Ethiopia,
Lesotho, and South Africa.An investigation of the experience of one hundred children
orphaned by AIDS in South Africa, summarized in a June 2001 report by the
Nelson Mandela Children’s Fund, found widespread hunger and other deprivation
among these children and a number of girls as young as eight being forced to engage
in prostitution to survive.Other research in Africa in 2000 and 2001 attributed the
large rise in the number of street children in countries such as Zambia and Kenya
to HIV/AIDS.
Loss of inheritance rights was another common problem of children orphaned
by AIDS, as documented by Human Rights Watch’s investigation of the problem
in Kenya in a report released in June 2001. AIDS orphaned over a million children
in Kenya by the end of 2000 and affected many more in other ways. A large percentage
of the children interviewed by Human Rights Watch experienced the
unlawful appropriation of property, usually by distant relatives, that the children
were entitled to inherit. NGO reports suggested that thousands of children in the
country have had this experience. Property-grabbing from children on a large
scale is a relatively recent phenomenon in the country, related again both to AIDS
and to the deterioration of the extended family. Human Rights Watch concluded
that the existing institutions of the judicial system in Kenya did not allow for adequate
consideration of property cases of children and recommended that the government establish a streamlined, user-friendly mechanism for civil court hearings
of these cases.
One of the most frequent AIDS-related rights violations suffered by children
worldwide was that of their right to information on HIV/AIDS, a matter of life and
death for children where the epidemic has a foothold. While most government
HIV/AIDS programs in Africa have focused on information in some form, a number
of reports released in 2001 showed young people to have poor access to appropriate
information across Africa. This problem was compounded by the effect of
AIDS on school enrollment, but even for children able to stay in school, appropriate
AIDS information—particularly in the later primary school years,where it was
arguably most needed—is absent from too many government curricula. In Kenya,
for example, resistance by Roman Catholic leaders to education on sex and reproductive
health impeded the development of an AIDS curriculum for primary and
secondary schools until 2000 and continued to handicap its full implementation
in 2001.
The U.N.General Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS in June agreed that all
countries should work toward implementation by 2005 of comprehensive national
programs to protect and support children affected by AIDS, including “providing
appropriate counseling and psychosocial support, ensuring their enrolment in
school and access to shelter . . . and protect[ing] orphans and vulnerable children
from all forms of abuse, violence, exploitation, discrimination, trafficking and loss
of inheritance.”The emergency already faced by children affected by AIDS urgently
demanded a comprehensive response.
CHILD SOLDIERS
Support continued to grow for an international treaty prohibiting the use of
children in armed conflict. The optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, adopted by the U.N.General Assembly in May 2000, established eighteen
as the minimum age for direct participation in armed conflict, for forced or
compulsory recruitment, and for any recruitment or use by nongovernmental
armed groups. From November 2000 to mid-November 2001 the number of
nations that signed the protocol grew from seventy to eighty-seven, and the number
of ratifications increased from three (Canada, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka) to
ten, with the addition of Andorra,Morocco, Panama, Iceland, Vietnam, Holy See,
the Democratic Republic of Congo and New Zealand.Having reached the ten ratifications
needed, the protocol will enter into force on February 12, 2002.
Demobilizations of child soldiers took place in several countries. In late February,
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) coordinated the demobilization
of over 2,500 children between the ages of eight and eighteen from the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) in Southern Sudan, airlifting them to transition
camps. By September 2001 the last of the group had been reunited with their families.
UNICEF indicated that the process of demobilization would continue in
2002 until all SPLA child soldiers—an estimated 10,000 before the February initiative—
were demobilized. From May through November over 2,903 children,
including 1,506 from the rebel Revolutionary United Front and 1,303 from government-allied militias were released and/or disarmed in Sierra Leone. In mid-
May, the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) decreed the
demobilization of child soldiers serving in its army who, according to conservative
estimates, numbered in the thousands. In June, President Joseph Kabila
announced that the DRC would no longer recruit child soldiers, and ordered an
education campaign for military commanders to facilitate the demobilization of
children. By July, teams of government and civil society workers were touring military
barracks to identify child soldiers and prepare for family reunification and
their reintegration into society.
However, the recruitment and use of children remained a global problem. The
Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers released its first global survey in June,
finding that more than half a million children were subject to recruitment into
national armed forces, paramilitaries, or non-state armed groups in a total of
eighty-seven countries, and at least 300,000 of these children were actively participating
in armed conflicts in forty-one countries.
In the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, rebel groupings backed by the
governments of Uganda and Rwanda coerced and forced children to join their
ranks. Instructors from the two occupying armies trained the recruits for their
respective local surrogates, and in certain cases Congolese children were taken to
Uganda and Rwanda for further training. A December 2000 U.N. report estimated
that between 15 and 30 percent of all newly recruited combatants in the DRC were
children under eighteen years of age, and a substantial number were under age
twelve. The Rwandan-backed Congolese Rally for Democracy-Goma (Rassemblement
Congolais pour la Démocratie-Goma, RCD-Goma) conducted an intensive
recruitment drive in late 2000 and abducted children from schools, roadsides, markets,
and their homes. In some communities, schools were closed and children and
young men began sleeping outdoors, away from their homes, to avoid recruitment.
A Rutshuru resident reported that RCD-Goma and Rwandan Patriotic Army
(RPA) soldiers abducted boys and girls from his community in November 2000,
targeting children and youth between the ages of thirteen and twenty. In other
cases, Human Rights Watch received reports of children aged twelve and even
younger being recruited and sent to camps for military training.
International criticism prompted the RCD-Goma to pledge in early April 2001
to end the recruitment of child soldiers and demobilize those in their ranks.But just
a few days later at a ceremony marking the end of a training program at the
Mushaki military camp, nearly 1800 of the 3000 graduates were observed to be children
aged twelve to seventeen. By mid-year, it became apparent that the RCD
recruitment plan had continued unabated in rural areas.
The opposition Army for the Liberation of Rwanda (Armeé pour la Libération
du Rwanda, ALIR) abducted children as young as ten in the eastern Democratic
Republic of Congo. Children recruited by ALIR were given weapons training and
used to fetch water, do other domestic chores, and transport supplies. Children
were also used by ALIR to shout or bang on pots to create diversions during battle.
Some older children, aged sixteen and seventeen, were used to participate directly
in combat.At least one fifteen-year-old also served in the ranks of the Local Defense
Force, a Rwandan auxiliary force, which engaged in combat against ALIR.
At least several dozen ALIR children were killed in combat between May and September; the actual number may have been far higher. In early August, 280 children
from ALIR were in Rwandan government custody after having been captured
or surrendered. Over fifty of these children were Congolese and were handed over
to RCD rebel authorities in eastern Congo, while the Rwandan children were sent
to a rehabilitation center south of Kigali.
In Burundi, military and civilian authorities recruited hundreds of children as
paramilitaries known as “Guardians of the Peace.” One source estimated that
between 750 and 900 children aged seven to twelve years of age were recruited and
trained in one year in Burundi.Recent recruitment spared very young children, but
recruitment of those fourteen and older continued. Recruits were subjected to
harsh conditions, and frequently beaten by soldiers. In one training program, three
young recruits—aged twelve, fifteen, and seventeen years—died as a result of beatings
suffered during their training. Many others died in combat after being sent
into battle ahead of regular soldiers.
A Burundian rebel group, the Forces for the Defense of Democracy (Forces pour
la Défense de la Démocratie, FDD), abducted thirty students in grades four to six
from Kirambi primary school in the eastern province of Ruyigi on November 6,
2001.Three days later, other FDD rebels abducted more than one hundred students
from Musema high school in Kayanza province and burned the school to the
ground.The rebels forced the students to transport good stolen from nearby homes
and shops and beat those who faltered en route.Rebels reportedly told the students
that they would turn them into soldiers to help in their war against the government,
now in its eighth year.As of November 15, the FDD had released the students from
Musema high school, but twenty-three Kirambi primary school boys between the
ages of twelve and sixteen were still in the hands of the rebel group.
In Liberia children fleeing the fighting in the north of the country were forcibly
recruited and later trained by government forces to help fight insurgents. Credible
sources reported to Human Rights Watch that from January through April 2001
scores of children as young as nine were taken off of buses as they fled the fighting,
at military checkpoints, or from camps for the internally displaced. They were
reportedly later trained for military service by government forces.Other aid agencies
reported that Liberian insurgents from the Liberians United for Reconciliation
and Democracy (LURD), based in Guinea, abducted numerous children during
raids on villages in northern Liberia.
In Colombia, the government estimated that up to 10,000 members of the
armed groups operating there, including guerrillas and army-backed paramilitaries,
were under eighteen. In late 2000, independent observers reported to
Human Rights Watch that dozens of children were among the supposed guerrillas
registered as killed or captured after an encounter between government troops and
the FARC-EP (Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo,
FARC-EP). The Colombian Army announced that thirty-two of those captured
were aged seventeen or under, including several younger than fourteen, and a third
were females. Of those killed, twenty were said by the army to be children.
Colombian paramilitaries linked to the army also continued to recruit and use
children. In July, paramilitaries reportedly seized a youth detention center and
abducted ten children in an apparent recruitment drive. In July, UNICEF criticized the rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri
Lanka for recruiting and using child soldiers as young as age twelve. The United
Nations reported increased recruitment activity by the Tigers in or near schools,
despite assurances given in 1998 to the special representative to the U.N. secretarygeneral
on children and armed conflict, Olara Otunnu, to end the recruitment of
children under the age of seventeen.
CHILDREN IN THE JUSTICE SYSTEM
The treatment of children in the justice system continued to raise concerns in
2001.Abuses often began with the first contact with law enforcement officials, during
which children were at risk of ill-treatment, torture, and even death. Asma
Jahangir, the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, highlighted
an extreme example in September, charging that up to 800 children and
young adults had been murdered in Honduras since 1998, many at the hands of
police.
In June, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ordered Guatemala to pay
nearly U.S. $500,000 in a case brought on behalf of five street children killed by
police. The court also directed Guatemala to name a youth educational center for
the children, establish a memorial to them, and provide other nonmonetary reparations.
The case was the first in which the Inter-American Court had ordered reparations,
including monetary damages, in a case involving violations of children’s
rights.
Once arrested and charged, children were often held in poor conditions of confinement,
sometimes together with adults. A former child soldier under sentence of
death died on September 26 after contracting tuberculosis in Kinshasa’s central
prison, a local group reported. In Paraguay,Amnesty International and Defence for
Children International-Paraguay Section reported that children were warehoused
in overcrowded prisons for adults, where they were subjected to constant ill-treatment
and daily isolation. Palestinian children held in Israel’s Telmond Prison
reported that they were subjected to attacks by adult inmates and severe beatings by
guards. Yemen reported to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 1999 that
its reformatories and penal institutions housing children lacked educational and
social services, provided poor quality and insufficient food, and frequently used
corporal punishment and torture. In Saudi Arabia, the 1977 Detention and Imprisonment
Regulations permitted flogging and other corporal punishment as disciplinary
measures for children in detention.
Because of the low numbers of girls typically in detention, they were at particular
risk of being housed with adults. For example, Yemen, which lacked separate
facilities for girls awaiting trial or after sentencing, housed girls with adult prisoners
in penal facilities. Saudi Arabia’s 1975 Statutes of the Welfare Institutions for
Young Women also allowed girls to be held with adult detainees.
Sentencing practices also raised serious human rights concerns. Countries
around the world continued to detain children for “status offenses,” acts that would
not be crimes if committed by an adult. In Yemen, for example, the vast majority of children in custodial institutions were “potential delinquents,” a category that
included children found begging, orphans, and children whose fathers were absent
or whose parents were divorced or separated, according to its 1999 report to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child.
In Egypt, a boy between the ages of fifteen and seventeen was sentenced to three
years of imprisonment for “indecency and debauchery” by a juvenile court in September.
One of at least fifty-five men arrested during the year in a crackdown
against homosexuality, the boy was convicted on the basis of a confession that he
said had been extracted under torture. Police made most of the arrests in a May 11
raid on a Cairo discotheque popular with gay men.Egypt does not criminalize consensual
sexual relations between members of the same sex; the adult men,who also
claimed that they were subject to beatings and other abuses while detained, were
charged with “obscene behavior” and “contempt of religion” (see Egypt chapter).
Many countries continued to impose corporal punishment on children as part
of their sentence. The Committee on the Rights of the Child found that in Saudi
Arabia, judicial authorities regularly sentenced people who were children at the
time of their offenses to flogging, stoning, and amputation. InNigeria’s Kebbi State,
a fifteen-year-old boy was reportedly sentenced to the amputation of one of his
hands after he was convicted of stealing 32,000 Naira (approximately U.S. $285). It
was not known if the sentence had been carried out at the time of writing.
Following a trend that began in the early 1990s, the United States continued to
try children as adults for a large number of offenses that had traditionally been handled
in the juvenile justice system.
The United States was also virtually alone in imposing sentences of death on
those who were children at the time of the crimes for which they were convicted.
On October 22, 2001, the state executed Gerald Lee Mitchell,who became the eighteenth
juvenile offender executed in the U.S. and the tenth in Texas since 1976.
Eighty-three juvenile offenders were on death rows in fifteen U.S. states as of October
1.With twenty-nine juvenile offenders on its death row, Texas accounted for
over one-third of the national total. In all, twenty-three U.S. states continued to
allow the death penalty to be imposed for crimes committed by those below the age
of eighteen.
Two juvenile offenders received last-minute stays of execution after their attorneys
presented new evidence or raised constitutional issues on appeal. On August
15,Napoleon Beazley, convicted in Texas for a murder he committed at age seventeen,
came within hours of execution when the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals
issued a stay to enable it to consider whether his first appellate attorney provided
ineffective assistance. Missouri death row inmate Antonio Richardson received a
stay from the U.S. Supreme Court in March. Sixteen at the time of his crime,
Richardson may be mentally retarded; his case was on hold while the Supreme
Court resolved another case that questioned the constitutionality of imposing the
death sentence on persons with mental retardation.
In Pakistan, where a July 2000 ordinance raised the minimum age for capital
punishment to eighteen, forty-nine people remained on death row for crimes they
committed as children, the Dawn reported in July 2001.
The Democratic Republic of Congo and Iran had mixed records on capital punishment during the year. Following a meeting with Human Rights Watch in May
2001, the Democratic Republic of Congo agreed to spare the lives of four child soldiers.
The four were arrested and sentenced to death by the Court ofMilitary Order
when they were between fourteen and sixteen years of age. President Joseph Kabila
subsequently commuted the sentences of these children, along with that of a fifth
former child soldier, to five years’ imprisonment. At least one additional former
child soldier remained under sentence of death, according to the World Organization
Against Torture (Organisation mondiale contre la torture, OMCT). In Iran,
the death sentence of a thirteen-year-old boy was commuted to life imprisonment,
Amnesty International reported; the reduced sentence may still violate international
standards, which prohibited the imposition of capital punishment or life
imprisonment without possibility of release for offenses committed by persons
below the age of eighteen.
REFUGEE AND MIGRANT CHILDREN
Refugee and migrant children, among the world’s most vulnerable populations,
were at particular risk of abuse when they were separated from their parents and
other caregivers.
In July, local authorities in the Spanish autonomous enclaves of Ceuta and
Melilla stepped up summary expulsions of unaccompanied Moroccan children living
there. The children, including some as young as eleven, were reportedly beaten
and threatened by both Spanish and Moroccan police and did not receive individualized
review of their cases before Spanish authorities dumped them on the
Moroccan side of the border.
In Greece, unaccompanied children were largely excluded from participation in
the June 5 to August 2 program that gave legal status to undocumented immigrants
who could prove they had arrived in Greece before June 2, 2000. Under the terms
of the program, undocumented migrants who could not provide extensive documentation
of their presence—including proof of identity,wage receipts,utility payment
receipts, and other documents unaccompanied children could not be
expected to have—were subject to forced deportation if they did not leave the
country voluntarily.
In the United States, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) continued
to detain a substantial proportion of the unaccompanied children in its custody
in jail-like settings, sometimes holding them in cells with juvenile offenders.
The agency was criticized for denying full access to independent monitors, including
the Women’s Commission for Refugee Women and Children and the lawyers
who represented detained children in a successful class-action lawsuit challenging
the conditions of confinement for youth in INS custody. In a positive development,
Senator Dianne Feinstein proposed legislation that would correct these and other
abusive conditions for unaccompanied children in the United States.
CHILD LABOR
With the addition of Estonia at the end of September, one hundred countries
had ratified the International Labor Organization’s Convention concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labor (ILO Convention 182),which prohibits debt bondage, forced or compulsory
labor (including forced recruitment into military service), prostitution and the
production of pornography, and other work likely to “harm the health, safety or
morals of children.”Nevertheless, far too many children around the world worked
under conditions that were hazardous to their health and safety. In Ecuador, a 2001
Human Rights Watch investigation found that children were routinely employed in
the banana industry, where they were exposed to pesticides and required to perform
hazardous labor. In addition, two girls interviewed by Human Rights Watch
reported that they were often subjected to sexual harassment by their supervisors.
In a tragic development, Carlos Alberto Santos de Oliveira, president of the
Sergipe Citrus Fruit Workers’Union and known for his advocacy in opposition to
child labor, was killed on September 23 by two gunmen who shot him eight times
at point-blank range in the Brazilian town of Pedrinhas, in Sergipe state.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Eighty heads of state and over 1,000 nongovernmental organizations were
expected to attend a U.N. General Assembly Special Session for Children in New
York from September 19-21.The session was intended to evaluate progress made in
meeting the goals of the 1990 World Summit on Children and to adopt a declaration
and plan of action for the future. The draft plan of action identified four priority
areas: health, education, HIV/AIDS, and protection from violence, abuse,
neglect, and exploitation. Following the September 11 attacks on New York and
Washington, the session was postponed until 2002.
Hundreds of nongovernmental organizations from around the world participated
in two preparatory committee sessions held during the year. A Child Rights
Caucus led by Human Rights Watch and Save the Children won the support of governments
for the inclusion of key issues in the draft plan of action, notably concerning
protection for children from violence, abuse and exploitation.
The draft declaration and plan of action did not break significant new ground,
however, as many governments were unwilling to move beyond previously agreed
commitments to children.The United States, one of only two states that have failed
to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child, opposed a rights-oriented plan
of action and sought to minimize references to the convention. Joined by the Holy
See and a grouping of primarily Islamic countries, the United States also sought to
roll back international agreements regarding the access of adolescents to sexual and
reproductive health care, information, and services. Issues related to child labor,
armed conflict, and mobilization of resources were also contentious.
The Committee on the Rights of the Child continued a focus on violence against children by holding a second general day of discussion on the topic, focused on violence
against children in the home and in schools. A similar discussion day had
been held in 2001 on violence against children in state-run institutions and in the
context of “law and public order.”Among its final recommendations, the committee
urged the General Assembly to initiate an in-depth study of violence against
children, comparable to the ground-breaking U.N. study led by Graça Machel on
the impact of armed conflict on children. In late November, the U.N.’s Third Committee
passed a resolution requesting the secretary-general to “conduct an in-depth
study on the issue of violence against children . . . and to put forward recommendations,
for consideration by member states, for appropriate action, including
effective remedies and preventive and rehabilitation measures.”
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports
To Protect the People: The Government-Sponsored “Self-Defense” Program in
Burundi, 12/01.
Israel: Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s
Schools, 12/01
Humanity Denied: Systematic Violations ofWomen’s Rights in Afghanistan, 10/01
Caste Discrimination: A Global Concern, 9/01
Easy Targets: Violence Against Children Worldwide, 9/01
Kenya: In the Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Children’s Rights in Kenya, 6/01
Democratic Republic of Congo: Reluctant Recruits: Children and Adults Forcibly
Recruited for Military Service in North Kivu, 5/01
United States: Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01.
Israel, the Occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and the Palestinian Authority Territories:
Center of the Storm: A Case Study of Human Rights Abuses in Hebron
District, 4/01
South Africa: Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African
Schools, 3/01
Egypt: Underage and Underprotected: Child Labor in Egypt’s Cotton Fields, 1/01
WOMEN’S HUMAN RIGHTS
One of the greatest challenges of governments in 2001 was to make respect
for women’s rights a more permanent and central part of the international
human rights agenda.Women’s rights activists made notable progress on several
fronts—leading governments to condemn sexual violence against women in armed
conflict, holding governments accountable for failing to protect women from
domestic violence, and forcing governments to acknowledge and treat trafficking
as a human rights crisis.However, governments’ reluctance to promote respect for
women’s rights systematically and thoroughly undercut these gains every day.
Many governments’ commitment to women’s human rights remained at best tenuous
and at worst nonexistent. The international women’s rights community
moved forward, pressing to protect women’s bodily integrity and right to sexual
autonomy, to examine the ways that race or ethnicity and gender intersect to deny
women human rights, and to protect women from gender-specific violations of the
laws of war.
The September 11 attacks on the U.S. triggered an international debate about
the motivation of the attackers and a just response. The subsequent U.S.-led military
action against the Taliban in Afghanistan focused international attention on
the plight of Afghans generally, and in particular on Afghan women. Governments
in the U.S.-led coalition and those outside it argued that the Taliban’s behavior
toward women—including banning women from most types of work, forcing
women to wear a head-to-toe enveloping garment, and banning women from education
beyond primary school—was unparalleled in severity and constituted a systematic
attack on women’s human rights and dignity. Yet, while the international
community recoiled at these abuses, the women’s human rights record of other
governments with similar practices, such as Saudi Arabia, received minimal criticism.
Critics of the Taliban virtually ignored Saudi Arabia, where women faced systematic
discrimination in all aspects of their lives: they were denied equality of
opportunity in access to work, forced to comply with a restrictive dress code, and
segregated in public life. Religious police punished infractions of the dress code
with public beatings. Kuwait’s record on women’s rights was also dismal: the
Kuwaiti government denied women the right to vote, segregated them, and
required them to veil in public.
The international community’s lack of complaint about the women’s human
rights records in these countries underscored a reality that women’s rights activists
grappled with everywhere: women’s rights must still be negotiated, and violations
of women’s rights often generate only fleeting interest.Many governments, through overt discrimination, attacked women’s rights in ways that essentially stripped
women of their legal personhood. For example, the governments of Nigeria,Kenya,
Zambia, and other African states denied women equal inheritance and property
rights. The Thai government denied women who married non-nationals the right
to buy and own property in their own names. Egypt discriminated against women
who married non-nationals by refusing to allow them to transfer their nationality
to their children. Syria conditioned a woman’s choice in marriage on the consent of
a male family member. Although having no such restriction for men, Venezuela
prevented women from marrying until ten months after a divorce or annulment.
Governments that condemned some types of violence and discrimination
against women often failed to prosecute others. Thus, Jordan and Pakistan condemned
domestic violence but still offered reduced sentences to males who committed
“honor” crimes against female family members. South Africa condemned
sexual violence broadly, but failed to take adequate steps to protect girls in school
from widespread sexual violence at the hands of teachers and students.Guatemala
passed sophisticated domestic violence legislation but was content to let stand discriminatory
labor law provisions that denied tens of thousands of female domestic
workers equality under the labor code.Nigeria deplored the treatment of trafficked
Nigerians abroad, but did little at home to stop domestic trafficking of Nigerians.
The international women’s human rights movement functioned as the antidote
to government complacency and lack of commitment. In every arena, women’s
rights activists challenged governments’ cursory commitment to women’s human
rights. Toward the end of 2000, in part as a result of an ongoing campaign by
women’s rights and peace activists to highlight the particular insecurity of women
in times of armed conflict, both the U.N. Security Council and the European Parliament
adopted resolutions on women and peace- building, that explicitly called
on governments to ensure that women participate both in peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction planning.Women’s rights activists in Peru caused the
government to modify its domestic violence law in January 2001 so that conciliation
sessions between abusers and victims were no longer mandatory.At the United
Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR), women’s rights activists successfully worked to
have the final document reflect how sex and race intersected to render women vulnerable
to sexual violence in armed conflict and to trafficking, and reinforced
women’s right to transfer their nationality,on an equal basis with men, to their children.
In mid-October 2001, activists rallied to press the Ethiopian government to
lift a ban on the only women’s rights organization advocating for women’s rights in
Ethiopia.
As governments responded to the September 11 attacks in the U.S., there was
danger that a pattern of political expediency in governments’ concern for women’s
rights would continue.
The following section describes key developments in women’s human rights
spanning a dozen countries in 2001. Our monitoring showed that violence and discrimination
remained pervasive components of many women’s lives. Governments
both actively violated women’s human rights and failed to prevent abuses by
private actors.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
As states and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) throughout the world
prepared for the WCAR, women’s human rights activists explored the intersection
between race, ethnicity, or religion and gender and the impact of this intersection
on women’s ability to enjoy human rights and fundamental freedoms. As some of
the cases below illustrate,women often experienced violations of their rights based
on their race or nationality as well as on their sex, gender, or sexual orientation.
Women experienced racism and sexism not as separate events but as violations that
were mutually reinforcing. For example, soldiers and noncombatants subjected
women to sexual violence in armed conflict not just because they were women but
also because they were women of a particular race, nationality, ethnicity, or religion.
Indeed, armed factions often portrayed acts of sexual violence against women
in conflict zones as attacks on the entire community, a community typically identified
by a shared race, religion or ethnicity. Likewise, women were vulnerable to
trafficking into forced labor, not just because they were poor and uneducated, but
also because in many countries their poverty and illiteracy was a function of discrimination
against women of a particular race, ethnicity, or religion. But the
impact of this convergence of racism and sexism did not end with women experiencing
trafficking-related human rights violations; it also affected how government
officials, such as police and prosecutors, in both sending and receiving countries
perceived them. Governments treated trafficked women as illegal immigrants at
best, criminals at worst. As a result, governments denied many trafficked women
any meaningful access to justice or financial redress.
Women experienced widespread violations of labor rights because of their race
and gender. In some cases, states created such varied categories of workers that
some women were unable to prove discrimination compared to women of different
races. They were also unable to prove discrimination compared to men of the
same race. For example, in the U.S. manufacturing sector, white women may be
employed in the front offices as secretaries and receptionists while black men may
be employed in the factory, making it impossible for black women to prove discrimination
because the employer hires women and hires blacks. But states did not
just violate women’s rights in the public sphere; they also persisted in enforcing laws
and condoning practices that discriminated against women in the private sphere.
Governments defended these discriminatory laws and practices as essential to
maintaining the integrity of religion and culture. Numerous governments, as in
Morocco and Peru, continued to uphold laws that gave women inferior legal status
within the family and that violated women’s rights to change or retain their nationality.
Some countries, such as Syria and Malaysia, violated women’s right to enter
into marriage with their free and full consent as well as their right to dissolve a marriage
on an equal basis with men.The motivation behind these discriminatory laws
appeared to be to keep women from marrying men of a different nationality, ethnicity,
or religion.
WOMEN’S STATUS IN THE FAMILY
Laws and practices governing women’s personal status—their legal capacity and
role in the family—continued to deny women rights.While the type of discrimination
varied from region to region, women throughout the world found that their
relationship to a male relative or husband determined their rights.
Sub-Saharan African countries continued to use statutory and customary law to
discriminate against women with regard to property ownership and inheritance.
The explosive increase in numbers of young widows with children as a result of the
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
(HIV/AIDS) pandemic and wars in the region starkly exposed the critical link
between denial of women’s rights and extreme poverty.Zambia provided an example
of a country devastated by HIV/AIDS and extreme poverty where the majority
of women continued to live under customary law that denied them the right to
inherit property from deceased male relatives. Although Zambia ratified the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW) in the mid-1980s, and its constitution outlawed sex discrimination, the
constitution itself gave primacy to customary law in matters of inheritance. War
widows in Sierra Leone faced similar prohibitions in customary law. In Nigeria,
Ghana, Kenya,Uganda, and Zimbabwe, statutory law reforms over the past twenty
years gave women equal rights to inheritance but judges in these countries continued
to apply customary law.
Personal status laws in Syria and Morocco,among other countries, continued to
curtail women’s rights entering into marriage, during marriage, and at the dissolution
of marriage. In Syria, the minimum age for marriage was eighteen for boys and
seventeen for girls. If a woman over the age of seventeen married without the consent
of a male guardian, the guardian could demand the annulment of the marriage
if the husband was not of the same social standing as the wife, and as long as the
wife was not pregnant. Further, a Muslim Syrian woman could not marry a non-
Muslim, while a Muslim man had absolute freedom to choose a spouse. Syrian law
also assigned different rights and responsibilities for women and men during marriage.
A wife’s “disobedience” could lead to forfeiture of her husband’s responsibility
to provide support. A man could legally have up to four wives simultaneously,
while a woman could have only one husband.Women did not have the same rights
as men to end marriage: while the personal status law provided for the unilateral
and unconditional right of a husband to effect divorce by repudiation (the repetition,
before the wife and a witness, of “I divorce you” three times), a woman seeking
divorce was required to go to court and prove that her husband had neglected
his marital duties.
Women’s rights activists in Morocco continued their long standing campaign to
eliminate discriminatory provisions in the personal status code under which
Moroccan women continued to be discriminated against with respect to legal
standing, marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance. It appeared that, as was
the case with the reform of the personal status code in 1993, the king would be the
final arbiter on women’s rights.On March 5, 2001, the King Mohammed VI formed a royal commission comprising religious scholars, judges, sociologists, and doctors
to consider amending the code. In a speech on April 27, 2001, he reiterated his commitment
to improving the status of Moroccan women and eliminating discrimination
against them according to the Islamic sharia and the values of justice and
equality. An advisory committee appointed by Prime Minister El-Yousoufi had
failed to act on the issue during 2000.
Women’s rights activists welcomed a long-overdue development in Brazil: in
August 2001, the Brazilian Congress adopted a law that, after twenty-six years of
protest and debate, removed the most discriminatory provisions of the 1916 civil
code.Most significant, the new code gave both women and men equal authority in
the family, abolishing paternal power, the legal concept that men had total control
over decision-making in the family. Elsewhere in Latin America, however, laws governing
women’s roles in the family reflected entrenched beliefs within society that
women are subordinate to men. The Chilean civil code continued to grant husbands
control over household decisions and their wives’property. In countries such
as Argentina, Mexico, and Colombia, the civil codes established lower marriage
ages for girls (sixteen, fourteen, and twelve, respectively) than for boys, while
women in Venezuela could not remarry until ten months after divorce or annulment,
unless they proved they were not pregnant.
A serious consequence of limitations on women’s equality in their private lives,
such as whom to marry, was loss of citizenship for themselves and/or their children.
Nationality laws in such disparate countries as Egypt, Sri Lanka, and Bangladesh
denied women the right to transfer citizenship to their children. These laws,
designed in part to curtail immigration and thus maintain the purity, loyalty, and
cohesion of the nation, demonstrated the way in which discrimination on the bases
of national origin and gender intersected to further entrench women’s subordinate
status in the family and in society.Despite years of protest and lawsuits by women’s
human rights groups, in May 2001 the State Consultative Council of Egypt dismissed
the recent parliamentary plea to amend the 1975 Nationality Law. Under
this law,which contradicted the constitution, an Egyptian man could automatically
transfer his nationality to his children while an Egyptian woman could do so only
under limited circumstances: when the child was born in Egypt to a stateless father
or to a father of unknown nationality, or when the child’s relationship to his or her
father could not be legally established. The Egyptian Center for Women’s Rights
estimated that thousands of women married to foreigners and as many as one million
children continued to suffer discrimination under this law.
LABOR RIGHTS
Governments continued to fail to protect women’s labor rights through enacting
and enforcing laws outlawing discrimination. In many countries,women faced
severe discrimination in employment practices and violence in the workplace,
including sexual harassment, with little or no protection.Afghanistan,Guatemala,
and South Africa, among many countries, provided examples involving work and
working conditions for women in factories, homes, and on farms.
In Taliban-controlled Afghanistan, women were not permitted to work outside
the home, unless they were healthcare professionals, or widows. The latter, estimated
to number 40,000 in Kabul alone, were mostly unable to obtain paid
employment and were reduced to begging to support their families and faced constant
harassment and violence at the hands of the religious police.
In Guatemala, where domestic workers number tens of thousands and domestic
labor is one of the principal forms of employment for poor, especially indigenous
women, the adoption of specific legislation to protect domestic workers
remained a low priority for the government. Under threat of losing its beneficiary
status under the U.S.Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) trade act,Guatemala
reformed its labor code with respect to freedom of association during 2001, to
bring it more in line with International Labor Organization conventions.However,
the government missed an opportunity to remedy the unequal treatment of
domestic workers who, under the current labor code, suffered discrimination as a
group: the code denied domestic workers the right to the eight-hour workday and
the minimum wage, limited their right to national holidays and rest, and based
access to healthcare on employer largesse.The author of the Guatemalan labor code
candidly acknowledged to Human Rights Watch that gender stereotypes and perceptions
about the role of domestic workers in the family, as well as racist attitudes
toward indigenous women, influenced the low priority attached to their rights
when drafting Guatemala’s labor legislation. In its export-processing sector
(maquiladoras, assembly plants for export goods), Guatemala also systematically
denied women workers the enjoyment of full labor rights, continuing to discriminate
against women on the grounds of reproductive status. Some factories required
job seekers to state whether they were pregnant, and denied full benefits to employees
who became pregnant post-hire.Though aware of the problem,the government
took no significant action to combating such sex discrimination in the maquiladora
sector.
In the United States, live-in domestic workers remained explicitly excluded from
protection under the National Labor Relations Act, the Occupational Safety and
Health Act, and the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.The exclusion
of domestic workers from basic U.S. labor rights and protections was based on
gender stereotypes and perceptions about the role of domestic workers in the family,
and had a disproportionate impact on women, thus constituting disparate
impact sex discrimination.
Around the world,women perform farm work. In post-apartheid South Africa,
the government made efforts to overcome the legacy of apartheid in commercial
farming areas: new laws provided full labor rights for farmworkers, including
women. Yet, in practice, racist and sexist attitudes remained pervasive on farms:
women farmworkers were the lowest paid, had the fewest benefits, were often
forced to become squatters, and were targets of harassment and violence by farmers
and farmworkers alike. In 2001, Human Rights Watch found that the situation
of women on South African farms was precarious: personal relationships were
divided on racial and patriarchal lines, with women subjected to discrimination,
violence, and abuse.Women farmworkers were more likely to be seasonal or temporary
workers than men, and usually did more menial, less remunerative work, such as planting or harvesting. Employers viewed women’s labor as a supplement
to men’s labor even in situations in which women did the same types of jobs and
worked as long hours as men.Women’s dependence on men for access to housing
rendered them vulnerable to abuse within the workplace and home, and employers
denied many women farmworkers statutory maternity benefits.
TRAFFICKING
Corrupt officials, complicit state authorities, xenophobia, and a profound lack
of political will coalesced to guarantee impunity for traffickers and to exacerbate
the suffering of their victims worldwide. Traffickers moved their human victims
around the globe, held them in debt bondage, seized their passports, and threatened
them or their families with harm if they resisted. Ever-tightening border controls
and the lack of legal opportunities to migrate often forced women to turn to
traffickers, increasing their vulnerability to abuse. Sold as chattel and forced to
work for little or no pay, trafficked persons feared local law enforcement authorities,
perceiving, in many cases correctly, that an appeal to police would end in prosecution
and deportation, rather than protection. Trafficking victims from ethnic
minority communities faced an even more daunting situation, including at its
worst xenophobic violence, racism, and, in the case of trafficked hilltribe women
and girls in Thailand, statelessness. States continued to fail to combat trafficking.
The token prosecutions of traffickers merely proved the rule.
One positive development brightened the picture slightly in 2001. The opening
for signature of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, marked a small step forward in
the battle against trafficking. By late November, one hundred countries had signed
the protocol, committing their governments to punish traffickers and protect the
human rights of trafficking victims,but only three had ratified it (forty ratifications
are needed for it to come into force).
Lackluster anti-trafficking efforts in Nigeria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia,
Japan, and Israel illustrated the disheartening trends, however. Even countries
that ratified the protocol, such as Nigeria, failed to adhere to those commitments.
Women’s organizations protested that Nigeria fell far short in the effective investigation
and prosecution of individuals engaged in trafficking of women and children.
The 2001 U.S. State Department report on trafficking in persons cited
widespread corruption among law enforcement officials as a major stumbling
block to combating trafficking in Nigeria. Trafficking victims alleged that some
Nigerian immigration officials colluded with traffickers, assisting them in forging
documents and bringing persons across borders, and accused others of actively
engaging in trafficking.Nigerian citizens, mostly women and children, facing stark
conditions and oppressive poverty, chose to migrate but found themselves preyed
upon by traffickers who transported them to Lagos and other cities and forced
them into domestic servitude or prostitution. Traffickers seized all wages to pay off
the trafficking victims’ debt. In addition to trafficking within Nigeria, traffickers also sent Nigerian citizens to other West African countries to work on farm plantations
or as domestic workers.
Other signatories to the protocol showed little progress in combating trafficking
in women. Bosnia and Herzegovina failed signally to confront endemic corruption
and state complicity in trafficking. Traffickers and employers held women trafficked
from Ukraine,Moldova, and Romania in debt bondage in brothels throughout
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Trafficked women reported to the United Nations
(U.N.) that their employers sometimes forced them to provide free sexual services
to local police officers. In a handful of cases, Bosnian police actively participated in
trafficking, either as part owners or employees of the clubs, or by procuring false
documents for traffickers. Trafficking victims, terrified of retaliation by traffickers,
feared reporting the abuse to law enforcement authorities. Eager to fan that fear,
employers routinely claimed that they counted police officers among their friends.
The U.N. also stood accused of complicity in trafficking when allegations
emerged that International Police Task Force (IPTF) officers—United Nations
police charged with monitoring local Bosnian police—had gone to brothels as
clients and, in a small number of cases, purchased women for personal use. In
December 2000, the U.N. repatriated an American IPTF officer after learning that
he had purchased a Moldovan woman from a Sarajevo brothel for 6,000
Deutschmarks (U.S. $2,777). In June 2001, Jacques Klein, special representative of
the U.N. secretary-general for the United Nations mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
defended the anti-trafficking measures implemented by the mission,
declaring that the U.N. mission had a zero-tolerance policy for sexual or other serious
misconduct.
The justice system within Bosnia and Herzegovina rarely delivered convictions
of traffickers in the cases brought to court.U.N. officials and NGO leaders blamed
inadequate laws and a lack of political will on the part of the Bosnian government
for the failure to gain convictions of traffickers.Most often, trafficking victims, not
traffickers, faced prosecution, detention, and fines for illegal entry into the state,
document fraud, and failure to procure a work permit—all administrative violations
that directly arose from their status as trafficking victims. In March 1999, the
U.N. stepped in to facilitate voluntary repatriation of trafficking victims through
an International Organization for Migration (IOM) program, but some trafficked
women fell through the cracks of the screening process, serving thirty-day sentences
in Bosnian prisons before facing deportation.By October 2001, the IOM had
completed over three hundred voluntary repatriations of victims ranging in age
from thirteen to thirty-six years old.
Government authorities in Colombia, another signatory to the protocol, estimated
that between two and ten women were trafficked from Colombia each day,
the vast majority of them to Europe. In July 2001, new anti-trafficking legislation
went into effect; however, the legislation only treated trafficking victims as those
who had been trafficked outside of Colombia for forced prostitution, failing to protect
persons trafficked into other forms of forced labor. In addition, NGOs
lamented that the law established prison sentences of just four to six years for traffickers.
In mid-2001, the Colombian Congress began debating an anti-trafficking
bill that would enhance the definition of trafficking, the range of victims protected, and the severity of the penalties for the crime. Experts warned that passage of the
bill could take up to a year and a half. Colombia also failed to implement a witness
protection system to ensure the safety of victims who agreed to cooperate in the
prosecution of traffickers.
In Japan,women trafficked into the sex industry accounted for a significant proportion
of the estimated 260,000 undocumented migrants. Yet, the government, a
non-signatory to the protocol, took no concrete steps to prevent trafficking and
continued to treat trafficked women as illegal immigrants, detaining them and failing
to provide them human rights protections. The minority of trafficked women
who managed to escape from their employers with the help of NGOs or their
embassies found themselves placed in detention and then deported as illegal aliens,
unable to seek redress or sue for compensation.
Thailand continued to be a major country of origin for women trafficked into
the Japan’s so-called snack bars. Discrimination against minority groups in Thailand
heightened some women’s vulnerability to trafficking. Hilltribe women,
denied citizenship and rights by the Thai government, suffered from extremely limited
educational and employment opportunities. Since births among the hilltribe
communities were often not registered, and because hilltribe people did not possess
official Thai citizenship, hilltribe people were left effectively stateless. The Thai
government frequently refused to allow hilltribe women trafficked to Japan to
return to Thailand, denying that they qualified as Thai citizens.
Israel, meanwhile, failed to provide even minimal human rights protections for
persons trafficked into its territory for domestic servitude, agricultural labor,
forced prostitution, and construction work despite the passage of an anti-trafficking
law in 2000. Trafficking victims feared cooperating with law enforcement officials
and had no incentive to do so, absent witness protection, shelter, and relief
from deportation, or legal assistance. State complicity and corruption also played a
role in trafficking into Israel. In March 2001, the Hotline for Migrant Workers, an
Israeli NGO working with trafficking victims, reported to the United Nations
Human Rights Commission that six trafficking cases involved policemen: in one
case a policeman stood accused of managing a brothel; in four cases police officers
tipped brothel owners off on upcoming raids; and in another case a policeman
faced charges of selling a trafficked woman to another brothel owner after arresting
her. Israeli authorities continued to treat trafficked women as criminals rather
than victims, and failed to prosecute those responsible for trafficking. The U.S.
State Department report on trafficking in persons ranked Israel in the lowest tier of
countries for failing to combat trafficking.
WOMEN IN CONFLICT AND REFUGEES
Women continued to face abuses associated with armed conflict and civil
unrest. Rape and sexual assault, in particular, were employed to achieve specific
military or political objectives.When women sought refuge in other countries, they
continued to experience sexual and other forms of physical violence in and around
refugee camps.While acts of sexual violence in the context of armed conflict were recognized internationally as a war crime and a crime against humanity, perpetrators
were rarely brought to justice.Moreover, in armed conflicts, women suffered
from a broad array of abuses not limited to violence by combatants.
In the former Yugoslavia, Indonesia, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Guinea, and Tanzania among other states, women continuously suffered conflictrelated
abuse or its sequelae, and waited in vain for justice.
As of November 2001, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) had failed to bring even a single indictment on rape as a war
crime in Kosovo.Women’s access to justice also suffered with regard to post-conflict
violence, which continued unabated. In October 2000, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) released a scathing report detailing
how women victims of sexual violence in Kosovo confronted discrimination,
intimidation, and bias in the criminal justice system. A follow-up report issued by
the OSCE in early 2001 indicated that the Kosovo judicial system had failed to remedy
those ongoing problems and continued to handle sexual assault cases “superficially
. . . illustrating disregard for the serious nature of such cases for both the
alleged victim and the defendant.” The OSCE reported that the majority of rape
and sexual assault cases involved juvenile victims.
In Indonesia, despite substantial evidence of the frequent occurrence of sexual
violence in the conflict in Aceh between Indonesian security forces and the armed
insurgent Free Aceh Movement (GAM), very few cases were reported to the authorities—
and one particularly notorious case showed why. The case involved five
women from South Aceh district who reported being sexually abused by members
of the Indonesian paramilitary police, Brimob, in February 2001. Human rights
NGOs brought the women to Banda Aceh, the provincial capital, where the case
and their identities were widely publicized. Taken into police custody for questioning,
the women publicly recanted their stories, instead saying it was members of the
armed insurgency, GAM, who had abducted them and forced them to say that
Brimob had assaulted them. The lack of protection for victims of sexual violence
and NGOs’ inexperience in handling such a case in a highly politicized context
made the women into pawns of the police. The end result was that the relevant
human rights violations remained uninvestigated and unpunished.
In an ongoing conflict largely ignored by the international community, the Congolese
Rally for Democracy (RCD) and its Rwandan allies, along with Hutu rebels
and Mai Mai forces, continued to abduct women and commit sexual violence
against them in eastern Congo. In 2001,Human Rights Watch and other organizations
found that these groups had raped thousands of women and girls of all ethnic
groups. In many cases,Mai Mai and Rwandan Hutu rebels raped women, often
in front of their husbands, families, or community as a public humiliation and
demonstration of power, when families fled an area under control by a certain
group, and moved into what was perceived as the “enemy’s” territory.Mai Mai and
Rwandan Hutu rebels took women and girls hostage and kept them as “wives” for
several weeks or months, releasing them after capturing other women. The health
consequences of such sexual violence were enormous.Many women died as a result
of the rapes, and unknown numbers contracted HIV/AIDS, all aggravated by the
lack of accessible medical and counseling services.
Even after fleeing conflict in search of sanctuary from violence,women refugees
frequently found that there was no meaningful refuge—they simply escaped violence
in conflict to be confronted by different types of violence in refugee camps or
en route to refugee camps. Guinean security personnel and civilians, during the
relocation of some 60,000 Liberian and Sierra Leonese refugees from the border to
the interior of the country, regularly harassed refugees. Checkpoints along the
roads were particularly dangerous places,where Guinean security forces often subjected
refugees to arbitrary strip searches, beatings, sexual assault, and extortion—
while allegedly screening refugees for the presence of rebel marks.
Refugee camps in Tanzania continued to showcase some of the dangers facing
women in flight, especially refugees from Burundi. Local Tanzanians and other
refugees physically and sexually assaulted women refugees with impunity, both
inside and outside refugee camps. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and aid agencies working with the camps sought to raise
awareness among refugees about sexual and gender-based violence, and provided
counseling to victims, but UNHCR reported a continuing high evidence of domestic
violence, recording some 1,739 cases in Tanzania’s Burundian refugee camps
between April and December 2000. UNHCR said some Tanzanian authorities were
prosecuting some rape cases. Generally, however, the Tanzanian justice system
failed to provide an effective remedy for victims of sexual and domestic violence in
the camps, such cases often being seen by the authorities as “private”domestic matters
beyond the scope of state intervention.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Violence and the threat of violence were ever-present in women’s public and private
lives. In situations of political upheaval, state custody, domestic contexts, and
other situations involving private actors and NGOs, women’s physical and sexual
integrity was at risk in all regions.Zimbabwe, the United States,Uzbekistan,Turkey,
and Jordan provided stark examples.
Since it came to power in 1980, the Zimbabwe government had promised to
enact land reform measures to redistribute to black Zimbabweans lands taken
under white ownership during colonial rule, though without making significant
progress before the end of 2000. In 2001, however, groups of ruling party supporters
and reputed veterans of the war against colonial rule seized control of many
white-owned farms by force in what the government described as a “spontaneous
and popular uprising.”Many black farmworkers, as well as white farmworkers and
their families, were assaulted in the process. Some were killed. Many women on
farms and in rural areas were raped or sexually assaulted with impunity. Victims
reported to Human Rights Watch that they could obtain no redress from the police
who declined to intervene in rape cases they saw occurring within a political context.
In the U.S., the California State Legislature held hearings in January 2001 to
address reports of continuing mental, physical, and sexual abuse, as well as medical
neglect in the state’s women’s prisons. The hearings were prompted by the deaths of nine women at the Central California Women’s Facility within a two-month
period at the end of 2000. Initially, the California Department of Corrections
attributed some of the deaths to prisoners taking tainted drugs, but autopsies discounted
that. The state authorities said they would investigate the deaths, but the
findings were not available at this writing.
Legislators also expressed concern over reports that some women inmates who
requested medical attention prior to their deaths did not receive immediate attention.
In one case, the cellmates of a deceased prisoner alleged that corrections officers
had mocked the dying woman’s pleas for assistance shortly before she died.
There was particular concern that medical technical assistants (MTAs), prison
guards with minimal medical training, were responsible for determining whether
women inmates should see medical staff.After the State Legislature hearings, a new
bill was introduced to remove MTAs from decision-making on women inmate’s
health care access to clinicians; it was still under consideration in November.
In Uzbekistan, instead of protecting women from domestic violence, the state
enforced a policy of “reconciliation” aimed at limiting the number of divorces.
Local officials and community leaders coerced women into remaining with abusive
partners, often thwarting their efforts to escape the violence by leaving their marriages.
In some cases, local authorities refused to provide documents to women
attempting to file for divorce.More frequently, officials and medical doctors sought
to convince the women to return to violent spouses in order to “save the family,”and
be “better wives.” Local law enforcement only rarely completed police reports of
women’s complaints or investigated cases of domestic violence,more often placing
families on a list for periodic police visits that did little to protect women from
ongoing abuse.Under article 103 of the Criminal Code for “driving a person to suicide,”
authorities pursued charges against perpetrators of violence against women
only if the woman committed suicide. NGOs in Uzbekistan attempted to provide
hotlines and services to victims of domestic violence, but their resources were limited,
and their services rarely reached beyond urban areas.
In Turkey, in both urban and rural areas, family members murder an estimated
two hundred girls and women in the name of honor each year. In 2001, judges trying
“honor” killing cases often reduced the penalties for perpetrators, holding that
the victim had “provoked” the murder by transgressing codes of conduct imposed
on women by society.Older relatives sometimes arranged for underage boys in the
family to commit “honor” murders because penalties for minors were lower, in
some cases as little as two years in prison. Domestic violence was also pervasive in
Turkey; women’s human rights activists condemned the authorities’ lack of
response to domestic violence and called for increased government funding to
establish shelters and provide legal services. The government, however, appeared
intent to reinstate virginity tests for women students wishing to become nurses and
medical technicians. In July,Minister of Health Osman Durmus issued a directive
to circumvent a 1999 ban on virginity tests and permit girls to be examined with
parental permission and a judge’s order if the nursing school suspected them of
“immoral behavior.” Local women’s rights groups condemned the directive, saying
schools would use it to expel girls that they wanted to dismiss for other reasons.
Amid the outcry provoked by the decree, Durmus denied that he had authorized
the reinstatement of the exams but the directive was not rescinded. 
In Jordan, despite an extensive grassroots public awareness and signature campaign
since 1999 run by the Jordanian National Committee to Eliminate the Socalled
Crimes of Honor, the government failed to repeal the law that allowed for a
reduced sentence for the perpetrators of “honor crimes.” In 2001, at least nineteen
women were reported killed in the name of honor by November, and the government
had still to make good on its promise to open a shelter for women whose families
threatened their lives on grounds of “honor,”and continued to hold threatened
women in corrections facilities.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
The war in Afghanistan mobilized international attention to women’s human
rights in that country,with the U.S. government and its allies giving women’s rights
a prominent place in the propaganda war against the Taliban. In 2001, however,
there seemed to be a disconnect between the U.S. and the international community’s
rhetorical commitment to equality and a willingness to adopt and implement
policies that fully integrated attention to women’s human rights. In 2001, U.N.-
sponsored meetings addressed critical issues such as the gender dimensions of
racism, gender-based persecution as grounds for asylum, and an international protocol
on the collection of forensic evidence in cases of sexual violence.At the same
time, the U.S. and the European Union took steps on trafficking, international
treaty ratification, funding for women’s health, and trade that marginalized or
ignored women’s human rights.Women’s rights activists found that many of these
steps were tentative and inconsistent, and hoped that the international community’s
concern for women’s rights in Afghanistan would be long-lasting and would
result in stepped-up efforts to recognize women’s human rights violations and curtail
them also in other parts of the world.
United Nations
The WCAR, held in Durban, South Africa, from August 31 through September
8, 2001, survived a lengthy preparatory process that was dominated by strong disagreements
with governments over issues such as reparations for slavery, the
Israel/Palestine question, caste and racism, and the inclusion of gender-related
issues.
As part of the WCAR preparatory process, the U.N. Division for the Advancement
ofWomen (DAW) convened a meeting in November 2000, in Zagreb, Croatia,
at which women’s rights experts analyzed the intersectionality of gender and
race.However, the document produced at this meeting,because it was not the result
of an official regional preparatory meeting, was then left out of the compilation
documents the conference secretariat prepared.
Successfully, women’s rights groups advocated for the inclusion of clear references
in the WCAR’s official declaration and plan of action to the impact of racism
and related intolerance on women belonging to racial and other minority communities
and to the need for governments to address gender-specific concerns such as
protecting women from sexual violence in ethnic-based armed conflicts.
Women’s rights activists also successfully lobbied for the inclusion of a call to
governments to allow women to confer nationality on their children and spouses,
on the same basis as men.
The actual value of the WCAR, and the extent to which governments will honor
the commitments they made there, remained to be seen. The U.N. had an important
follow-up role to play and it was hoped that the of Committee on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW Committee) would
develop a basis for governments to report regularly on their efforts to address the
confluence of racism and sexism.
The role of the CEDAW Committee expanded in 2001, as the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women came into force on December 22, 2000, enabling the committee to receive
and consider complaints from individuals or groups within its jurisdiction. As of
November 2001, the committee had yet to explore any complaints initiated under
the protocol.
Despite the WCAR’s explicit acknowledgement that women are targeted for sexual
violence in armed conflicts on the basis of their ethnic or related identities, the
ad hoc international criminal tribunals for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
Rwanda (ICTR) continued to compile a mixed record on investigations and prosecutions
of crimes of sexual violence that occurred in the to which they relate.
On February 22, 2001, the ICTY issued a landmark verdict for rape, torture, and
sexual enslavement, holding that rape and enslavement rose to the level of crimes
against humanity in the Bosnian town of Foca. Sixteen victims of rape testified during
the trial, describing months of sexual slavery and multiple gang rapes. The case
marked the first time that an international tribunal charged defendants solely for
crimes of sexual violence against women and girls and the first time that the ICTY
convicted a defendant for rape as a crime against humanity.Women’s human rights
experts hailed the decision, while expressing concern for the safety and well-being
of the witnesses who testified in the trial, as three of those accused in the case had
not been apprehended.
In January 2001, Biljana Plavsic, a former member of the Presidency of the Serbian
republic whose indictment was sealed, surrendered to the ICTY. The ICTY
immediately unsealed the indictment revealing that Plavsic would face charges of
command responsibility for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
acts of sexual violence. With the former Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic still at large, Plavsic became the highest-ranking Serbian official
in the dock on charges that included sexual violence.
In June 2001, the former Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, was arrested
and extradited to The Hague to face trial before the ICTY for crimes committed
during the conflicts in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, and Kosovo. Milosevic was
charged with responsibility for crimes of genocide, deportation, and persecution,
either by giving direct orders or through omission as effective commander of Serbian
police, army and paramilitary groups.He was also indicted in relation to sexual
assaults inflicted by Serbian forces on Kosovo Albanian women, although
initially the indictment failed to include these gender-specific crimes.
The Rwanda tribunal’s ineffective record of prosecuting rape and other sexual violence continued in 2001. This failure to address effectively sexual violence was a
result of, among other things, lack of staff awareness about sexual violence, poor
training on investigating and prosecuting crimes of sexual violence, and a general
attitude of according low priority to sexual violence offences.
Since the landmark Akayesu verdict in 1998, the first and only case as yet in
which rape was found to be an act of genocide, the ICTR has brought several more
indictments for rape. In some, however, the rape count was only added belatedly,
typically when witnesses alluded to rape and sexual violence while testifying in
court, raising serious questions about the quality of investigations and decisionmaking
on drafting indictments. In February, the tribunal’s judges rejected a
belated prosecution attempt to add sexual violence charges against the three defendants
facing genocide and crimes against humanity charges in the Cyangugu case.
Prosecutors did not ask to amend the indictment but nevertheless to bring in rape
testimony, arguing that the Akayesu precedent holding that rape was a part of genocide
should suffice.
Women fleeing conflict may have a stronger claim to asylum if they also have a
well-founded fear of gender-based persecution.Consequently, as part of the Global
Consultations marking the fiftieth anniversary of the 1951 Convention Relating to
the Status of Refugees, UNHCR convened a roundtable of experts to examine the
issue of gender-based persecution and made recommendations on the interpretation
of the refugee convention.
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization convened a group of forensic
experts to begin drafting a standard protocol for the collection of evidence in cases
of sexual violence. The meeting, held in June in Geneva, ended with a plan for the
drafting and field-testing of the protocol in the next year. If successful, the protocol
will be a tool for documenting sexual violence in countries in which such evidence
is limited to the examiner’s evaluations of the victim’s virginity.
Unites States
Nearly a year into the presidency of George W. Bush, the U.S. program on
women’s human rights remained ill-defined, notwithstanding high level public
condemnation of the Taliban for their abuse of women’s rights in Afghanistan.The
issue of women’s rights did not feature visibly in any of Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell’s foreign visits but, to its credit, the Bush administration retained the position
of senior coordinator for international women’s issues, an office that in the
past had played a critical role in the coordination and spearheading of women’s
human rights issues at the State Department.At this writing, although no appointment
had been announced to head the office, U.S. women’s rights activists
remained hopeful that the office would be headed by an individual with broad,
demonstrable expertise in the women’s human rights movement.
President Bush initiated his term with an assault on freedom of expression in the
context of global women’s health. One of his first acts as president was to reinstate
a U.S. government policy, known variously as the “Mexico City Policy” and the
“global gag rule,”which required international women’s health advocates to sacrifice
their right to free expression in exchange for U.S. funding. The restriction, first adopted by President Reagan in 1984, prohibited international family planning
NGOs from receiving U.S. funds if, with their own separate funds, they engaged in
legal abortion-related activities.The Bush administration’s argument that U.S. taxpayers’money
should not be used to pay for abortion was disingenuous, given that
since 1973,U.S. law had banned the use of U.S. funds for abortions in foreign countries.
The Bush administration featured trafficking as an important component of its
women’s human rights program. In July 2000, under the terms of the Victims of
Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000, the U.S. State Department released
its first annual trafficking report, evaluating the performance of eighty-two countries,
putting each in one of three categories depending on how its domestic efforts
met the legislation’s minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking. The
report was notable for its candid criticism of a number of allies. Unfortunately, it
focused primarily on trafficking for prostitution, to the exclusion of trafficking into
other forms of forced labor; paid scant attention to the role of state complicity in
trafficking; failed to criticize instances in which countries summarily arrested or
deported trafficking victims; and failed to note and evaluate in-country services for
trafficking victims. In October, the State Department named a head for the Office
to Monitor and Combat Trafficking, whose establishment was called for by the
2000 legislation.
While the Bush administration seemed to acknowledge the connection between
women’s limited economic opportunities and their vulnerability to trafficking, it
nevertheless failed to make use of international mechanisms that strengthen
respect for women workers’ rights, such as the labor rights side agreement to the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). In July 1997, the U.S. National
Administrative Office (U.S. NAO), the office charged with hearing complaints
against Mexico and Canada under NAFTA, accepted for review a case co-sponsored
by Human Rights Watch against Mexico that alleged Mexican government failure
to enforce its labor code to curtail widespread pregnancy-based discrimination in
export-processing factories (maquiladoras) along the U.S.-Mexico border. In January
1998, the U.S.NAO found,among other things, that the Mexican constitution
and labor code prohibited discrimination based on sex and that there were contradictory
interpretations ofMexico’s law regarding the illegality of pregnancy testing.
In October 1998, various programs, conferences, and meetings were held as part of
a ministerial consultation agreement that Mexico, the United States, and Canada
had signed, but these had little effect. In November 2001, however the final U.S.
NAO report was more than two years overdue, underscoring the inadequacy of the
mechanism for addressing women’s labor rights violations.
The U.S. Congress also appeared in November about to squander an opportunity
to support women’s labor rights, in connection with renewal of the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP), a trade regime that allows over one hundred
beneficiary countries to export certain goods to the U.S. paying little or no tariffs.
Since 1984, this has conditioned eligibility on respect for what the U.S. has termed
“internationally recognized worker rights,” including freedom of association; the
right to organize and bargain collectively; the prohibition on the use of forced or
compulsory labor; a minimum age for employment of children; and acceptable conditions of work with respect to minimum wages, hours of work, and occupational
safety and health—but not freedom from discrimination. The renewal of
GSP by the House of Representatives offered a real but missed opportunity to
address this significant omission, though at the time of this writing it was hoped
that the Senate, under pressure from women’s and labor rights activists, would
include in the law language prohibiting sex discrimination.
The year ended with the U.S. Senate having failed to ratify CEDAW. Advocates
of the convention urged the new chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
Senator Joseph Biden, to schedule a hearing and vote on the treaty, but it appeared
unlikely at the time of this writing that he would do so.
European Union
In Europe, racism and xenophobia led to increased hostility and violence against
asylum seekers, refugees, trafficking victims and migrants, male and female alike.
Women seeking to migrate to Europe, particularly women from developing countries,
were denied virtually any legal means of doing so and as a result became easy
prey for traffickers. The “fortress Europe” approach to immigration led some
women migrants into the hands of traffickers, trapping them in debt bondage,
forced labor, and abuse.Trafficking for forced prostitution received disproportionate
attention in rhetoric and policy in Europe,while trafficking into other forms of
forced labor, including domestic servitude, flourished in near obscurity.According
to a report by a coalition of German NGOs known as KOK that combats trafficking
in human beings, increasing numbers of women from countries in Africa,Asia,
Latin America, and Eastern Europe worked in Germany as nannies, domestic servants,
cleaners, maids, and nurses. Some migrants ended up in debt bondage, physical
and sexual violence, and, in some cases, slavery-like conditions.
Meanwhile, the European Union funded anti-trafficking grants programs that
plowed money into conferences, research, and meetings, neglecting desperately
needed programs to support victims of trafficking and to train police in human
rights related to trafficking. In addition, much of the funding allocated in 2001
under the Stop anti-trafficking program, a funding program designed to finance
anti-trafficking efforts, flowed to government ministries and universities: of the
eighteen programs funded, only four grants involved NGOs. In addition, almost all
of the programs funded focused on women and children trafficked from the former
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, largely ignoring the plight of victims from
the global south.
The European Commission allocated 20 million euros (U.S. $17.2 million) over
three years through the Daphne Programme for grants to NGOs and public institutions
working to prevent violence against women, children, and young people in
Europe, countries hoping to gain admission to the European Union, and members
of the European Free Trade Association.
On the policy side of the trafficking debate, the European Union acknowledged
the growing phenomenon of trafficking into the European Union. The Commission
outlined “a comprehensive European strategy” on trafficking in women,
including prevention programs, efforts to criminalize trafficking in all of the member states, support for victims, and cooperation with countries of origin.Unfortunately,
much of the policy flowing from Brussels continued to center around a law
enforcement approach to trafficking, rather than integrating the human rights of
victims. States were fining airlines that transported migrants and asylum seekers
and implementing increasingly restrictive visa regimes. The obstacles to travel
translated into higher debts for trafficked persons in countries of destination and
higher profits for traffickers,who simply increased the fees demanded of migrants.
In December 2000, the Commission proposed a Council Framework decision, an
agreement among the countries of the European Union to harmonize their legislation,
on combating trafficking in human beings that focused almost entirely on
harmonization of criminal penalties, criminalization of trafficking, and adoption
of a common definition of the crime. Recommendations made by the European
Parliament and a coalition of NGOs to remedy the lack of human rights protections
in the document went unheeded.
Council of Europe
The Council of Europe, under the auspices of the “Police and Human Rights—
Beyond 2000” program, published a series of pamphlets and training manuals on
human rights, including one, the “VIP Guide,” on violence against women. The
guide, launched on the web and in book form at a conference in December 2000,
included training modules on trafficking, domestic violence, rape, stalking,“honor
killings,” and sexual harassment.While the guide provided excellent basic information
on these violations of women’s human rights, the other pamphlets and training
modules prepared under the program failed to integrate women’s human rights
concerns adequately. For example, almost all of the documents mentioned domestic
violence at least in passing but failed to include other forms of violence against
women.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
In February 2001, the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR), which is charged with implementing and funding human rights programs
of the OSCE, announced the establishment of an anti-trafficking project
fund financed by the United Kingdom. The OSCE continued its leadership role
within the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, pressing participating countries
to adopt national plans of action and to take concrete steps to combat trafficking.
But many NGOs in the region remained skeptical about the political will of governments
to implement the elaborately crafted action plans, fearing another
onslaught of rhetoric without action.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Afghanistan: Humanity Denied: Systematic Violation of Women’s Rights in
Afghanistan, 10/01
South Africa: Unequal Protection: The State Response to Violent Crime on South
African Farms, 8/01
Uzbekistan: Sacrificing Women to Save the Family?: State Response to Domestic
Violence in Uzbekistan, 7/01
United States: Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students in U.S. Schools, 5/01
South Africa: Scared at School: Sexual Violence Against Girls in South African
Schools, 3/01