Indonesia
Indonesia held national elections in April, July, and September 2004
resulting in a new parliament and new president. While Indonesia’s first
ever direct presidential election marked another step toward full democratization,
significant barriers to rule of law and human rights remain in
place.
Pressing human rights concerns include the resurgent power of the military
in social and political affairs, ongoing impunity of security forces
responsible for atrocities, abuses associated with armed conflict in Aceh
province, repression in Papua, and disturbing signs of a return to intimidation
of the press and criminalization of dissent.
Indonesia also faces a domestic terrorist threat, with more than two
hundred civilians killed in bomb attacks since 2002 targeting western
institutions: the Australian embassy (September 9, 2004), the Marriott
hotel in Jakarta (August 5, 2003), and a nightclub frequented by
Australians in Bali (October 12, 2002). Under immense international
pressure, in particular from Australia and the United States, Indonesia
has begun addressing this threat through criminal prosecutions and a
slowly improving police force, although the perpetrators of some of the
attacks remain at large.
Elections
Indonesia held parliamentary elections in April 2004, and two rounds of
presidential elections in July and September (previously, members of
parliament had selected the president). Despite voter intimidation in
Aceh province, and widespread reports of “money politics” in all three
elections, domestic and international observers deemed the elections
notably peaceful and generally free and fair.
The April legislative election brought in a new parliament with the
majority of seats won by the Golkar party of former President (and
autocrat) Soeharto. This result was widely interpreted as motivated in
part by the electorate’s desire for a return to the security and stability of
the Soeharto era after several years of turbulence and instability.
Indonesia’s presidential election in July 2004 went to a second round
run-off in September between incumbent Megawati Sukarnoputri and
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, a former general and member of President
Megawati’s cabinet. Yudhoyono won convincingly on a platform of
reform and anti-corruption.
Impunity and the TNI
The Indonesian armed forces (Tentara Nasional Indonesia, TNI) continues
to violate international human rights and humanitarian law with
almost complete impunity. Military operations in Papua and Aceh
provinces continue to be characterized by undisciplined and unaccountable
troops committing widespread abuses against civilians. Abuses
include extra-judicial executions, forced disappearances, beatings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, and drastic limits on freedom of movement.
Torture of detainees in police and military custody is also widespread
across the archipelago.
Indonesia’s executive and judicial branches regularly fail to address such
abuses. Indonesia’s judiciary in particular is corrupt and subject to political
interference.
To date there has been no legal accounting for the violence instigated
by pro-Soeharto forces in a failed attempt to stave off his fall from
power in 1998 or for the majority of atrocities committed during his
more than three decades in office. Trials for the 1984 killing of civilians by Indonesian security forces at Tanjung Priok in Jakarta finished with
weak verdicts amid ongoing reports of political interference and witness
intimidation.
Despite significant international pressure and interest, trials of senior
Indonesian officers in Jakarta failed to give a credible judicial accounting
for atrocities committed in East Timor in 1999. Twelve of the
eighteen defendants were acquitted. Four defendants who were found
guilty received nominal sentences, which were all overturned on appeal.
The appeals court initially upheld guilty verdicts for the two East
Timorese defendants on trial but one of these verdicts was overturned
by Indonesia’s Supreme Court in November 2004.
Aceh
In May 2003 the Indonesian government withdrew from peace negotiations
and launched full-scale military operations in Aceh. An estimated
forty thousand new troops were sent to the province to crush an estimated
five thousand members of the Free Aceh Movement (Gerakan
Aceh Merdeka, GAM) in Indonesia’s largest military operation since the
invasion of East Timor.
Three consecutive post-Soeharto presidents have failed to address the
economic, social, governance, and justice-related grievances underpinning
the fighting. The new war has led to widespread abuses against
civilians with little prospect for a military solution.
Human Rights Watch has documented serious abuses by both sides in
the context of the conflict. Dozens of interviews with Acehnese refugees
in Malaysia make clear that Indonesian security forces continue to
engage in widespread extra-judicial execution, torture, disappearances,
and restrictions on movement, assembly, and association.
At this writing, Aceh remains closed to most diplomats, international
aid workers, international press, and independent human rights monitors.
Indonesian journalists working in the province have faced threats
and reprisals from both Indonesia security forces and GAM. Indonesian
lawyers and NGOs documenting abuses against the Acehnese have been
accused by Indonesian security forces of being GAM sympathizers.
Despite these restrictions, Human Rights Watch interviewed three
dozen Acehnese prisoners in 2004, all of whom had faced serious mistreatment
while in detention; many had been tortured. All had been
detained and convicted without basic due process rights and often on
the basis of trumped up evidence or coerced confessions.
Papua
The Indonesian military regularly responds to low level attacks by the
Free Papua Movement (Organisasi Papua Merdeka, OPM) with disproportionate
force; unarmed civilians continue to be among those injured
or killed in military reprisals. Arbitrary detention, torture, disappearances,
and arson are widespread in this vast and isolated region of
Indonesia.
Jakarta’s decision in 2003 to divide Papua into three provinces, viewed
by many as an effort to dilute Papuan political aspirations, was met by
widespread local resistance. The province subsequently was divided into
two provinces, with legislated “special autonomy” provisions largely put
on hold.
Papua has seen a swelling of its population in recent years due to a large
influx of economic migrants and civilians fleeing conflict in other parts
of Indonesia. Tension between these groups is likely to rise unless
addressed. Among other things, indigenous Papuans are predominantly
rural and Christian while major immigrant groups are predominantly town-based and Muslim, creating a volatile mix susceptible to manipulation
by unscrupulous political leaders.
Papua has the highest HIV prevalence in Indonesia and discrimination
against people living with HIV/AIDS is widespread.
Political Prisoners
Although political space for dissent increased enormously after the fall
of President Soeharto, broadly worded laws limiting freedom of expression
remain on the books and are being increasingly used by authorities
to target outspoken critics. Soeharto’s first two successors, President
B.J. Habibie and President Abdurrahman Wahid, issued a series of
amnesties to release most political prisoners convicted during the
Soeharto era, but by 2003 at least forty-six new prisoners of conscience
had been imprisoned—thirty-nine of them during President Megawati
Sukarnoputri’s tenure between July 2001 and October 2004.
Indonesian Migrant Workers
Hundreds of thousands of Indonesians migrate for work each year, and
the money they send back to Indonesia is critical to the country’s economy.
These workers continue to endure abuses by labor agents and to
confront corruption at every stage of the migration cycle. Women comprise
over 75 percent of these migrant workers. Women migrants typically
seek employment as domestic workers in Saudi Arabia, Malaysia,
and other countries in the Middle East and Asia.
In addition to problems these workers encounter while abroad (See
Malaysia), women domestic workers confront a wide range of human
rights abuses during recruitment, pre-departure training, and return to
Indonesia. Labor recruiters often fail to provide complete information
about job responsibilities, work conditions, or where the women can
turn for help. Some girls and women seeking employment become victims of human trafficking, as they are deceived about they type of work
they will perform, fall into debt bondage, or are otherwise coerced into
exploitative situations. Women expecting to spend one month in predeparture
training facilities in Indonesia are often trapped in heavilyguarded
centers for three to six months without any income. Most have
complained of overcrowded conditions and some reported inadequate
food and water, as well as verbal and physical abuse. Indonesia has taken
some positive steps to address this issue, but new migrant workers legislation
is deeply flawed and officials have not vigorously implemented
necessary protections.
Press Freedom
After the fall of Soeharto, Indonesia for a time was considered a center
of media freedom in Southeast Asia. Critical reporting and commentary
emerged on a scale unimaginable in the Soeharto era. However, the
trend more recently has been toward a more restrictive environment,
symbolized in 2004 by continuing far-reaching restrictions on and
intimidation of journalists in Aceh and by the one-year prison sentence
imposed on Bambang Harymurti, editor of the prominent independent
weekly newsmagazine Tempo, for an article alleged to have defamed
well-connected businessman Tomy Winata. In addition, private business
interests and military officers increasingly file lawsuits and rely on a
corrupt judiciary to influence coverage and in some cases impose potentially
crippling monetary judgments on independent news providers.
Human Rights Defenders
Since the fall of Soeharto the climate for human rights defenders in
Indonesia has improved. However, in Aceh human rights defenders still
suffer threats and intimidation from security forces and GAM when
monitoring and investigating human rights abuses. 
On September 7, 2004 one of Indonesia’s most outspoken and respected
human rights defenders, Munir, died under suspicious circumstances on
a plane to the Netherlands. The autopsy report, released in November,
concluded that Munir had died due to arsenic poisoning. At this writing
a police investigation was underway.
Key International Actors
Japan is Indonesia’s largest aid donor, and in 2003 the Koizumi government
played an increasingly important role in helping Indonesia address
pressing problems, most noticeably the conflict in Aceh.
Indonesia’s relationship with the United States continues to focus on
joint efforts to fight terrorism. Although U.S. military assistance to
Indonesia remains conditioned on accountability for human rights abuses,
the U.S. has made it clear that co-operation in the war on terrorism
is more critical than human rights to normalization of the relationship.
At this writing, Indonesian failure to bring to justice those responsible
for the shooting death of one Papuan and two U.S. citizens in Papua in
2002 continues to limit formal military cooperation. Initial police and
nongovernmental organization investigations had indicated military
involvement in the murders.
The United Nations has a strong presence in Indonesia concentrating
on humanitarian and health programs in conflict areas. U.N. access to
Aceh, however, remains severely restricted.
Indonesia’s failure to successfully prosecute officers and officials responsible
for atrocities committed in East Timor following the U.N.-supervised
independence referendum there in 1999 has put the onus on U.N.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to act: Annan has said that he would
“closely monitor progress” of the Indonesian response to the crimes in
East Timor to see that it is a “credible response in accordance with
international human rights principles.” At this writing, it was expected that in December 2004 or early 2005 Annan would announce the establishment
of a Commission of Experts to assess the success and failings
of both the Jakarta trials, described above, and the parallel process at
Dili’s Special Panels for Serious Crimes.
A number of U.N. special rapporteurs have requested to visit Indonesia
to no avail, including the special representative of the secretary-general
on the situation of human rights defenders, the special rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, the special rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, and
the special rapporteur on torture.
Indonesia withdrew from formal Inernational Monetary Fund supervision
of monetary and fiscal policy at the end of 2003, but continues to
require considerable external financial assistance. The Consultative
Group on Indonesia (CGI) meeting, an annual conference of
Indonesia’s largest donors convened by the World Bank, continues to
pledge significant sums, although donors increasingly are conditioning
assistance on good governance and legal reform.