Indonesia
Two Constitutional Court decisions and efforts toward accountability for the murder
of human rights defender Munir Said Thalib marked good progress on human
rights in Indonesia.
However, threats and intimidation against human rights defenders significantly
increased in Papua and West Papua, while efforts at military reform stalled. The
killing of four civilians by marines in East Java exemplified continuing human
rights violations associated with security force involvement in private business
activity.
Impunity
Some progress was made in addressing human rights crimes of the Soeharto era.
In December 2006 Indonesias Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional a
law establishing a Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) in Indonesia. The
law empowered the TRC to award amnesties to perpetrators of past crimes and
barred victims from taking any future legal action against them. Reparations to
victims were made contingent upon victims signing formal statements exonerating
the perpetrators. The Court declared that provisions of the TRC law violated
Indonesias international obligations and domestic laws. The decision came after
two years of legal challenges by Indonesian human rights groups.
In July 2007 prosecutors filed a civil suit against former Indonesian dictator
Soeharto, seeking return of US$440 million allegedly stolen from the state during
his 32 years in power and seeking US$1.54 billion in damages. The suit claims
that the former president funneled money from the state to his own accounts
through the Supersemar Foundation. In September the United Nations and the
World Bank placed Soeharto at the top of a global list of political leaders accused
of stealing state assets.
Military Reform
The government has not completed key military reforms. It has yet to end military
business practices, as required under a 2004 law, or ensure accountability for abuses. In May 2007, 13 marines shot and killed four civilians of whom two were
women, and wounded eight in Pasuruan, East Java. The incident was sparked by
a long-running dispute over land that a Navy cooperative, jointly with an
Indonesian company, wanted to develop into a plantation against the wishes of
local residents. Military chief Air Marshal Djoko Suyanto defended the marines
actions, claiming self defense. These assertions were disputed by media, witnesses,
and a subsequent investigation by the national human rights commission,
Komnas HAM.
Aceh
In December 2006 Irwandi Yusuf, a former spokesperson for the Free Aceh
Movement (GAM), won the gubernatorial election in Aceh. His running mate for
vice-governor was Muhammad Nazar, a former political prisoner and head of the
Aceh Referendum Information Center (SIRA), which campaigned on a referendum
for Aceh independence. Irwandi and Nazar were installed in office on February 8,
2007.
The December 11, 2006 polls (district and provincial) were the first-ever direct
local elections in Aceh, and first elections after the August 2005 Helsinki peace
agreement between the Indonesian government and GAM, and the first in
Indonesia allowing independent (non-party affiliated) candidates to stand.
To date there is no progress on accountability for past human rights violations in
Aceh. The 2006 Law on Aceh Governance set out to establish a TRC and an ad hoc
court to look at crimes committed after the August 2005 peace agreement. In
2007 there was little movement toward either, and since the national TRC was
declared unconstitutional the status of the Aceh branch remained uncertain.
Papua and West Papua
Peaceful political activists in Papua and West Papua continue to be classified as
separatists, facing arrest and criminal conviction for their activities. In the central
highlands both army troops and police units, particularly mobile paramilitary
police units, engage in largely indiscriminate village sweeping operations to
pursue suspected militants. Excessive, often brutal force is used against civilians.
In 2007 Col. Burhanuddin Siagian was appointed as regional military commander
in Papua. Colonel Siagian has been indicted by the United Nations for crimes
against humanity in East Timor, including forming militias responsible for human
rights violations.
Death Penalty
In August 2007 Indonesias Supreme Court threw out a final appeal against the
death penalty for Amrozi, one of the convicted 2002 Bali bombers. Verdicts for
the other two Bali bombers on death row, Imam Samudra and Mukhlas, are still
pending at this writing.
In April an Indonesian man was executed by firing squad for a 1999 murder conviction
in Kalimantan. At least 90 other people remain sentenced to death in
Indonesia.
Freedom of Expression and Press
In July the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional legal provisions prohibiting
free expression. Articles 154 and 155 of Indonesias Criminal Code criminalize
the public expression of feelings of hostility, hatred or contempt toward
the government and prohibit the expression of such feelings or views through
the public media. Despite the ruling, those sentenced to prison under these provisions
remained there, and no progress was made on removing the articles from
Indonesias new draft criminal code.
In April the court case against the editor-in-chief of Playboy Indonesia, Erwin
Arnada, for violating indecency provisions of the criminal code was dismissed.
In August Indonesias Supreme Court awarded Soeharto one trillion Rupiah
(US$106 million) in damages for a defamation lawsuit brought against US-based
TIME magazine over a May 1999 article alleging he had amassed a fortune in
overseas bank accounts. Press associations criticized the ruling as a violation of
media freedom, asserting that the TIME article had been fair, with Indonesias
Press Council declaring the decision an evil omen for local journalists covering
corruption stories.
In March 2007 Indonesias attorney general banned a number of history books
over their presentation of the events surrounding the 1965 coup in which
Soeharto came to power. This was on the grounds that the books did not mention
the alleged role of the PKI, the Indonesian Communist Party.
Freedom of Religion
Religious extremists forcibly closed more places of worship of religious minorities,
with little response from local authorities. On June 3 a large group of people
stormed a Sunday school session of a Christian congregation in Soreang, West
Java, assaulting the pastors wife and a teenager, and destroying church property.
A week later the same group attacked a church in Garut, forcing the pastor and
his congregation to flee for safety to another village.
In September in Malang, East Java, 41 people were convicted of blasphemy
against Islam and each sentenced to five years imprisonment. The defendants
had been arrested in May for making a videotape denouncing the Quran. Those
convicted were all members of the Lembaga Pelayanan Mahasiswa Indonesia, a
mainly student organization active in disaster relief.
Child Domestic Workers in Indonesia
An estimated 700,000 to 1 million children, mainly girls, work as domestic workers
in Indonesia, representing up to one-fifth of the countrys domestic workers.
Typically recruited between the ages of 12 and 15, often on false promises of
decent wages and working conditions, girls may work 14 to 18 hours a day, seven
days a week, and earn far less than the prevailing minimum wage. In the worst
cases, child domestics are paid no salary at all and are physically and sexually
abused.
As informal workers, domestics are not protected by traditional labor laws. At this
writing, draft legislation that would mandate an eight-hour work day, a weekly
day of rest, and an annual holiday remained under discussion in government and
had not yet been presented to parliament. The current draft contains no sanctions
against employers or recruiting agencies that violate its provisions.
Indonesian Migrant Workers
Approximately two million Indonesians work abroad, of whom the vast majority
are women. Many migrate as domestic workers to the Middle East and other parts
of Asia, where they are subject to a wide range of labor abuses (see Saudi Arabia
and Malaysia chapters). Poorly monitored labor recruiters often deceive workers
about their jobs abroad and impose excessive recruitment fees, placing these
migrants at risk of trafficking and forced labor.
Migrants groups protested against the continued operation of Terminal 3 at
Soekarno-Hatta Airport in Jakarta, where returning migrant workers are diverted to
a separate terminal and subject to inflated charges and extortion.
Human Rights Defenders
Three years after the assassination of leading human rights defender Munir Said
Thalib, no one has been convicted for murder. Following the acquittal of
Pollycarpus Priyanto, a Garuda Airways pilot linked to intelligence officials, for
Munirs murder, in April police arrested two new suspects, Indra Setiawan (former
president-director of Garuda Indonesia) and Rohainil Aini (former secretary to the
chief pilot for Garuda). Their trial for murder started in October. In August the
Attorney Generals Office filed new evidence to the Supreme Court and requested
a review of Priyantos acquittal.
In May a Jakarta civil court found Garuda guilty of negligence for failing to take adequate
action to prevent Munirs death. The court ordered $73,800 damages to his
widow, who nevertheless appealed seeking stiffer penalties and an apology.
In Papua and West Papua human rights defenders face increasing intimidation
including death threats, arbitrary detention, and surveillance by Indonesian security
forces. The head of the Papua branch of Indonesias national human rights
commission, Alberth Rumbekwan, was subjected to such intimidation throughout
the second half of 2007.
In June the UN Secretary-Generals Special Representative on Human Rights
Defenders Hina Jilani visited Indonesia including Aceh and Papua. She noted that
while prospects for promoting human rights had considerably improved, there remained resistance and little commitment to eliminate impunity for past and
ongoing human rights violations. Of particular concern was the lack of protection
for those engaged in socially sensitive issues such as the rights of lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender persons or public awareness on HIV/AIDS.
Key International Actors
In addition to Hina Jilani, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour
visited Indonesia for five days in July. Both Jilani and Arbour expressed concern
about the Munir case and the lack of progress in dealing with past human rights
violations. In November UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Manfred Nowak visited
Indonesia. In May Indonesia was elected for a second term on the UN Human
Rights Council.
US Congressman Eni Faleomavaega, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and the Global Environment, led a delegation
to Indonesia in July to investigate conditions in Papua. The Indonesian government
denied him permission to the province but he met several Papuan leaders
in Jakarta, as well as President Yudhoyono and other government officials.
In efforts to decrease its perceived over-reliance on US military cooperation, in
April Indonesia ratified a security agreement with India. The agreement paved the
way for the joint production of military equipment and cooperation on issues
including combating terrorism and piracy.
The Indonesia-Timor-Leste bilateral Truth and Friendship Commission extended
its mandate in June for a further six months. In July UN Secretary-General Ban Kimoon
effectively enforced a UN boycott of the Commission by stating that UN
staff would not testify unless the amnesty provision of the Commissions mandate
was changed to not include perpetrators of serious crimes. In September the
Commission held its fifth and final public hearing in Dili.