Indonesia
Indonesia saw little human rights progress in 2008. Basic freedoms in the country
expanded dramatically following the resignation of President Suharto in 1998,
transforming Indonesia from an authoritarian state to a vibrant if chaotic democracy.
Today, there is a loss of momentum, with reforms in key areas bogged down
and backtracking in some areas.
Apart from halting progress in prosecutions for the murder of prominent activist
Munir Said Thalib, efforts to pursue accountability for past human rights crimes
remain at a complete standstill. Current abuses, including endemic police torture,
also routinely go unpunished.
In a major setback for religious freedom, the government in 2008 bowed to pressure
from hard-line Islamic groups and banned the Ahmadiyah sect from publicly
practicing their faith.
Indonesia has a diverse and lively media sector, but freedom of expression has
been undermined by powerful officials and businessmen using criminal and civil
defamation laws to silence criticism.
In Indonesian Papua, deeply rooted distrust of Jakarta is still a time bomb; failure
to address human rights—including security force abuses—is one important reason
the distrust has not been dispelled.
Impunity
Former president Suharto died in January 2008 having escaped prosecution for
abuses committed during his 32-year rule. The list of abuses is extensive, and
includes anticommunist pogroms that killed half a million or more people in
1965-1966, security force atrocities in East Timor, Aceh, southern Sumatra, and
Papua, and the Trisakti and Semanggi killings in Jakarta in 1998-1999. Many collaborators
in Suharto-era abuses still hold positions of power. Several are candidates
for the forthcoming 2009 elections, including General Wiranto and
Suharto’s son-in-law Prabowo Subianto, implicated in abuses in East Timor and
other crimes.
In March 2008 the Indonesian Supreme Court overturned the conviction of former
militia leader Eurico Guterres for instigating violence following the 1999 UN-sponsored
referendum on independence for East Timor. Indonesian-army-backed militias
killed hundreds of Timorese and destroyed much of East Timor’s physical
infrastructure. With the reversal of the conviction, all 18 people indicted by the
Indonesian Ad Hoc Human Rights Court on East Timor have been acquitted.
The Indonesian and Timorese joint Commission on Truth and Friendship released
its final report in July 2008 assigning institutional responsibility for the 1999
atrocities to the Indonesian military, police, and government. UN Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon urged accountability, but President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono insisted that no such action would be taken.
In August a military court convicted 13 marines for killing four civilians and
wounding eight in a 2007 incident involving a land dispute in Pasuruan, East
Java. The marines received light sentences of 18 months to three-and-a-half years.
Also in August, a US court ruled that a lawsuit against Exxon Mobil for alleged
complicity in military abuses in Aceh could proceed to trial.
Military Business
Efforts to end Indonesian military business activity, a barrier to full civilian control
of the armed forces, showed few results in 2008. An April presidential decree created
a new advisory team on military business reform but it remained unclear
whether the government would fully dismantle the military’s economic interests
before October 2009 as mandated by law.
While the government has focused on legal businesses, military involvement in
illegal businesses, including in the logging and oil palm sector, also continues to
feed corruption and generate conflicts of interest.
Freedom of Religion
In June 2008 the government ordered members of the Ahmadiyah sect to cease
public religious activities or face up to five years’ imprisonment. In the weeks following
the decree, Muslim hardliners attacked Ahmadiyah mosques in Cianjur, West Java, and Islamic Defenders Front members closed the local Ahmadiyah
headquarters in Makassar, South Sulawesi. In September the South Sumatra
provincial government issued a total ban on Ahmadiyah, claiming the ministerial
decree did not go far enough.
In January 2008 a mob burnt down the Sangkareang Hindu temple in West
Lombok and in July, Muslim hardliners attacked students at a Christian theology
school in East Jakarta, injuring 18 and forcing the school to shut its 20-year-old
campus.
In April, Abdul Salam, the self-proclaimed prophet and founder of the Islamic sect
Al-Qiyadah Al-Islamiyah, was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment for “blasphemy.”
Indonesian laws prohibiting blasphemy are primarily applied to practices
perceived to deviate from mainstream Islam.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Approximately two million Indonesians, mostly women, work abroad. Many
migrate as domestic workers and are subject to a range of human rights violations
(see Saudi Arabia and Malaysia chapters). Prior to departure, poorly monitored
labor recruiters often deceive workers about their jobs abroad and impose
excessive fees, placing the migrants at risk of trafficking and forced labor.
Many Indonesian foreign missions in the Persian Gulf and Asia operate temporary
shelters for the thousands of domestic workers facing abuses each year. Despite
recent improvements, foreign missions often fall short of meeting minimum
requirements including in the areas of shelter, case management, and legal representation.
Child Domestic Workers
More than 700,000 children, mainly girls, work as domestic workers in Indonesia.
Typically recruited between the ages of 12 and 15, often on false promises of
decent wages and working conditions, they may work 14 to 18 hours a day, seven
days a week, earning far less than the prevailing minimum wage. In the worst cases, child domestic workers are paid no salary at all and are physically, sexually,
and psychologically abused.
Domestic workers are excluded from existing national labor laws, which afford
protections such as minimum wage, an eight-hour work day, weekly day of rest,
and vacation time. At this writing, draft national legislation that would mandate
an eight-hour work day, a weekly day of rest, and an annual holiday for domestic
workers remained stalled in the Ministry of Manpower.
Aceh
Six political parties in Aceh will take part in general elections in 2009. All party
candidates must take a Quran reading test administered by Aceh’s election
commission, which discriminates against qualified secular or non-Muslim
Acehnese.
There remains no accountability for past human rights violations committed during
or after the Aceh conflict and there has been no movement toward establishing
a truth and reconciliation commission.
Papua and West Papua
Despite dozens of Indonesian government statements pledging a new approach
in Papua and positive developments on some fronts, justice has noticeably
lagged.Security forces, including special Mobile Brigade (Brimob) police units,
continue to engage in abuses in remote highland regions with virtual impunity.
Freedom of expression also continues to be corralled. In March police jailed nine
Papuan activists for displaying the Papuan “Morning Star” flag. They remain in
detention charged with rebellion (makar), a crime punishable by life imprisonment.
In July police assaulted 46 protesters and charged six with rebellion for
raising the Morning Star flag in Fakfak, West Papua. In August police fired live
ammunition into a crowd, killing a peaceful demonstrator after protesters raised
the Morning Star flag in Wamena.
Death Penalty
After a 14-month hiatus, Indonesia resumed executions in June 2008, killing two
Nigerians convicted of drug trafficking. In July and August four Indonesians convicted
of multiple murders were executed. In November, authorities executed
Amrozi, Mukhlas, and Imam Samudra, convicted for the 2002 Bali bombings that
killed 202 people.Over 100 people remain on death row in Indonesia.
Freedom of Expression and Press
In April 2008, the House of Representatives passed a freedom of information law
after seven years of debate. Critics are concerned with a vaguely worded provision
criminalizing “deliberate misuse” of public information.
Criminal and civil defamation laws continue to be used to silence press criticism.
In February 2008, Time Magazine submitted a petition to reverse the $US110 million
libel ruling against it in favor of the Suharto family. In September a Jakarta
court found Indonesia’s Tempo magazine guilty of defaming agribusiness giant
Asian Agri for an investigative report on alleged tax evasion. In June 2008 a court
convicted and jailed Risang Bima Wijaya, a Yogyakarta-based reporter, for an article
on sexual harassment ruled to have insulted the manager of a local newspaper.
Human Rights Defenders
In January 2008 the Supreme Court reconvicted Garuda Airways pilot Pollycarpus
Budihari Priyanto, and sentenced him to 20 years in prison for the 2004 murder
of human rights defender Munir Said Thalib. An Indonesian court sentenced Indra
Setiawan, a former airline official, to one year in prison for being an
accessory.Reinvigorated police investigations uncovered key evidence linking
Muchdi Purwopranjono—a former general, special forces commander, and deputy
national intelligence chief—with Pollycarpus and the murder of Munir.
In a January 2008 report on Indonesia, Hina Jilani, UN expert on human rights
defenders, concluded that defenders in Papua are particularly vulnerable to
threats, harassment, arbitrary detention, and torture. She also noted that while conditions for defenders in Aceh have improved since the 2005 peace agreement,
no perpetrators have been brought to justice for abuses committed against
defenders there between 2001 and 2005.
Key International Actors
United States Defense Secretary Robert Gates visited Indonesia in February 2008
offering increased military assistance to the Indonesian military. The US military
has not resumed cooperation with Kopassus (special forces) and Brimob (antiriot
police), units notorious for rights abuses.
Forty members of the US House of Representatives sent a letter to Yudhoyono in
July 2008, requesting the release of Papuan political prisoners Filep Karma and
Yusak Pakage.
Relations between Indonesia and Australia were strengthened through the June
2008 visit of Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Rudd and Indonesian
President Yudhoyono discussed security cooperation and signed a joint Forest
Carbon Partnership agreement, but Indonesia’s commitment to curbing deforestation
remained in doubt with corruption rampant in the forestry section and inadequate
timber and financial tracking systems.
In April 2008 the UN Human Rights Council examined Indonesia’s human rights
record as part of the new Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process. Concerns put
to Indonesia during the UPR dialogue included continuing impunity, torture,
arrests, detention of peaceful political activists, and human rights violations in
Papua.Indonesia made no clear commitments to address ongoing violations in
Papua, but it agreed to criminalize torture and ratify the Optional Protocol of the
Convention against Torture.
In May 2008 the UN Committee against Torture issued findings that both police
and military routinely use torture; it expressed concern that no Indonesian official
has been convicted of the offense.
As a key ASEAN member, Indonesia continues to press Burma to release Aung
San Suu Kyi. Indonesia played a pivotal role in ASEAN efforts to convince Burma to lift a ban on foreign assistance following the devastating Cyclone Nargis in
May.
In October Indonesia’s Parliament ratified the ASEAN Charter, but lawmakers and
officials said they would press for future changes to strengthen its compliance
with international standards and establish penalties for non-compliant members.
In September 2008 the Norwegian government abandoned its US$1 billion investment
in Rio Tinto over concerns with unethical conduct and environmental devastation
at the Grasberg gold and copper mine in Papua.