Indonesia
The December 2004 earthquake and tsunami overshadowed all other issues
in Indonesia in 2005. While the disaster helped propel an August 2005 peace
agreement for Indonesia’s northwest Aceh province, Indonesia struggled to
cope with the massive rehabilitation and reconstruction needs posed by the
crisis. The Indonesian military continued to commit human rights violations
in Papua, and impunity reigned in other parts of Indonesia. There were disturbing
signs of a return to intimidation of the press and criminalization of
dissent. In September Indonesia’s parliament finally ratified the two main
international human rights covenants, on civil and political rights, and economic,
social and cultural rights. Three bombs killed at least twenty-three
people in Bali in October, in an attack similar to that of October 2002.
Aceh: Tsunami and Subsequent Peace Agreement
The tsunami devastated Aceh, which lies only ninety miles from the epicenter
of one the worst natural disasters in recent history. Over 127,000 people
were killed there in the span of minutes; an additional thirty-seven thousand
are still missing and presumed dead. More than half a million displaced continue
to rely on outside help for basic necessities. Aftershocks, including the
March 28, 2005 Nias Island quake, which killed at least 905 people and displaced
almost 107,000, continue to traumatize the populations in Aceh and
North Sumatra. It will take years for Aceh to recover from the physical, emotional,
and human toll of the earthquake and tsunami.
In August 2005, the government of Indonesia and the Free Aceh Movement
(Gerakan Aceh Merdeka, GAM) signed a comprehensive peace agreement
after thirty years of devastating armed conflict. In August and September,
approximately 200 monitors from the European Union and the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) arrived in the province to observe the
initial implementation of the agreement, which includes the release of all
GAM prisoners convicted of treason, a disarmament program, and a significant
reduction of government troops in the province. The agreement also
covers the planned establishment of an ad hoc court in Aceh to hear cases of human rights violations. As of November, the ceasefire and implementation
of the peace agreement appeared to be holding, with prospects for a sustainable
peace in the region stronger than ever.
Papua
There was a significant build-up of troops in Papua, the easternmost part of
the country, with reports of widespread displacement of civilians, arson, and
arbitrary detention in the central highlands region. In August a reported
10,000 Papuan protestors held the largest ever demonstration in the province
over the failure of the government to implement special autonomy as mandated
in a 2001 agreement. In October the government finally set up the
Papuan Peoples Council (MRP) in accordance with provisions in the 2001
Act on Papuan Special Autonomy and a subsequent government regulation.
To date there has been no judicial accounting for atrocities committed in
Papua in 2000. In September 2005 two police officers standing trial for the
December 2000 killing in Papua of three students and the torture of up to
100 civilians were acquitted by a human rights court in Sulawesi.
Papua has the highest HIV prevalence in Indonesia, and discrimination
against people living with HIV/AIDS is widespread.
Terrorism
Indonesia faces a domestic terrorist threat, with more than 200 civilians
killed since 2002 in bomb attacks targeting Western interests. Indonesia is
addressing this threat through criminal prosecutions and a slowly improving
police force, although the perpetrators of some of the attacks remain at large.
Abu Bakar Bashir, believed by many to be the spiritual head of the terrorist
organization Jemaah Islamiyah, was convicted in March 2005 of criminal
conspiracy behind the 2002 Bali bombings. Due to poor conduct of the prosecution,
he was acquitted of the more serious charge of planning a terrorist
attack. He received a sentence of only thirty months, which was further shortened to twenty-five-and-a-half months in an August 2005 Independence
Day sentence reduction.
Impunity and the TNI
The Indonesian armed forces (Tentara Nasional Indonesia, TNI) continue to
violate international human rights and humanitarian law with impunity.
Military operations in Papua and Aceh are characterized by undisciplined and
unaccountable troops committing widespread abuses against civilians, including
extrajudicial executions, torture, forced disappearances, beatings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions, and drastic limits on freedom of movement.
Torture of detainees in police and military custody is also widespread across
the country; some of the detainees tortured are children. Indonesia’s executive
and judicial branches regularly fail to address such abuses.
September 30, 2005, marked the fortieth anniversary of the alleged coup
attempt that precipitated former Indonesian President Soeharto’s rise to
power. The Indonesian Communist Party remains banned for allegedly plotting
the coup attempt, and former members or supporters continue to suffer
discrimination. At least half a million people were killed in anti-communist
purges after the coup attempt, and hundreds of thousands more were imprisoned
without charge or trial. To date there has been no accountability for
atrocities committed in 1965 and 1966. There has also been no legal
accounting for the majority of atrocities committed during Soeharto’s more
than three decades in power, or for the violence instigated by pro-Soeharto
forces in a failed attempt to stave off his 1998 fall from power.
Trials for the 1984 killing of civilians by Indonesian security forces at
Tanjung Priok, Jakarta, finished in July 2005 with the appeals court overturning
the convictions of twelve of the fourteen defendants. The other defendants
had been acquitted the previous year amid reports of political interference
and witness intimidation.
Despite significant international pressure and interest, trials of senior
Indonesian officers in Jakarta failed to give a credible judicial accounting for
atrocities committed in East Timor in 1999 (see East Timor chapter).
Freedom of Expression
Although political space for dissent increased enormously after the fall of
President Soeharto, the June 2005 conviction and six-month sentence for a
student in Bali for burning a portrait of President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono illustrates how broadly-worded laws limiting freedom of expression
are still used by authorities to target outspoken critics.
After the fall of Soeharto, Indonesia for a time was considered a center of
media freedom in Southeast Asia. However, the trend more recently has been
toward a more restrictive environment characterized by extensive restrictions
on, and intimidation of, journalists in Aceh, and ongoing use of criminal
defamation laws to target journalists and editors who criticize public figures.
In May 2005 two newspaper editors, Darwin Ruslinur and Budiono
Syahputro, were each sentenced to nine months in jail after a judge found
them guilty of defaming a local Golkar Party leader in Lampung, Sumatra. In
April an appeals court upheld a one-year prison sentence for Bambang
Harymurti, the editor of the prominent independent Jakarta news magazine
Tempo, for an allegedly defamatory article about a well-connected businessman.
Freedom of Religion
In July 2005 Indonesia’s Council of Ulemas issued a fatwa against the
Ahmadiyah, prompting a series of attacks against their places of worship.
Founded in 1889 by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the Ahmadiyah identify themselves
as Muslims but differ with other Muslims as to whether Mohammad
was the “final” monotheist prophet; consequently, some other Muslims perceive
the Ahmadiyah as heretics. The police regularly failed to respond to the
attacks, and at the time of writing no charges had been brought against any
perpetrator. By November 2005 at least two local regencies in Java had
banned all Ahmadiyah religious activity in those areas, in direct violation of
Indonesian constitutional religious freedom guarantees.
Indonesian Migrant Workers
Over a million Indonesians work abroad, sending home remittances critical
to the country’s economy. Women comprise over 75 percent of these migrant
workers.
In addition to problems these workers encounter while abroad (see the
Malaysia and Saudi Arabia chapters), many women domestic workers confront
a wide range of human rights abuses during recruitment, pre-departure
training, and return to Indonesia. These abuses include being confined in
locked, overcrowded training centers for months on end, and many fall
deeply into debt to pay exorbitant agency fees. Some girls and women seeking
employment become victims of human trafficking.
Indonesia has taken some positive steps to address this issue, but 2004
migrant workers legislation is deeply flawed. Indonesian officials have not
vigorously implemented necessary protections, such as effectively monitoring
and prosecuting labor agencies or fighting corruption.
Child Domestic Workers in Indonesia
At least 688,000 children, mainly girls, are estimated to work as domestics in
Indonesia. Typically recruited between the ages of twelve and fifteen, often
on false promises of decent wages and working conditions, girls may work
fourteen to eighteen hours a day, seven days a week, and earn far less than
the prevailing minimum wage. In the worst cases, child domestics are paid no
salary at all and are physically and sexually abused. Domestic workers in
Indonesia are not recognized as workers by the government, and are excluded
from the nation’s labor code, which affords basic labor rights to workers in
the “formal” sector such as a minimum wage, overtime pay, an eight-hour
work day and forty-hour work week, weekly day of rest, vacation, and social
security. The Ministry of Manpower does not monitor the “informal” sector,
and no effective mechanisms exist for domestics to report cases of abuse. The
exclusion of all domestic workers from these rights denies them equal protection
of the law and has a discriminatory impact on women and girls, who
constitute the vast majority of domestic workers.
Human Rights Defenders
On September 7, 2004, one of Indonesia’s most outspoken and respected
human rights defenders, Munir Said Thalib, died under suspicious circumstances
on a plane to the Netherlands. The autopsy report, released in
November 2004, concluded that Munir had died from arsenic poisoning.
In December 2004 President Yudhoyono established, by presidential decree,
an independent fact-finding team to investigate Munir’s killing. The team’s
unpublished report identified Garuda airlines pilot Pollycarpus Priyanto as a
leading suspect in the case, and linked him to senior employees of the
Garuda airline and high-ranking intelligence officials. On August 9, 2005,
the trial of Pollycarpus began at the Central Jakarta District Court.
Pollycarpus was charged with committing or participating in the planned
murder of Munir, either alone or in collaboration with two other named suspects.
However, the indictment against Pollycarpus made no mention of the
fact-finding team’s report or findings. The trial is ongoing at this writing.
The fact-finding team also issued a summons to retired army Lt. Gen.
Hendropriyono, the head of Indonesia’s State Intelligence Body at the time
of the murder. He refused to comply with the summons, and subsequently
filed criminal defamation charges against two respected human rights defenders,
Usman Hamid (the head of Kontras) and Rachland Nashidik (the head of
Imparsial), who were members of the fact-finding team.
In Aceh, human rights defenders still suffer threats and intimidation from
security forces and GAM when monitoring and investigating human rights
abuses.
Key International Actors
In February 2005 the United States lifted long-running restrictions and
resumed full International Military Education and Training (IMET) for
Indonesia. First imposed following the massacre of civilians at Santa Cruz
cemetery in East Timor in 1991, the restrictions had remained in place pending
Indonesia’s cooperation with the FBI in an ongoing investigation into the killing of two Americans and one Papuan in Papua in August 2002. In
November the U.S Congress voted to maintain some restrictions on U.S
military assistance to Indonesia in foreign military financing, pending
progress in accountability for human rights violations, and increased civilian
control over the military.
Indonesia’s relationship with the United States continues to focus on joint
efforts to fight terrorism. The United States has made it clear that cooperation
in the “war on terror” is more critical than human rights to normalization
of the U.S.-Indonesia relationship.
In February 2005 U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced the establishment
of a commission of experts to review the prosecution of serious
human rights violations committed in East Timor in 1999, given Indonesia’s
failure to do so effectively. After initially being refused visas to enter the
country, the commission traveled to Jakarta in May 2005. The commission’s
report to the secretary-general, published in July, found that the trials in
Jakarta for crimes committed in East Timor in 1999 were “manifestly inadequate,”
showing “scant respect for or conformity to relevant international
standards,” primarily due to a lack of commitment on the part of the prosecution,
and a lack of expertise, experience and training. The commission recommended
that Indonesia accept international support to strengthen its
prosecutorial capacity, advising that the Indonesian government be given a
clear six-month timetable to show progress on the commission’s recommendations.
At the time of writing neither the U.N. Security Council nor the
secretary-general had acted on any of the commission’s recommendations.
The Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI) meeting, an annual conference
of Indonesia’s largest donors convened by the World Bank, continues to
pledge significant sums, although donors are increasingly conditioning assistance
on good governance and legal reform.