Indonesia
Over the past 12 years Indonesia has made great strides in becoming a stable,
democratic country with a strong civil society and independent media. However,
serious human rights concerns remain. While senior officials pay lip service to
protecting human rights, they seem unwilling to take the steps necessary to
ensure compliance by the security forces with international human rights and
punishment for those responsible for abuses.
New allegations of security force involvement in torture emerged in 2010. But the
military consistently shields its officers from investigations and the government
makes little effort to hold them accountable. The government has also done too
little to curb discrimination against and attacks on religious, sexual, and ethnic
minorities.
In July the US government lifted its ban on military assistance to Kopassus,
Indonesia’s elite special forces, despite continuing concerns about its human
rights record.
Freedom of Expression
While Indonesia today has a vibrant media, authorities continue to invoke harsh
laws criminalizing those who raise controversial issues, chilling peaceful expression.
Indonesia has imprisoned more than 100 activists from the Moluccas and
Papua for “rebellion” for peacefully voicing political views, holding demonstrations,
and raising separatist flags.
In August Indonesian police arrested 21 individuals for planning to float pro-independence
flags attached to balloons during a visit to the Moluccas by President
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Police subjected them to severe beatings that lasted
for days including with wooden sticks and bars and forced them to hold painful
stress positions. In September Papuan activist Yusuf Sapakoly, convicted of
“rebellion” in 2007 for assisting activists who displayed a pro-independence flag,
died of kidney failure after prison authorities denied him medical treatment. In
July, after 10 months of delay, prison authorities in Papua permitted political prisoner
Filep Karma to travel to Jakarta for necessary surgery.
Indonesia’s criminal libel, slander, and “insult” laws prohibit deliberately “insulting”
a public official and intentionally publicizing statements that harm another
person’s reputation, often even if those statements are true. In early 2010 Tukijo,
a farmer from Yogyakarta, was sentenced to six months’ probation and a threemonth
suspended prison sentence for criminal defamation after he asked a local
official to disclose the results of a land assessment.
Military Reform and Impunity
Indonesia still does not credibly investigate most allegations of serious human
rights abuse by security forces. Despite parliament’s recommendation in
September 2009, President Yudhoyono failed in 2010 to authorize an ad hoc
court to investigate the 1997-98 enforced disappearances of student activists. Nor
was there any progress on a bill before parliament that would give civilian courts
jurisdiction to try soldiers accused of committing abuses against civilians. In
November a military court in Papua convicted four soldiers for beating unarmed
civilians in Papua to sentences of between five and seven months in prison, the
incident was captured on film. Other videos of security forces torturing or killing
civilians emerged this year but few perpetrators have faced justice.
Ignoring recommendations from a National Human Rights Commission team,
police and prosecutors took no steps to reopen the case against former deputy
state intelligence chief and one-time Kopassus commander Maj. Gen. Muchdi
Purwopranjono, implicated in the 2004 murder of prominent human rights
activist Munir Said Thalib.
In January President Yudhoyono appointed Maj. Gen. Sjafrie Sjamsoeddin, implicated
in the 1997-98 student disappearances and in serious human rights abuses
in East Timor, to the position of deputy defense minister.
Of 18 Kopassus personnel convicted of human rights abuse since 1999, at least 11
continue to serve in the military. On March 22 Defense Minister Purnomo
Yusgiantoro publicly pledged to suspend from active duty military officials credibly
accused of gross human rights abuses in the future, discharge those convicted
of abuse, and cooperate with their prosecution. Six days later soldiers in
Depok were accused of severely assaulting four boys who had allegedly stolen a bicycle. Military police said they investigated the soldiers but released no information
suggesting that they were prosecuted or disciplined.
The armed forces retain extensive business holdings despite a law requiring the
government to shut down these businesses or take them over by October 2009.
The government merely ordered a partial restructuring of the entities—cooperatives
and foundations—through which the military holds many of its investments.
The team overseeing the restructuring failed to meet an August deadline to complete
its work, which remains incomplete at this writing.
Freedom of Religion
Senior government officials justify restrictions on religious freedom in the name
of public order. In April Indonesia’s Constitutional Court upheld a law prohibiting
“blasphemy,” which criminalizes the practice of beliefs deviating from the central
tenets of one of six officially recognized religions, on the grounds that it protects
public order.
On several occasions militant Islamist groups mobilized large groups of private
citizens and attacked places of worship of minority religious communities. Police
frequently failed to arrest the perpetrators of the violence. In July the local authorities
tried to seal a mosque where members of the Ahmadiyah religious community
worship in Kuningan, West Java. When Ahmadiyah members blocked them,
hundreds of anti-Ahmadiyah protesters then attempted to forcibly close the
mosque, resulting in minor injuries. Police made no arrests, and in August
Indonesia’s religious affairs minister called for a ban on Ahmadiyah religious
practice, claiming that the violence resulted from the Ahmadiyah’s failure to
adhere to a 2008 decree requiring them to refrain from spreading their faith.
Several minority congregations alleged that local government officials arbitrarily
refused to issue them permits required by law to build a “house of worship.”
Those who attempted to worship without a permit faced harassment and violence.
In August protesters assaulted a Protestant congregation that had begun holding
services in a vacant lot after officials in Bekasi, a Jakarta suburb, denied their permit
request and sealed two sites they used for services. Approximately 20 congregants were injured, but police made no arrests. In September assailants attacked
two leaders of the congregation, injuring one critically. Police arrested 10 suspects,
including the leader of the local chapter of the militant Islamic Defenders
Front.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In a sign of rising social intolerance, threats by the Islamic Defenders Front forced
cancellation of a regional meeting of the International Lesbian, Gay Bisexual,
Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA) in Surabaya in March and a National Human
Rights Commission workshop on transgender issues in April.
Papua/West Papua
In 2010 Indonesia maintained restrictions on access to Papua by foreign human
rights monitors and journalists, facilitating a climate of impunity. Indonesia
expelled the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) from Papua in 2009;
its office there remained closed in 2010.
In May government officials transferred Anthonius Ayorbaba, the warden at
Papua’s Abepura prison, after the Papua office of the National Commission on
Human Rights found him responsible for frequent beatings of prisoners by
guards. However, authorities did not investigate Ayorbaba further and took no
other steps to address allegations of prisoner abuse at Abepura.
In July Papuan journalist Ardiansyah Matra’is’s body was found in a river. Matra’is
had reported on plans for a large agri-business development in Papua and illegal
logging involving police officers. Police claimed he had committed suicide, but an
autopsy revealed he had died before entering the river.
Despite the wide circulation of a video showing police paramilitary (Brimob) officers
taunting Yawan Wayeni after they had cut open his stomach, police officials
made no effort to investigate or prosecute those responsible for his killing.
In October a 10-minute cell phone video showed Indonesian soldiers brutally torturing
two Papuan farmers, Tunaliwor Kiwo and Telangga Gire, as they asked them about weapons. Kiwo screams as a piece of burning wood is repeatedly jabbed at
his genitals. The Indonesian government promised to prosecute the soldiers.
Aceh
Aceh’s provincial government continued to implement a repressive Shariainspired
dress code and law on “seclusion”—banning association between
unmarried men and women in “isolated” places—primarily through a Sharia
police force that harasses, intimidates, and arbitrarily arrests and detains women
and men. Local community groups also forcibly enter homes and assault and
publicly humiliate couples they suspect to be committing “seclusion.” Police
make little effort to deter such behavior.
In January 2010, three Sharia police officers raped a young woman they had
detained overnight on suspicion of “seclusion.” Officials replaced the head of the
local Sharia police and two of the perpetrators were tried and sentenced to
imprisonment for eight years, but authorities declined to implement broader
remedial measures.
In July the West Aceh district government forbade women from wearing tight
pants and authorized the local Sharia police to require women wearing pants to
immediately change into a government-issued skirt.
In a positive development, Aceh’s governor refused to implement an October
2009 draft law that would have added new Sharia offenses that raise human
rights concerns, including criminalizing adultery by a married person and imposing
penalties including death by stoning.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Migrant domestic workers continue to confront a range of abuses both during the
recruitment process in Indonesia and while employed abroad. The government
has failed to stop local recruiters from charging prospective migrants exorbitant
fees that leave them highly indebted, which contributes to situations of forced
labor abroad. Citing concerns about abuse, the government has maintained bans
of new migration to Malaysia and Kuwait, and in 2010 imposed and lifted a ban on migration to Jordan. Negotiations to revise a 2006 memorandum of understanding
with Malaysia on domestic workers, initially expected to be concluded in
2009, have repeatedly stalled on establishing a minimum wage and a recruitment
fee structure.
Child Domestic Workers
Hundreds of thousands of girls in Indonesia are employed as domestic workers.
Many work long hours, with no day off, and are forbidden from leaving the house
where they work. In the worst cases, girls are physically, psychologically, and sexually
abused by their employers. Presently, Indonesia’s labor law excludes all
domestic workers from the basic labor rights afforded to formal workers.
The parliament failed to enact a draft Domestic Worker’s Law. The committee considering
the bill ceased its deliberations in July 2010 following internal disagreements,
particularly over a provision that would require domestic workers to be
paid the minimum wage.
Migration and Refugees
Indonesia does not offer asylum for refugees and has not ratified the 1951
Refugee Convention. Increasingly, Indonesia has detained asylum seekers, largely
as a result of foreign pressure. Indonesia detained nearly 1,300 migrants between
January and June 2010, many of whom were attempting to reach Australia. Some
organizations have reported mistreatment and substandard care in detention.
Key International Actors
Indonesia continued its leadership role in ASEAN and appointed an independent
expert supported by civil society groups as its representative to the ASEAN
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR), which held its first formal
session in Jakarta in April. Yet Indonesia failed to press for strengthening the
AICHR’s weak mandate or for substantial participation by civil society organizations
in its work.
The United States broadened bilateral relations with Indonesia by implementing
the US-Indonesia Comprehensive Partnership. In July the US lifted an 11-year ban
on military aid to Kopassus, despite continuing concerns about impunity and the
unit’s human rights record. The US requested that Indonesia shift soldiers previously
convicted of human rights abuse out of the force but not that they be discharged
from the military entirely. In November President Barack Obama visited
Jakarta to discuss the US-Indonesia Comprehensive Partnership, signaling closer
cooperation between the two nations. He did not raise specific human rights concerns.
The US also continued to provide significant support to Detachment 88,
Indonesia’s counterterrorism police, but revealed that it cut off aid for the unit in
the Moluccas in 2008 as a result of human rights concerns.
In September the US House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs held
a hearing to discuss abuses by security forces in Papua and shortcomings in the
implementation of special autonomy.
The Australian government continued to cooperate with Kopassus and
Detachment 88. In September Australia noted concern about torture allegations
in the Moluccas but did not announce a suspension of aid in response.
In June the European Union held the first EU-Indonesia Human Rights Dialogue in
Jakarta. The EU reported that it raised areas of concern but did not indicate
whether it had called for any specific human rights improvements.