Indonesia
Competitive, credible, and fair local elections in Jakarta and the province of
West Kalimantan in 2012 underscored the ongoing transition from decades of
authoritarian rule in Indonesia. The government’s willingness to accept numerous
recommendations from United Nations member states during the UN’s
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of Indonesia’s human rights record was another
hopeful sign of a growing commitment to respecting human rights.
However, Indonesia remains beset by serious human rights problems. Violence
and discrimination against religious minorities, particularly Ahmadiyah, Bahai,
Christians, and Shia deepened. Lack of accountability for abuses by police and
military forces continues to affect the lives of residents in Papua and West
Papua provinces.
Freedom of Expression
Indonesia’s vibrant media routinely reports on crucial social and political issues
including corruption, environmental destruction, and violence against religious
minorities. But a rising climate of religious intolerance and an infrastructure of
discriminatory national and local laws deny freedom of expression to
Indonesia’s religious minorities.
In May, the Indonesian government dismissed recommendations during its UPR
to release more than 100 political prisoners, the majority in the Moluccas
Islands and Papua. These activists are serving sentences of up to 20 years for
acts of peaceful protest including staging protest dances or raising separatist
flags. In January, the government refused to accept the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention’s determination, issued in September 2011, that Papuan
independence activist Filep Karma is a political prisoner. The working group
called on Indonesia to immediately and unconditionally release Karma.
Indonesian police and government authorities failed to adequately protect
artists, writers, and media companies targeted with threats and protests by militant
Islamist groups. In May, neither police nor government officials intervened
to prevent Islamist groups from disrupting the book tour of Canadian-Muslim writer Irshad Manji in the capital, Jakarta, and Yogyakarta. In June, Jakarta police
bowed to pressure from the militant Islamic Defenders Front organization
protesting the planned concert of US pop star Lady Gaga and revoked the permit
to the concert organizers, prompting its cancellation.
Military Reform and Impunity
Impunity for members of Indonesia’s security forces remained a serious concern,
with the military courts having a poor prosecution record and no civilian
jurisdiction over soldiers who commit serious rights abuses. On June 6, over
300 soldiers from the 756th Battalion rampaged in the Papuan village of
Wamena as a reprisal for an incident in which in which villagers beat to death
two soldiers involved in a fatal traffic accident. Soldiers randomly fired their
weapons into shopping areas, burned down 87 houses, stabbed 13
villagers, and killed a native Papuan civil servant.
Although military officials on June 12 apologized for the incident and promised
compensation, victims said military investigators failed to question them about
the incident. They said rather than paying any compensation, the military has
limited its response to the violence to a traditional Papuan “stone-burning” ceremony
and declared the case closed.
Freedom of Religion
In 2012, incidents of violence against religious minorities were frequent and
occasionally deadly. Islamist militants mobilized mobs to attack religious
minorities with impunity. Light prison terms imposed on those prosecuted sent
a message of official tolerance for such mob violence. Dozens of regulations,
including ministerial decrees on building houses of worship, continue to foster
discrimination and intolerance.
Throughout 2012, dozens of minority Christian congregations, including GKI
Yasmin church in Bogor and HKBP Filadelfia church in the Jakarta suburb of
Bekasi, reported that local government officials arbitrarily refused to issue them
permits required under a 2006 decree on building houses of worship. Both
churches had already won Supreme Court decisions to build such structures.
Senior government officials, including Religious Affairs Minister Suryadharma
Ali and Home Affairs Minister Gamawan Fauzi, continued to justify restrictions
on religious freedom in the name of public order. They both offered affected
minorities “relocation” rather than legal protection of their rights.
Suryadharma Ali has himself inflamed tensions by making highly discriminatory
remarks about the Ahmadiyah and Shia, suggesting that both are heretical. In
September 2012, he stated that the “solution” to religious intolerance of Shia
and Ahmadiyah was their conversion to the Sunni Islam that most Indonesians
follow. That same month, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono called for the
development of an international instrument to prosecute “religious blasphemy,”
which could be used to restrict free expression and the religious freedom of
minorities.
According to Indonesia’s Setara Institute, which monitors religious freedom,
religious attacks increased from 216 in 2010 to 244 in 2011. In the first nine
months of 2012 there were 214 cases.
On December 29, 2011, Sunni militants attacked a Shia village in Sampang
regency, Madura Island, burning houses and the madrasa, causing around 500
Shia residents to flee. Police arrested and charged only one of the militants for
the arson attack. On August 26, at the end of the holiday following the end of
Ramadan, hundreds of Sunni militants again attacked the same Shia village and
burned down around 50 Shia houses, killing one man and seriously injuring
another. Several police officers at the scene failed to intervene to stop the
attack.
In March, a court in Central Java sentenced Andreas Guntur, the leader of the
spiritual group Amanat Keagungan Ilahi, to four years’ imprisonment on charges
of blasphemy on the basis of allegedly improper teachings of certain verses of
the Quran.
In June, a West Sumatra court sentenced Alexander An, an administrator of the
“Minang Atheist” Facebook group, to 30 months in prison and a fine of 100 million
rupiah (US$11,000) for “inciting public unrest” via Facebook postings
espousing atheism.
In July, an East Java district court sentenced Shia cleric Tajul Muluk to two years’
imprisonment for blasphemy against Islam. The East Java high court later
increased his sentence to four years and two months for causing “riots” in
August.
In November, Acehnese villagers attacked a Muslim sect in Bireuen, Aceh, targeting
the house of Muslim teacher Tengku Aiyub Syakuban. Mainstream
Muslim clerics accused Syakuban of disseminating “heretical teachings.”
Hundreds of villagers burned and killed Syakuban and his student Muntasir.
One attacker, Mansyur, also died in the melee.
Papua/West Papua
In March, a Jayapura court convicted five men—Selpius Bobii, a social media
activist; August Sananay Kraar, a civil servant; Dominikus Sorabut, a filmmaker;
Edison Waromi, a former political prisoner; and Forkorus Yaboisembut, a
Papuan tribal leader—and sentenced them to three years in prison for statements
made at a Papuan People’s Congress in October 2011. The security forces
had brutally attacked the congress, leaving at least three people dead.
In May, more than a dozen UN member countries raised questions and made
recommendations during Indonesia’s UPR in Geneva about human rights problems
in Papua including impunity for abuses by security forces, restrictions on
the rights to freedom of expression, and excessive restrictions and surveillance
of foreign journalists and human rights researchers. In September, Indonesia
rejected all the Papua-related UPR recommendations. The government instead
denied that Indonesia has political prisoners and asserted that there is no
impunity in Papua and that “national journalists” could travel freely in the
region.
From May to August there was a marked upsurge in violence as Indonesian
security forces apparently sought to crackdown on Papuan activists. Forty-seven
reported violent incidents in this period left 18 dead, including one Indonesian
security officer, and dozens of wounded, including a German tourist.
On June 14, police shot and killed KNPB deputy chairman Mako Tabuni, triggering
riots in the Jayapura neighborhood of Wamena, over perceptions that Tabuni was the victim of an extrajudicial execution. Papua police suspected Tabuni of
involvement in numerous shootings.
Aceh
In June, former Aceh guerilla leaders Zaini Abdullah and Muzakir Manaf took the
offices of Aceh’s governor and deputy governor respectively after winning an
April 9 election.
In May, the Singkil regency closed down 19 churches and one house of worship
belonging to followers of Pambi, a native faith among the Pakpak Dairi ethnic
group, after protests from the militant Islamic Defenders Front who asserted the
structures were “illegal.” Governor Zaini refused to intervene in the dispute,
blaming religious tension on unnamed “outsiders.”
Aceh’s provincial government continued to implement a repressive Shariainspired
dress code and law on “seclusion,” banning association between
unmarried men and women in “isolated” places. The provisions are enforced
primarily through a Sharia police force that harasses, intimidates, and arbitrarily
arrests and detains women and men.
In September, a 16-year-old teenage girl arrested by the Sharia police in Langsa
regency committed suicide after two daily newspapers reported that she was a
“prostitute.” In her suicide note, she denied the allegation and said she could
not bear the shame.
Migrant Workers
More than four million Indonesian women work abroad in Malaysia, Singapore,
and the Middle East as live-in domestic workers. These women often encounter
a range of abuses, including labor exploitation, psychological, physical, and
sexual abuse, and situations of forced labor and slavery-like conditions. The
Indonesian government has become an increasingly vocal advocate for its workers
abroad, successfully negotiating the pardon of 22 Indonesian women on
Saudi Arabia’s death row, calling for improved labor protections, and ratifying
the Migrant Workers Convention.
However, Indonesia has consistently failed to rein in abusive recruitment agencies
that send workers abroad. Many agencies charge workers high fees that
leave them heavily indebted and give them deceptive or incomplete information
about their work conditions. Revisions to its migration law remain pending.
Within Indonesia, an important draft law extending key protections to domestic
workers has languished in parliament. The country’s labor law excludes all
domestic workers from the basic labor rights afforded to formal workers, such
as a minimum wage, overtime pay, limits to hours of work, a weekly rest day,
and vacation. Hundreds of thousands of girls, some as young as 11, are
employed as domestic workers. Many work 14 to 18-hour days, seven days a
week, with no day off. Many employers forbid child domestic workers from leaving
the house where they work and pay little or none of their salaries. In the
worst cases, girls are physically, psychologically, and sexually abused by their
employers or their employers’ family members.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Indonesia detains and mistreats thousands of asylum seekers, including children,
from Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Burma, and elsewhere. Asylum seekers face
detention, abuses in custody, limited access to education, and have little or no
basic assistance. In February 2012, an Afghan asylum seeker died from injuries
allegedly inflicted by guards at the Pontianak Immigration Detention Center.
There are at least 1,000 unaccompanied migrant children in Indonesia, approximately
200 of whom remain in detention with unrelated adults. Indonesia is not
party to the 1951 Refugee Convention, and does not provide most migrants
opportunities to obtain legal status, such as to seek asylum. Many migrants
consider traveling on to Australia on boats arranged by smugglers a viable
option, despite the risks of drowning in the dangerous sea crossing.
Key International Actors
In April 2012, British Prime Minister David Cameron visited Jakarta. Cameron
applauded Indonesia’s political progress, but challenged the government to
stand up against “despicable violence and persecution” of religious minorities.
Much of US policy towards Indonesia has focused on cementing military ties,
including with Indonesian special forces, which have long been implicated in
serious abuses. In September, the US announced the sale of eight Apache
attack helicopters to Indonesia.
In November, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay
visited Jakarta and asked the Indonesian government to address “increasing
levels of violence and hatred towards religious minorities and narrow and
extremist-interpretations of Islam.”