In the Migration Trap:
Unaccompanied Migrant Children in Europe
By Simone Troller
One might have thought that in Western Europe, where child mortality is close to
zero, education and healthcare a given, and social services and institutions well
developed, children’s rights would be one of the most uncontroversial topics for
policy-makers. Not, it seems, when the children in question are unaccompanied
migrants.
All too often the thousands of unaccompanied children arriving without parents
or caregivers find themselves trapped in their status as migrants, with European
governments giving little consideration to their vulnerabilities and needs as children.
Many end up without the humane treatment Europe claims to stand for.
Instead they may face prolonged detention, intimidation and abusive police
behavior, registration and treatment as adults after unreliable age exams, bureaucratic
obstacles to accessing education, abuse when detained or housed in institutions
and, too often, exploitation.
Compounding this, many suffer from a pervasive lack of legal defense that leaves
them unable to claim their rights. They may be prevented from seeking redress in
case of ill-treatment, from challenging their detention, from appealing a negative
asylum decision, or simply from appointing a lawyer to protect their rights.
Unaccompanied migrant children represent a tiny fraction of all migrants entering
Europe, and governments are unable to present reliable data.1 Yet, officials
across the continent speak about a “mass influx” or “avalanche” of children.
Unsurprisingly, these children have now become the focus of regional concern,
not least because they are perceived to be a resource burden.
Deliberate Legal Gaps
Within a given country, unaccompanied migrant children are typically dealt with
under two different and often contradictory sets of laws: immigration legislation
and child-protection legislation. All too often, authorities resort to immigration legislation first and child-protection second, which has direct and dire consequences
for children.
France presents one of the worst examples of what happens when unaccompanied
migrant children are dealt with primarily as irregular migrants. It maintains
extra-territorial zones, the biggest at Roissy Charles de Gaulle airport near Paris,
where unaccompanied migrant children are treated as if they had not entered
France. Inside these zones, they are subject to a different legal regime. In practice,
the legal fiction that they are not in France means they have fewer rights.
Up to 1,000 unaccompanied migrant children per year end up in the legal bubble
of the Roissy Charles de Gaulle airport transit zone, a zone that goes well beyond
the immediate surroundings of the airport to include places as far as 20 kilometers
away, and which can be extended at authorities’ discretion. The purpose of
that transit zone is simple: to insulate migrant children from the rights they would
be accorded on French territory, thereby greasing the legal skids for their speedy
removal from France.
Speedy removal includes removing these children to countries they merely transited
on their journey to France. For example, French authorities attempted to
deport a Chadian boy to Egypt, an Egyptian boy to Madagascar, and in 2008 contemplated
the removal of a five-year-old Comorian child to Yemen. Some of these
children resisted their deportation and risked police custody and criminal charges
as a result. Those who were removed—around 30 percent of all children who
arrived—almost always left without any record of what happened to them.2
Systems that prevent unaccompanied migrant children from accessing their rights
in Europe are not necessarily the result of sophisticated legal regimes. Legal gaps
that either target unaccompanied migrant children—or hit them as “collateral
damage”—may be blunt and discriminatory. European governments have all
signed the main United Nations treaty protecting the rights of children, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). Still, some have excluded migrant
children from entitlements otherwise granted to children through reservations
and declarations to the CRC that give deference to immigration legislation. In
other words, children are first considered migrants, and only secondly children.
For years the United Kingdom was criticized for excluding migrant children from
the full entitlements under the CRC due to their migration status until it lifted the
reservation in 2008, announcing its move days before the United Nations was set
to evaluate its children’s rights record.3
Germany has a similar declaration, filed in 1990 by the federal government. While
saying it does not object to withdrawing the declaration, the federal government
argues it is powerless to lift it, despite explicit requests by parliament, because, it
claims, several of the 16 German states object. Whatever it says, there are other
signs that the government itself is reluctant to end the discrimination against
migrant children: it argues, for example, that ending the reservation could act as
a “pull-factor” leading to the arrival of large numbers of migrant children and create
unpredictable costs.4 Meanwhile, in Germany the declaration continues to
have serious consequences for unaccompanied children who seek asylum. From
age 16 these children may not be assisted by a guardian or lawyer when going
through the complexities of an asylum procedure, and have to stay in reception
centers with adults.
Perhaps the most egregious regime for children treated as irregular migrants is to
be found in Greece, one of the major gateways for migrants into Europe. Children
spend months in detention centers—often in the same cell with adults—in conditions
that a European rights body termed “unacceptable.”5 Released from detention,
they are served an order to leave the country. If they do not, they may find
themselves back in detention, no matter how vulnerable they are. Even outside
detention they are far from protected. Greece offers a mere 300 places in reception
centers, which are full, for an estimated annual arrival of 1,000 children. With
no safety net, even for trafficked children and others most at risk, they can end
up in a daily struggle for survival and in a vicious cycle of exploitation.6
Government Coordination, or How to Pass the Buck
The fact of two sets of legislation applying to unaccompanied migrant children
means that at least two government bodies are in charge of them. One would like
to think this might mean double assistance and protection. But the reality is that
children fall through the bureaucratic cracks. Social policy ministries and interior or immigration ministries, the two types of bodies typically in charge, have inherently
different approaches.
Greek police officials, for example, pointed out to Human Rights Watch that they
cannot release migrant children from detention because no other accommodation
is available. Yet the Ministry of Health, responsible for providing care centers for
these children, claims there is no need for more reception facilities since many
children abscond shortly after their admission, a circumstance that should be
worrying in itself. With both bodies pointing fingers at the other, neither takes
responsibility for the children; the deadlock contributes to children’s prolonged
stay in detention.
Even when the overall number of unaccompanied migrant children in a given
country may not be that significant, their presence can put a considerable burden
on entry point regions, such as the Canary Islands in Spain, or the department of
Seine-Saint-Denis in France which has Roissy Charles de Gaulle airport on its territory.
When the primary responsibility within a country is devolved to regions, the
central state, although bound by international law to make sure all children in the
country can access their rights, may shirk responsibility by hiding behind such
administrative arrangements.
The Canary Islands, by geographical circumstance is a first landing point for
migrants from West Africa, Morocco, and Western Sahara, saw about 1,000 unaccompanied
migrant children arriving at its shores in 2006. It rushed to set up
emergency shelters in industrial sites and reopened a previously closed detention
center to house several hundred children. Then it demanded that the government
in Madrid take in or redistribute all but 300 children, its self-declared maximum
capacity. The central government organized and paid for some children’s
transfer to other regions, but ongoing arrivals kept numbers stable and few other
regions offered to accept children. While Madrid gradually withdrew its engagement,
the temporary and substandard shelters turned into the children’s permanent
residences. Even when Human Rights Watch confronted Madrid with findings
that children had been abused and continued to face risks in these centers, the
central government maintained that it was powerless over the situation. The
Canary Islands responded similarly, saying these centers would be closed as soon as the central government accepted responsibility for the children. So the
buck kept being passed, with children left unprotected.7
Worse Off than Adults
Because migrant children are underage, many governments deem them incapable
of making important decisions. As persons considered legally incapable, they are
assigned a guardian (a person or institution) that is mandated to decide all matters
on their behalf. Guardianship is intended to safeguard children’s interests
especially because children tend to be unaware of their entitlements. In reality,
however, guardians too often are ineffective, lack the necessary powers or expertise,
or worse, do not challenge government action and as a result fail to serve
children’s best interests. Children in these cases not only bear the full brunt of
tough migration policies, but stripped from decision-making, they are even worse
off than adults.
France, for example, provides that every unaccompanied migrant child arriving at
Charles de Gaulle airport be represented by a guardian. Yet the role of these
guardians may be redundant. If for any reason no guardian is available, or the
guardian arrives “too late” to meet the child, this does not prevent authorities
from detaining and deporting children. In 2008 around 30 percent of children
never met with their appointed guardian, often because they were deported
before their representative arrived. Yet, without that guardian, children cannot
legally challenge their detention or deportation, as they are themselves considered
“incapable” to file legal acts or even to appoint a lawyer. So the absent
guardian turns into an obstacle that prevents the child from escaping his or her
legal limbo.
Children may be powerless to object to guardians who do not act in their interest.
Spain deported unaccompanied migrant children to Morocco until 2008 on the
assumption that the child’s return was in his or her best interest. Government
institutions acted as the child’s guardian, but officials did not consult with the
child and they ignored consistent reports of children’s ill-treatment and detention
upon return.8 Children, in turn, were unable to challenge their deportation. To do
so, they would have needed their guardian, who initiated the decision in the first
place, and therefore was not going to challenge it. The Spanish government fought hard to keep the system that way, tried to block lawyers from representing
these children, and demanded the guardian’s exclusive power in all decisionmaking
over the child. Spanish national courts, in dozens of rulings that suspended
governmental deportation orders, for the time being, put an end to this
shameful practice.9
In Greece, children Human Rights Watch spoke to in 2008 and 2009 were
unaware they had a guardian—and guardians were unable to tell us how many
children they represented. Police in some cases did not even bother to inform
guardians about a child’s existence. In such situations, children below age 14 are
barred from accessing the universal right to seek asylum because they need a
guardian to do so. For example, a 10-year-old unaccompanied girl from Somalia
who Human Rights Watch met in June 2008 could not file an asylum application
because of the dysfunctional guardianship system. She remained an irregular
migrant instead, and Greek police detained her multiple times.10
The Returns “Solution”
As European governments struggle with their response to unaccompanied children
on their territory and the responsibility and costs they generate, the instinct
of some European Union member states is to find a cheap and easy solution: the
child’s return. While return is only one of several possible lasting solutions for a
child, it is too often the solution governments immediately favor, with little consideration
as to whether repatriation is in the child’s best interests.
In sending countries where social services barely exist and family tracing and
reunification remains difficult, some European host governments are attracted by
the idea of building reception centers to which they can swiftly return unaccompanied
migrant children. International law does not forbid the child’s return to a
care institution in the country of origin, but it allows it only when it is in the
child’s best interests. It remains questionable to what extent the return to an
institution is in the child’s best interest when, for example, it is far from his or her
family and local community, and when it is used as a way of ensuring the child’s
fast removal rather than the search for a permanent solution.
Investing in such a way in the returns of children may not only be a waste of
money, with those returned leaving their countries soon again, but it may also put
children back at serious risk. The construction of model care centers in countries
where services for children are absent or inadequate may also have an unintended
side-effect: they create disparities in countries of origin and could draw children
into migration as the only way to get services that would not be available if
they stayed home. Instead of seemingly quick and easy solutions that focus on
returns, investments into services and institutions accessible to all children in
their home countries are needed.
Finally, European governments are not simply off the hook once the child is
returned. They are directly responsible if the child is ill-treated, detained, or disappears
upon arrival if they ignored relevant information before returning a child
and did nothing to mitigate such risks. The European Court of Human Rights’ condemnation
in 2006 of Belgium for returning a five-year-old unaccompanied
Congolese girl by dumping her at Kinshasa airport was a much needed signal that
such action is held to account. In a decision concluding that Belgium demonstrated
“a total lack of humanity,” the court maintains that governments are obliged to
take “measures and precautions” against the inhuman treatment of a returned
child.11
Enter the European Union
It is positive that the EU wants to address the situation of these children in the
Stockholm Program, its five-year asylum and migration strategy, starting with an
action plan in 2010. EU policy coherence and action is needed in light of legal
provisions that require governments to remove a trafficking victim under one set
of laws, and to protect the victim under another set. Additionally, EU legislation
does not address the needs of those children who never file an asylum application—
possibly a majority—including the needs of those who cannot file a claim
because of practical or legal obstacles.12
The EU should be cautious, though, and make sure that before adopting an
action plan it takes the time to understand the complexities behind children’s
migration and informs itself on the basis of existing and, where necessary, additional
unbiased research. It should avoid falling back on myths and false pretexts put forward by some member states. Those include that detaining children protects
them from traffickers, or that intercepting (and returning) migrants before
they reach European soil prevents the unnecessary deaths of children. The EU
should also avoid repeating broad generalizations that the best place for a child
is always with the family, or that better services and laws in Europe will only lead
to more children arriving.13 Not only are such arguments dangerous and unsubstantiated,
but they inevitably open up a race to the lowest standards and undermine
the ultimate goal of better protection. The EU should also refrain from using
its political and economic weight to put undue pressure on countries of origin to
take children back.
Instead, the EU should ensure its policies and actions are truly rights-based and
treat these children first and foremost as children, and not on the basis of their
migration status. It should help member states adopt sound and transparent procedures
to guarantee every child a fair, comprehensive, and individualized
assessment that leads to a lasting and beneficial solution. All options for a
child’s durable solution should be considered on an equal basis, including the
possibility of the child’s stay in the host country, or transfer to another EU member
state to join close relatives (such as siblings), alongside return to country of
origin. The primary factors in such decision-making should be the child’s best
interests, informed by a number of elements including the child’s personal history
and his or her views.
The EU should put forward standards to ensure that children enjoy better safeguards,
can defend their rights, and are able to challenge government decisions
with the help of guardians and lawyers when they face detention, deportation, or
go through an asylum interview. These standards should require guardians’ to
possess expertise on migrants and children’s rights, undergo regular training, be
independent from the body deciding on a child’s return, and to be subject to
independent review. Guardians who have a conflict of interest in representing the
child should be excluded from taking on such a role. Guardians also need to be
given the mandate and the power to represent the child’s best interests, and they
need to have a say in all decision-making, including decisions regarding a child’s
detention or deportation. Furthermore, in all administrative and judicial decisions
children should be represented by lawyers in addition to guardians.14 
Current methods to determine the age of a child are another area where EU guidance
can make a positive contribution. Because some governments predominantly
use unreliable age tests based on medical examinations only, an unaccompanied
child risks being arbitrarily declared an adult. Minimum safeguards to prevent
such scenarios include that the error margin in these examinations is
acknowledged, that the child and guardian consent to the exam, and that the
child is given the benefit of the doubt and has access to a lawyer and legal procedure
to challenge flawed results. The EU should further support member states’
adoption of comprehensive exams that also take into account a child’s psychological
maturity, life experiences, ability to interact with adults, and demeanor.
Spain, with its long-standing exposure to unaccompanied migrant children, is certainly
well placed to lead the adoption of an action plan during its presidency in
early 2010.15 Spanish practices of not detaining unaccompanied migrant children
and of regularizing their presence while on Spanish territory are powerful examples
of good practice for other EU member states. But Spain also needs to critically
and honestly examine its record and not repeat past mistakes. This includes
recognition that readmission agreements lacking transparency and safeguards for
children, and requiring sending countries to accept children back within an unrealistic
timeframe, are not the way forward.16 It should also reflect on why unaccompanied
children in Spain almost never seek asylum—without resorting to the
implausible explanation that none of them fit the profile. And it should candidly
look at its record of returning unaccompanied Moroccan children to dangerous
situations, with the result that many went straight back to Spain. These are important
lessons that need to feed into discussion on EU action.
Last but not least, the EU needs to make sure its policies do not undermine but
realize European governments’ obligations under international human rights law
and under the EU’s Charter of Fundamental Rights. Its proposed children’s rights
strategy has the potential to contribute toward this aim and should make unaccompanied
migrant children an integral part. Ultimately, though, the EU should
also consider filling the existing gaps with a set of binding rules that harmonize
member states’ response to the common needs and vulnerabilities of all unaccompanied
migrant children in Europe, whether they escape persecution or
abuse, are smuggled into Europe for exploitation, or have left their homes in
search for a better life. And the EU needs to underscore that its members must fulfill obligations under applicable human rights treaties while these children are
on European territory, and that children are protected from return to abuse, illtreatment,
or neglect. Member states whose actions fall below European standards
should be held to account.
Without such decisive action, unaccompanied migrant children likely remain
trapped in their status as migrants, with the result that their protection and safety
as children remain elusive aspirations.
Simone Troller is a researcher in the Children’s Rights Division
at Human Rights Watch.
1 There are no reliable statistics on how many unaccompanied migrant children enter
Europe every year. Asylum statistics, although they do not account for all children, are
indicative of the proportion of unaccompanied children as compared to other asylum
seekers in Europe. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), over the past 10 years unaccompanied children have consistently made up
4 or 5 percent of all asylum applicants in the EU. “Addressing the Protection Gap for
Unaccompanied and Separated Children in the European Union,” Judith Kumin, director,
UNHCR Bureau for Europe, Brussels, September 15, 2009. The presentation is on file
with Human Rights Watch.
2 Human Rights Watch, France – Lost in Transit: Insufficient Protection for
Unaccompanied Migrant Children at Roissy Charles de Gaulle Airport, 1-56432-557-1,
October 2009, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/france1009webwcover_
0.pdf, pp. 49-54.
3 United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Consideration of Reports
Submitted by States Parties under Article 44 of the Convention, Concluding
Observations, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,”
CRC/C/GBR/CO/4, October 20, 2008,
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/AdvanceVersions/CRC.C.GBR.CO.4.pdf
(accessed September 28, 2009), para. 70.
4 Deutscher Bundestag (German Parliament), “Antwort der Bundesregierung auf die
Grosse Anfrage der Abgeordneten Ekin Deligöz, Grietje Bettin, Volker Beck (Köln), weiterer
Abgeordneter und der Fraktion BÜNDNIS 90/DIE GR􀀀NEN – Drucksache 16/4205 –
R􀀀cknahme der Vorbehalte zur UN-Kinderrechtskonvention” (“Response by the German
Government to the Extended Request of the members of Parliament Ekin Deligöz, Grietje
Bettin, Volker Beck (Köln), other members and the parliamentary group BÜNDNIS 90/DIE
GRÜNEN – Reference number 16/4205 – Withdrawal of Reservations to the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child”), July 13, 2007, p. 9. Deutscher Bundestag
(German Parliament), “Antwort der Bundesregierung auf die Kleine Anfrage der
Abgeordneten Rainer Funke, Dr. Werner Hoyer, Klaus Haupt, weiterer Abgeordneter und
der Fraktion der FDP – Drucksache 15/1606 – Vorbehaltserklärungen Deutschlands zur
Kinderrechtskonvention der Vereinten Nationen” (“Response by the German Government
to the Request of the members of Parliament Rainer Funke, Dr. Werner Hoyer, Klaus
Haupt, and others, and the FDP parliamentary group – Reference number 15/1606 –
Reservations by Germany to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child”), October 23,
2003, p. 3.
5 European Committee for the Prevention of Torture, “Report to the Government of
Greece on the visit to Greece carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention
of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 23 to 29
September 2008,” http://www.cpt.coe.int/documents/grc/2009-20-inf-eng.htm
(accessed November 1, 2009), para. 53.
6 Human Rights Watch, Left to Survive: Systematic Failure to Protect Unaccompanied
Migrant Children in Greece, 1-56432-418-4, December 2008,
http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/12/22/left-survive, pp. 53-93.
7 Human Rights Watch, Unwelcome Responsibilities: Spain’s Failure to Protect the Rights
of Unaccompanied Migrant Children in the Canary Islands, vol. 19, no. 4(D),
http://www.hrw.org/en/node/10817/section/5, pp. 55-69, 95-98.
8 Human Rights Watch, Nowhere to Turn: State Abuses of Unaccompanied Migrant
Children by Spain and Morocco, vol. 14, no. 4(D), May 2002,
http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2002/05/06/spain-and-morocco-abuse-child-migrants,
pp. 28-37.
9 Ibid., pp. 8-14.
10 Human Rights Watch, Left to Survive, pp. 56-57.
11 Mubilanzila Mayeka and Kaniki Mitunga v. Belgium (Application no. 13178/03),
October 12, 2006, www.echr.coe.int, para. 69.
12 Human Rights Watch, Left to Survive, pp. 42-45; Unwelcome Responsibilities,
pp. 49-54; Lost in Transit, pp. 39-41; and Human Rights Watch, Returns at Any Cost:
Spain’s Push to Repatriate Unaccompanied Children in the Absence of Safeguards,
1-56432-388-9, October 2008, http://www.hrw.org/en/reports/2008/10/17/returnsany-
cost-0, pp. 18-19.
13 Host states should trace the family or caregiver of unaccompanied children and seek
reunification. In certain cases, however, particularly when the child was subjected to violence,
exploitation, or neglect inside the family, or when the family was unable to protect
the child from such abuse, a child’s best interest may not be the return to parents or
caregiver. A decision whether it is in a child’s best interest to return to his or her family,
therefore, must be subject to a careful assessment and cannot be generally assumed.
14 EU standards on guardianship should be in line with those of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child. UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, “Treatment of
Unaccompanied and Separated Children Outside their Country of Origin,” General
Comment No. 6, UN Doc. CRC/GC/2005/6 (2005), paras. 33-38.
15 Human Rights Watch joined Save the Children, UNHCR, UNICEF, and the Separated
Children in Europe Programme in recommendations on necessary EU actions that should
feature in an EU action plan. “General Recommendations for EU Action in relation to
Unaccompanied and Separated Children of Third Country Origin,” September 15, 2009,
http://www.savethechildren.net/alliance/europegroup/europegrp_pubs.html (accessed
October 21, 2009).
16 Letter from Human Rights Watch to Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero,
January 9, 2007, http://hrw.org/pub/2006/SpainMorocco010907.pdf; Letter from
Human Rights Watch to Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, April 2, 2007,
http://hrw.org/english/docs/2007/04/02/spain15628.htm.