India
India, the world’s most populous democracy, continues to have significant
human rights problems despite making commitments to tackle some of the
most prevalent abuses. The country has a thriving civil society, free media, and
an independent judiciary. But longstanding abusive practices, corruption, and
lack of accountability for perpetrators foster human rights violations.
Government initiatives, including police reform and improved access to health
care and education, languish due to poor implementation. Many women, children,
Dalits (so-called untouchables), tribal communities, religious minorities,
people with disabilities, and sexual and gender minorities remain marginalized
and continue to suffer discrimination because of government failure to train
public officials in stopping discriminatory behavior.
Impunity remains a serious problem, particularly for abuses committed by security
forces in Jammu and Kashmir, the northeast, and areas in central and eastern
India facing a Maoist insurgency. Resource extraction and infrastructure
projects often have deleterious environmental and economic impacts, and may
infringe upon the rights of affected communities.
The central government tightened restrictions on internet content, insisting the
measures are to contain threats to public order. It used a colonial-era sedition
law to stifle peaceful dissent in 2012 on issues ranging from the government’s
handling of the Maoist insurgency and corruption, to protests against a nuclear
power plant in the southern state of Tamil Nadu. The protection of religious
minorities received a boost from the prosecutions of several suspects in the
2002 Gujarat riots, resulting in over 75 convictions in 2012. These included the
August conviction of Maya Kodnani, a former minister and a leader of Bajrang
Dal, a militant Hindu organization.
Impunity
Members of security forces implicated in serious rights abuses continued to
enjoy impunity, in large measure due to India’s laws and policies.
The Indian defense establishment resisted attempts in 2012 to revoke or revise
the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA), which permits soldiers to commit
serious human rights violations with effective immunity.
Maoist Insurgency
Maoists operations extend to nine states in central and eastern India, finding
support in regions with weak governance, infrastructure and basic public services,
such as health care and education.
Maoist insurgents known as Naxalites continued to target government schools
and hospitals. Paramilitary forces continued to occupy and use schools as
bases, despite a Supreme Court order to vacate all schools by May 2011. In
September, government officials in Chhattisgarh, central India, stated they
would remove forces from 36 schools and hostels because of their impact on
children’s education.
At this writing, Maoist-related violence in 2012 had resulted in 257 deaths,
including 98 civilians. In June, security forces killed 19 villagers in Chhattisgarh
state in a night operation, prompting widespread condemnation.
Civil society activists in Maoist areas remain increasingly at risk from both
Maoists and state security forces. Many activists have been arbitrarily arrested,
tortured, and charged with politically motivated offenses that include murder,
conspiracy, and sedition. The Maoists have threatened or attacked activists they
believe are linked to the government.
Jammu and Kashmir
While violence in the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir has been on a
decline, security forces responsible for serious rights abuses remain effectively
immune from prosecution under the AFSPA.
In September, the state government rejected calls for DNA testing of 2,730
corpses that a police investigative team found in unmarked graves at 38 sites in
north Kashmir in July 2011. Some of the gravesites are believed to hold victims of enforced disappearance and extrajudicial execution by government security
forces dating back to the 1990s.
A number of elected village council leaders resigned in September following
threats and attacks from armed separatist militants who oppose any election in
Jammu and Kashmir.
Violence in Assam
In July, violence between indigenous Bodo tribes and Muslim migrant settlers
started in Kokrajhar and spread to several districts in Assam, resulting in the
deaths of at least 97 people and displacing over 450,000. Authorities in Assam
failed to prevent the violence, despite information about increasing tensions
between the communities, which have clashed in the past over access to land
and resources.
Freedom of Expression
In 2012, the central government used the Information Technology (Intermediary
Guidelines) Rules to tighten internet censorship, raising concerns about restrictions
on the right to free speech. Under the rules, intermediaries such as internet
service providers and search engines are required to remove content within
36 hours that is deemed offensive. However, criteria for prohibited content are
ambiguous and frequently used to stifle criticism of the government.
The government used the colonial-era sedition law without regard for a Supreme
Court ruling that sedition requires evidence of incitement. In September, police
in Mumbai arrested political cartoonist Aseem Trivedi, acting on a complaint
that his cartoons mocked the Indian constitution and the national emblem. He
was released after widespread protests. In May, in the southern state of Tamil
Nadu, police filed sedition complaints against thousands of people who peacefully
protested the construction of a nuclear power plant. In Orissa and
Chhattisgarh states, sedition cases have been filed against activists and
lawyers suspected of supporting armed Maoist groups.
The government continued to use the Foreign Contributions Regulation Act
(FCRA) to restrict access to foreign assistance by domestic nongovernmental
organizations.
Protection of Children’s Rights
Children remained at risk of abuse, with a large number forced into dangerous
forms of labor, and without proper access to health care and education.
India has one of the largest populations of malnourished children in the world.
According to government estimates, at least 40 percent of children are vulnerable
to sex trafficking, homelessness, forced labor, drug abuse, and crime—and
need protection.
The government took some significant steps in 2012 to improve children’s
rights. In April, the Supreme Court upheld the government decision to provide
universal access to primary education, requiring that private schools reserve 25
percent of seats for underprivileged children. In May, parliament passed a new
law to protect children from sexual abuse. In August, the government issued a
blanket ban on employing children under 14, reversing a former law that only
prohibited employment in hazardous jobs.
Women’s Rights
Violence against women and girls continued in 2012, with increased reports of
sexual assault, including against those with disabilities. The government had
yet to properly investigate and prosecute sexual abuse in police custody.
In June 2012, Pinki Pramanik, a renowned woman athlete, was arrested on allegations
of rape. Male police officers mistreated her while taking her into custody
and authorities conducted “gender determination” tests in violation of her
rights to consent, privacy, and dignity. A video of her undergoing some part of
the abusive examination was made public.
India has yet to enact amendments to reform its penal laws to recognize a wide
range of sexual offenses. While the central government modified its protocols
for handling rape investigations, removing questions on the degrading “two-finger test,” the changes still fall short of World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines
on sexual assault, especially regarding medical treatment for victims.
India has a strong law to curb child marriages but the government also pursues
discriminatory policies. In central India’s Madhya Pradesh state, for example,
adult candidates are barred from taking state civil service exams if they were
forced to marry as children. The government continued to limit its nutrition programs
for pregnant mothers in many states to women ages 19 and older, and up
to two live births only, excluding many young mothers from benefits.
Abuses in Extractive Industry
A breakdown in government oversight over India’s mining sector has led to rampant
corruption and, in some cases, to serious harm to health, environments,
and livelihoods of mining-affected communities.
In September, the government of the western state of Goa canceled all mining
licenses to examine whether proper procedures were followed to mitigate the
negative impact on health and environment. The same month, after a year-long
suspension, mining activity was allowed to partially resume in the southern
Karnataka state, on condition that no environmental restrictions are violated.
However, the government failed to enforce protection mechanisms in other
parts of the country.
Access to Palliative Care
The Indian government took several important steps in 2012 to address the suffering
of hundreds of thousands of persons with incurable diseases from pain
and other symptoms. It has begun to actively encourage regional cancer centers,
many of which do not currently offer palliative care, to ensure such services
become available. The government is also preparing amendments to the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, which, if adopted, would
improve the medical availability of morphine. More than seven million people in
India require palliative care every year.
Death Penalty
In November, India hanged Ajmal Kasab, the only surviving Pakistani gunman
from the November 2008 Mumbai attacks in which 10 members of the Lashkare-
Taiba Pakistan-based terrorist group killed more than 160 people. It was the
first execution in India since 2004, ending an eight-year unofficial moratorium.
India maintains that it imposes capital punishment in only the “rarest of rare”
cases. In July, 14 retired judges asked the president to commute the death sentences
of 13 inmates erroneously upheld by the Supreme Court over the past
nine years. This followed the court’s admission that these death sentences were
rendered per incuriam (out of error or ignorance). In November, the Supreme
Court also conceded that the “rarest of rare” standard has not been applied uniformly
over the years and that the principles for judging what constitutes “rarest
of rare” crimes need “a fresh look.”
International Role
India’s foreign policy in the region continues to be influenced by strategic and
economic concerns about China’s growing influence in Burma, Nepal, Pakistan,
and Sri Lanka.
India took some positive steps toward promoting human rights and accountability
globally. In March, India voted for a United States-led resolution at the
United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC) calling for post-war reconciliation
and accountability in Sri Lanka. This marked a significant change of position by
India, which has traditionally refrained from publicly criticizing the Sri Lankan
government on well-documented war crimes and related abuses.
In February, India voted in favor of a UN Security Council resolution on Syria
backing an Arab League plan concerning the escalating violence there. In July,
India again voted with Western governments at the Security Council in favor of a
resolution on Syria, which if adopted, would have extended the mandate of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) and threatened sanctions
if demands that Syrian authorities end abuses were not met.
Key International Actors
India has traditionally followed a foreign policy based on the principle of noninterference
and deems any criticism on human rights issues as interference in
its domestic affairs. As a result, most countries, including the US and the
European Union (EU), prefer to discuss these issues with India in private rather
than publicly press it to improve its rights record.
However, in May, several UN member states made significant recommendations
during the UN Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of India’s human rights record.
Recommendations included calls for India to ratify international treaties against
torture and enforced disappearance, repeal the death penalty as well as the
much-abused AFSPA, and protect the rights of Dalits, religious minorities,
women, children, and tribal groups. The Indian government has responded by
committing to address some of the recommendations, but ignored those that
required substantive action against impunity.
India invited the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary
executions, and the UN special rapporteur on the sale of children, child pornography,
and child prostitution to visit the country. After his visit in March,
Christof Heyns, the special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary
executions, expressed concerns over “high levels of impunity” enjoyed by police
and armed forces, recommended that the AFSPA be repealed, and called for
establishing a commission of inquiry to investigate extrajudicial killings.