India
The ruling alliance led by the Congress Party returned to power after elections in
2009. In its first term in office the Congress-led coalition made only modest
progress on rights. It has not yet addressed some of India’s most pressing needs,
including better training and reform of its police force; providing health, education,
and food security to millions still struggling for subsistence despite the
country’s economic growth; ending discrimination against Dalits, tribal groups,
and religious minorities; and protecting the rights of women and children.
A spate of indiscriminate bombings in various Indian cities, culminating in the
seaborne-based attack in Mumbai in November 2008, which killed at least 171,
and injured over 300 people, led to continued tensions with Pakistan. While the
Mumbai attack was attributed to the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba, earlier
deadly bombings were blamed on Muslim and Hindu extremist groups. Under
intense public pressure, the government amended the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, reinstating harsh provisions from previous counterterrorism laws
that had either been allowed to lapse or been repealed.
Maoist insurgents known as Naxalites broadened their attacks in 2009, resulting
in increased deployment of paramilitary and police forces. Although government
officials announced a “zero tolerance” policy for human rights violations during
security operations against the Maoists, separatist militants, and other armed
groups in various parts of the country, cases of custodial killings, torture, and
arbitrary arrests continued.
These abuses occur in part because of failure by the government to properly train
or modernize its police force. Police officers face dismal working conditions and
recruitment lags far behind increasing duties, creating an overstretched force that
is likely to take short-cuts to gain convictions. Embittered and overworked, the
police regard themselves as enforcers of the law—but not beholden to it.
The government’s failure to protect minorities and other vulnerable groups engenders
justified grievances and contributes to militant activity around the country.
At senior levels of government there is growing acceptance that Maoists are
attracting supporters in part because of the state’s long failure to address basic socioeconomic needs; the continued arbitrary displacement of families to make
way for government-backed infrastructure, mining, and factory projects; and discrimination
based on caste or ethnicity.
Justice and Accountability
India points to its independent judiciary, vibrant media, and active civil society as
evidence that it is a thriving, rights-respecting democracy. Yet fundamental, structural
problems remain including, most glaringly, widespread impunity for human
rights violations. The government routinely fails to hold security forces accountable
for abuses.
2009 marked the 25th anniversary of mass killings of Sikhs to avenge the assassination
of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards in 1984. A10-year
security operation against Sikh militants, who were responsible for numerous
human rights abuses, resulted in the arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance,
and extra-judicial killing of thousands of young Sikh men for suspected
affiliation with separatist groups. Many victims, witnesses, and alleged perpetrators
have died in the long, fruitless wait for accountability.
In Jammu and Kashmir and in the state of Manipur and elsewhere in the northeast,
many citizens have lost confidence in the state’s willingness to hold perpetrators
of human rights violations accountable. Kashmiris protested on the streets
after the death of two women in Shopian in May, refusing to believe a police
investigation would be fair. An ongoing inquiry by the Central Bureau of
Investigation has calmed tempers, but the protests were symptomatic of the government’s
failure to address impunity. In July an unarmed 27-year-old in Manipur
was shot and killed by police in a crowded market place, a killing captured by a
photo-journalist. Despite widespread outrage, the Manipur chief minister initially
praised the police for shooting a “militant.” Only after weeks of protests did the
state government order a judicial inquiry.
Laws such as article 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code and the Armed Forces
Special Powers Act provide legal protection for members of the security forces
who violate human rights. The problem of de jure impunity is likely to be exacerbated
by December 2008 amendments to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, which expand the already vague definition of terrorism, authorize search and
seizure with few safeguards, and double periods of pre-charge detention to 180
days, 30 of which may be in police custody. The use of draconian laws such as
the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, which allows confessions to
police to be used as evidence despite it being evident that they are coerced, is a
cause for serious concern, as are efforts by other states such as Gujarat to enact
similar legislation.
While India claims that its National Human Rights Commission ensures the protection
of rights, the commission often defends government behavior, lacks sufficient
resources to conduct its own investigations, and is not empowered to investigate
violations by the army. State human rights commissions are even more
poorly equipped and vulnerable to political pressure.
Conduct of Security Forces
Militants in many parts of the country have been responsible for large numbers of
killings. Nearly 2,000 people, including over 500 civilians and 350 security personnel,
were killed by militants in 2009, while over 1,000 civilians and nearly 40o
security personnel were killed in 2008. At the same time nearly 2,000 alleged terrorists
have been killed since January 2008.
The Indian government and militants in various parts of the country are locked in
a vicious cycle of violence. Cases of arbitrary arrest, torture and forced confessions
by Indian security forces are common. The use of “fake encounters”—in
which people are taken into custody and shot, with officials falsely claiming that
the deaths occurred during an armed exchange—are a continuing cause of serious
concern. Police torture is also common, including in counterterror operations.
Some Indian Mujahidin suspects, blamed for a series of indiscriminate bombings
in Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Jaipur, and Delhi in 2008, have claimed that they were
tortured and forced to make false confessions, as have Hindu militants arrested
for bombings in Malegaon, Maharashtra.
Violence against Minorities
Following attacks on Christians in Orissa in 2008, mob attacks on churches and
other Christian institutions, apparently instigated by Hindu extremist groups,
occurred in several states. While some of the alleged perpetrators of the Orissa
attacks have been arrested, there has been little success in containing Hindu
extremists.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
The rights of women are often neglected. A 2005 UN study estimated that twothirds
of married women in India suffer domestic violence. Female infanticide and
sex-selective abortions are the primary causes of skewed sex ratios and reflect
the unequal share of resources made available to women and girls in areas such
as access to education, food, and medical aid.
In part because of healthcare system failures, tens of thousands of Indian women
and girls die each year in childbirth and pregnancy. More suffer preventable
injuries, serious infections, and disabilities. Recent data show that more than a
fourth of maternal deaths worldwide take place in India. The country’s maternal
mortality ratio is many times that of Russia, China, and Brazil, and a girl who
reaches reproductive age in India is 100 times more likely to die from such causes
than a girl in the developed world.
Access to Education, and Child Soldiers
Millions of children in India have abysmal educational opportunities. While the
constitution provides for free and compulsory primary education, actual delivery
remains patchy. High numbers of students are out of school for reasons that
include poverty (with millions of children still employed in hazardous and other
“worst forms” of labor), gender discrimination, early marriage, poor quality of
teachers and curriculum, and lack of basic facilities. Many are further affected by
internal conflicts. For instance, the education of tens of thousands of children has
been disrupted by the Maoist conflict, with the Maoists bombing remote government
schools and government security forces occupying and using schools as
long-term outposts.
The Maoists admit that it is standard practice to recruit 16 and 17-year-old children
in their forces; they have used children as young as 12 in some armed operations.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In a positive development, the Delhi High Court in July ruled that section 377 of
the Indian Penal Code can no longer be used to treat consensual homosexual
conduct between adults as a criminal offense. While the ruling was challenged in
the Supreme Court by a few groups and individuals, the Indian government decided
not to oppose the verdict.
International Role
India has failed to adequately use its considerable influence to address human
rights problems in other countries or to be a human rights promoter at the United
Nations. India has played a negative role at the UN Human Rights Council, siding
with a bloc that opposes strong action to address violations. As India’s regional
and global influence grows, it needs to modernize its foreign policy to reflect its
status as the world’s largest democracy.
In the past India was a strong opponent of apartheid in South Africa, supported
the democratic opposition in Burma, and backed groups demanding democracy
in Nepal and Bangladesh. But officials now often use the language of “non-interference
in the internal affairs” of other countries to defend their inaction. In part,
this reflects India’s growing strategic concerns about China’s role in the region,
which has strongly invested in Burma and Pakistan and is expanding its influence
in Nepal, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka.
India claims that it needs good relations with its neighbors to counter threats to
national security by groups operating across borders. It wants Bangladesh,
Burma, and Pakistan to arrest and prosecute separatists. In particular, it wants
the international community to pressure Pakistan to end tacit protection of
groups blamed for attacks like the one in Mumbai in November 2008.
Key International Actors
India’s rapidly growing economy and increasing importance as a trading partner
has meant that its domestic human rights record rarely elicits serious international
scrutiny, including from the US, the country with the greatest external influence.
After a visit to India in March 2009, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
Navanethem Pillay called upon the government to bridge the gap in implementing
“national laws and policies that promote and protect human rights and seek to
support the most vulnerable.” She also sought repeal of laws such as the Armed
Forces Special Powers Act “that breach contemporary international human rights
standards” and encouraged India to welcome the visits of UN special rapporteurs.
India is yet to act on those recommendations. India has also not responded to
international recommendations that it more effectively combat caste- and religion-
based discrimination.
India has been repeatedly urged to play a greater role in advancing human rights
and protecting civilians in Burma and Sri Lanka. While India claims that it privately
raises such subjects with the governments concerned, Indian officials say little
publicly and do not play a leadership role in protecting rights.