India
The Congress Party-led coalition government elected in 2004 took some
important positive steps with respect to human rights in 2005. It established
a committee to review the Armed Forces Special Powers Act and has received
a report for review. For the first time, a prime minister from the Congress
Party has apologized for the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. During talks with rebel
groups in September, the government promised to ensure an end to human
rights abuses by troops deployed in Indian-administered Kashmir. For the
first time, the Indian army in Kashmir apologized in July for its actions after
troops killed three boys, mistaking them for militants. New legislation may
strengthen the right to information, rights over land, and minimum employment
guarantees.
Some problems persisted, however, and new problematic issues emerged.
Attacks on civilians by militant groups and Indian security forces continued
unabated. Not only were such killings reported from Kashmir and the northeast,
but a leftist extremist movement known as Naxalites spread through
central India, leading to a number of deaths, both in attacks by Naxalite
armed groups and retaliatory measures by security forces. The government
continued to use legislation that shields security forces from accountability—
Indian military, paramilitary, and police forces have engaged in serious
human rights abuses in conflict zones and yet there have been no attempts at
transparent investigations or prosecutions of those responsible. Police reform
was discussed, but torture during interrogation remained the norm. The
Gujarat government again failed to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for attacks on Muslims during the Gujarat riots of 2002. Despite legislative
measures to protect marginalized groups, discrimination based on caste,
social, or religious status continues widely in practice, with the failure to
implement anti-discrimination policies being especially apparent after the
December 2004 tsunami.
Rights of Dalits, Religious Minorities, and Indigenous Tribal
Groups
Although caste-based abuses are forbidden under Indian law, and the government
has embarked upon consultations to protect the rights of Dalits, other
marginalized castes, and vulnerable communities, the government has failed
to eradicate prejudice, particularly in rural areas. In a May 2005 report, After
the Deluge, Human Rights Watch documented numerous instances in which
higher-caste communities refused to share post-tsunami emergency relief
with Dalits. Ongoing abuses against Dalits include harassment, excessive
force by security forces in routine matters, mutilations, and killings by members
of other castes for attempting to cross caste barriers. For example, in
September 2005, more than fifty Dalit homes were burned down by the
upper-caste Jat community in Haryana state.
Increasingly, caste panchayats, or caste-based village councils, extrajudicially
punish inter-caste marriages with public lynching of couples or their relatives,
murder of the bride or the groom, rape, public beatings, and other
sanctions. This is particularly common if either bride or bridegroom is a
Dalit.
Indigenous peoples, known as Scheduled Tribes or Adivasis, suffer from high
rates of displacement. They make up 8 percent of the total population but
constitute 55 percent of displaced people. This has had a serious effect on the
overall development of these communities, particularly tribal children. The
government continues to use the 1894 Land Acquisition Act to displace
indigenous peoples from their lands without sufficient compensation. In
2005, the government proposed the Scheduled Tribes (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Bill, which is designed to protect the rights of those who had been
occupying forest land prior to October 1980. Activists worried that the new
law could aggravate tensions between those who will and will not benefit. In
addition, the draft fails to clarify access rights to common property resources
such as pastures and forests, and it appears to be in conflict with earlier forest
and wildlife protection laws.
Tribal groups who have converted to Christianity have been targeted for
attack by extremist Hindu organizations. In June 2005, an independent people’s
tribunal investigating the rise of violent sectarianism in Orissa state was
threatened by members of the right-wing Hindu extremist groups Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh and the Bajrang Dal.
Legacy of Communal Violence
The Indian government has failed to contain violent religious extremism and
to prosecute those who instigate or participate in religious violence. Such
failures only reinforce communal resentments.
After they were committed for retrial in another state on Supreme Court
orders, hearings in two cases related to the 2002 attacks upon Muslims in the
western state of Gujarat are nearing completion. Otherwise, there has still
been little accountability for the deaths of more than 2,000 Muslims in
Gujarat during the communal violence that erupted after a train carrying
Hindu pilgrims caught fire, killing fifty-nine passengers. Human rights
activists and lawyers had petitioned for fresh investigations and trials in a
number of cases where it was felt that the local courts, prosecutors, and
police were hostile to Muslim complainants. There continue to be delays in
the investigation and prosecution of these cases. Victims insist that the perpetrators
remain at large and threaten witnesses; the police claim that the perpetrators
cannot be located.
In October 2005, five people were killed in the town of Mau in Uttar
Pradesh in Hindu-Muslim riots. The majority Muslims in the town had
objected to the celebration of a Hindu festival.
In February, a commission headed by Justice G.T. Nanavati to probe the
1984 anti-Sikh riots submitted its report to the government, and the report
was placed before parliament in August. After initially refusing to take action
against Congress leaders named in the report—a decision that led to widespread
protests—Prime Minister Manmohan Singh apologized for the 1984
riots. Senior Congress leaders accused of involvement in organizing the anti-
Sikh pogrom resigned from their posts. Separately, in respect of counterterrorism measures adopted by the police in Punjab to contain a separatist
movement, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) in November
2004 found the state of Punjab “accountable and vicariously responsible” for
its failure to protect lives, and ordered compensation of 250,000 rupees (U.S.
$5800) for each of the more than 100 victims of summary execution.
Thousands of other cases still remain to be investigated. Many of the families
said they did not want the compensation unless those responsible were prosecuted—
a step the Punjabi government appears unwilling to take, particularly
with respect to assigning individual criminal responsibility.
Impunity of Security Forces
As Human Rights Watch noted in 2004, Indian security forces, including the
military, paramilitary forces, and the police, routinely violate human rights
with impunity. The Indian federal government rarely prosecutes army and
paramilitary troops in a credible and transparent manner. The result has been
an increase in serious abuses by security forces throughout the country.
Laws such as the Disturbed Areas Act and the Armed Forces Special Powers
Act have spawned abuses in various parts of the country, including many
deaths in custody, “disappearances,” and widespread allegations of torture.
Section 197 of the Criminal Code of Procedure gives security forces virtual
immunity for crimes committed in the course of duty.
Kashmir Conflict
The Kashmir insurgency, which began in 1989, has displaced tens of thousands
of people and seen thousands more “disappeared” at the hands of militant
and government forces.
In 2005, India and Pakistan continued talks to resolve the Kashmir issue, and
both sides also met with some Kashmiri rebel leaders. In April the governments
launched a bus service between Indian- and Pakistani-held Kashmir to
allow separated families to meet. After a devastating earthquake in October
2005, which killed tens of thousands in Pakistan-administered Kashmir, India
sent relief materials and offered other assistance. Five points have been opened up at the Line of Control, the de facto border between India and
Pakistan in Kashmir, to send relief materials and allow Kashmiris to meet and
assist their relatives affected by the earthquake.
According to the Indian government, there was a marked decline in violence
in 2005 because of the peace efforts. India withdrew some troops from
Indian-administered Kashmir and promised to continue demilitarization of
the valley if the violence is contained. The government released several
detainees in 2005 as part of a goodwill effort and as a means of addressing
human rights concerns.
Yet some human rights abuses continued and accountability remains a serious
problem. Militants killed and injured civilians in indiscriminate bomb attacks
and murdered a number of political activists, particularly those who participated
in the 2005 municipal elections. Attacks and threats against moderate
Kashmiri leaders, apparently by separatist militants, have hindered the peace
process, and if such moderates continue to be murdered for their views, a
lasting solution is unlikely to be found.
Troops continue to be responsible for arbitrary detention, torture, and custodial
killings. There has been a disturbing rise in extrajudicial executions.
Security forces regularly report gun battles where “foreign militants” are
killed. But there have been persistent allegations that such incidents are faked
and that alleged militants, taken into custody, are routinely executed.
Rights of Children
Despite a scheme launched in 2004 to provide universal education, millions
of children in India still have no access to education and work long hours in
the worst forms of child labor. Vulnerable communities such as Dalits and
tribal groups also have higher illiteracy and drop-out rates, and face significant
discrimination in education. Many continue to be forced into becoming
soldiers in areas where there are armed conflicts. Others languish in substandard
orphanages or detention centers where they endure inhumane conditions
and assaults on their dignity. Recent investigations show that hundreds
of children, most of them living in remote tribal areas, died in the last few years from causes linked to malnutrition. Children continue to be trafficked
for marriage, sex work, or employment. Tens of thousands of children, many
of them girls, live on the streets where they are at risk of physical abuse by
police, heightened vulnerability to HIV transmission, trafficking, and recruitment
into child labor.
Rights of Those Living with HIV/AIDS
The government estimates that in 2004, 5.134 million people in India were
living with HIV/AIDS, though many experts suggest that the number is
much higher. People living with AIDS, as well as those traditionally at highest
risk—sex workers, injection drug users, and men who have sex with
men—continue to face widespread stigmatization and discrimination. People
with AIDS are denied employment and access to education and healthcare.
Hundreds of thousands of children are living with HIV/AIDS. Many more
are otherwise seriously affected when they are forced to withdraw from
school to care for sick parents, are forced to work to replace their parents’
income, or are orphaned (losing one or both parents to AIDS). India is still
framing a promised legislation to end discrimination faced by people with
HIV and their families. While the government says it is committed to preventing
such abuse, there continue to be reports of hospitals and employers
rejecting people living with HIV/AIDS. Despite promises by the then-minister
of health in 2002 to provide free anti-retroviral treatment to 100,000 people
(prioritizing children), only 7,333 people were enrolled in the government’s
program as of April 2005.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders
Although the Congress-led central government has set up a National
Advisory Council that includes some human rights defenders and also holds
consultations with nongovernmental organizations to frame social welfare
policies, human rights defenders in Indian-administered Kashmir and in
Gujarat have been threatened. In Kashmir, human rights lawyers and activists
have reported threats from both security forces and militants. Through the
years of the conflict, several human rights defenders have been attacked, both by security forces and armed groups. Without proper accountability, it is difficult
to identify those responsible. Kashmiri human rights groups seldom
document abuses by militants because they fear retaliation. In 2005, some
Gujarati lawyers and activists pursing justice in the 2002 riot cases continued
to receive anonymous, threatening phone calls.
Key International Actors
As a test of its growing capabilities, India refused offers of help with immediate
relief and rescue after the December 2004 tsunami, and, in fact, assisted
other affected countries. The Indian government has since received substantial
assistance from international donors for the rehabilitation of tsunami survivors.
Ties between the United States and India have strengthened through increasing
trade, joint military exercises, training of U.S. troops by Indian counterinsurgency
experts, and Washington’s 2005 promise to provide India with
assistance to develop its nuclear energy program. Prime Minister Singh visited
the U.S. in July 2005, and, in a joint statement, both countries said they
were “committed to the values of human freedom, democracy and rule of
law.” Through the new U.S.-India Global Democracy Initiative, both committed
to assist countries that seek to build institutions and resources that
strengthen the foundations to make democracies credible and effective.
Despite such commitments, India has not used its increasing influence with
smaller neighbors—achieved through significant amounts of financial and
military aid—to press for better compliance with human rights standards.
The notable exception is Nepal—there, its suspension of military assistance
and engagement with political parties after the February 2005 coup by the
king has been important in promoting the restoration of democracy.