India
India, the world’s most populous democracy, has a vibrant media, active civil
society, a respected judiciary, and significant human rights problems.
The government’s agenda in 2010 was dominated by continuing insurgency and
armed conflict in several regions, including Jammu and Kashmir, Maoist-afflicted
areas in central India, and Manipur and other parts of the volatile northeast.
Impunity for abuses committed by security forces in the context of these conflicts
remains a pressing concern.
Authorities made little progress in reforming the police; improving healthcare,
education, and food security for millions still struggling for subsistence; ending
discrimination against Dalits (“untouchables”), tribal groups, and religious
minorities; and protecting the rights of women and children.
In many parts of the country, communities protested forcible acquisition of land
by state governments for infrastructure and mining projects. These projects frequently
go ahead without proper safeguards to protect the rights of those at risk
of displacement.
Legislators and officials proposed new laws to prevent torture, ensure food security,
and prosecute those responsible for sexual violence, but have yet to repeal
laws providing effective immunity from prosecution to government officials,
including soldiers and police, responsible for human rights violations.
Accountability for Security Force Abuses
The security forces have at times used excessive force in suppressing violent
street protests in Indian-administered Kashmir; the clashes resulting in more than
100 deaths and thousands of injuries to both civilians and security forces. Deaths
and injuries to protesters, many of them children, prompted anger and renewed
protests, deepening a cycle of tit-for-tat violence. In September the government
sought to calm tempers by announcing dialogue, releasing arrested protesters,
and providing financial compensation for deaths.
Maoist insurgents (Naxalites), operating in seven states, killed more than 100
police and paramilitary personnel in 2010, prompting a massive government
security response. Civilians were often caught up in the fighting.
In Manipur, conflicting separatist demands by rival groups led to repeated unrest,
with the security forces continuing to operate under the Armed Forces Special
Powers Act (AFSPA). Separatist groups and security forces committed serious
abuses against civilians; no members of the security forces were held accountable.
Activists in all of the conflict areas and in major cities demanded repeal of the
AFSPA and a larger commitment by officials to holding security forces accountable
for abuse, but repeal efforts were stymied by opposition from the army and
extreme nationalist political parties.
Bombings and Other Attacks
Prosecutors made some progress in 2010 in pursuing justice for a series of bombings
targeting civilians that killed 152 persons in 2008, responsibility for which
was claimed by an Islamist militant group called Indian Mujahedin (IM). Police
have charged more than 70 alleged IM members or associates from nine states in
the 2008 attacks and continue to seek the arrest of more than three dozen fugitives.
The IM is also suspected in a February 2010 attack in Pune city that claimed
17 lives and has apparently claimed responsibility for a September attack that
injured two foreign tourists in New Delhi.
There were repeated allegations of unlawful detention, torture, and other ill-treatment
by police to secure confessions in response to such attacks. In several
cases, the police themselves appear to have drafted the confessions. The suspects
suffered further abuses while in jail awaiting trial and even in court.
On an encouraging note, the trial of Ajmal Kasab, the sole surviving Pakistani
gunman in the November 2008 Mumbai attack that claimed 166 lives, was conducted
in a professional manner and was not the summary proceeding that critics
had feared.
Police in 2010 reported that extremist Hindu groups may have been responsible
for bombing attacks in Ajmer and Hyderabad, prompting the Home Minister to
warn against these previously ignored militant groups.
Other Accountability Issues
Impunity for abusive policing remains a pressing concern in India, with continuing
allegations in 2010 of police brutality, extrajudicial killings, and torture. While
some policemen were prosecuted for human rights abuses, legal hurdles to prosecution
remained in place and long-promised police reforms remained in draft
form or unimplemented. Alleged perpetrators use political influence, corruption,
and intimidation to obstruct investigations, delay proceedings, discourage plaintiffs,
and ultimately escape prosecution.
The long backlog and slow progress of cases in India’s courts also discourages
potential complainants. Victims’ family members and human rights lawyers needed
several years, for example, to force an investigation into allegations that the
Gujarat police summarily executed four persons in 2004. Only after the Supreme
Court ordered the Central Bureau of Investigation to investigate the summary execution
of an alleged terrorist in 2005 were a state minister and several senior
Gujarat police officials arrested.
The government has yet to prosecute those responsible for the mass killings of
Sikhs that followed the 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her
Sikh bodyguards. Delivery of justice for mass violence against Muslims in
Mumbai in 1992-93 and in Gujarat in 2002 has been slow.
In a positive development, a legislator from the ultra-nationalist Bharatiya Janata
Party was convicted in June 2010 for his role in violence against Christians in
Orissa in 2008 that left at least 40 people dead and thousands displaced when a
Hindu mob attacked Christians. In August, 16 others were sentenced to three
years in prison for their role in the violence.
Women’s Rights
While many serious issues remain, Indian officials took some positive steps on
women’s rights in 2010. In March long-awaited legislation reserving seats for
women in parliament was passed by the upper house and awaits lower house
approval. In April authorities introduced nationwide guidelines for maternal death
investigations and introduced a separate mechanism to track pregnancies and
their outcomes.
“Honor” killings of women and girls continued in 2010, mostly in the northern
states of Haryana, Punjab, and Uttar Pradesh. Khap panchayats (unofficial village
councils) issued edicts condemning couples for marrying outside their caste or
religion and censured marriages within a gotra (kinship group) as incestuous
even though there was no biological connection. To enforce these decrees, family
members threatened couples, filed false cases of abduction, and killed spouses
to protect the family’s “honor.” Some local politicians and officials were sympathetic
to the councils’ edicts, implicitly supporting the violence.
India still lacks comprehensive legislation on sexual violence and child sexual
abuse, but authorities in 2010 began to consider reforms to the existing sexual
violence law. Among a host of other problems, rape survivors continue to suffer
from use of an unscientific and degrading “finger test” in many hospitals to determine
whether they are “habituated” to sexual intercourse; the findings of the test
can be used in rape cases and other criminal proceedings.
Children’s Rights
In Jammu and Kashmir, several children were among those killed or injured during
anti-government demonstrations. Children detained for alleged participation
in the violent protests were held in jail with adults, in violation of juvenile justice
laws.
Although the government issued a directive preventing security forces from occupying
and using schools as long-term outposts during anti-Maoist operations in
states such as Chhattisgarh, Bihar, and Jharkhand, it failed to effectively implement
the measure, resulting in continued disruptions in education. Maoist insurgents
continued to bomb government schools and to recruit children into armed combat. The government failed to effectively implement policies that provide for
free and compulsory primary education.
Access to Pain Relief
Hundreds of thousands of persons with advanced cancer suffer unnecessarily
from severe pain because the Indian government has failed to ensure access to
safe, effective, and inexpensive pain drugs. More than half of government-supported
regional cancer centers do not offer palliative care or pain management,
even though more than 70 percent of their patients need it. Numerous patients
told Human Rights Watch that their suffering from cancer and other conditions
was so severe that they would rather die than live with the pain. The government
also failed to integrate palliative care into HIV treatment programs.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Building on a 2009 decision of the Delhi High Court, government officials promised
to drop section 377—a provision too often abused to treat consensual homosexual
conduct between adults as a crime—in proposed amendments to the
Penal Code.
India’s Foreign Policy
Despite its considerable influence, India continues to miss opportunities to raise
concerns about even egregious human rights violations in other countries or to
assert leadership on human rights at the United Nations. In several cases, it has
actively opposed international efforts to pressure human rights violators.
India played an important role in Afghanistan, providing aid for humanitarian and
infrastructure projects. In July the Foreign Minister called on all parties to abjure
violence, end links to terrorism, and accept the “democratic and pluralistic values
of the Afghan Constitution, including women’s rights.”
After the conclusion of a Sri Lankan military campaign to defeat the Tamil Tigers
in 2009, India provided humanitarian assistance for the rehabilitation of displaced
persons and called for political reconciliation. India, however, has continued to be weak on accountability for atrocities committed during the conflict by
both Sri Lankan and Tamil Tiger forces.
In July India hosted a state visit by Burma’s authoritarian leader, General Than
Shwe. India failed to demand greater protection for human rights by the military
junta, support an international commission of inquiry into war crimes in Burma,
or condemn the deeply flawed processes and rules for Burma’s national election
held on November 7, 2010.
Relations with Pakistan remained tense, particularly when new evidence showed
that Pakistani military intelligence officials may have been involved in supporting
the Lashkar-e-Taiba attack in Mumbai in November 2008.
Key International Actors
India’s policy in the subcontinent is heavily influenced by its strategic and economic
concerns about China’s growing influence in countries like Burma, Nepal,
Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
Relations between India and China suffered setbacks in 2010. China disapproves
of India’s continued support to Tibetan refugees and its hosting of the Tibetan
government in exile. However, both China and India agreed to resolve differences
through continued dialogue.
India continued to build strong ties with the United States and Europe, built on
increasing trade and business opportunities. Both the US and EU insisted they
privately pressed India to address a range of domestic rights concerns and to
become more of a champion of human rights issues internationally. But there was
no evidence such efforts resulted in changes in Indian policy or practice.