India
The new coalition government led by the Congress party, which
replaced the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) after elections
in May 2004, has taken some important positive steps with regard
to respect for human rights. These include repeal of the oft-abused
Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) and a re-evaluation of federal government
educational policies that have fostered communitarian resentments.
Attacks on civilians by militant groups and Indian security forces continued
unabated before and after the change in government.
Notwithstanding the repeal of POTA, the government continues to use
other legislation to shield security forces from accountability. Indian
military, paramilitary, and police forces have engaged in serious human
rights abuses not just in conflict-zones such as Kashmir, but also when
dealing with criminal suspects and detainees.
The Gujarat government’s failure to bring to justice those responsible
for massive communitarian riots in the state, in which thousands of
Muslims were killed and left homeless, continues to be a source of tension
throughout the entire country. However, the Supreme Court and
the National Human Rights Commission have taken several positive
steps to secure justice for the victims of the riots. The new government
of Manmohan Singh also has to contend with the Indian government’s
systematic failure to protect the rights of Dalits, other marginalized
castes and religious minorities. The Congress Party itself has failed to
provide any justice to the victims of serious abuses against the Sikh
community in Delhi and Punjab twenty years ago.
India faces a burgeoning HIV/AIDS problem, as people with HIV and
their families face government and social discrimination.
Rights of Dalits and Indigenous Tribal Groups
Despite legislative measures to protect marginalized groups, discrimination
based on caste, social, or religious grounds continues widely in
practice. Local police often fail to implement the special laws set up to
protect Dalits and members of tribal groups.
Dalits, or so-called untouchables, continue to face violence and discrimination
in nearly every sphere of their lives. Abuses against Dalits range
from harassment and use of excessive force by security forces in routine
matters, to mutilations and killings by members of other castes for
attempting to cross caste barriers. Dalit women are targeted with sexual
violence. Not only do authorities regularly tolerate such discrimination
and violence, in some instances they actively encourage it. In one widely
noted incident in July 2004, for example, police used excessive force
against Dalits who tried to participate in a religious festival in Tamil
Nadu.
Indigenous peoples, or Adivasis, have suffered from high rates of displacement.
Scheduled Tribes that make up 8 percent of the total population
constitute 55 percent of displaced people. This has had a serious
effect on the overall development of these communities, particularly
tribal children. The government continues to use the Land Acquisition
Act of 1894 to displace the indigenous peoples from their lands without
sufficient compensation, as is evident in the Narmada Valley
Development Project. Tribal groups who have converted to Christianity
have been targeted for attack by extremist Hindu organizations.
Impunity of Security Forces
Indian security forces, including the military, paramilitary forces, and
the police, routinely abuse human rights with impunity. The Indian federal
government rarely prosecutes army and paramilitary troops in a credible and transparent manner. The result has been an increase in
serious violations by security forces throughout the country.
The government’s repeal of the controversial Prevention of Terrorism
Act (POTA) was a major step forward for civil liberties in India. POTA
empowered security forces to hold individuals for up to 180 days without
filing charges, broadening the scope of the death penalty, dispensing
with the presumption of innocence by placing the burden of proof on
suspects, and admitting confessions into evidence despite the frequent
use of torture. The law was often used against marginalized communities
such as Dalits, indigenous groups, Muslims, and the political opposition.
But POTA’s repeal has not ended the legal impunity that security agencies
enjoy. Laws such as the National Security Act, the Disturbed Areas
Act, the Armed Forces Special Powers Act or the Armed Forces (Jammu
and Kashmir) Special Powers Act have spawned abuses in various parts
of the country, including many deaths in custody and widespread allegations
of torture. These laws give security agencies unchecked powers of
detention that often foster torture during interrogation.
For instance in Kashmir and Manipur states, the sites of long-standing
insurgencies, Indian military and paramilitary forces have held suspects
in army camps and barracks and have routinely tortured them, in violation
of domestic and international laws.
In July 2004, Manipur state witnessed unprecedented civilian protests
against the Armed Forces Special Powers Act after army troops sexually
assaulted and killed a woman in custody. That Act provides security
forces virtual immunity for crimes committed in the course of duty. The
new government recently agreed to review the act.
Other laws such as the Public Safety Act and section 197 of the
Criminal Code of Procedure also raise human rights concerns. Section 197 extends immunity to public servants by requiring government
authorization to initiate the prosecution of public servants for crimes
that result from the discharge of their official functions. In effect, it
allows the government to shield security forces from any legal accountability.
In Kashmir, military, paramilitary, and police forces continue their practice
of torturing detainees and custodial killings. There has also been a
nationwide rise in allegations of extrajudicial executions by security
forces, who typically justify their actions by claiming to have killed suspects
in an exchange of gunfire.
Kashmir Conflict
Since November 2003, a cease-fire along the Line of Control in
Kashmir has provided tremendous relief to residents on both sides of
the de facto border. During the intermittent shelling, however, neither
Pakistan nor India took adequate precautions to protect civilians. The
violence inside Indian-controlled Kashmir continued.
Bomb and grenade attacks by militants in crowded market places constituted
the intentional targeting of civilians. Attacks, apparently by separatist
militants, on moderate Kashmiri leaders have hindered the peace
process. Indian police and security services often use excessive force,
and have been responsible for arbitrary detention, torture, and extrajudicial
execution. Since 1989, when the insurgency began, thousands of
people have disappeared at the hands of both militant and government
forces.
Legacy of Communal Violence
Large-scale episodes of communal violence remain unpunished. This
injustice continues to foster communal resentments throughout India.
There has still been no accountability for the deaths of more than two thousand Muslims in the western state of Gujarat during communal
violence that erupted following an attack on a train carrying Hindu pilgrims
in 2002. In Discouraging Dissent, a report released in August 2004,
Human Rights Watch documented the continued discrimination, intimidation
of witnesses, faulty investigation, and apparent interference from
members of the BJP state government in efforts to prosecute those
responsible for the anti-Muslim violence.
The Indian Supreme Court has already ordered two Gujarat cases to be
retried in another state. The criminal justice system in Gujarat, the
Supreme Court concluded, had been “abused, misused and mutilated by
subterfuge.” Human rights activists and lawyers have petitioned for
fresh investigations and trials in a number of cases where it was felt that
the local courts, prosecutors and police were hostile to Muslim complainants.
Despite these positive developments, rights activists in
Gujarat continue to be harassed on the basis of what police claim are
their “anti-national activities.” Witnesses, however, remain vulnerable
to threats.
2004 marked the twentieth anniversary of Operation Blue Star, a focal
point in the conflict between Sikh nationalists and state security apparatus
in the Punjab in the 1980s; and the anti-Sikh riots in New Delhi,
which resulted in more than three thousand Sikh deaths. In July, the
National Human Rights Commission called for claims in cases of summary
execution in Punjab. The assignment of individual criminal
responsibility for those and other crimes committed during the period,
however, remains elusive. Also in July, the Nanavati Commission of
inquiry served former prime minister P.V. Narasimha Rao, who was
home minister in the Congress Party government in 1984, a notice for
his failure to act to prevent the attacks on Sikhs. Two others who have
similarly been served notices have recently been appointed ministers in
the new Congress government.
Rights of Children
India has the largest number of working children in the world, millions
of whom work in the worst forms of child labor, including bonded
labor. The Indian government knows about these children and is
required by its own laws to protect them. Instead, for reasons of apathy,
caste bias, and corruption, many government officials deny that they
exist at all.
Both literacy and school enrollment rates overall have improved in the
last decade, but according to UNESCO, approximately half of students
completed grade five. Proportionately fewer girls than boys attend
school, and those that do, drop out at higher rates. Dalits also have
higher illiteracy and drop-out rates and face significant discrimination
in education.
Rights of Those Living with HIV/AIDS
The government estimates that 5.1 million people in India are living
with HIV/AIDS, though many experts suggest the number is much
higher. People with AIDS, as well as those traditionally at highest risk—
sex workers, injection drug users, and men who have sex with men—
face widespread stigmatization and discrimination. People with AIDS
are denied employment and access to education and healthcare. Those
at high risk face police harassment and other state-sponsored abuse that
undermines HIV prevention and AIDS care services for them. Married
women are also at risk because they are frequently unable to demand
condom use of their husbands, who may have extramarital sexual partners.
At least hundreds of thousands of children are living with HIV/AIDS.
Many more are otherwise seriously affected by India’s burgeoning epidemic—
when they are forced to withdraw from school to care for sick
parents, are forced to work to replace their parents’ income, or are orphaned (losing one or both parents to AIDS). Children affected by
HIV/AIDS are being discriminated against in education and health
services, denied care by orphanages, and pushed onto the streets and
into the worst forms of child labor. Gender discrimination makes girls
more vulnerable to HIV transmission and makes it more difficult for
them to get care. Many children, especially the most vulnerable as well
as the professionals who care for them, are not getting the information
about HIV they need to protect themselves or to combat discrimination.
Inadequate Protection against Gender-based Discrimination
and Violence
Women and girls confront discrimination and violence in practically
every aspect of life. A strong preference for sons over daughters has led
to sharply skewed gender ratios in several states. Sex-selective abortions,
female feticide, and inadequate provision of food and health care to girls
has led to ratios of less than eight hundred women for every one thousand
men in some places. Despite several legal provisions for gender
equality, women still struggle to realize equal rights to property, marriage,
divorce, and protection under the law. Gender-based violence,
including domestic violence, sexual harassment, sexual assault, and trafficking
into forced labor and forced prostitution remain serious and
pervasive problems in India. Domestic violence includes dowry-related
abuses and “bride-burning.”
Activists continue to campaign for reform of rape laws to protect
women and children from all forms of sexual violence. The pervasive
understanding of ‘rape’ is that it occurs only when a stranger uses force
on a woman. A marital exemption protects men from being prosecuted
for raping their wives. Marital rape is not recognized or penalized
unless the wife is under the age of fifteen or if she lives separately from
her husband. 
There is inadequate legal protection for abuse against girls, boys, and
men, or for sexual violence between spouses. In the absence of a more
suitable law, section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which penalizes consensual
sexual activity deemed “unnatural,” is also used to prosecute the
sexual abuse of children and women.
This provision has also been used to penalize men having sex with men,
and has been used as justification for harassment of HIV/AIDS educators.
The Delhi High Court dismissed a legal challenge to section 377,
dealing a disappointing set back for activists working to improve the
rights of gay and lesbian people in India.
Key International Actors
India receives 60 percent of its aid from multilateral donors such as the
World Bank. India decided in 2003 to stop receiving bilateral assistance
from all but six countries, including the United States, the United
Kingdom, and Russia. The decision is widely perceived as an effort to
bolster India’s image as a world power. Increasingly, India has been providing
significant amounts of financial and military aid to its smaller
neighbors, but has not used its increasing influence to make public calls
for better compliance with human rights standards.
The thawing of relations between India and Pakistan began in earnest
in November 2003 with a ceasefire across the line-of-control. That was
followed by a meeting between then-Prime Minister Vajpayee and
President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan in January 2004. The Congress
government continued its predecessor’s policy of dialogue with Pakistan
to resolve outstanding issues of conflict. The two countries’ leaders met
in New York in September, where Singh and Musharraf reiterated a
commitment to the bilateral dialogue to restore normalcy and a peaceful
negotiated settlement in Kashmir.
The easing of tensions between India and Pakistan has allowed the
United States to focus its dialogue with India on strengthening bilateral
relations between New Delhi and Washington. U.S. Secretary of State
Colin Powell visited India in March 2004. Human rights issues were
not discussed. The increasingly warm relations between the two countries,
despite the U.S. conferring the status of “major non-NATO ally”
upon Pakistan, will likely continue under Congress Party leadership.
Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage visited New Delhi in July,
reaffirming to Indian leaders that the United States sees India as an
important partner. India has also been strengthening its military-to-military
ties, conducting joint exercises with United States and other
NATO forces.
India is the largest provider of military assistance to Nepal, which is in
the midst of a brutal civil war. India has not used its position of influence
to push the Nepalese government to improve its human right
records, and has resisted calls for a multilateral peace conference, presumably
to avoid similar calls for resolving the Kashmir dispute.
India has been increasingly close to the brutal military government of
Burma. A delegation of Burma’s political opposition was not allowed to
enter India to attend a conference on human rights. In September 2004,
the Indian government welcomed a delegation from the Burmese military
government, but did not raise any concerns about Burma’s dismal
human rights record. Thousands of Burmese continue to seek refuge in
India, where they are not granted proper protections under international
law.