INTRODUCTION
In the wake of the September 11 attacks on New York and Washington, the
United States government articulated a single overriding goal—defeating
terrorism—and sought to build a global alliance committed to that end.Yet determined
as this campaign has been, it remains to be seen whether it is merely a fight
against a particular set of criminals or also an effort to defeat the logic of terrorism.
Is it a struggle only against Osama bin Laden, his al-Qaeda network, and a few likeminded
groups? Or is it also an effort to undermine the view that anything goes in
the name of a cause, the belief that even a deadly attack on skyscrapers filled with
civilians is an acceptable political act?
The September 11 attacks were antithetical to the values of human rights.
Indeed, it is the body of international human rights and humanitarian law—the
limits placed on permissible conduct—that explains why these attacks were not
legitimate acts of war or politics. If the human rights cause stands for anything, it
stands for the principle that civilians should never be deliberately slaughtered,
regardless of the cause.Whether in time of peace or war,whether the actor is a government
or an armed group, certain means are never justified, no matter what the
ends.
As many of the world’s governments join the fight against al-Qaeda, they face a
fundamental choice.They must decide whether this battle provides an opportunity
to reaffirm human rights principles or a new reason to ignore them. They must
determine whether this is a moment to embrace values governing means as well as
ends or an excuse to subordinate means to ends. Their choice will not determine
whether any particular perpetrator is captured or killed. But over the long term it
will affect the strength of the ends-justify-the-means ideology that led a group of
men deliberately to crash civilian passenger planes into the World Trade Center and
the Pentagon. Unless the global anti-terror coalition firmly rejects this amorality,
unless the rules of international human rights and humanitarian law clearly govern
all anti-terror actions, the battle against particular terrorists is likely to end up reaffirming
the warped instrumentalism of terrorism.
Unfortunately, the coalition’s conduct so far has not been auspicious. As this
introduction describes, its leading members have violated human rights principles
at home and overlooked human rights transgressions among their partners. They
have substituted expediency for the firm commitment to human rights that alone
can defeat the rationale of terrorism.Whatever its success in pursuing particular
terrorists, the coalition risks reinforcing the logic of terrorism unless human rights
are given a far more central role.
This report is Human Rights Watch’s twelfth annual review of human rights
practices around the globe. It addresses developments in sixty-six countries, covering
the period from November 2000 through November 2001. Most chapters
examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the
response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the
United Nations, and various regional organizations; and the freedom of local
human rights defenders to conduct their work. Other chapters address important
thematic concerns.
Highlights of 2001 include, on the positive side, several strikes against the
impunity that so often underwrites severe abuses, including the surrender of former
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic for trial before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia; the indictment in Chile of former President
Augusto Pinochet (although the prosecution was then ended on medical grounds);
an Argentine judicial decision declaring the country’s amnesty laws unconstitutional;
and rapid progress toward the establishment of the International Criminal
Court, with forty-seven of the needed sixty countries having ratified its treaty by
early December.Other milestones include the entry into force of the protocol outlawing
the use of child soldiers; the highlighting at the World Conference Against
Racism of caste-based discrimination as an issue of global concern; the international
community’s speed and resolve (for the first time in a decade of Balkan atrocities)
in defusing the armed ethnic conflict in Macedonia; and the U.N.Commission
on Human Rights’ condemnation of ongoing Russian atrocities in Chechnya and
the government’s persistent failure to hold abusers accountable. On the negative
side, the World Trade Organization agreed to launch a new round of talks on reducing
barriers to trade without giving the protection of labor rights a significant place
on the agenda; efforts to create internationally sponsored tribunals were stalled in
the case of Cambodia and proceeding painfully slowly in the case of Sierra Leone,
while the principal architects of atrocities in East Timor in 1999 continued to walk
free in Indonesia; and abusive wars and political violence continued to claim large
numbers of civilian victims in Algeria,Angola,Burundi,Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Indonesia, and Sudan.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2001 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human rights
activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of the Human Rights
Watch advocacy team, which monitors the policies of governments and international
institutions that have influence to curb human rights abuses.Human Rights
Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain more elaborate accounts
of the brief summaries collected in this volume. They can be found on the Human
Rights Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works,nor does it discuss every issue of importance.The failure
to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing limitations
and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the problem.
There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights Watch simply
lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2001 (and
hence the content of this volume) included the severity of abuses, access to the
country and the availability of information about it, the susceptibility of abusive
forces to influence, and the importance of addressing certain thematic concerns
and of reinforcing the work of local rights organizations.
HUMAN RIGHTS VALUES
AS AN ANTIDOTE TO TERRORISM
Any fight against terrorism is only in part a matter of security. It is also a matter
of values. Police, intelligence units, even armies all have a role to play in meeting
particular terrorist threats. But terrorism emanates as well from the realm of public
morality.Terrorism is less likely when the public embraces the view that civilians
should never be targeted—that is, when the public is firmly committed to basic
human rights principles.
It is beyond the scope of Human Rights Watch’s work to address the political
grievances, let alone the pathology, that might lead a group of men to attack thousands
of civilians. Our concern is with the mores that would countenance such
mass murder as a legitimate political tool. Sympathy for such crimes is the breeding
ground for terrorism; sympathizers are the potential recruits. Building a
stronger human rights culture—a culture in which any disregard for civilian life is
condemned rather than condoned—is essential in the long run for defeating terrorism.
Many of the policies of the major powers, both before and after September 11,
have undermined efforts to build a global culture of human rights. These governments
often embraced human rights only in theory while subverting them in practice.
Reversing these policies is essential to building the strong human rights culture
needed to reject terrorism.
The importance of such a policy reappraisal is especially acute in the Middle
East and North Africa, where al-Qaeda seems to have attracted many of its adherents.
But it is also needed more broadly—in evaluating the policies guiding the new
global coalition against terrorism and in assessing the conduct of many of the leading
members of that coalition.
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
The Middle East and North Africa do not have a monopoly on producing practitioners
of terrorism. Armed groups have resorted to attacking civilians and sowing
terror in Colombia, India, Spain, Sri Lanka, Spain, the United Kingdom, and
many other places. The rationale of various groups may have differed, but the
amorality of their methods was comparable.
Yet today the focus of global attention is on al-Qaeda, both because of the target of its alleged actions—the world’s superpower—and because of the magnitude of
its presumed and projected crimes. Thus the Middle East and North Africa is one
of the regions where it is essential to affirm a culture of human rights as an antidote
to terrorism.
Many in the region see Western tolerance for human rights abuse reflected in the
failure to rein in Israeli abuse of Palestinians or to restructure sanctions against Iraq
to minimize the suffering of the Iraqi people. Such policies—both closely followed
in the region—suggest that the West’s commitment to human rights is one of convenience,
to be forsaken when abuses are committed by an ally or in the name of
containing a foe. That grievance has become all the more acute since September
2000 as the death toll mounts from Israeli-Palestinian violence and as Iraqi sanctions
drag on with no indication that Saddam Hussein will acquiesce to U.N.
demands.
But a feeble commitment to human rights can also be found in the West’s attitude
toward the region as a whole. Saudi Arabia and Egypt provide good examples.
Saudi Arabia, the home of Osama bin Laden as well as fifteen of the nineteen presumed
hijackers of September 11, imposes strict limits on civil society, severely discriminates
against women, and systematically suppresses dissent. But Western
governments to date have contented themselves with purchasing Saudi oil and
soliciting Saudi contracts while maintaining a shameful silence toward Saudi
abuses. Egypt, home of the accused September 11 ringleader as well as other key al-
Qaeda leaders, features a narrowly circumscribed political realm and a government
that does all it can to suffocate peaceful political opposition. Yet as a “partner” for
Middle East peace, Egypt has secured from the U.S. government massive aid and
tacit acceptance of its human rights violations.
In societies where basic freedoms flourish, citizens could have pressed their government
to respond to grievances, on threat of being publicly scorned and voted
out of power. But in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and many of the other countries where
Osama bin Laden strikes a chord of resentment, governments restrict debate about
how to address society’s ills. They close off avenues for peaceful political change.
They leave people with the desperate choice of tolerating the status quo, exile, or
violence. Frequently, as political options are closed off, the voices of non-violent
dissent are upstaged by a politics of radical opposition.
The West has quietly accepted this pattern of repression because, in the short
term, it seems to promise stability, and because the democratic alternative is feared.
Indeed, the brilliance of the strategy from the perspective of these repressive governments
is that they have created a political landscape in which the only available
alternative to supporting their authoritarian rule is risking their overthrow by radical
opponents. In an environment in which the political center has been systematically
silenced, these governments can credibly portray themselves as the only
bulwark against extremism.
The challenge for global proponents of human rights—and for any successful
campaign to defeat the logic of terrorism—is to recognize the role that governmental
repression plays in constructing this dilemma. The more the government
closes off legitimate avenues of dissent, the more the government’s portrayal of itself as the only alternative to repressive radicalism becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
The conduct of the Saudi government is illustrative. As corruption flourishes
among the ruling family and the country’s vast but finite oil wealth proves inadequate
to provide a promising economic future for a rapidly growing population,
the Saudi government’s position is increasingly precarious. But just when the need
for openness is greatest, so are the dangers. With peaceful political opposition
firmly repressed, the voices of violence and intolerance have grown in volume.
Riyadh can thus claim that it alone stands before the abyss, that human rights must
be suppressed for their own protection, that democratization would lead to its own
demise. The stark choice today, it is posited, has now been reduced to blocking any
political liberalization, as occurred in Algeria in 1992 when the country’s military
chiefs intervened to head off an imminent electoral victory by an Islamist party, or
witnessing a repetition of the Iran scenario of 1979, in which the West’s backing
away from the authoritarian Shah led to a repressive theocratic state.
Only from an ahistorical vantage point are the choices so stark and unappealing.
An immediate democratic transition may not be possible in such a warped political
environment, but steps can and should be taken to begin to provide a meaningful
array of electoral choices. Of course, in a democracy there is no guarantee of any
particular political result. But if pressure is put on authoritarian governments to
allow a spectrum of political options, the likelihood increases that democracy will
lead to governments that respect human rights.
Several Middle Eastern and North African governments have begun the process
of liberalization without empowering extremists. In recent years,Morocco and Jordan
have become more open societies, while Qatar and Bahrain have begun to
loosen political restraints and have promised to hold elections. Kuwait already has
an elected parliament, although its powers are limited and all women and many
other native-born residents continue to be denied the vote. Even in Iran, a gradual
and partial political opening has corresponded with the emergence of a movement
demanding respect for civil liberties. Although the correlation is not always neat,
these experiences suggest that the appeal of violent and intolerant movements
diminishes as people are given the chance to participate meaningfully in politics
and to select from a range of political parties and perspectives. Promoting the full
respect for human rights needed to produce this range of political options thus
should be a central part of any anti-terrorism strategy for the region.But if the West
continues to accept repression as the best defense against radical politics, it will
undermine the human rights culture that is needed in the long run to defeat terrorism.
THE GLOBAL COALITION
In the days following September 11, various governments tried to take advantage
of the tragedy by touting their own internal struggles as battles against terrorism.
For example, President Vladimir Putin of Russia embraced this rhetoric to
defend his government’s brutal campaign in Chechnya. China’s foreign minister Tang Jiaxuan did the same to defend his government’s response to political agitation
in Xinjiang province. Egyptian Prime Minister Atef Abeid, brushing off criticism
of torture and summary military trials, rejected “call[s] on us to give these
terrorists their ‘human rights’” and suggested that Western countries should “think
of Egypt’s own fight against terror as their new model.” Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon repeatedly referred to Palestinian Authority President Yasir Arafat as “our
bin Laden.”Alluding to September 11,Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah
Ahman Badawi defended administrative detention under his country’s longabused
Internal Security Act as “an initial preventive measure before things get
beyond control.”A spokesman for Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe justified
a crackdown on independent journalists reporting on abuses by his government as
an attack on the “supporters” of terrorism.
Particularly in the case of Russia, this cynical strategy seemed to work. In the
days following September 11, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and Italian
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said that Russia’s actions in Chechnya must be
reassessed.The U.S. government,which in April had supported the U.N. resolution
condemning atrocities in Chechnya, began to play down its human rights concerns
and play up alleged links between Chechen rebels and the Qaeda network. In general
remarks at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Shanghai in
October, in the presence of Putin but without reference to any particular country,
U.S. President George W. Bush did publicly warn that “the war on terrorism must
not be a war on minorities” and that countries need to “distinguish between those
who pursue legitimate political aspirations and terrorists.” But during a bilateral
summit with Putin in November, Bush spoke at length of Russian progress toward
respect for human rights and democratic principles while mentioning Chechnya
only to praise “President Putin’s commitment to a political dialogue.”Nothing was
said publicly about Russian atrocities and the continuing impunity of those who
commit them.
Uzbekistan further illustrates the selectivity of concern with attacks on civilians.
With the possible exception of Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan has done the most
among the post-Soviet states to perpetuate the ruthless repression of the Soviet era.
There are no political parties, no independent media, no civil society of any sort.
Efforts by Muslims to pray outside the state-controlled mosque are met harshly,
with torture and long prison sentences frequent.As a state bordering Afghanistan,
Uzbekistan was an obvious potential military ally of the United States, particularly
since it faces its own al-Qaeda-linked rebel movement, the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan. But it remains unclear whether the U.S. government will prevent its
new military alliance with Uzbekistan from becoming an endorsement of the
repressive policies of Uzbek President Islam Karimov. President Bush repeatedly
insisted that the U.S. campaign against terrorism was not directed against Islam, yet
the U.S. government made no visible effort to curb Uzbekistan’s severe repression
ofMuslims who wanted only to practice their faith peacefully outside state control.
The biggest opportunity lost was when, as required by legislation, the U.S. State
Department in October named “countries of particular concern” for their repression
of religious freedom. Uzbekistan, an obvious candidate under any objective
standard, was not on the list. (Nor, for that matter, was Saudi Arabia, despite the State Department spokesman’s admission that there is “no religious freedom”
there.)
This inconsistent attention to violent abuse against civilians could be found
elsewhere as well.Washington (though not the European Union) put effective pressure
on Belgrade to surrender former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic for
trial in The Hague for the depredations he allegedly sponsored in Bosnia, Kosovo,
and Croatia. But throughout the year NATO troops in Bosnia failed to arrest former
Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic from his sanctuary in Bosnia,
and the international community did little to pressure Belgrade to surrender former
Bosnian Serb military leader Ratko Mladic, both of whom stand accused of
comparable crimes. Closer to home, the U.S. government continues to shelter
Emmanuel “Toto”Constant, the ruthless former Haitian paramilitary leader, from
Haiti’s efforts to secure him for trial. During the military dictatorship of 1991-94,
Constant oversaw the killing and tortured of many Haitian civilians who were perceived
as opponents of military rule.
In some parts of the world, particularly Africa, violent abuse against civilians
was virtually ignored by the U.S. government, except insofar as a link might be
found with al-Qaeda. Atrocities were routine in conflicts in Angola, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and Sierra Leone, yet the U.S. government’s attention
seemed to focus almost exclusively on Sudan, Somalia, and other countries in
the Horn of Africa where the Qaeda network was said to operate. Typical was the
November visit to Washington of Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo; no mention
was made of soldiers’ recent massacre of civilians in central Nigeria, but President
Obasanjo was praised for his support of the fight against terrorism.
The message sent by this inconsistency was that, as seen from Washington, violence
becomes intolerable based not on whether civilians are attacked but on whose
civilians are attacked and who is doing the attacking. Attacks against civilians on
U.S. soil are to be vigorously opposed, but attacks against other civilians often are
not.Rebel or insurgent attacks on civilians are condemned, but government attacks
on civilians—especially attacks by key government allies—are ignored. Such a message
hardly helps to build broad public support for human rights.
The annual meeting next March in Geneva of the U.N.Commission on Human
Rights will test the West’s willingness to condemn violence against innocent civilians
wherever it occurs. For the last two years, with reluctant but eventual support
by the U.S. government and the European Union, the commission has condemned
Russia for its atrocities in Chechnya and its failure to prosecute those responsible.
Now is no time to abandon that effort, as Russian forces continue to be responsible
for summary executions, torture, and arbitrary arrests, and no progress has been
made in bringing the authors of past massacres to justice. Western governments
will also be judged by whether they finally mount a serious effort at the commission
(for the first time without U.S. membership) to condemn China’s persistent
repression. In the case of Washington, it will be judged by whether it applies laws
designed to sanction religious repression in Uzbekistan and Saudi Arabia. Finally,
the question remains whether the West will overcome its traditional downplaying
of atrocities in sub-Saharan Africa. To squander such opportunities to condemn
and curb political violence will suggest that violent attacks on civilians warrant serious action only when they strike close to home. It will not take long for the
world to see through this selectivity.
THE IMPORTANCE OF
ENFORCEABLE HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARDS
If the battle against terrorism is to be understood as a fight for human rights, the
most ardent combatants have often been the least willing to be bound by its principles.
Washington stands out because its resistance to enforceable human rights
standards has been most fundamental. That is not to say that the United States
ignores human rights; most U.S. citizens enjoy a wide range of rights protections.
But Washington has never been willing to subject itself to binding international
human rights scrutiny. September 11 offered an opportunity to rethink this unwillingness.
Washington immediately realized that to fight a global terrorist network,
it needed global cooperation—for gathering intelligence, blocking finances, making
arrests, and defending the legitimacy of its military efforts. The U.S. government’s
appeal for help was widely answered, but that did not alter Washington’s
resistance to international human rights law.
Often the U.S. government simply refuses to ratify leading human rights
treaties, such as those on women’s rights, children’s rights, and economic, social and
cultural rights.Most significantly in time of war, the U.S. government still has not
ratified the First Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949—
the leading standards on the use of air power,Washington’s primary warfare tool.
Moreover,when periodically the U.S. government ratifies a human rights treaty,
whether under a Republican or Democratic administration, it always does so in a
way to ensure that there will be no right of enforcement, so that ratification imposes
no practical constraint on official action. The formal embrace of a treaty thus
becomes an act for external consumption—an empty declaration that the United
States is part of the international human rights system—not an act to grant or even
solidify rights in the United States.
Perhaps the greatest disappointment is that the Bush administration actually
intensified U.S. opposition to the International Criminal Court—a potential
forum for prosecuting future crimes against humanity such as the attacks of September
11.With the number of countries that have ratified the ICC treaty growing
rapidly, the treaty’s entry into force in 2002 is a virtual certainty. But Washington
has opposed the court because it theoretically could be used to scrutinize the conduct
of U.S. armed forces. Just two weeks before it launched its bombing campaign
in Afghanistan, the Bush administration endorsed legislation that would authorize
sanctions against governments that ratify the ICC treaty (other than NATO and
certain other key allies)—legislation that, in modified form, was working its way
through Congress in early December. The administration’s endorsement was part
of a tactical bargain that allowed overdue U.N. dues to be paid and was supposed to
give the president the power to waive sanctions. Yet even in this light, the Bush
administration’s willingness to endorse an attack on the ICC at a time when it was
appealing for international cooperation in the fight against terrorism smacked of hypocrisy. It seemed that the Bush administration was willing to seek protection for
its own citizens, but determined to undermine an institution that many governments
see as essential for the protection of others.
This resistance to accountability—which was replicated in international negotiations
on climate change, nuclear weapons, biological weapons, small arms, and
racism—gave the U.S. government the latitude, for example, to continue using
cluster bombs in Afghanistan, even though these imprecise weapons with their history
of littering the landscape with deadly and highly volatile bomblets had caused
a quarter of the bombing-related civilian deaths in Yugoslavia. More fundamentally,
this resistance to accountability heightened global unease about the U.S. use
of force, especially in light of repeated incidents of civilian casualties.The U.S. government
seems to assume that if its policy is to respect international humanitarian
law, its conduct should be beyond reproach. But much of the rest of the world
understandably condemns the United States for refusing to countenance any independent
enforcement, or even formal scrutiny, of the standards it claims to uphold.
Accountability is a key missing component of the legitimacy that Washington seeks
but so often fails to achieve.
THE FUTURE OF AFGHANISTAN
Human rights will also be put to the test as the international community works
to construct a post-Taliban Afghanistan.The Taliban had an abysmal human rights
record, most notably its systematic discrimination against women, its ready use of
violence against those who failed to abide by its harsh vision of Islam, and its periodic
resort to massacres of perceived sympathizers with its military adversaries.
The demise of this regime creates an opportunity for positive change in Afghanistan.
But many of the forces vying to replace the Taliban, including elements of the
Northern Alliance, also have horrendous human rights records, ranging from their
own massacres in recent years to their part in the destruction of vast swathes of
Kabul while they shared power in 1992-96.
The test of the anti-terror coalition’s commitment to human rights will come in
the pressure it exerts on the Afghan parties to break definitively with the atrocities
of the past. The international community should not simply replace the Taliban
with whichever set of forces gains de facto control of the country, joins a broadbased
coalition, and promises to cooperate in the fight against international terrorism.
That would risk replacing a regime that helped to sponsor international
attacks on civilians with one that simply directs its violence against civilians inward.
It would also severely handicap Afghanistan as it struggles to rebuild and to meet
dire humanitarian needs. In the short term, even if abusive commanders must be
accepted as the de facto powers in certain parts of Afghanistan, intense pressure
should be put on them to avoid reprisals against civilians or captured or surrendering
combatants. In the longer term, those responsible for the worst atrocities
should be precluded from any role in a future Afghan government or in any Afghan
security forces.
Meanwhile, the international community should actively collect evidence of abuses by all Afghan factions, make that evidence available to either a newly established
international tribunal or a reinforced national court, and ensure that no
amnesty is given to those responsible for serious crimes. The U.N.-sponsored
accord on Afghanistan, agreed to in Bonn in December, was a useful step in this
direction. The international community should also work to end discrimination
against women so they are given a full opportunity to participate in a new government,
and to ensure that civil society as a whole, including women, is given a meaningful
voice in determining priorities for reconstruction and economic
development. These are among the steps that will allow Afghans to break from a
long line of persecutors, rather than simply substitute one set of persecutors for
another.
HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE WEST
In the West, the danger of an inappropriate balance between security and
human rights was particularly acute after September 11 because of the focused
nature of the anti-terrorism efforts. If the entire population had faced scrutiny
under new security measures, popular pressure might have gone a long way toward
avoiding unreasonable restraints on rights. But because the anti-terrorism effort
was aimed largely at young men from the Middle East and North Africa, most residents
ofWestern countries believed that they would not be personally targeted by
new law enforcement powers. In these circumstances, political leadership is
required to ensure that rights are not unnecessarily sacrificed in the rush to enhance
security. Such leadership was largely lacking.
For example, emergency legislation rushed through the US Congress, the socalled
USA Patriot Act, permits the indefinite detention of nondeportable non-citizens
once the attorney general “certifies” that he has “reasonable grounds to
believe” that the individual is engaged in terrorist activities or endangers national
security. These broad and vague criteria could allow the attorney general to certify
and detain any alien in the United States who had any connection, however tenuous
or distant in time, with a group that had once unlawfully used a weapon to
endanger a person.
Still more flagrant in its affront to international fair-trial standards was President
Bush’s order establishing “military commissions” to prosecute non-U.S. citizens.
To begin with, the order was notably vague about the crimes that could give
rise to the commission’s jurisdiction. The commission could be used to try people
accused of membership in al-Qaeda, involvement in the undefined crime of “international
terrorism,” or harboring anyone charged with these offenses. It thus
extended far beyond any traditional use of military tribunals—to address offenses
by combatants in war—to include people who might be charged with acts far
removed from Afghanistan or any other armed conflict.
Moreover, the virtual lack of procedural protections in the order raised the
prospect of suspects being tried, convicted, and even executed with no appearance
before an independent judicial tribunal, no right to appeal, no right to a public trial,
no presumption of innocence, no right to confront evidence or testimony against them, and no requirement that proof be established beyond a reasonable doubt.
Some of these due-process transgressions may still be remedied through the adoption
of additional regulations—none had been issued through early December—
but the Bush order itself displayed a disturbing indifference to international fair
trial standards and long-expressed U.S. values. While promising “a full and fair
trial,” the order explicitly rejected scrutiny of military commission proceedings by
any other court, domestic or international, and ignored the Uniform Code of Military
Justice—the procedural code used for regular courts-martial—which would
have ensured most basic fair trial rights.
Such indifference to human rights standards will undermine the important
value, as people accused of violent abuse are punished, of ensuring that justice is
done and can be seen to be done. By precluding public confidence that the rule of
law is being applied fairly, secret, summary trials of accused terrorists undermine
the principles of human rights that stand in the way of terrorism. A Spanish judge’s
refusal to extradite alleged al-Qaeda members to the United States without assurances
that they would avoid trial before such commissions illustrates at a practical
level the obstacle that such fair-trial shortcuts pose to cooperative efforts to bring
accused criminals to justice.
The Bush order, even if later modified by the fine print of regulations, also
threatens to silence the U.S. voice in support of human rights.Washington had routinely
objected when similar military tribunals were used against alleged “terrorists”
in Peru, Nigeria, Russia, and elsewhere. By suddenly proposing to sponsor
similar travesties of justice in the face of its own security threats, the U.S. government
compromises its capacity to defend human rights abroad. Indeed, tomorrow’s
military dictators need do nothing more than photocopy the Bush order to
secure a repressive mechanism that promises to be highly effective in warding off
U.S. criticism. Finally, the proposed military commissions, as the other conduct
outlined above, send the profoundly damaging message that human rights are mere
standards of convenience, to be applied when other countries face security threats,
but not when the United States is at risk. Such a la carte principles, of course, are no
principles at all.
Similar human rights compromises could be found in other aspects of the global
response to terrorism. Australian Prime Minister John Howard, stoking post-September
11 fears of foreigners, built his candidacy for reelection in November
around his summary expulsion, in blatant violation of international refugee law, of
asylum-seekers who had reached outlying Australian territory. Proposed European
Union-wide security measures included a broad definition of terrorism that threatens
freedom of association and the right to dissent; a European arrest warrant to
facilitate transfer of terrorist suspects without fair-trial safeguards; and a “re-evaluation”
of the right to seek asylum in Western Europe in light of new security considerations.
Proposals by the British government would permit the prolonged
arbitrary detention of foreigners suspected of terrorist activity and severely curtail
the right to seek asylum. The Indian government used the new focus on terrorism
to push for sweeping new police powers of arrest and detention—powers last used
to crack down on political opponents, social activists, and human rights defenders.
The U.S. government detained over 1,000 suspects following the September 11 attacks, but threw a shroud of secrecy over the cases that made it impossible to
determine whether criminal justice powers were being appropriately applied.
At the United Nations, Western governments are rushing to push through an
anti-terrorism treaty that, according to the draft of early December, threatened to
codify an overly broad definition of terrorism without adequate guarantees that the
fight against terrorism would be circumscribed by human rights guarantees. Ironically,
the major obstacle to adopting the treaty was not states defending human
rights but states arguing that terrorist means should be tolerated if used as part of
a war for “national liberation.” The result threatens to be an anti-terrorism treaty
that reinforces the ends-justify-the-means rationale of terrorism.
HYPOCRISY MATTERS
This hypocrisy matters because it is profoundly more difficult to promote the
values of human rights if some of the most visible and powerful proponents seek to
exempt themselves from these same standards.This exceptionalism remains strong
after September 11, as governments seek to justify extraordinary constraints on
rights in the name of combating extraordinary threats. Yet in the long term, this
trend is counterproductive. If the logic of terrorism, not just immediate terrorist
threats, is ultimately to be defeated, governments must redouble their commitment
to international standards, not indulge a new round of excuses to ignore them.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
August 2001 marked the first anniversary of the U.N. secretary-general’s
special representative for human rights defenders. Hina Jilani was the
first to carry out the post’s mandate, which called for her to press for the implementation
of the 1998 Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and intervene in
cases of threats to and harassment of human rights defenders worldwide. Since
October 2000, Jilani had sent urgent appeals and communications to, among
others, the governments of Colombia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia,
Tunisia, and the United Kingdom voicing her concerns over the targeting of human
rights defenders in those countries. Jilani worked closely with other U.N. thematic
mechanisms, such as the special rapporteurs on torture, on extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions, and on violence against women, and the chairman-rapporteur
of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. Since her appointment,
Jilani had focused on countries where immediate attention to the safety of human
rights defenders was needed. She visited Kyrgyzstan in August,where she stated her
concerns that basic civil rights were not being systematically observed; Kyrgyz
authorities refused to allow her to meet with Topchubek Turgunaliev, a political
activist who was in a prison hospital at the time.
Colombia continued to be extremely dangerous for human rights defenders.
On December 13, 2000, Fernando Cruz Peña, from the city of Cali, Valle, was
forcibly disappeared. Cruz represented Colombians accused of support for guerrilla
groups.On December 24, 2000,Fernando Rafael Castro Escobar, from Sabanas
de Angel, Magdalena, was killed. Castro served as the personero of Sabanas de
Angel, and collected local reports of rights violations. On February 12, 2001, Iván
Villamizar Luciani, a former public advocate, was shot and killed by ten gunmen
outside the Free University in Cúcuta,Norte de Santander,where he was serving as
president. On February 17, Carmenza Trujillo Bernal, a member of the Caldas
Human Rights Committee, was killed in Chinchiná, Caldas. On May 5, Gonzalo
Zárate Triana, a founding member of the Meta Civic Committee for Human Rights,
was killed in Villavicencio. On May 12, Dario Suárez Meneses, the leader of a local
displaced group, was killed, in the city of Neiva, Huila. On May 19, José Jorge
Navarro G. was killed near San Antonio,Tolima.He was the director of a local chapter
of the Colombian Red Cross. Kimy Pernia Domicó, a leader of the indigenous
Emberá-Katío, was forcibly "disappeared" on June 2, in Tierralta, Córdoba, and was
presumed dead. On September 2, former Apartadó,Antioquia, town council member
José de Jesús Geman was killed in a Bogotá hotel. Geman was preparing to deliver material to the attorney general’s office as part of the continuing case against
retired general Rito Alejo del Río, who was being investigated for supporting paramilitary
groups. Alma Rosa Jaramillo Lafourie’s, a lawyer who worked with the
Middle Magdalena Development and Peace Program (Programa de Desarrollo y
Paz del Magdalena Medio,PDPMM),was found dead on July 1 near the city of Barrancabermeja,
Santander, after she had been kidnapped by paramilitaries who had
been engaged in a deadly campaign against rights workers in the region. On July 18,
Eduardo Estrada, also with PDPMM, was murdered in the town of San Pablo,Bolívar.
On September 19, armed men shot and killed Roman Catholic nun and human
rights defender Yolanda Cerón Delgado in front of a church in Tumaco,Nariño.On
September 20, Juan Manuel Corzo, the director of the attorney general’s investigative
unit in the city of Cúcuta, Norte de Santander, was shot and killed as he drove
with his mother.At the time, Corzo was investigating several killings of colleagues.
On October 17, Julian Rodríguez Benítez, a member of CREDHOS,a human rights
group, was killed in Barrancabermeja, Santander. Also in 2001, Miguel Ignacio
Lora, Yolanda Paternina, Carlos Arturo Pinto, María del Rosario, and Maria del
Rosario Rojas Silva were killed.All had investigated paramilitary or guerilla activities.
In October 2001, human rights lawyer Digna Ochoa was found shot to death in
her Mexico City office. A note left by her side warned members of the Miguel
Agustín Pro Juarez Human Rights Center, where Ochoa had worked for several
years, that the same could happen to them.
Aceh province experienced the loss of at least seven human rights defenders over
the past year. On December 6, 2000, four workers for the Rehabilitation Action for
Torture Victims of Aceh (RATA) were stopped outside Lhokseumawe,North Aceh,
and abducted by a group of armed soldiers and civilians.Three of them were extrajudicially
executed. On February 28,Muhamad Efendi Malikon, the secretary of the
human rights organization Care Forum for Human Rights (Forum Peduli HAMAceh
Timur) was killed in Peukan Langsa village, East Aceh. On March 29, Suprin
Sulaiman, a lawyer with Koalist-HAM in South Aceh was killed after accompanying
his client to a police interrogation session. On September 8,Yusuf Usman, also
a member of Forum Peduli HAM-Aceh Timur, was killed. On October 3, the body
of an Indonesian Red Cross (PMI) volunteer, Jafar Syehdo, known as Dabra, from
Bireun, Aceh was discovered shot in North Aceh. The PMI was the lead agency
responsible for removing the bodies of those killed in the conflict and helping
return them to their families.
In India, in November 2000, T. Puroshottam, the joint secretary of the Andhra
Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee (APCLC) was stabbed to death by a group of
unidentified men. In February 2001, Azam Ali, the district secretary of the Nalgonda
branch of APCLC was killed by two sword-wielding youths.
In Uzbekistan, Shovruk Ruzimuradov, an activist in the Human Rights Society
of Uzbekistan, died in custody, apparently tortured to death by police. Officers
arrested forty-four-year-old Ruzimuradov on June 15 in southwestern Uzbekistan
and held him incommunicado for some twenty-two days before returning his
corpse to his family on July 7. In June, Viktor Popkov, a Russian human rights
defender, died of wounds inflicted when his car was shot at in Chechnya.