Lea dership requires more than a big stick and a thick wallet. It also requires a
positive vision shared by others and conduct consistent with that vision.
The campaign against terrorism is no exception to this rule. The United States, as
a major target, has taken the lead in combating terrorism. But the global outpouring
of sympathy that followed the attacks of September 11, 2001 has given way to
growing reluctance to join the fight and even resentment toward the government
leading it.
How was this goodwill depleted so quickly? In part the cause is traditional
resentment of America and its role in the world—resentment which was softened
only temporarily by the tragedy of September 11. In part it is opposition to U.S.
policy in the Middle East. And in part it is growing disquiet that the means used to
fight terrorism are often in conflict with the values of freedom and law that most
people uphold and that U.S. President George W. Bush has said the United States
is defending.
Despite its declared policy of supporting human rights, Washington in fighting
terrorism has refused to be bound by human rights standards. Despite its tradition
at home of a government under law, Washington has rejected legal constraints
when acting abroad. Despite a constitutional order that is premised on the need to
impose checks and balances, Washington seems to want an international order that
places no limits on a nation’s use of power save its own avowed good intentions.
These attitudes jeopardize the campaign against terrorism. They also put at risk the
human rights ideal.
This is hardly to say that Washington is among the worst human rights offenders.
But because of the U.S. government’s extraordinary influence, its willingness to
compromise human rights to fight terrorism sets a dangerous precedent. Because
of the leadership role it so often has played in promoting human rights, the weakening
of its voice weighs heavily, particularly in some of the front-line countries in
the war against terrorism where the need for a vigorous defense of human rights is
great. For this reason, Human Rights Watch devotes much of the introduction to
this year’s World Report to highlighting this unfortunate trend in U.S. policy.
The European Union might have been expected to fill this leadership void.
Instead, its excessive preoccupation with achieving consensus, and other concerns,
frequently left it paralyzed. At a moment when Europe’s growing unity might have
enhanced its influence on human rights, the opposite occurred. Other voices, such
as the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, were also compromised by governments’
failure to require at least a modicum of interest in promoting human rights as a condition of membership. On many human rights issues, the burden of moving
forward fell on a handful of principled but less powerful governments acting
alone or in small groups, such as Mexico, Canada, and Senegal.
Despite these troubling trends, there were some positive developments in 2002.
The treaty to establish the International Criminal Court (ICC) went into effect,
launching a tribunal with global scope to prosecute anyone responsible for genocide,
war crimes, or crimes against humanity. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia began the long-awaited trial of former Yugoslav President
Slobodan Milosevic. After an intense campaign, a new treaty entered into force
banning the forced recruitment of children under the age of eighteen or their use
as combatants.
The people of East Timor gained their independence under an elected government,
a fitting retort to the severe repression they had faced under Indonesian rule.
Devastating civil wars ended in Angola (after twenty-seven years) and Sierra Leone
(after a decade). In Sierra Leone, a special court and a truth commission were established
to address atrocities of the recent past. Steps were also taken toward ending
vicious civil wars in Sri Lanka and Sudan, where cease-fires were in place after some
two decades of armed conflict.
African leaders made significant new commitments to transparent and
accountable government and respect for human rights with the creation of the
African Union and its adoption of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD). The Organization of American States applied the newly created Inter-
American Democratic Charter to thwart a coup attempt against a freely elected
government in Venezuela.
In the Middle East and North Africa, Egypt’s domestic courts convicted police
officers of torturing detainees to death, and the Court of Cassation for a second
time rebuffed a security court’s conviction of democracy activist Saadeddin Ibrahim.
In Algeria and Tunisia, activists and torture victims bypassed compromised
local courts to seek justice in France. In Bahrain, women voted and stood for office
in national assembly elections, a first in the Arabian Peninsula, and two local independent
human rights organizations were allowed to register. Saudi Arabia adopted
a criminal procedure code that prohibited torture and other ill-treatment and
provided for oversight of prisons to ensure against unlawful detentions. Turkey,
bidding to enter the European Union, abolished the death penalty and removed
restrictions on the use of the Kurdish language; despite past interventions, its
staunchly secular military accepted the electoral victory of a moderate political
party with Islamist roots.
Yet serious problems remained in many parts of the world, from the continued
killing of civilians in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to a surge of communal violence
in Gujarat, India; from the eruption of full-scale civil war in Nepal to continuing
atrocities during wars in Colombia, Chechnya, and the Democratic Republic
of Congo. There was a surge in large-scale deliberate attacks on civilians elsewhere
as well, including Russians in Moscow, Australians and others in Bali, Germans in
Tunisia, Israelis and Kenyans in Kenya, and French in Pakistan. Repressive dictatorships
remained in such places as Burma, China, Iraq, North Korea, Saudi Arabia,
and Vietnam. Industrialized governments continued to tighten their restrictions
on refugees while doing far too little to provide treatment and care for the fifty-five million Africans who are predicted to die prematurely of AIDS between 2000 and
2020.
U.S. POLICY AND THE CHALLENGE OF TERRORISM
Terrorism is antithetical to human rights. Its continuing spread in 2002 was
a major challenge. Because targeting civilians for violent attack is repugnant to
human rights values, the human rights movement has a direct interest in the
success of the anti-terrorism effort. Yet, Washington’s tendency to ignore human
rights in fighting terrorism is not only disturbing in its own right; it is dangerously
counter-productive. The smoldering resentment it breeds risks generating terrorist
recruits, puts off potential anti-terrorism allies, and weakens efforts to curb terrorist
atrocities.
Terrorism cannot be defeated from afar. Curbing terrorism requires the support
of people in the countries where terrorists reside. They are the people who
must cooperate with police inquiries rather than shield terrorist activity. They are
the people who must take the lead in dissuading would-be terrorists. But if they
see Washington embracing the governments that repress them, they will hardly be
inclined to help. Their reluctance only increases if their entire community is viewed
as suspect, as many people from the Middle East and North Africa now feel.
Clearly, Washington needs to take extra security measures. But the U.S. government
must also pay attention to the pathology of terrorism—the set of beliefs
that leads some people to join in attacking civilians, to believe that the ends justify
the means. A strong human rights culture is an antidote to this pathology, but in
too many places Washington sees human rights mainly as an obstacle to its goals.
Human rights and security are mutually reinforcing, but too often Washington
treats them as a zero-sum game.
Even at the height of the Cold War, the U.S. government understood the need
for a positive vision. It understood that the United States could not only be against
communism. It had to stand for democracy, even if at times that support was solely
rhetorical. Similarly, it will not work for the U.S. government today to be only
against terrorism. It will have to be in favor of the values that explain what is wrong
with attacking civilians—the values of human rights.
There have been hints of such a positive vision—in prominent parts of a speech
that President Bush gave at West Point, in June; in part of his administration’s new
National Security Strategy, released in September; and in the conditions for disbursing
increased international assistance (the Millennium Challenge Account),
announced in November. But this rhetorical embrace of human rights has translated
only inconsistently into U.S. conduct and foreign policy.
The sad irony is that for much of the past half century, the United States has
often been a driving force behind the expansion of the human rights ideal. It took
the lead in drafting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and building the
international human rights system, and it has lent its voice and influence on behalf
of human rights in many parts of the world. Even in 2002, the Bush administration
tried to advance human rights in places where the war on terrorism was not implicated,
such as Burma, Belarus, and Zimbabwe. It also recognized the connection between repression and terrorism, and to a limited extent tried to promote human
rights in some places that were more directly involved in the fight against terrorism,
such as Egypt and Uzbekistan.
Yet this long engagement on human rights has been compromised in three
important respects. First, in several key countries involved in the campaign against
terrorism, such as Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, even rhetorical U.S. support for
human rights has been rare—often nothing more than the State Department’s
once-a-year pronouncements in its global human rights report. Washington has
also shown little inclination to confront such influential governments as Russia,
China, and Israel that are using the fight against terrorism to cloak or intensify
repression aimed at separatist, dissident, or nationalist movements that are themselves
often abusive.
Second, even when the U.S. government does try to promote human rights, its
authority is undermined by its refusal to be bound by the standards it preaches to
others. From its rejection of the Geneva Conventions to its misuse of the “enemy
combatant” designation, from its threatened use of substandard military commissions
to its misuse of immigration laws to deny criminal suspects their rights,
Washington has waged war on terrorism as if human rights were not a constraint.
Third, Washington has intensely opposed the broader enforcement of international
human rights law, from the International Criminal Court to more modest
efforts to affirm or reinforce human rights norms. (Similar exceptionalism can
be seen in such matters as the administration’s rejection of the Kyoto Protocol on
global warming or its blocking of efforts to strengthen the Biological Weapons
Convention.) This opposition suggests a radical vision of world order. Certain
influential elements in the administration seem to view international law as an
unnecessary impediment—a set of rules that in the future might constrain the
United States in unforeseeable and inconvenient ways. Given America’s overwhelming
economic and military strength, they reasoned, U.S. interests are better
served by case-by-case negotiations.
But even American might has limits. Shared norms—of commerce, peace, or
human rights—are needed so that most governments voluntarily abide by them.
Pressure may still be needed to rein in recalcitrant governments, but an effective
global order depends on most governments living voluntarily by agreed-upon
rules. Even if the result is disappointing in a particular case, most governments
recognize that a system of law is in their interest over the long run. But that logic
breaks down if the superpower routinely exempts itself from the enforcement of
international law. If shared norms give way to relations built on power alone, the
world will revert to a pre-modern, Hobbesian order. That can hardly be in the longterm
interest of the United States or anyone else.
In 2002, Washington’s neglect of human rights was seen in its behavior in international
fora, its bilateral relations with other governments, and its own treatment
of terrorist suspects.
INTERNATIONAL FORA
At the multilateral level, the U.S. government consistently opposed any effort to enforce human rights standards. This posture was not entirely new. Both Democratic
and Republican administrations have always kept human rights treaties at
arm’s length. The U.S. government has never ratified half of the six leading human
rights treaties (including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women) as well as the leading treaty governing modern armed
conflict (the First Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949).
Even when the U.S. government has ratified a human rights treaty, it has done so in
a way that denies Americans the ability to enforce the treaty in any court, whether
international or domestic. Yet in 2002, this resistance to enforceable human rights
standards intensified.
It was on display at the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the leading U.N.
human rights body. Mexico proposed a resolution that stressed the importance
of fighting terrorism consistently with human rights. The resolution did not
condemn any nation; it simply reaffirmed an essential principle. Yet Washington
opposed even this seemingly uncontroversial statement. It was joined by Algeria,
India, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia—hardly committed supporters of human rights.
Ultimately, Mexico withdrew the resolution. The U.N. General Assembly later
adopted a similar resolution by consensus after Washington failed to derail it.
The U.S. government similarly opposed efforts to strengthen the prohibition
against torture. It objected to a proposed new Optional Protocol to the Convention
Against Torture, which establishes a system for inspecting detention facilities where
torture is suspected—an important preventive measure. Yet, as a matter of policy,
the United States opposes torture and has even ratified the Torture Convention. If
Washington wants to avoid scrutiny under this new inspection procedure, it could
simply decide not to ratify the protocol, which, as its name suggests, is optional.
Its decision, instead, to try to deprive other nations of this added human rights
protection stems from an evident desire to avoid strengthening any international
human rights law that might even remotely be used to criticize its own conduct.
The torture protocol came to a vote before the U.N. General Assembly in December,
where the United States was one of only four governments to oppose it, against 127
supporters.
At the U.N. General Assembly Special Session on Children, in May, the U.S.
government sought to prevent any reference to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. The United States is the only country in the world not to have ratified
the treaty (other than Somalia, which has no recognized national government). The
special session—the highest level U.N. summit on children in a decade—presented
an important opportunity to reaffirm the rights contained in the convention. But
Washington objected to any mention of the concrete rights of children, preferring
vaguer reference to their “well-being.”
U.S. opposition to the enforcement of human rights standards was most extreme
in the case of the International Criminal Court. The court has numerous safeguards
to address Washington’s legitimate concern about politicized prosecutions. These
include narrowly defined crimes, extensive oversight by several independent panels
of judges, provision for impeachment of an abusive prosecutor by a mere majority
of the states party (most of which are democracies and close U.S. allies), and the
ability of a national government to avoid ICC prosecution altogether by conducting its own good-faith investigation and, if appropriate, prosecution. Moreover,
the ICC does not purport to exert jurisdiction over a suspect unless the suspect’s
government has ratified the court’s treaty or the suspect is alleged to have committed
a crime on the territory of a government that has ratified the treaty—both
long-accepted bases of jurisdiction.
Yet, the Bush administration declared a virtual war on the court. It repudiated
former U.S. President Bill Clinton’s signature on the ICC treaty. It threatened to
shut down U.N. peacekeeping unless U.S. participants in U.N.-authorized operations
were exempted from ICC jurisdiction. It threatened to cut off military aid to
governments unless they agreed never to deliver American suspects to the court.
And President Bush signed legislation authorizing military intervention to free
any American suspect held by the ICC—dubbed the “Hague Invasion Act.” With
occasional exceptions, the administration did not discourage governments from
ratifying the ICC treaty, and as of mid-December, eighty-seven governments had
joined the court—well above the sixty needed for the treaty to take effect. But the
U.S. government’s efforts to exempt Americans from investigation and prosecution
advanced a double standard that threatened to undermine the court’s legitimacy.
By these multilateral interventions, across a wide range of issues, the U.S. government
signaled that human rights standards are at best window-dressing. They
are fine, grand pronouncements, but their universal enforcement—enforcement
that might even indirectly affect the United States—is to be avoided. Such hypocrisy
only undermines these norms. It also undermines the credibility of the United
States as a proponent of human rights, whether in fighting terrorism or in combating
more traditional repression and abuse.
BILATERAL RELATIONS
In its bilateral relations, the U.S. government did make some efforts to promote
human rights while fighting terrorism. After September 11, for example, many
assumed that Washington’s already muted engagement on human rights issues in
the front line states of Central Asia would end; in fact, in some ways it intensified.
The U.S. military presence in Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan associated the
United States with these countries’ repressive policies—as did frequent presidential
summits and enhanced aid packages. And Washington consistently exaggerated
their progress toward reform to justify continued aid. But more often than in the
past, U.S. officials pressed the region’s leaders to release prisoners, respect media
freedoms, and allow civil society to function, in part due to more frequent interaction
at all levels between U.S. officials and governments in the region. The United
States also took its first limited steps to use its leverage with these countries to
promote human rights, canceling a high-level meeting with the Kazakh foreign
minister with the aim of freeing a Turkmen dissident detained on Kazakh soil, and
suspending a trade mission to Kyrgyzstan over its refusal to a allow an independent
printing press.
In Colombia, linked by Secretary of State Colin Powell to the global war on terrorism,
Washington also took several positive new steps—indicting top leaders of
Colombia’s paramilitary and guerrilla organizations who were implicated in grave human rights abuses as well as drug trafficking, canceling the U.S. visa of a senior
Colombian admiral linked to gross abuses, and suspending assistance to a Colombian
air force unit implicated in a serious violation of the laws of war. Once again,
the U.S. government exaggerated Colombia’s progress in meeting human rights
conditions attached to U.S. military aid, which continued to send mixed signals to
the Colombian military. Nevertheless, Washington’s actions sent a stronger message
than in the past that Colombia must break remaining ties between its armed
forces and abusive paramilitary groups.
Despite these positive examples, however, Washington’s support for human
rights in countries that were critical to the fight against terrorism was at best
inconsistent and at worst completely muted. Afghanistan, the primary focus of
anti-terrorism efforts in 2002, illustrated the problem. The removal of the highly
abusive Taliban raised the prospect of greater freedom for the Afghan people.
And if one judged by Kabul, the Afghan capital where international peacekeepers
patrolled, life had improved dramatically. But the U.S. government sought security
for the rest of the country on the cheap. It offered at best lukewarm support to the
deployment of international troops outside of Kabul (European governments were
equally reluctant) and took few meaningful steps to demobilize factional forces
or establish a professional Afghan army. Instead, it delegated security to resurgent
warlords and provided them with money and arms.
In some parts of the country, the consequences looked much like life under
the Taliban—a far cry from President Bush’s vow, reiterated in October, to help
Afghanistan “claim its democratic future.” For example, Ismail Khan, the Heratbased
warlord in western Afghanistan, stamped out all dissent, muzzled the press,
and bundled women back into their burqas. Those who resisted faced death threats,
detention, and sometimes even torture. Afghans who had taken refuge in Iran during
Taliban rule complained that they had been freer there than under Khan. Yet
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, during a visit to Herat in April, called
Khan an “appealing person.” Under growing pressure to address the violence and
insecurity outside of Kabul, the Bush administration announced in November that
it would send a small number of soldiers and civil affairs officers to Afghan regional
centers. This was a positive step, but one too small to end warlord abuses.
In Pakistan, General Pervez Musharraf pushed through constitutional amendments
that extended his presidential term by five years, arrogated to himself
the power to dissolve the elected parliament, and created a military-dominated
National Security Council to oversee civilian government. But when asked about
this disturbing trend, President Bush said in August, “My reaction about President
Musharraf, he’s still tight with us on the war against terror, and that’s what I
appreciate.” Only as an afterthought did President Bush also mention the importance
of democracy. With Washington supporting Pakistan’s military ruler and
the repressive warlords next door in Afghanistan, it should have been no surprise
that anti-American political parties were the big winners in October’s parliamentary
elections. Their victory as well in parallel local elections in the two provinces
bordering Afghanistan will particularly complicate U.S. efforts to apprehend any
residual Taliban and al-Qaeda forces in the area.
In Indonesia, an abusive military and allied militia have been major factors in
separatist and communal strife. The government’s inability to hold abusive military figures accountable has been a major cause of popular discontent. Military-sponsored
atrocities in East Timor in 1999 had led the United States to cut off some
military assistance. But with Indonesia seen as a major front in the battle against
terrorism, the Bush administration tried to resume military training, even though
little if any progress had been made in subjecting the military to the rule of law. The
administration also sought dismissal of a lawsuit brought in U.S. courts by victims
of military atrocities in Aceh who sought compensation from ExxonMobil for its
alleged complicity in the abuse. The administration justified its opposition to this
effort to enforce human rights in part out of its fear that Indonesia would retaliate
by stopping its cooperation in the war on terrorism.
Other U.S. allies in the war on terrorism received soft treatment for their human
rights abuses. Russian President Vladimir Putin faced only mild criticism of his
troops’ brutal behavior in Chechnya. Despite the Bush administration’s occasional
criticism of China’s conduct in its western Xinjiang province, where China has
long cracked down on the Turkic-speaking Uighur majority, the administration’s
decision to designate the small East Turkistan Islamic Movement as a terrorist organization
provided cover for Beijing’s repression of the country’s largest Muslim
minority. Despite ongoing abuses by the Israeli military in fighting armed Palestinian
groups and their suicide bombings, Washington frequently shielded Israel from
international pressure and continued to supply it unconditionally with weapons
and military assistance. Because Malaysian Prime Minister Mahatir bin Mohamad
was outspoken in support of the campaign against terrorism, Washington also
muted its criticism of his government, whether for its use of administrative detention
or its continued detention on trumped-up charges of former Deputy Prime
Minister Anwar Ibrahim.
The overriding message sent by these U.S. bilateral actions is that human rights
are dispensable in the name of fighting terrorism. That policy may provide greater
leeway for short-term security measures. But if an important aim is to build a culture
of human rights in place of the pathology of terrorism, it sent a terrible signal
to replace the values of respect for the life of every person with the view that the
ends justify the means.
U.S. TREATMENT OF TERRORIST SUSPECTS
Washington’s disregard for human rights standards could be found in its own
conduct as well. Historically, the United States has complied with the requirements
of international humanitarian law (the laws of war) with regard to belligerents
captured in the course of an armed conflict. The United States upheld international
standards in part out of recognition that they ultimately benefited U.S. soldiers
as well. But the Bush administration’s unjustifiably narrow reading of the 1949
Geneva Conventions effectively placed those captured abroad and detained at
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba in a type of legal black hole—a form of long-term arbitrary
detention at odds with international requirements. For instance, the Third Geneva
Convention provides that captured combatants are to be treated as prisonersof-
war until a “competent tribunal” determines otherwise. Under the standards
set out in the convention, the detainees who were former Taliban soldiers would almost certainly qualify as POWs, while most of the detainees who were members
of al-Qaeda probably would not. But the Bush administration refused to bring any
of the detainees before a tribunal and unilaterally asserted that none qualified as
POWs. By contrast, during the Gulf War, the United States convened more than one
thousand tribunals for captured combatants.
The administration’s flouting of international humanitarian law could not be
explained by the exigencies of fighting terrorism. Treating the detainees as POWs
would not have precluded the United States from interrogating them or prosecuting
them for committing terrorist acts or other atrocities. And POWs, like other
detained combatants, can be held without charge or trial until the end of the relevant
armed conflict.
The administration’s refusal to apply the Geneva Conventions seemed to stem in
part from its desire to minimize public scrutiny of its conduct. For instance, in the
absence of criminal prosecutions, the Geneva Conventions require that all detainees,
regardless of their status, be repatriated once “active hostilities” have ended. In
the case of at least the Taliban detainees, that would seem to require repatriation as
soon as the war with the Afghan government was over—that is, presumably, upon
the installation of Hamid Karzai as president. But by refusing to apply the Geneva
Conventions, the administration avoided making such a determination.
The U.S. government took custody of some detainees in suspect circumstances.
In October 2001, it sought the surrender of six Algerian men in Bosnia suspected
of planning attacks on Americans. After a three-month investigation, Bosnia’s
Supreme Court ordered the men’s release from custody for lack of evidence. When
rumors spread of U.S. efforts to seize the suspects anyway, Bosnia’s Human Rights
Chamber—which was established under the U.S.-sponsored Dayton peace accord
and includes six local and eight international members—issued an injunction
against their removal. Yet in January 2002, under pressure from Washington, the
Bosnian government ignored this legal ruling and delivered the men to U.S. forces,
who whisked them out of the country, reportedly to Guantánamo.
The line between war and law enforcement gained importance as the U.S.
government extended its military efforts against terrorism outside of Afghanistan
and Pakistan. In November, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency used a missile
to kill Qaid Salim Sinan al-Harethi, an alleged senior al-Qaeda official, and five
companions as they were driving in a remote and lawless area of Yemen controlled
by tribal chiefs. Washington accused al-Harethi of masterminding the October
2000 bombing of the U.S.S. Cole which had killed seventeen sailors. Based on the
limited information available, Human Rights Watch did not criticize the attack on
al-Harethi as an extra-judicial execution because his alleged al-Qaeda role arguably
made him a combatant, the government apparently lacked control over the area
in question, and there evidently was no reasonable law enforcement alternative.
Indeed, eighteen Yemeni soldiers had reportedly been killed in a prior attempt to
arrest al-Harethi. However, the U.S. government made no public effort to justify
this use of its war powers or to articulate the legal limits to such powers. It is Human
Rights Watch’s position that even someone who might be classified as an enemy
combatant should not be subject to military attack when reasonable law enforcement
means are available. The failure to respect this principle would risk creating a
huge loophole in due process protections worldwide. It would leave everyone open almost certainly qualify as POWs, while most of the detainees who were members
of al-Qaeda probably would not. But the Bush administration refused to bring any
of the detainees before a tribunal and unilaterally asserted that none qualified as
POWs. By contrast, during the Gulf War, the United States convened more than one
thousand tribunals for captured combatants.
The administration’s flouting of international humanitarian law could not be
explained by the exigencies of fighting terrorism. Treating the detainees as POWs
would not have precluded the United States from interrogating them or prosecuting
them for committing terrorist acts or other atrocities. And POWs, like other
detained combatants, can be held without charge or trial until the end of the relevant
armed conflict.
The administration’s refusal to apply the Geneva Conventions seemed to stem in
part from its desire to minimize public scrutiny of its conduct. For instance, in the
absence of criminal prosecutions, the Geneva Conventions require that all detainees,
regardless of their status, be repatriated once “active hostilities” have ended. In
the case of at least the Taliban detainees, that would seem to require repatriation as
soon as the war with the Afghan government was over—that is, presumably, upon
the installation of Hamid Karzai as president. But by refusing to apply the Geneva
Conventions, the administration avoided making such a determination.
The U.S. government took custody of some detainees in suspect circumstances.
In October 2001, it sought the surrender of six Algerian men in Bosnia suspected
of planning attacks on Americans. After a three-month investigation, Bosnia’s
Supreme Court ordered the men’s release from custody for lack of evidence. When
rumors spread of U.S. efforts to seize the suspects anyway, Bosnia’s Human Rights
Chamber—which was established under the U.S.-sponsored Dayton peace accord
and includes six local and eight international members—issued an injunction
against their removal. Yet in January 2002, under pressure from Washington, the
Bosnian government ignored this legal ruling and delivered the men to U.S. forces,
who whisked them out of the country, reportedly to Guantánamo.
The line between war and law enforcement gained importance as the U.S.
government extended its military efforts against terrorism outside of Afghanistan
and Pakistan. In November, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency used a missile
to kill Qaid Salim Sinan al-Harethi, an alleged senior al-Qaeda official, and five
companions as they were driving in a remote and lawless area of Yemen controlled
by tribal chiefs. Washington accused al-Harethi of masterminding the October
2000 bombing of the U.S.S. Cole which had killed seventeen sailors. Based on the
limited information available, Human Rights Watch did not criticize the attack on
al-Harethi as an extra-judicial execution because his alleged al-Qaeda role arguably
made him a combatant, the government apparently lacked control over the area
in question, and there evidently was no reasonable law enforcement alternative.
Indeed, eighteen Yemeni soldiers had reportedly been killed in a prior attempt to
arrest al-Harethi. However, the U.S. government made no public effort to justify
this use of its war powers or to articulate the legal limits to such powers. It is Human
Rights Watch’s position that even someone who might be classified as an enemy
combatant should not be subject to military attack when reasonable law enforcement
means are available. The failure to respect this principle would risk creating a
huge loophole in due process protections worldwide. It would leave everyone open to being summarily killed anyplace in the world upon the unilateral determination
by the United States (or, as the approach is inevitably emulated, by any other government)
that he or she is an enemy combatant.
The appropriate line between war and law enforcement was crossed in the case
of Jose Padilla, a U.S. citizen who the Bush administration claimed had flown from
Pakistan to the United States to investigate creating a radiological bomb. The Bush
administration arrested him as he arrived in the United States, but instead of charging
him with this serious criminal offense and bringing him to trial, it unilaterally
declared him an “enemy combatant.” That designation, it claimed, permitted it to
hold him without access to counsel and without charge or trial until the end of the
war against terrorism, which may never come. With no link to a discernible battlefield,
that assertion of power, again, threatens to create a giant exception to the most
basic criminal justice guarantees. Anyone could be picked up and detained forever
as an “enemy combatant” upon the unverified claim of the Bush administration
or any other government. As the year ended, the U.S. courts were considering this
radical claim.
Due process shortcuts also plagued the Bush administration’s detention of
some 1,200 non-U.S. citizens whom the government sought to question regarding
their links to or knowledge of the September 11 attacks. Of this group, whose
number has never been fully disclosed, 752 were detained on immigration charges
but treated like criminals. Rather than grant them the rights of criminal suspects,
the administration used immigration law to detain and interrogate them secretly,
without their usual right to be charged promptly with a criminal offense and (in
case of economic need) to government-appointed counsel. Immigration detainees
would ordinarily be deported, allowed to leave the country voluntarily, or released
on bond pending a hearing on their case. But these “special interest” detainees
were kept in jail until “cleared”—that is, until proven innocent of terrorist connections—
often for many months. By mid-December, none of them had been charged
with a crime related to September 11.
President Bush’s November 2001 order authorizing the creation of military
commissions to try non-American suspects lacked the most basic due process guarantees
and raised the prospect of trials that would have been a travesty of justice. In
March 2002, the Defense Department issued regulations for the new commissions
that corrected many of the due process problems of the original order. However,
the commissions are still to operate without even the fair-trial standards applicable
in U.S. courts-martial. Defendants in such courts-martial are entitled to appeal to
the United States Court of Appeal for the Armed Forces—a civilian court outside
the control of the executive branch—and ultimately to petition the U.S. Supreme
Court. But the commission regulations permit appeal only to another military
panel of people who must answer to the president. That makes the president,
through his surrogates, both prosecutor and judge. Especially as applied away from
the exigencies of the battlefield, these compromised commissions violate the minimum
legal requirement of “an impartial and regularly constituted court respecting
the generally recognized principles of regular judicial procedure” (Geneva
Conventions, Protocol I, art. 75, reflecting customary international law). If these
commissions are used to try detainees who should be considered prisoners-of-war, and thus are entitled to the more protective procedures of a court-martial, the Bush
administration would open itself to war crimes charges.
CONSEQUENCES FOR
THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST TERRORISM
The U.S. government’s willingness to sidestep human rights as it fights terrorism
has potentially profound and dangerous consequences. At the very least, it means
that the United States is a party to serious abuse. If Washington provides assistance
to abusive warlords in Afghanistan or a military dictatorship such as Pakistan’s, it
becomes complicit in the abuses that they foreseeably commit.
In addition, as noted, Washington’s neglect of human rights threatens to impede
its campaign against terrorism. As President Bush himself has observed, repression
fuels terrorism, by closing off avenues for peaceful dissent. Yet if the U.S. campaign
against terrorism reinforces that repression, it risks breeding more terrorists as it
alienates would-be allies in the fight against terrorism.
Washington’s subordination of human rights to the campaign against terrorism
has also bred a copycat phenomenon. By waving the anti-terrorism banner, governments
such as Uzbekistan seemed to feel that they had license to persecute religious
dissenters, while governments such as Russia, Israel, and China seemed to feel freer
to intensify repression in Chechnya, the West Bank, and Xinjiang. Tunisia stepped
up trying civilians on terrorism charges before military courts that flagrantly
disregard due-process rights. Claiming that asylum-seekers can be a “pipeline for
terrorists” entering the country, Australia imposed some of the tightest restrictions
on asylum in the industrialized world. Facing forces on the right and left that have
been designated terrorists, Colombia’s new president, Álvaro Uribe, tried to permit
warrantless searches and wiretaps and to restrict the movement of journalists (until
the country’s highest court ruled these measures unconstitutional).
In sub-Saharan Africa, some of the mimicry took on absurd proportions. Ugandan
President Yoweri Museveni shut down the leading independent newspaper for
a week in October because it was allegedly promoting terrorism (it had reported a
military defeat by the government in its battle against the Lord’s Resistance Army
rebel group). In June, Liberian President Charles Taylor declared three of his critics—
the editor of a local newspaper and two others—to be “illegal combatants”
who would be tried for terrorism in a military court. Eritrea justified its lengthy
detention of the founder of the country’s leading newspaper by citing Washington’s
widespread detentions. Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe justified the
November 2001 arrest of six journalists as terrorists because they wrote stories
about political violence in the country. Elsewhere, even former Yugoslav President
Slobodan Milosevic defended himself against war-crimes charges by contending
that abusive troops under his command had merely been combating terrorism.
The inconsistency of Washington’s attention to human rights abroad has also
weakened an important voice for human rights when it does speak out. The most
dramatic example occurred in the case of Saadeddin Ibrahim, the Egyptian democracy
activist who was sentenced in July to seven years in prison for his peaceful
political activities. To its credit, the Bush administration not only protested but also said it would withhold an incremental increase in aid that might have gone to
Egypt. This was a dramatic step—the first time in the Middle East that the United
States had conditioned aid on the positive resolution of a human rights case. But in
light of Washington’s long history of closing its eyes to human rights abuses in the
Middle East, and the its failure to protest Egypt’s similar persecution of Islamists
for non-violent political activity, many Egyptians distrusted its motives, and even
some Egyptian human rights groups denounced the action. In early December,
Egypt’s highest appeals court—with a long tradition of independence from the
government—reversed Ibrahim’s conviction and ordered a new trial. But Washington’s
voice was clearly shown to have been compromised as a means to build broad
public support for human rights.
EUROPEAN UNION
As Washington forsakes its traditional role as a strong if not always consistent
proponent of human rights, one would have hoped that the European Union, with
its own tradition of promoting human rights, would fill the void. But Europe’s
leadership was hampered by its own failure of political will, its undue deference to
Washington, and the premium it puts on consensus at any cost.
The year did not begin auspiciously. At the annual session of the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights in March and April, the absence of the United States—the
first time in the history of the commission that Washington had not been voted a
member—presented Europe with a test of its leadership. It failed. Without Washington
to take the lead, the European Union did not even table a resolution on
China’s continuing abysmal record on human rights. Instead, it pursued a proforma
dialogue on human rights with Beijing. Europe did act on Chechnya, but
half-heartedly. It engaged in long and futile efforts to negotiate with the Russian
government a watered-down, consensus-based chairman’s statement instead of a
critical resolution. That approach was inappropriate to begin with in light of Russian
security forces’ persistent atrocities and Russian authorities’ utter failure to
bring abusive forces to justice. When the negotiations ended in stalemate, the E.U.
belatedly tabled a critical resolution, but it lost by a single vote—the first defeat of
a Chechnya resolution in three years.
In the case of China, key European governments have shown far more interest
in building economic ties than in promoting human rights—even though the one
need not preclude the other. The E.U. has thus left it to the United States, which
also places a higher value on economic relations with China, to take the lead in
condemning Beijing’s closed political system.
European deference to Washington was most visible in conflicts over the International
Criminal Court. The E.U. deserves credit for being among the court’s
leading defenders in the face of the Bush administration’s intense opposition. But
European governments were too quick to compromise on matters of principle,
largely because the United Kingdom was determined to bridge the gap between
Europe and the United States. For instance, in June and July, as noted, Washington
threatened to use its veto on the U.N. Security Council to end various peacekeeping
missions unless the council exempted American participants in U.N.-authorized operations from ICC jurisdiction. Washington’s threat was unsustainable, since it
would have required, for example, removing the U.N. forces that keep Sierra Leone
from descending back into vicious conflict and that serve as a buffer between Hezbollah
and Israel’s northern border. Yet rather than stand on principle, France and
especially Britain endorsed a “compromise” that exempted American troops for
one year. Whether this is a reasonable compromise or a face-saving step toward
American impunity will depend on whether these countries acquiesce in extending
this agreement when the year’s exemption expires in July 2003.
Similarly, largely at Britain’s insistence, the European Union failed to agree on a
common rejection of Washington’s attempt to enter into bilateral immunity agreements
under article 98 of the ICC treaty. Article 98 permits bilateral agreements to
determine which of two interested governments has the prior claim to investigate
and, if appropriate, prosecute a suspect. But article 98 must be read in light of the
treaty’s overriding purpose—to empower the ICC to oversee any such prosecutorial
effort and ensure that it is carried out in good faith. Several European governments
suggested that it would be enough if Washington simply vowed to pursue
any suspect sent its way under an article 98 agreement. But the entire purpose of
the ICC is never to trust unverified pledges of prosecution. That is the system that
allowed such tyrants as Augusto Pinochet, Idi Amin, and Pol Pot to escape with
impunity. European nations (and other ICC supporters) must recognize that no
agreement is valid under article 98 unless both parties recognize the oversight
authority of the ICC. As of mid-December, E.U. governments had not done so.
However, only fifteen governments worldwide had entered into these bilateral
immunity agreements.
Part of the explanation for the European Union’s weak record on human rights
is the premium it places on consensus no matter the consequences. A consensus
rule reflects a preference for inaction unless there is unanimous support for action.
Its purpose is to guard against undue intrusions on the interests of a single member
state. On certain internal E.U. matters, this rule may be a reasonable concession to
national sovereignty. It can even be useful in holding prospective member states to
higher human rights expectations. But when it comes to promoting human rights
outside the arena of would-be E.U. members, it has proved harmful, as shown by
the E.U.’s record on Chechyna, China, and the ICC.
To succeed, the promotion of human rights must be consistent and vigorous.
But the E.U.’s consensus rule produces the lowest common denominator. Any
single member can water down or stop common action to protect human rights.
Inaction becomes the default position.
As the U.S. voice for human rights fades, the cost of E.U. inaction increases. Its
effect will only compound as the number of E.U. members grows from fifteen to
twenty-five. At least when it comes to promoting human rights, it is time for Europe
to adopt a different decision-making threshold. One alternative would be to allow
a supermajority to speak for the E.U., perhaps with a right for dissenting governments
to opt out.
The difficulty of achieving a strong consensus could be mitigated somewhat if
individual E.U. governments saw themselves as free to promote human rights more
vigorously than the E.U. common foreign policy—that is, if the common policy
were seen as a floor rather than a ceiling. Historically, this occurred. For example, in 1997, Denmark alone sponsored a critical resolution on China at the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights. Similarly, Germany has traditionally taken a stronger
stand than the E.U. as a whole in support of the ICC. The Nordic countries have
done the same for the Great Lakes region of Africa and, together with the United
Kingdom, for Burma. Individual interventions do not have the power of collective
action, but they are better than nothing.
Increasingly, however, E.U. members seem to be denying themselves this latitude,
or at least using the preference for common action as an excuse not to act
beyond the consensus. This problem was particularly acute in 2002 with regard to
China and Chechnya. Delegates at the U.N. commission repeatedly cited the E.U.
common policy as a reason why they could not push harder (or at all) for a critical
resolution.
This trend should be resisted. The presumption that no one acts unless everyone
does may make sense for internal matters, where a premium is placed on regularity
across borders. But it is an unnecessary restraint when it comes to the external
promotion of human rights. The E.U. common foreign policy should be seen as the
minimum that all members must support, not a constraint on those willing to do
more for human rights.
Adding to the problem is the lack of transparency in E.U. decision-making.
Simply learning that a proposed policy is even on the table usually requires intensive
detective work. The public typically is not informed of a policy debate until
a decision has been made, and the positions taken by individual member states
during the debate are generally not revealed. The democracy deficit produced by
this secrecy is particularly pernicious in the case of human rights, where popular
pressure is often needed to overcome the reluctance of many governments to promote
human rights in the face of countervailing political or economic interests. As
is increasingly heard in the corridors of the U.N. and other multilateral fora, this
secrecy also alienates potential allies. They hardly appreciate being expected to wait
for and then follow an E.U. pronouncement when they have little knowledge of or
opportunity to influence the debate.
Consensus, uniformity, secrecy—all at times have their purpose. But the E.U.’s
voice on human rights is too important to allow these procedural values to stand in
its way. As the E.U. expands, it should also ensure that its essential role in promoting
human rights around the world is preserved.
U.N. COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
An alternative voice for human rights might have come from the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights. But in addition to Europe’s disappointing role, the commission
has been hampered by a perverse incentive system that encourages abusive
governments to flock to it for the purpose of weakening it and sparing themselves
condemnation.
It is hardly surprising that there are more governments vying for membership
on U.N. bodies than there are positions to go around. Particularly in the developing
world, most rights-respecting governments seek membership on one of the U.N.
bodies that address development issues, hoping to steer additional development funds their way. But for abusive governments, their top priority is avoiding U.N.
condemnation. They tend to congregate on the human rights commission. The
result is that some two dozen of the commission’s fifty-three members are governments
with records of indifference if not hostility to human rights.
There is an urgent need to counteract this perverse set of incentives by adopting
criteria for commission membership. If governments seek to join the leading U.N.
body for promoting human rights, they should be required to show some basic
commitment to human rights. That should include, at least, an open invitation for
U.N. human rights investigators to enter their country, ratification of the six leading
human rights treaties and compliance with their reporting requirements, and a
record of not having recently been condemned by the commission. Adopting such
criteria should be the top priority of any government interested in enhancing the
effectiveness of the commission. It should also be a focus of efforts by the new U.N.
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello, in addition to his
essential role as a high-profile public critic of abusive governments.
OTHER VOICES FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
Several governments have stepped forward to try to fill this leadership void on
human rights. They cannot replace the power and influence of Europe and the
United States but they can still play a helpful role.
Mexico under President Vicente Fox continued to be a consistent supporter of
international human rights initiatives. It played a lead role in trying to fend off U.S.
attacks on the International Criminal Court at the U.N. Security Council. It was
joined by Canada, which though not a member of the council was outspoken in
rejecting the Bush administration’s vision of impunity for American suspects.
Senegal, South Africa, and Nigeria joined in creating the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD), which commits its members to democratization
and the rule of law in return for foreign investment and international assistance.
The initiative was formally adopted in July at the first summit of the African
Union, a new incarnation of the Organization of African Unity whose constitutive
act also included language on respect for human rights, democratic principles, and
good governance as a condition for membership. A key innovation in NEPAD is
the promise of “peer review”—a pledge that African governments will be jointly
responsible for democratic development and respect for human rights, not only in
their own countries but in neighboring countries as well.
However, African governments’ conduct under NEPAD was disappointing.
According to the U.N.’s usual rotation system, it was the turn of the African caucus
to nominate the chair of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights for the session
beginning in March 2003. In one of their first acts after the launching of NEPAD,
African governments proposed Libya—a major funder of the African Union.
To endorse such a long-time abuser of human rights to lead the U.N.’s foremost
human rights body does not bode well for compliance with the NEPAD-related
vows of meaningful peer review. Moreover, Nigeria, a key player in NEPAD, was
one of the few countries to vote against creating the above-mentioned inspection
regime to stop torture and, at home, failed to take meaningful steps to discipline or prosecute soldiers responsible for massacring hundreds of civilians in two serious
incidents in 1999 and 2001. South Africa, praised for its effective chairing of
the 1998 session of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, played a significantly
more troubling role in 2002. South African President Thebo Mbeki offered only
muted criticism of Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe, despite his persistent
violations of civil and political liberties and disturbing reports of politically motivated
diversion of food in time of famine.
Norway and Canada—two major Western governments not burdened by the
E.U. preoccupation with consensus—frequently played a positive leadership role
on human rights. As noted, Canada was outspoken in defending the ICC from U.S.
attack, although its advocacy of human rights in China was weak. Both Norway and
Canada, drawing from their experience with the campaigns to ban landmines and
end the use of child soldiers, continued to build a like-minded group of nations to
address other serious human rights and humanitarian concerns. New Zealand also
played a notably positive role in defending the ICC, although its traditional partner—
Australia—supported Washington in its obstructionist efforts on the ICC
and, as described above, set a disturbing precedent on the treatment of refugees.
POSSIBLE WAR IN IRAQ
At this writing, war in Iraq is threatening. Human Rights Watch takes no position
on whether war should be launched. But in the interest of saving the lives of
noncombatants, we are concerned about the way a war might proceed.
In human rights terms, Saddam Hussein is as bad as they come. In 1988, in the
notorious Anfal campaign, he committed genocide against the Kurds. After using
chemical weapons on at least forty occasions to drive Kurds from their highland
villages, his forces rounded up and executed some one hundred thousand, mostly
men and boys. In suppressing the 1991 uprisings, his forces killed an estimated
thirty thousand Iraqis, mostly Kurds in the north and Shi’a in the south. In the following
years, untold atrocities were committed against the Marsh Arabs. On a dayto-
day basis, the Iraqi government uses arbitrary detention, torture, and execution
to maintain power.
But the threatened war on Iraq is not a humanitarian intervention in the sense
that it would be waged primarily for the purpose of benefiting the Iraqi people.
If Saddam Hussein were overthrown in a palace coup and replaced by an equally
repressive dictator who nonetheless was willing to cooperate in ridding the country
of alleged weapons of mass destruction, there clearly would be no invasion. That
said, Human Rights Watch does not discount the importance of stopping the possible
use of weapons of mass destruction when there is a credible threat of their
use. If this war is fought, however, it is essential that the attackers take into account
the potential risks facing the Iraqi people, particularly in light of the atrocities that
Saddam Hussein is obviously capable of committing.
First, the attackers should do everything feasible to avoid civilian casualties by
their own forces. This means, at minimum, avoiding such controversial practices
as using cluster bombs near populated areas (as occurred during the Gulf War
of 1991, the Yugoslav war of 1999, and the Afghan war of 2001-02). It means not using military force to undermine civilian morale or to attack political supporters
of a regime who are not directly contributing to the military effort (as occurred in
Yugoslavia). And it means taking all feasible precautions to avoid misidentifying
targets, especially in the case of “targets of opportunity” when the review system is
necessarily abbreviated (as occurred in all three above-noted wars but particularly
in Afghanistan, where special operations forces in the field were used extensively
to identify targets).
Second, the U.S. and its allies must take into account the history of abuse already
suffered by the Iraqi people and make serious attempts to prevent its recurrence.
As noted, on numerous occasions as part of the 1988 Anfal genocide, Saddam Hussein
used chemical weapons against Iraqi Kurds. Now, if he sees that the end of his
rule is near, he is perfectly capable of resuming the slaughter by using chemical
or biological weapons he might retain against his own people, perhaps even in
an effort to embarrass his attackers. During the 1991 uprising, Iraqi rebel forces,
both Kurdish and Shi’a, demonstrated that they are capable of summarily executing
government officials, Baath Party members, and their perceived supporters.
Unless restrained during a possible new war, there is every reason to believe that
they will pick up where they left off, but this time as possible U.S. proxies. Also in
1991, some neighboring countries closed their borders to people fleeing the war in
Iraq. Turkey, in particular, left Kurds to die of exposure to the winter cold on the
mountains along its border. In the event of renewed war, it has publicly threatened
to close its borders again.
Washington has taken some steps to prevent repetition of these abuses should
it go to war. It has warned Iraqi troops that they will be prosecuted if they use
weapons of mass destruction. And it has cautioned the relatively organized Kurdish
forces against committing atrocities, although that message is difficult to deliver to
less organized Shi’a forces. But more clearly must be done to avoid repetition of
the Kosovo tragedy, when unprepared U.S. troops were forced to watch from the
sidelines as the forces of Slobodan Milosevic escalated their attacks on Kosovar
Albanian civilians in response to the NATO bombing campaign. Vigilance is particularly
urgent because the possible availability of weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq could produce killing on a much larger scale. In addition, neighboring governments
must be pressured to respect the right of Iraqis to flee violence and take
refuge elsewhere, especially given the substantial dangers they might face.
There is also the difficult issue of combatants who are taken prisoner. During
the Afghan war, the United States took insufficient steps to prevent allied Northern
Alliance forces from committing atrocities against prisoners. During the Gulf War,
Iraq severely mistreated coalition prisoners-of-war. Steps must be taken to prevent
a repetition of those abuses, although the Bush administration’s degrading of the
Geneva Conventions at Guantánamo will make some arguments in defense of captured
combatants more difficult to advance.
Washington has also been reticent about its post-war strategy. Will the Bush
administration commit to rebuilding the rule of law in Iraq, in contrast to the “warlord
strategy” it has pursued in Afghanistan? It has spoken about bringing senior
Iraqi officials to justice, but will it ensure fair trials and independent tribunals? Will
it subject to international scrutiny its own conduct and that of its allies or will it
impose only victor’s justice? The answers to these and similar questions will determine whether, even with Saddam Hussein gone, possible war with Iraq would hold
much promise of improving the Iraqi people’s plight.
CONCLUSION
The security threat posed by terrorism should not obscure the importance of
human rights. Military or police action can be seductive. It leaves the impression
that the problem is being addressed firmly, head-on. Concern with human rights,
by contrast, may seem peripheral—of long-term utility, undoubtedly, but not a
high immediate priority.
That view is profoundly mistaken. An anti-terrorism policy that ignores human
rights is a gift to the terrorists. It reaffirms the violent instrumentalism that breeds
terrorism as it undermines the public support needed to defeat terrorism. A strong
human rights policy cannot replace the actions of security forces, but it is an essential
complement. A successful anti-terrorism policy must endeavor to build strong
international norms and institutions on human rights, not provide a new rationale
for avoiding and undermining them.
THIS REPORT
This report is Human Rights Watch’s thirteenth annual review of human rights
practices around the globe. It addresses developments in fifty-eight countries,
covering the period from November 2001 through November 2002. Most chapters
examine significant human rights developments in a particular country; the
response of global actors, such as the European Union, Japan, the United States, the
United Nations, and various regional and international organizations and institutions;
and the freedom of local human rights defenders to conduct their work.
This report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2002 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human rights
activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of the Human Rights
Watch advocacy team, which monitors the policies of governments and international
institutions that have influence to curb human rights abuses. Human Rights
Watch publications, issued throughout the year, contain more detailed accounts of
many of the issues addressed in the brief summaries collected in this volume. They
can be found on the Human Rights Watch website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country where
Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance. The
failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more than staffing
limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance of the problem.
There are many serious human rights violations that Human Rights Watch
simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2002 (and
hence the content of this volume) included the severity of abuses, access to the
country and the availability of information about it, the susceptibility of abusive
forces to influence, and the importance of addressing certain thematic concerns
and of reinforcing the work of local rights organizations.
Unlike previous World Reports, this year’s does not have separate chapters
addressing Human Rights Watch’s thematic work. Instead, this year’s report incorporates
such material directly into the report’s regional overviews, country chapters,
and a new chapter on “Global Issues.” The change was made in the interests of
streamlining the volume and mainstreaming developments in thematic areas into
our country descriptions and analyses. The Human Rights Watch website can be
consulted for more detailed treatment of our work on children’s rights, women’s
rights, arms, academic freedom, business and human rights, HIV/AIDS and human
rights, international justice, refugees and displaced, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender rights, and for information on our international film festival.