Iran
With the government of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad continuing to invoke
“national security” as a justification for silencing dissent, 2008 saw a dramatic
rise in arrests of political activists, academics, and others for peacefully exercising
their rights of free expression and association in Iran. There were numerous
reports of the torture and mistreatment of such detainees. The Judiciary, accountable
to Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, and the Ministry of Intelligence continued
to be responsible for many serious human rights violations. The number of executions
also increased sharply in 2008.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Iranian authorities systematically suppress freedom of expression and opinion by
imprisoning journalists and editors, and strictly controlling publishing and academic
activity. Most journalists arrested in 2008 were targeted for covering ethnic
minority issues and civil society activities, and the National Security Council has
given newspapers formal and informal warnings against covering issues such as
human rights violations and social protests. The few independent dailies that
remain heavily self-censor.
Many writers and intellectuals who have evaded imprisonment have left the country
or ceased to be critical. The government has fired dissident university professors
or forced them into early retirement, a trend that intensified in 2008. State
universities also recently began banning some politically active students from
registering for their next semester, putting pressure on student associations and
their supporters to not criticize the government.
In 2008 the authorities continued to target student and internet journalists. The
government systematically blocks Iranian and foreign websites that carry political
news and analysis.
The Ahmadinejad government shows no tolerance for peaceful protests and gatherings.
Security forces arrested over a hundred student activists in 2008, often
without informing their families of the arrests. According to some of the imprisoned students and their families, security forces subjected these students to mistreatment
and abuse during their detention.
Civil Society
The government has increased pressure on civil society organizations that call for
human rights and freedom of speech by restricting their activities and barring
activists from leaving the country. These include the Center for Defenders of
Human Rights, led by 2003 Noble Peace Prize Laureate Shirin Ebadi, and the
Association of Iranian Journalists. On October 2 Iran’s official news agency
warned Ebadi, a lawyer who publically criticizes the government and regularly
defends political and human rights cases in court, not to “misuse the tolerance of
the government.” The Malaysian foreign ministry, under pressure from the Iranian
government, forced the International Peace Foundation to cancel an October
2008 conference that Ebadi was due to attend. Earlier in the year Ebadi had
received death threats. In response, she announced that the Iranian government
would be held responsible for any harm to her. The authorities later promised to
guarantee her safety.
Government intelligence officials forced Mohammad Sadigh Kaboudvand, a journalist
and human rights activist in the western province of Kurdistan, to shut
down his NGO Defending the Human Rights in Kurdistan, and in July 2007 arrested
him. He was sentenced to 11 years’ imprisonment in June 2008 for acting
against national security and engaging in propaganda against the state.
Criminal Justice and the Juvenile Death Penalty
Iranian law allows death sentences for persons who have reached puberty,
defined in law as age 9 for girls and 15 for boys. At this writing, Iran was the only
country to have executed juvenile offenders in 2008, a total of six persons for
crimes committed while under age 18. The country carried out 26 of the 32 known
executions of juvenile offenders worldwide since January 2005. According to multiple
sources, at least 130 other juvenile offenders are on death row in Iran. In
many cases these sentences followed unfair trials, and the executions themselves
sometimes violated Iranian national laws, such as the failure to notify families
and lawyers of the execution 48 hours in advance.
On August 4, 2008, the Judiciary cancelled the execution by stoning of four
Iranians. The Judiciary spokesman said that it would review all pending stoning
sentences. However, stoning remains a sentence permitted under the penal code.
Women’s Rights
The government escalated its crackdown on women’s rights activists in 2008,
subjecting dozens of women to arbitrary detention, travel bans, and harassment.
Eight women’s rights activists were arrested in June as they were commemorating
a 2006 meeting on women’s rights that was broken up by police. In October an
Iranian-American student researching women’s rights in Iran, Esha Momeni,
was arrested and held for some three weeks in Tehran’s Evin prison. Security
agents seized her computer and footage of interviews she had conducted with
women’s rights activists. Later that month, security agents blocked Sussan
Tahmasebi, a leader of the One Million Signatures Campaign for Equality, from
boarding a plane and confiscated her passport, without charging her with any
crime. The Judiciary has also prosecuted women involved in peaceful activities on
behalf of the campaign for “disturbing public opinion,” “propaganda against the
order,” and “publishing lies via the publication of false news.”
In September an appeals court in Tehran upheld prison and lashing sentences
against two women’s rights activists, Massoumeh Zia and Marzieh Mortazi
Langrudi, for taking part in a 2006 demonstration demanding equal rights. Four
women were also sentenced earlier in the year to six months in jail each for writing
articles for feminist websites.
In January 2008 the authorities released Maryam Hosseinkhah and Jelveh
Javaheri from Evin prison, where they were serving sentences for “disturbing public
opinion” and “publishing lies.” Two other activists, Ronak Safazadeh and
Hana Abdi, remain in detention in Sanandaj on charges of “endangering national
security.” Prior to their arrest they were active members of the Azarmehr
Association of the Women of Kurdistan, a group that organizes capacity-building
workshops for women in Iranian Kurdistan.
Minorities
Iran’s ethnic and religious minorities are subject to discrimination and, in some
cases, persecution. In the northwestern provinces of Azerbaijan and Kurdistan,
the government restricts cultural and political activities by the Azerbaijani and
Kurdish populations, including the operation of NGOs that focus on social issues.
The government also restricts the promotion of minority cultures and languages.
On September 10, for example, plainclothes Intelligence Ministry agents arrested
19 prominent Azerbaijani cultural activists and academics during a private
Ramadan celebration and detained them in Evin Prison. The Iranian government
accuses them of siding with armed opposition groups and acting against national
security.
On September 30, Molavi Abdolhamid, one of the most prominent Sunni clerics
in Iran, said that if the government failed to address the problems of the Sunni
community, including discrimination, its members would be unlikely to participate
in the presidential election in 2009. The 2008 execution of two Sunni clerics
in Zahedan, the assassination of two Sunni clerics in Kurdistan, the destruction of
the Abu-Hanifeh Sunni religious school near Zahedan, and the arrest of 11 Sunni
clerics who protested against this assault, coupled with systematic efforts to
remove Sunni citizens from governmental positions, the army, and the police
force, are among the major criticisms Abdolhamid leveled against the government.
The government continues to deny Iran’s Baha’i community permission to worship
publicly or pursue religious activities. On May 14, security forces arrested six
leading Baha’i adherents and members of the Baha’i national coordination group,
without informing them of the charges against them, and sent them to Evin
prison. One associate of this group had already been arrested on March 5. At this
writing, all seven remain in detention.
HIV/AIDS
In late June security forces detained without charge Arash and Kamyar Alaei, who
are well known in Iran and internationally for their contributions to HIV/AIDS prevention
and treatment programs; they remain in detention at this writing. For more than 20 years the Alaei brothers have been active in addressing problems
relating to drug use, with a focus on the spread of HIV/AIDS, and have played key
roles in putting these issues on the national healthcare agenda.
Key International Actors
In 2008 Iran’s nuclear program again dominated discussions and policies in the
international arena, overshadowing the urgency of discussing Iran’s human rights
violations. During Ahmadinejad’s presidency, critical dialogue between the West
and the Iranian government on human rights issues effectively stopped. The
European Union has pledged to tie progress in broader cooperation with Iran to
respect for human rights, but the pledge has had little impact. The United Nations
Security Council has adopted three resolutions since 2007 to sanction Iran economically
for its nuclear program.
In 2008 Iran continued to use what it calls “foreign threats” as grounds to suppress
civil society and ignore widespread domestic and international objections
to human rights violations. The authorities use the rhetorical support of Western
countries, especially the United States, for dissidents and human rights
activists as an excuse to restrict the freedom of expression and assembly within
the country.
The Iranian government has not allowed the UN Human Rights Council’s special
rapporteurs to enter Iran and investigate violations of human rights alleged by
activists, the media, and independent sources since 2005.