Iran
Respect for basic human rights in Iran, especially freedom of expression and
assembly, deteriorated in 2006. The government routinely tortures and mistreats
detained dissidents, including through prolonged solitary confinement. The
Judiciary, which is accountable to Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, is responsible
for many serious human rights violations.
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s cabinet is dominated by former intelligence
and security officials, some of whom have been implicated in serious human
rights violations, such as the assassination of dissident intellectuals. Under his
administration, the Ministry of Information, which essentially performs intelligence
functions, has substantially increased its surveillance of dissidents, civil
society activists, and journalists.
Freedom of Expression
Iranian authorities systematically suppress freedom of expression and opinion by
closing newspapers and imprisoning journalists and editors. The few independent
dailies that remain heavily self-censor. Many writers and intellectuals have
left the country, are in prison, or have ceased to be critical. In September 2006
the Ministry of Culture and Guidance closed the reformist daily, Shargh, and shut
down two reformist journals, Nameh and Hafez. In October the Ministry shut
down a new reformist daily, Roozgar, only three days after it started publication.
During the year the Ministry of Information summoned and interrogated dozens of
journalists critical of the government.
In 2006 the authorities also targeted websites and internet journalists in an effort
to prevent online dissemination of news and information. The government systematically
blocks websites inside Iran and abroad that carry political news and
analysis. In September 2006 Esmail Radkani, director-general of the governmentcontrolled
Information Technology Company, announced that his company is
blocking access to 10 million “unauthorized” websites on orders from the
Judiciary and other authorities.
Freedom of Assembly
The Ahmadinejad government, in a pronounced shift from the policy under former
president Mohammed Khatami, has shown no tolerance for peaceful protests and
gatherings. In January 2006 security forces attacked striking bus drivers in Tehran
and detained hundreds. The government refused to recognize the drivers’ independent
union or engage in collective bargaining with them. In February government
forces attacked a peaceful gathering of Sufi devotees in front of their religious
building in Qum to prevent its destruction by the authorities, using tear gas
and water cannons to disperse them. In March police and plainclothes agents
charged a peaceful assembly of women’s rights activists in Tehran and beat hundreds
of women and men who had gathered to commemorate International
Women’s Day. In June as women’s rights defenders assembled again in Tehran,
security forces beat them with batons, sprayed them with pepper gas, marked the
demonstrators with sprayed dye, and took 70 people into custody.
Torture and Ill-Treatment in Detention
Since President Ahmadinejad came to power, treatment of detainees has worsened
in Evin prison as well as in detention centers operated clandestinely by the
Judiciary, the Ministry of Information, and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
The authorities have subjected those imprisoned for peaceful expression of political
views to torture and ill-treatment, including beatings, sleep depravation, and
mock executions. Judges often accept coerced confessions. The authorities use
prolonged solitary confinement, often in small basement cells, to coerce confessions
(which are videotaped) and gain information regarding associates.
In 2006 two prisoners held for their political beliefs, Akbar Mohammadi and
Valiollah Feyz Mahdavi, died in suspicious circumstances in prison. The authorities
prevented their families from conducting independent autopsies. The government
has taken no action to investigate the cause of the deaths.
Impunity
There is no mechanism for monitoring and investigating human rights violations
perpetrated by agents of the government. The closure of independent media in
Iran has helped to perpetuate an atmosphere of impunity.
In recent years public testimonies by numerous former prisoners and detainees
have implicated Tehran’s public prosecutor Saeed Mortazavi and his office in
some of the worst cases of human rights violations. Despite extensive evidence,
Mortazavi has not been held responsible for his role in illegal detentions, torture
of detainees, and coercing false confessions. The case of Iranian-Canadian photojournalist
Zahra Kazemi, who died in the custody of judiciary and security agents
led by Mortazavi in June 2003, remains unresolved. Mustapha Pour-Mohammadi,
the current interior minister, is implicated in extrajudicial massacres of thousands
of political prisoners in 1988.
Human Rights Defenders
In 2006 the authorities intensified their harassment of independent human rights
defenders and lawyers in an attempt to prevent them from publicizing and pursuing
human rights violations. In August the Interior Ministry declared illegal the
Center for Defense of Human Rights, led by Shirin Ebadi, the 2003 Nobel Peace
Prize winner. Ebadi and her colleagues provide pro-bono legal counsel to hundreds
of dissidents, journalists, and students facing prosecution for exercising
fundamental freedoms, such as peacefully protesting or criticizing government
policies. The authorities threatened Ebadi and her colleagues with arrest should
they continue their activities in defense of human rights. Following international
protests, the government has not carried out its threat, but Ebadi and her colleagues
remain vulnerable.
In June 2006 government agents arrested Ali Akbar Mousavi Khoini, a former
member of parliament and outspoken critic of the government’s human rights
record. The authorities held him in solitary confinement without access to his
lawyers for more than four months. The Judiciary released him on October 21, only
after he posted $300,000 bail. During a brief release to attend his father’s funeral in September, he publicly alleged that he was being tortured and forced to
“repent” for his activities.
Juvenile Death Penalty
Iran has executed at least 13 juvenile offenders in the last five years, more than
any other nation. On May 11, 2006, Iran executed Majid Segound and Masoud
Naghi Biranvand, both 17 years old at the time of execution. Two youths scheduled
to be executed on September 20, 2006, for murders committed while under
18 had their executions suspended when the victims’ families agreed to accept
blood money in lieu of execution. About 30 juvenile offenders are on death row.
Minorities
Iran’s ethnic and religious minorities are subject to discrimination and, in some
cases, persecution. In May Iranian Azeris in the northwestern provinces of East
and West Azerbaijan and Ardebil demonstrated against government restrictions
on Azeri language and cultural and political activities. Security services forcibly
disrupted public protests that engulfed the region. In some protests demonstrators
attacked government offices. Four people died in clashes in the city of
Naghadeh on May 25.
In the southwestern province of Khuzistan, unrest among Iran’s Arab population
intensified in 2006. Revolutionary Courts, following secret proceedings that did
not meet international fair trial standards, condemned at least 16 Iranians of Arab
origin to death on charges of armed activity against the state.
The government continues to deny Iran’s Baha’i community permission to publicly
worship or pursue religious activities. In a letter dated October 29, 2005,
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei instructed several government organs,
including the Ministry of Information and the armed forces, “to acquire a comprehensive
and complete report of all the activities of Baha’is for the purpose of
identifying all the individuals of these misguided sects.” In May the authorities
arrested 54 Baha’i youth who were teaching English, math, and other non-religious
subjects to underprivileged children in the southern city of Shiraz. None of the Baha’i youth were charged with a crime. All but three were released after a
week of detention and the remaining three were released on June 14, 2006.
Key International Actors
In 2006 negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program dominated the policy of the
European Union towards Iran, with human rights concerns a secondary matter.
The EU pledged to tie Iranian respect for human rights to progress in co-operation
on other issues, but the pledge had little impact. Iran refused to resume its
“human rights dialogue” with the EU that it had suspended in 2005, despite the
EU’s repeated calls to do so.
The United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution in November 2005
noting serious violations and the worsening human rights situation in Iran. Under
a standing invitation that Tehran issued in 2002 to the thematic mechanisms of
the UN Commission on Human Rights, the special rapporteur on violence against
women, Yakin Ertürk, visited Iran in February 2005. In a January 2006 report she
highlighted “discriminatory provisions in both the Civil and Penal Codes, and
flaws in the administration of justice,” resulting in disempowerment of women.
The special rapporteur on adequate housing, Miloon Kothari, visited Iran in
August 2005 and issued a report in March 2006. In his March 2006 report he
raised several concerns about discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities
and nomadic groups, among other things.
Iran has not responded to requests by the UN special rapporteurs on extrajudicial
executions and torture, made in 2004 and 2005 respectively, to visit the country.
The Bush Administration remains divided on its Iran policy, and relations
between the United States and Iran remain poor. The State Department frequently
invoked Iran’s human rights record as a matter of concern. In February the State
Department budgeted US$75 million “to support democracy promotion activities
in Iran,” but a vast majority of Iranian dissidents, human rights defenders, and
civil society activists inside Iran publicly dissociated themselves from the initiative,
making clear they do not seek any financial help form the American government.
The administration did not utilize multilateral international institutions to
address human rights violations in Iran, in contrast to its vigorous efforts to build international coalitions in response to Iran’s alleged drive to acquire nuclear
weapons and its support for Hezbollah in Lebanon and armed groups in the
Occupied Palestinian Territories.