Iran
Respect for basic human rights in Iran, especially freedom of expression and
opinion, deteriorated considerably in 2005. The government routinely uses
torture and ill-treatment in detention, including prolonged solitary confinement,
to punish dissidents. The judiciary, which is accountable to Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei, has been at the center of many serious human rights
violations. Abuses are perpetrated by what Iranians call “parallel institutions”:
paramilitary groups and plainclothes intelligence agents violently attack
peaceful protesters, and intelligence services run illegal secret prisons and
interrogation centers. President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, elected in June
2005, appointed a cabinet dominated by former members of the intelligence
and security forces, some of whom are allegedly implicated in the most serious
human rights violations since the Islamic Republic of Iran was established
twenty-six years ago, such as the assassination of dissident intellectuals.
Freedom of Expression and Opinion
The Iranian authorities have systematically suppressed freedom of expression
and opinion since April 2000, when the government launched a campaign
involving closure of newspapers and the imprisonment of journalists and editors.
Consequently, very few independent dailies remain, and those that do
self-censor heavily. Many writers and intellectuals have left the country, are
in prison, or have ceased to be critical. During 2005 the authorities also targeted
websites and Internet journalists in an effort to prevent online dissemination
of news and information. Between September and November of 2004,
the judiciary detained and tortured more than twenty bloggers and Internet
journalists, and subjected them to lengthy solitary confinement. The government
systematically blocks websites with political news and analysis from
inside Iran and abroad. On February 2, 2005, a court in the province of
Gilan sentenced Arash Sigarchi to fourteen years in prison for his online
writings. In August 2005, the judiciary sentenced another blogger, Mojtaba
Saminejad, to two years in prison for “insulting” Iran’s leaders.
Torture and Ill-treatment in Detention
With the closure of independent newspapers and journals and the suppression
of reporting on human rights abuses, treatment of detainees has worsened
in Evin prison as well as in detention centers operated clandestinely by
the judiciary and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. The authorities
have subjected those imprisoned for peaceful expression of their political
views to torture and ill-treatment. Judges often accept coerced confessions.
The authorities use prolonged solitary confinement, often in small basement
cells, to coerce confessions (which are videotaped) and gain information
regarding associates. Combined with denial of access to counsel, prolonged
solitary confinement creates an environment in which prisoners have
nowhere to turn to seek redress for their treatment in detention.
The judiciary issued an internal report in July 2005 admitting serious human
rights violations, including widespread use of torture, illegal detentions, and
coercive interrogation techniques. However, the judiciary failed to establish
any safeguards, follow up on its findings, or hold any officials responsible.
Impunity
There is no mechanism for monitoring and investigating human rights violations
perpetrated by agents of the government. The closure of independent
media in Iran has helped to perpetuate an atmosphere of impunity.
In recent years, public testimonies by numerous former prisoners and
detainees have implicated Tehran’s public prosecutor Saeed Mortazavi and his
office in some of the worst cases of human rights violations. Despite extensive
evidence, Mortazavi has not been held responsible for his role in illegal
detentions, torture of detainees, and coercing false confessions. The case of
Iranian-Canadian photojournalist Zahra Kazemi, who died in the custody of
judiciary and security agents led by Mortazavi in June 2003, remains unresolved.
Lawyers representing Kazemi’s family revealed that in addition to
signs of torture including fractures to her nose, fingers, and toes, Kazemi
received heavy blows to her head, once during her initial detention by the
head of the intelligence unit at Evin prison on June 23, 2003, and another blow during an interrogation led by Mortazavi three days later. According to
autopsy reports, Kazemi died of severe blows to her head. The judiciary had
accused a low-ranking Intelligence Ministry official, Reza Ahmadi, of
Kazemi’s unintentional homicide, and had proceeded with a hastily organized
trial held in May 2004 which cleared Reza Ahmadi of the charges. Following
an appeal by lawyers representing Kazemi’s family, an appeal hearing was
convened in July 2005, in which the lawyers demanded that the judiciary
launch an investigation into charges of intentional homicide, but the judge
refused their request. The judiciary has taken no further steps to identify or
prosecute those responsible for Kazemi’s killing.
Human Rights Defenders
In 2005, the authorities intensified their harassment of independent human
rights defenders and lawyers in an attempt to prevent them from publicizing
and pursuing human rights violations. The judiciary summoned Noble Peace
Prize winner Shirin Ebadi in January 2005 without specifying charges against
her. After she challenged her summons as illegal, and following an international
outcry, the judiciary rescinded its order. In July, the authorities once
again threatened to arrest Ebadi after she publicized several high-profile
human rights cases. On July 30, the judiciary detained Abdolfattah Soltani, a
lawyer and member of the Center for Defense of Human Rights, after
Soltani and Ebadi protested the judiciary’s inaction in Zahra Kazemi’s case.
No formal charges have been filed against Soltani; the judiciary appears to be
using his illegal detention as a way to intimidate and silence other human
rights defenders and lawyers. Prominent dissident and investigative journalist
Akbar Ganji, who exposed the role of high-ranking officials in the murders of
writers and intellectuals in 1998, remained imprisoned for a sixth year.
Minorities
Iran’s ethnic and religious minorities are subject to discrimination and, in
some cases, persecution. The Baha’i community continues to be denied permission
to worship or engage in communal affairs in a public manner. In
April 2005, protests erupted in the southern province of Khuzistan, home to nearly two million Iranians of Arab descent, following publication of a letter
allegedly written by Mohammad Ali Abtahi, an advisor to then-President
Mohammad Khatami, which referred to government plans to implement
policies that would reduce the proportion of ethnic Arabs in Khuzistan’s population.
After security forces opened fire to disperse demonstrators in Ahvaz,
the confrontation turned violent and spread to other cities and towns in
Khuzistan. The next day, Abtahi and other government officials called the
letter a fake. During the clashes, security forces killed at least fifty protestors
and detained hundreds more.
In July 2005, security forces shot and killed a Kurdish activist, Shivan Qaderi,
in Mahabad. In the wake of this incident protests were held in several cities
and towns in Kurdistan demanding that the government apprehend Qaderi’s
killers and put them on trial. Government forces put down the protests,
killing at least seventeen people and detaining several prominent Kurdish
journalists and activists. In October 2005, they were released on bail.
Key International Actors
In 2005 the policy of the European Union towards Iran was dominated by
negotiations over Iran’s nuclear programs, with human rights concerns a secondary
matter. The European Union has pledged to tie Iranian respect for
human rights to progress in co-operation on other issues, but so far with little
impact. Australia and Switzerland also have “human rights dialogues” with
Iran but have not made public any relevant benchmarks for assessing
progress.
Against strenuous Iranian objections, the United Nations General Assembly
adopted a resolution in November 2004, noting serious violations and the
worsening of the human rights situation in Iran. However, in 2005, unlike in
previous years, no resolution was introduced at the U.N. Commission on
Human Rights concerning the human rights situation in Iran. Under a standing
invitation issued in 2002 from Tehran to the thematic mechanisms of the
U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention and the special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression visited the country and subsequently issued reports critical of government practices. However, the government
has failed to implement their recommendations, and in some cases
there were reprisals, such as re-arrest, against persons who testified to the
experts. In January 2005 the special rapporteur on violence against women
visited Iran, and the special rapporteur on adequate housing made a visit in
August. Iran has not responded to requests by the U.N. special rapporteurs
on torture and on extrajudicial executions to visit the country.
Relations between the United States and Iran remain poor. President Bush in
August 2005 said that U.S. military action against Iran was an “option on the
table,” but the administration reportedly remains divided on this point.