Iran
Following the disputed June 12 presidential election and the massive protests it
provoked, the government unleashed the most widespread crackdown in a
decade. Security forces were responsible for at least 30 deaths, according to official
sources. On August 13, Judiciary spokesman Ali Reza Jamshidi said that
authorities had detained 4,000 people following the election, mostly in street
protests that were largely peaceful. Security forces also arrested dozens of leading
government critics, including human rights lawyers, whom the government
held without charge, many of them in solitary confinement. The Judiciary, the
Revolutionary Guard, the Basij militia, and the Ministry of Intelligence—all of
which report to Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei—were responsible for many serious
human rights violations. Meanwhile, long-standing human rights issues, including
restrictions on freedom of expression and association, religious and genderbased
discrimination, and the frequent use of the death penalty, including on
juvenile offenders, continued unabated.
Torture and Ill-Treatment of Political Prisoners
Following the disputed election, both ordinary protestors and prominent opposition
figures faced detention without trial, harsh treatment including sexual violence
and denial of due process including lack of access to lawyers of their choosing.
Human Rights Watch documented at least 26 cases in which detainees were
subjected to torture and/or coerced to make false confessions, though local
activists believe that there were many more such cases. Some released detainees
told Human Rights Watch that they were held in solitary confinement, and
deprived of food and proper healthcare. Security forces used beatings, threats
against family members, sleep deprivation, and fake executions to intimidate
detainees and to force them to confess that they instigated post-election riots
and were plotting a “velvet coup.” The government held a series of show trials in
which prominent political figures such as former Vice President Mohammad Ali
Abtahi, Mohamed Atrian Far, Saeed Hajarian, Saeed Shariati, Abdullah Momeni,
Hedayat Aghaie, and journalists and analysts such as Maziar Bahari, Amir
Hussein Mahdavi, and Hussein Rassam publicly “confessed” to these charges.
Freedom of Expression
Iranian authorities continued to imprison journalists and editors for publishing
critical views, and strictly controlled publishing and academic activities.
In the aftermath of the election authorities arrested more than 30 journalists and
bloggers. Some imprisoned journalists and their families claimed that security
forces subjected them to mistreatment and abuse during detention.
Throughout 2009 Iran’s National Security Council gave newspapers formal and
informal warnings against covering issues such as human rights violations and
social protests. The Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance continues to monitor
and censor independent newspapers before publication.
On June 15 the authorities suspended the publication of Kalameh Sabz (The
Green Word), a newspaper owned by opposition presidential candidate Mir
Hossein Mousavi. On August 17, Etemad Melli, a newspaper aligned with another
candidate, Mehdi Karrubi, was shut down for publishing a letter by Karrubi alleging
that some post-election detainees in Iran were sexually harassed and raped in
detention.
State universities prohibited some politically active students from registering for
graduate programs despite undergraduate test scores which ordinarily would
have guaranteed them access.
Following the election, the government sharply increased restrictions on domestic
and foreign media, detaining at least two journalists working with foreign outlets
and prohibiting at least a dozen journalists from covering the post-election developments,
forcing them to leave the country. In early October security forces confiscated
the passports of three prominent Iranian journalists—Badrolsadat Mofidi,
Farzaneh Roostai and Zahra Ebrahimi–at Tehran airport, preventing them from
leaving Iran.
The government systematically blocks Iranian and foreign websites that carry
political news and analysis and disrupted SMS services prior to gatherings by
opposition groups.
Freedom of Association
The government increased restrictions on civil society organizations that advocate
human rights and freedom of speech. Security forces on December 23, 2008 shut
down the Center for Defenders of Human Rights, led by 2003 Noble Peace Prize
Laureate Shirin Ebadi. The authorities later threatened human rights lawyers
associated with the center and demanded that they stop cooperating with Ebadi.
On August 17, on the basis of a warrant issued by Saeed Mortazavi, Tehran’s prosecutor
general, officials shut down the Association of Iranian Journalists on the
day of the association’s annual meeting, putting an end to operations of the only
independent and the largest journalists’ association in Iran, with more than 3,700
members.
On January 21, Minister of Science, Research and Technology Mohammad Mehdi
Zahedi declared Daftar-e-Tahkim Vahdat (Office for Consolidating Unity), a national
independent student association an illegal organization, and prohibited it from
continuing to operate on the premises of any university. On October 2, authorities
arrested 14 of the association’s leaders when they met informally at a park in
northern Tehran. The government also continues to ban the activities of civil society
organizations such as Volunteer Actors (a resource center for civil society
organizations), the NGO Training Center, and the Rahi Institute, all led by prominent
civil society activists and all of which the government had arbitrarily shut
down in 2007 and 2008.
Since 2006, authorities have responded harshly to workers, teachers, and
women’s rights groups who advocate for better working conditions, better wages,
benefits, and demands for changes in discriminatory laws. In 2009 the authorities
arrested union leaders, women activists, and suppressed gatherings of teachers
and workers.
Death Penalty
Iran carries out more executions annually than any other nation except China.
These executions frequently occur after unfair or political crimes with inadequate
access to legal counsel. In 2009 authorities hanged 20 persons in the city of Karaj on charges of drug trafficking, and 13 members of Jondollah, an armed opposition
group operating in Sistan and Baluchistan province.
Iran leads the world in the execution of juvenile offenders. As of October Iran had
executed three juvenile offenders in 2009. Iranian law allows death sentences for
persons who have reached puberty, defined by Iranian law as age 9 for girls and
15 for boys. At least 130 other juvenile offenders are currently on death row. In
many cases these sentences followed unfair trials.
On January 21 Iran executed a 21-year-old Afghan citizen Molla Gol Hassanm, for a
crime allegedly committed when he was 17 years old. On May 1 Iran secretly
hanged Delara Darabi, 22, accused of a murder committed when she was 17,
despite a flawed trial and a two-month stay of execution issued on April 19 by
Ayatollah Shahroudi, Head of the Judiciary. On October 12 despite an initial pardon
by the victim’s family, authorities executed Behnoud Shojaie for a killing that
he committed in 2005, when he was 17.
Human Rights Defenders
The government escalated its crackdown on human rights lawyers in 2009, subjecting
some to arbitrary detention, travel bans, and harassment. Since the contested
June 12 election, authorities arrested at least four human rights lawyers,
including Abdolfattah Soltani, Shadi Sadr, Mohammad Mostafayee and
Mohammad Ali Dadkhah. The government’s crackdown on such prominent
lawyers was an attempt to intimidate not only them but also younger, less prominent
lawyers who are considering representing political detainees.
Judiciary officials did not allow families of detainees to choose prominent independent
human rights lawyers to represent their detained family members. Family
members of detainees said that officials told them that if they picked from those
lawyers, their loved ones would “stay in prison for a long time.” Several released
detainees told Human Rights Watch that they were forbidden to name Shirin
Ebadi or other prominent human rights lawyers when they applied for an attorney.
Treatment of Minorities
The government continues to deny members of the Baha’i faith, Iran’s largest
non-Muslim religious minority, freedom of religion. In May 2008 authorities
arrested seven leaders of the national organization of Baha’i based on fabricated
security related accusations. The government accused them of espionage without
providing evidence and has denied their lawyers request to release them on bail
and promptly conduct a free and fair trial. As of November 2009 the seven remain
in detention.
In the northwest provinces of Azerbaijan and Kurdistan, the government restricts
cultural and political activities, including the organizations that focus on social
issues. The government also restricts these minorities from promoting their cultures
and languages.
Key International Actors
The government accused foreign media and governments of instigating demonstrations
after the contested presidential election in mid-June, expelled most foreign
correspondents, and arrested Iranian nationals employed in the British
embassy in Tehran.
Following the elections, the Obama administration condemned violence against
protestors and urged respect for human rights in Iran, while steering clear of language
that would imply support for the opposition movement.
On October 26, Sweden, which then held the European Union presidency, issued
a strong statement condemning the human rights situation in the aftermath of
the election, and in particular the rise in death sentences, the mass trials of
around 150 prisoners accused of crimes against national security, and the arbitrary
detention of journalists, human rights defenders and political activists.
Since 2005 the government has prevented independent experts of the United
Nations Human Rights Council from visiting to investigate alleged human rights
violations. On November 20, the UN General Assembly’s Third Committee, which
comprises all the member states of the General Assembly itself, approved a resolution
criticizing Iran for “harassment, intimidation and persecution, including by arbitrary arrest, detention or disappearance, of opposition members” as well as
“violence and intimidation by government-directed militias.”