Iraq
Human rights conditions in Iraq deteriorated for much of 2007 with sectarian violence
swelling the ranks of Iraq’s displaced to some 4.4 million, half of them outside
the country. Attacks on civilians by various insurgent and militia groups continued,
including the single deadliest attack since the war began, targeting Iraq’s
Yazidi minority and resulting in the deaths of almost 500 civilians in August.
Iraq’s government executed former President Saddam Hussein in late December
2006 and his one-time intelligence chief Barzan al-Tikriti two weeks later following
deeply flawed trials. The manner of the executions further inflamed minority
Sunni apprehensions about the Shia majority government.
The sectarian cleansing of Baghdad by both Sunni and Shia groups proceeded
despite a major US troop deployment aimed in part at stopping it. US military
operations continued against Shia and Sunni insurgents throughout the country,
leading to an unknown number of civilian casualties.
The US and Iraqi security offensive was accompanied by alliances between the
military and Sunni tribal and insurgent factions in Anbar province and Baghdad,
some of which had begun fighting al Qaeda in Mesopotamia.
During the course of the year, Iraq’s government grew more fragmented and dysfunctional.
Legislation on oil revenue, one index of the chances of a cohesive
national government, languished in a paralyzed parliament. Defections from the
government left its political and sectarian base even narrower, and made the
prospect of national political reconciliation seem distant.
The US and Iraqi security offensive in Baghdad led to a sharp increase in the
numbers of detainees. Iraqi detention facilities strained to accommodate them,
and the justice system often foundered in reviewing their cases, leading to a
backlog in Iraqi detention centers where reports of physical abuse and torture
were common. The US military said in October its detainee population had grown
by about two-thirds from the year before, to about 25,000. Some detainees have
spent years in US custody without charge or trial.
Government and the Political Process
In January 2007, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki outlined a drive to pacify Baghdad
in which operations against Sunni insurgents would be coupled with disarming of
Shia militias. The Bush administration pledged to send more than 20,000 troops
to Baghdad and western Iraq to shore up the security plan, which began in mid-
February amid devastating suicide bombings in Baghdad. The cabinet agreed to a
draft oil law on February 27 but parliament had not ratified it at this writing. The
main Sunni bloc, the Iraqi Accordance Front, quit the government in August, citing
failure to release detainees not charged with crimes, disband militias, and grant
Sunnis a say in security matters; it was followed by a secularist bloc which withdrew
ministers from the government.
Shia cleric and militia leader Muqtada al-Sadr pulled his ministers from the cabinet
in April over government reluctance to demand a timetable for US military
withdrawal. In September, he pulled his parliamentary bloc out of the governing
coalition. Sadr ordered his Jaysh al-Mahdi militia to stand down for six months
after bloody August clashes in Karbala with government forces loyal to its main
Shia rival, the Supreme Iraqi Islamic Council (SIIC). The Allawi and Sunni al-
Tawafuq blocs also left the cabinet. At this writing, Maliki’s government—reliant
on Kurdish parties and a Shia group hostile to Sadr—clung to power with a slender
majority in the 275-seat parliament.
Attacks on Civilians and Displacement
Civilians were once again the targets of attacks by Sunni and Shia armed groups
across the country, though the number of such attacks decreased following the
US and Iraqi security offensive. Many attacks appeared to be intended to cause
the greatest possible civilian casualties and spread fear, notably those occurring
in marketplaces, schools, and places of worship. Iraq’s government and US military
officials blamed Sunni insurgents for waves of car bombings in the capital in
early 2007. Bombings in a Shia area of the northern town of Tel Afar in March that
killed some 150 people were followed by revenge killings of dozens of Sunnis by
Shia policemen. Suicide truck bombings targeting minority Yazidis near the northern
town of Sinjar in August killed as many as 500 people, the worst single attack
since 2003. Shia armed groups, including Jaysh al-Mahdi and SIIC’s Badr militia, were reported to have carried out numerous abductions and killings in Baghdad
and elsewhere.
Sectarian violence spurred large-scale flight: over a million Iraqis were displaced
following the February 2006 shrine bombing, according to figures from the
International Organization for Migration (IOM), most of them leaving mixed areas
for more homogenous ones within the capital and outside Baghdad province.
Eighty-nine percent of displaced Iraqis cited their sectarian identity as the source
of threats to their safety, the IOM said in its mid-year review. There were signs at
this writing, however, that some refugees and IDPs were starting to return.
The situation of Iraqis seeking refuge outside the country was little better: Jordan,
which hosts more than 500,000 Iraqi refugees, began turning back most Iraqis
arriving by land and air in January 2007. Syria, which hosts some 1.5 million
Iraqis, began enforcing strict visa requirements in October that restricted entry to
Iraqis entering for specific commercial or educational purposes. Many other countries—
notably the United States—have taken very few refugees. In October, the
US State Department said 1,608 Iraqi refugees had been admitted for resettlement
in fiscal year 2007, with a target of 12,000 for the next fiscal year.
MNF Operations and Contractors
Stepped-up military operations by the US-led Multinational Forces (MNF) during
the security offensive led to an increase in civilian casualties. UN officials reported
that MNF airstrikes between March and May killed 88 civilians and called for
investigations into the deaths.
The killing of at least 17 Iraqi civilians by employees of US-based security firm
Blackwater in September focused attention on the impunity with which private
contractors operate in Iraq. Iraq’s government demanded over $100 million in
compensation for victims’ families and called for Blackwater’s departure. Non-
Iraqi contractors have been exempt from prosecution in Iraqi courts under a 2004
decree by the US occupation authority. A draft law approved by Iraq’s government
in late October 2007, still not approved at this writing, would end their immunity
from prosecution.
Detention and Torture by Iraqi Forces
Reports of widespread torture and other abuse of detainees in detention facilities
run by Iraq’s defense and interior ministries and police continue to emerge. In
October 2007, officials from the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) reported that detainees had been hung by their limbs, subjected to electric
shocks, forced to sit on sharp objects, and burned by their jailers. Officials in
Iraq’s Interior Ministry, which had previously vowed to investigate instances of
detainee abuse, disputed the charges.
The number of detainees in Iraqi government custody grew by nearly 4,000 from
April through June, according to UNAMI officials. Detainees often had limited
access to counsel and faced lengthy delays in review of their cases.
Kurdish officials, responding to Human Rights Watch research documenting torture
and denial of due-process rights to detainees in northern Iraq, released
some detainees in 2007 and began reviewing cases of others. Conditions for
remaining detainees were unchanged at this writing.
US Detention
As of October 2007, the US military was holding about 25,000 people in Iraq, an
increase of some 10,000 from a year earlier, according to Major General Douglas
Stone, head of detainee operations. Stone estimated the average detention period
at 300 days, but noted detainees involved in criminal proceedings had
remained in custody for several years. Many security detainees are also sometimes
held for years without charge or trial and only limited review.
According to press accounts, US arrests of children allegedly involved in insurgent
activities rose from an average of 25 per month to 100 per month in 2007, with
over 800 children held at Camp Cropper by mid-September. In August the US
opened Dar al-Hikmah, a non-residential facility intended to provide 600
detainees ages 11-17 with education services pending release or transfer to Iraqi
custody. Officials have said children would be subject to the same detention
review process as adults, which does not guarantee detainees access to lawyers
when presenting their cases.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The Iraqi government executed Saddam Hussein on December 30, 2006, following
his conviction by the Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT) for crimes against humanity in
Dujail in 1982. The government executed his half-brother and former security
chief Barzan al-Tikriti and former chief judge of the Revolutionary Court `Awwad
al-Bandar on January 15 after convictions in the same case. Their trials were
marred by the failure to disclose key evidence to the defense, government actions
that undermined the independence and impartiality of the court, and violations of
defendants’ right to confront witnesses against them.
Taha Yassin Ramadan was executed in March after the IHT’s Appeals Chamber
ordered the trial chamber to change his life sentence to death by hanging.
The IHT in June convicted five of Saddam’s aides of genocide, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity for their actions during the 1988 Anfal campaign, in
which Iraqi forces used chemical weapons and killed as many as 100,000 Iraqi
Kurds. Three of them were sentenced to death.
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women and girls in Iraq continues to be a serious problem, with
members of insurgent groups and militias, soldiers, and police among the perpetrators.
Even in high-profile cases involving police or security forces, prosecutions
are rare.
Violence within the family also continues to be a serious issue. In 2007, UNAMI
officials recorded 40 alleged “honor” crimes in the Kurdish region alone within a
three-month period.
Key International Actors
In June 2007 the UN Security Council re-affirmed the mandate of the MNF for
2007. As of October, the United States had approximately 165,000 troops in Iraq;
the United Kingdom, the other principal contributor of foreign forces, planned to
halve its troop presence based in southern Iraq to about 2,500 in 2008.
In November 2007 the US and Iraqi governments announced they would negotiate
an agreement on bilateral relations, including the status of US forces in the
country in the years to come. Iraq’s government said 2008 would be the last year
of the United Nations mandate for multinational forces in the country, which had
been expanded in 2007 to include political reconciliation, displacement, and
human rights protection. The Human Rights Office of the UNAMI monitors, reports
on, and follows up on human rights violations as part of a plan aimed at developing
Iraqi mechanisms for addressing past and current abuses.