II8H
Human rights conditions in Iraq remained extremely poor, especially for journalists,
detainees, and opposition activists. In part inspired by peaceful uprisings
elsewhere in the region, thousands of Iraqis demonstrated in the streets to
demand better services and an end to corruption. Security forces and gangs
responded with violence and threats.
Reports continued of torture of detainees unlawfully held outside the custody of
the Justice Ministry. In late June or early July United States forces handed over
the last of the 192 detainees in Iraq who were still under US control at the end
of 2010, including some former members of Saddam Hussein’s government.
Attacks by armed groups killed hundreds of civilians as well as police. The US
continued to withdraw troops as part of a 2008 agreement that calls for a complete
US withdrawal by the end of 2011.
Freedom of Assembly
After thousands took to the streets in February to protest widespread corruption
and demand greater civil and political rights, federal Iraqi authorities and
Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) authorities both responded with violence.
On February 21, Iraqi police stood by as dozens of assailants, some wielding
knives and clubs, stabbed and beat at least 20 protesters intending to camp in
Tahrir Square in Baghdad, the capital. During nationwide demonstrations on
February 25, security forces killed at least 12 protesters across the country and
injured more than 100. Baghdad security forces beat unarmed journalists and
protesters that day, smashing cameras and confiscating memory cards.
Anti-government protests started in Kurdistan on February 17. At this writing
security forces had killed at least 10 protesters and bystanders and injured
more than 250.On March 6, masked assailants attacked demonstrators in Sara
Square—the center of daily protests in Sulaimaniya—and set the demonstrators’
tents on fire, but failed to evict the demonstrators from the site. On April
18, security forces seized control of Sara Square to prevent further demonstrations. On April 27 the KRG released a 19-page report that determined that both
security forces and protesters were responsible for violence, and that security
forces “were not prepared to control the situation.”
On June 10 in Baghdad government-backed thugs armed with wooden planks,
knives, iron pipes, and other weapons beat and stabbed peaceful protesters
and sexually molested female demonstrators as security forces stood by and
watched, sometimes laughing at the victims.
Authorities also used legal means to curtail protests. On April 13, Iraqi officials
issued new regulations barring street protests and allowing them only at three
soccer (football) stadiums, although they have not enforced the regulations. In
May the Council of Ministers approved a “Law on the Freedom of Expression of
Opinion, Assembly, and Peaceful Demonstration” that authorizes officials to
restrict freedom of assembly to protect “the public interest” and in the interest
of “general order or public morals.” At this writing the law still awaited parliamentary
approval.
Freedom of Expression
In 2011 Iraq remained one of the most dangerous countries in the world to work
as a journalist. Armed groups and unknown assailants killed at least five journalists
and one media worker, according to the New York-based Committee to
Protect Journalists. Journalists also contended with emboldened Iraqi and KRG
security forces.
On February 20, dozens of masked men attacked the private Nalia Radio and
Television (NRT) station in Sulaimaniya. They shot up broadcasting equipment
and wounded one guard. They then doused the premises with gasoline and set
fire to the building, according to the station’s staff. NRT had begun its inaugural
broadcasts of footage of the protests only two days before the attack.
On February 23 security forces in Baghdad raided the office of the Journalistic
Freedoms Observatory, a press freedom group. Their destructive search lasted
more than an hour and they seized computers, external hard drives, cameras,
cell phones, computer disk More than 20 journalists covering protests in Kurdistan said that security forces
and their proxies routinely threatened journalists, subjected them to arbitrary
arrest, beatings, and harassment, and confiscated or destroyed their equipment.
After quashing the daily protests in Sulaimaniya in April, KRG officials
and security forces expanded their suppression of journalists through libel
suits, beatings, detentions, and death threats. The threat of attacks and arrests
sent some journalists into hiding.
On September 8 an unknown assailant shot to death Hadi al-Mahdi, a popular
radio journalist often critical of government corruption and social inequality, at
his Baghdad home. The Ministry of Interior said it would investigate his death,
but at this writing no one had been charged. Immediately prior to his death al-
Mahdi received several phone and text message threats not to return to Tahrir
Square. Earlier, after attending the February 25 “Day of Anger” mass demonstration
in Baghdad, security forces arrested, blindfolded, and severely beat him
along with three other journalists during their subsequent interrogation.
In April Iraq’s parliament approved a Journalists’ Protection Law, intended to
protect media workers and compensate them for injuries sustained while working.
Critics say the law does not do enough to ensure proper protections for
journalists.
In May the Council of Ministers approved a draft of the “Law on Freedom of
Expression of Opinion, Assembly, and Peaceful Demonstration,” which contains
provisions that would criminalize speech, with penalties of up to 10 years in
prison. Under article 13, anyone who “attacks a belief of any religious sect or
shows contempt for its rites”, or publicly insults a “symbol, or person who is
held sacred, exalted, or venerated by a religious sect” would face up to one
year in jail and fines of up to 10 million Iraqi dinars (US$8,600). The law provides
no guidance about what might constitute an unlawful insult.
Secret Prisons and Torture
In February Human Rights Watch uncovered, within the Camp Justice military
base in Baghdad, a secret detention facility controlled by elite security forces
who report to the military office of Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki. Beginning on November 23, 2010, Iraqi authorities transferred more than 280 detainees to
the facility, which was controlled by the Army’s 56th Brigade and the Counter-
Terrorism Service.
The same elite divisions controlled Camp Honor, a separate facility in Baghdad
where detainees were tortured with impunity. More than a dozen former Camp
Honor detainees told Human Rights Watch how detainees were held incommunicado
and in inhumane conditions, many for months at a time. Detainees said
interrogators beat them; hung them upside down for hours at a time; administered
electric shocks to various body parts, including the genitals; and repeatedly
put plastic bags over their heads until they passed out from asphyxiation.
On March 14 the Justice Ministry announced that it would close Camp Honor
after a parliamentary investigative committee found evidence of torture during a
spot inspection of the facility. Human Rights Watch has since received credible
information that elite forces may still hold and interrogate detainees at Camp
Honor.
At this writing the authorities had not prosecuted any officials responsible for
torture at Camp Honor.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights and Gender-Based Violence
Iraq adjudicates family law and personal status matters pursuant to a 1959
Personal Status Code. The law discriminates against women by granting men
privileged status in matters of divorce and inheritance. The law further discriminates
against women by permitting Iraqi men to have as many as four polygamous
marriages.
On October 6 Iraq’s parliament passed legislation to lift Iraq’s reservation to
article 9 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. Article 9 grants women equal rights with men to acquire,
change, or retain their nationality and pass on their nationality to their children.
Violence against women and girls continued to be a serious problem across
Iraq. Women’s rights activists said they remained at risk of attack from extremists,
who also targeted female politicians, civil servants, and journalists.
“Honor” crimes and domestic abuse remained a threat to women and girls, who were also vulnerable to trafficking for sexual exploitation and forced prostitution
due to insecurity, displacement, financial hardship, social disintegration,
and the dissolution of rule of law and state authority.
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is practiced mainly in Kurdish areas of northern
Iraq and several official and non-governmental studies estimate that the prevalence
of FGM among girls and women in Kurdistan is at least 40 percent. On
June 21 Kurdistan’s parliament passed the Family Violence Bill, which includes
several provisions criminalizing the practice, as well as forced and child marriages,
and verbal, physical, and psychological abuse of girls and women.
Attacks on Civilians
Attacks by armed groups killed hundreds of civilians and security forces.
Assailants targeted provincial councils and government officials, checkpoints,
markets, and mosques. In one of the worst attacks, a string of over 40 coordinated
assaults in 17 cities on August 15 killed more than 90 people, including
many unarmed civilians and members of the security forces.
The ongoing attacks, along with injuries from abandoned landmines and cluster
munitions, have created a disproportionately high number of persons with
physical and mental disabilities, many of whom have not received rehabilitation
or support for re-integration into their communities. On August 17 Iraq’s
parliament held a second reading of a resolution to ratify the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Two draft disability laws under consideration
would create a national body to oversee disability issues. But the
proposed laws have several deficiencies including language that is incompatible
with the CRPD.
Key International Actors
The European Court of Human Rights issued two landmark judgments on July 7,
2011, which ruled that the United Kingdom’s human rights obligations apply to
British acts in Iraq, and that the UK had violated the European Convention on
Human Rights by failing to adequately investigate the killings of five Iraqis by its forces there, and that its internment of Iraqis had amounted to arbitrary
detention.
On September 8 a three-year UK inquiry into the death of Baha Mousa, a hotel
receptionist who died in British custody following serious abuse by British soldiers,
condemned inadequate detention procedures, leadership failures, poor
training, a loss of discipline, and a lack of “moral courage” among soldiers to
report abuse. Only one British soldier was convicted of any crime in connection
with this killing, and he was sentenced to only one year in prison.
In September Wikileaks released thousands of classified cables from the US
embassy in Baghdad, one of which called into question the results of a US military
investigation of a 2006 incident in which US soldiers may have handcuffed
and executed at least 10 Iraqi civilians.
In July the United Nations Security Council voted to extend the mandate of the
UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for another year. UNAMI’s 2010 Report
on Human Rights in Iraq, released in August 2011, found that “significant problems
remain with law enforcement and the administration of justice, especially
in relation to the provision and respect for due process and fair trial rights,”
and that “incidents of abuse and torture remain widely reported.”