Iraq
The human rights situation worsened significantly in 2006.The continuing armed
conflict became increasingly sectarian in nature, with many commentators declaring
the onset of a civil war, and Sunni and Shia armed groups targeting civilians
from each other’s communities. United States forces continued military operations
against insurgent forces throughout the country, resulting in an unknown
number of civilian deaths and injuries. In October, a Johns Hopkins-MIT mortality
study estimated that 650,000 Iraqis had died as a result of the war since 2003,
600,000 of them in violent deaths; this figure was far higher than previous estimates.
The bombing on February 22 of two Shia holy sites in Samarra’ catalyzed an
unprecedented level of violent attacks, primarily against civilians. Despite several
security plans announced by the Iraqi government and Multi-National Forces
(MNF) to curb the violence and bring armed militias under control, the overall
security situation continued to deteriorate. In October, Iraq’s National Assembly
passed legislation providing for the formation of federal regions in the country in
2008, despite strong opposition by Sunni representatives and two Shia parties.
Some feared the law would fuel sectarian violence and threaten Iraq’s sovereignty
while depriving the central region of access to natural resources.
Further revelations emerged of Ministry of Interior and Ministry of Defense personnel
systematically torturing and sometimes killing detainees in their custody.
Government investigations failed to lead to the arrest and prosecution of alleged
suspects, despite mounting evidence.
The Governing Authority and the Political Process
Elections were held on December 15, 2005, for a new 275-seat National Assembly.
Political uncertainty continued, however, as outgoing Prime Minister Ibrahim al-
Ja’fari, nominated again by the largest parliamentary bloc, failed to gain consensus.
On April 23 the National Assembly elected Jalal Talabani as the country’s
president and nominated Nouri al-Maliki as prime minister after al-Ja’fari withdrew
his candidacy.
In June, Prime Minister Maliki announced a 24-point National Reconciliation Plan
addressing the political and security crises in the country. Among other things,
the plan provided for mechanisms to facilitate the political process, the disbanding
of armed militias and laying down security plans, tackling mass internal displacement,
legislative and judicial reforms, a partial amnesty for non-terrorist
offenses, and accountability mechanisms for human rights abuses. At this writing,
the government had not implemented any of these provisions.
Attacks against Civilians by Armed Groups and Internal
Displacement
Civilians remained the primary victims of directed or indiscriminate attacks perpetrated
by Sunni and Shia armed groups. Numerous attacks appeared aimed at
inflicting maximum casualties and spreading fear among the civilian population
as militias targeted marketplaces, places of worship, and shops. Incidents were
also rife of armed groups on both sides reportedly abducting, torturing, and
killing people on the basis of their religious or sectarian affiliation. Sunni insurgent
groups, including al Qaeda and Ansar al-Sunna, claimed responsibility for a
number of incidents involving car bomb and suicide attacks against civilian
areas, while levels of abduction by such groups remained very high. Shia armed
groups, in particular the Mahdi Army and the Badr militia, were reportedly
responsible for numerous abductions and killings in Baghdad and elsewhere.
According to Iraqi government figures, the number of killings in Baghdad in July
and August exceeded 5,000.
Relentless violent attacks caused greater displacement of civilians across Iraq,
affecting Sunni and Shia communities as well as Christians and other minorities.
The Iraqi government stated that 234,000 persons were displaced since February,
but a study published by the Brookings Institution and the University of Bern in
October estimated that the numbers were between 300,000 and 400,000. The
report cited failure to register and the politicization of tracking the numbers of
displaced persons as key reasons for the higher figures.
Torture by Iraqi Forces
Evidence of widespread torture and other ill-treatment of detainees in the custody
of the Iraqi ministries of interior and defense continued to emerge. A joint MNFIraqi
raid on the Ministry of Interior’s al-Jadiriyya facility in Baghdad in November
2005 discovered some 170 detainees, many bearing injuries consistent with torture.
At least 18 others allegedly had died in custody, and the fate of others
remained unknown. Between December 2005 and May 2006, joint MNF-Iraqi
teams inspected at least eight facilities run by the two ministries in and around
Baghdad. The inspectors found consistent evidence of detainee abuse at most
locations, including the Ministry of Interior’s Site 4 facility, where in May many of
the 1,845 detainees displayed recent injuries consistent with severe beatings and
electric shock.
In December 2005 the government ordered an investigation into detainee abuse
at the al-Jadiriyya facility. While it released tens of detainees as a result of a case
review by a judicial committee, by October 2006 it had not made public the findings
of the investigation. The government also failed to announce the findings of
another investigation into detainee abuse at the Site 4 facility. At this writing, the
government had neither arrested nor charged any of the alleged perpetrators at
either facility, including 52 personnel at Site 4. No further joint inspections of
detention facilities were carried out after May 31, reportedly because of governmental
opposition to the program.
Illegal Detentions by Kurdish Security Forces
Security forces (Asayish) in the Kurdistan Federal Region continued to hold illegally
hundreds of detainees, including Kurds, Arabs, and other nationals, many of
them on suspicion of terrorism offenses. The majority of detainees stated during
prison visits conducted by Human Rights Watch that security officials had neither
referred them to an investigative judge nor charged them with cognizable offenses,
often for up to three years. Many also stated that detaining officials denied
them access to legal counsel and family visits, and subjected them to torture or
ill-treatment under interrogation. Beginning in May, and following the unification
of the administrations of the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union
of Kurdistan, the Kurdish authorities took positive steps to resolve some of these issues, and a partial review of case files led to several hundred detainees being
released by August.
Detention by US Forces
As of October, US forces were detaining about 13,000 Iraqis on the basis of
United Nations Security Council authorization, but the legal regime applicable to
the detainees remained unclear. Detainees may be held indefinitely on security
grounds and then released, while others were transferred after several months to
Iraqi custody for prosecution. Among the detainees were journalists, including
Associated Press photographer Bilal Hussein, arrested in Ramadi on April 12 and
since held without charge or judicial review.
Further details of widespread detainee abuse by US military personnel emerged
from new accounts by US soldiers, revealing that such abuse was an established
policy of detention and interrogation processes in Iraq for much of 2003-05.
Senior officers apparently rebuffed or ignored soldiers who sought to report
abuse.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The first trial before the Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT), which began in October 2005,
concluded in July. Eight defendants, including former president Saddam Hussein,
were tried on charges of crimes against humanity in connection with the arbitrary
detention and forced displacement of 800 men, women, and children from the
town of Dujail in 1982, of whom 148 men and boys were executed or died in
detention. In the verdict delivered on November 5, Saddam Hussein and six other
defendants were convicted; Hussein and two others were sentenced to death by
hanging. In a report issued in November 2006 Human Rights Watch concluded
that the trial had not respected basic fair trial guarantees. A second trial opened
in August, with Saddam Hussein and six other defendants facing charges including
genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes in connection with the former
government’s Anfal campaign against the Kurdish population in northern
Iraq, involving the systematic, deliberate murder of at least 50,000 and possibly
as many as 100,000 Kurds, over six months in 1988.
Serious concerns remained about the capacity of the IHT to fairly and effectively
try these massive crimes in accordance with international criminal law and fair
trial standards. The IHT was also beset by external problems, misunderstanding
and hostility in public opinion, and grave security threats to all participants.
Serious administrative, procedural, and substantive legal defects characterized
the Dujail trial, which was also marred by the assassination of a third defense
lawyer in June, the resignation of the presiding judge, and boycotts by defense
counsel. In the Anfal trial, the transfer of the presiding judge off the case in
September by decision of the Council of Ministers interfered with the independence
of the judiciary.
As of September 2005, US forces retained physical custody of 108 “high value
detainees,” most of whom were held at Camp Cropper near Baghdad
International Airport. Most were awaiting trial before the IHT and had been
brought before an investigative judge, but it remained unclear how many had
been formally charged.
Key International Actors
In November 2005 the UN Security Council extended the mandate of the MNF-I
until December 31, 2006, under resolution 1637. As of August, the United States
maintained approximately 130,000 active troops in Iraq, with the United Kingdom
as the key partner retaining some 7,200 troops principally in the southeastern
governorates. Among the 28 countries contributing to the MNF-I forces were
Australia, the Czech Republic, and Georgia.
The US government urged Iraqi officials on numerous occasions to take action in
restraining armed militias operating death squads responsible for many of the
abductions and killings of civilians. It pressed for decisive action in holding the
leadership of such groups accountable, and for the prosecution of officials of the
Ministry of Interior identified as operating detention facilities where the routine
torture of inmates was discovered. US military investigative teams carried out several
inspections of facilities under the authority of the ministries of interior and
defense, urging Prime Minister Maliki to authorize official investigations.
In his September report to the Security Council, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan
said, “Iraq is experiencing an acute human rights and humanitarian crisis, with
indiscriminate killings, targeted attacks, crime and corruption contributing to the
lack of law and order.” The United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
reported regularly on these abuses, describing a “vicious cycle of violence and
revenge killings resulting in overall instability in the country.”