Iraq
Human rights conditions in Iraq remain extremely poor, especially for displaced
persons, religious and ethnic minorities, and vulnerable groups such as women
and girls, and men suspected of homosexual conduct. Iraq marked the June 30,
2009 withdrawal of United States combat forces from its towns and cities with
parades and a national holiday. In the subsequent weeks, violence shook the
country as extremists launched multiple attacks in several locations.
Serious tensions between the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) and the Iraqi
central and provincial governments continued over control of territories lying
between the mainly Kurdish- and Arab-inhabited areas in northern Iraq.
Escalating conflict there worsened the human rights situation of non-Kurdish and
non-Arab minority groups living in these contested areas.
Political Developments
In January 2009, 14 of Iraq’s 18 governorates held provincial elections (the three
governorates comprising the Kurdistan region had their elections in July; no elections
were held in the disputed Kirkuk governorate). The participation of more
political parties, in particular Sunni Arab parties, resulted in a dramatic change of
power in areas where Sunni Arabs had boycotted the 2005 elections, notably in
Nineveh governorate. Overall, the election results reflected sectarian divisions.
On June 24, 2009, the Kurdistan National Assembly (the regional parliament)
passed a draft regional constitution that laid claim to disputed areas, provoking
outrage from central government leaders. The KRG insists, in the face of central
and provincial government recalcitrance, that the referendum mandated by article
140 of Iraq’s 2005 constitution finally be held (the constitutional deadline was
December 31, 2007), confident that the referendum would endorse the incorporation
of the disputed areas into the semi-autonomous Kurdish region.
Iraqi security forces in July 2009 raided Camp Ashraf, an area controlled for over
two decades by several thousand members of an Iranian opposition group, the
Mojahedin-e Khalq Organization. The raid, in which the government tried to
assert its authority by establishing a police station inside the camp, resulted in the deaths of 11 Camp Ashraf residents, some by gunfire, and dozens injured. The
government said it would conduct an investigation into the incident, but as of
mid-November it had provided no information about the progress of any investigation
or its results.
In November Iraq signed the Convention on Cluster Munitions, an international
treaty that prohibits the use, production, and transfer of cluster bombs.
Attacks on Civilians and Displacement
Civilians remained the targets of attacks across the country. In the first six weeks
following the June 30 withdrawal of US forces from cities to their bases, coordinated
bombings and other violence killed more than 700 Iraqis, mainly Shia. On
August 19, coordinated truck bombs outside the foreign and finance ministries in
Baghdad killed nearly 100 people and wounded more than 600. On October 25,
two vehicle bombs, driven by suicide bombers, destroyed three major government
buildings, including the Ministry of Justice. That attack, the country’s deadliest
in more than two years, killed more than 155 people and wounded over 500.
Sunni Arab insurgents appeared to have been responsible for these and other
attacks, such as the January and April 2009 bombings of Baghdad’s Kadhimiyya
mosque, a major Shia place of worship, killing more than 100 people. The perpetrators
also targeted groups of Shia refugees waiting for food rations, children
gathering for handouts of candy, religious pilgrimages, weddings, funerals,
mosques, and hospitals in Shia areas. Sunni leaders forcefully condemned such
attacks, and Shia militias refrained from engaging in widespread reprisal attacks.
Displacement caused by sectarian violence continued, but economic pressures
and difficulties maintaining legal status in Syria, Jordan, and Egypt induced some
refugees to return. The government remained without a workable plan for the
return of Iraqis displaced internally or who had fled to neighboring countries,
according to the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. In
Baghdad returnees were seldom able to reclaim their former homes. In rural communities
many returnees found their houses destroyed or in complete disrepair,
and they lacked access to income and basic services including, water, electricity,
and healthcare. With the resurgence of attacks in the latter half of 2009, some returnees reportedly found themselves forcibly displaced again. People mostly
returned to neighborhoods or districts under the control of members of their sect;
very few families returned to former home areas where they would be in a minority.
Detention Conditions and Torture
Reports continued of widespread torture and other abuse of detainees in detention
facilities run by Iraq’s defense and interior ministries and police.
Government-run detention facilities struggled to accommodate almost 30,000
detainees, and serious delays in the judicial review of detention exacerbated
overcrowding: Some detainees have spent years in custody without charge or
trial. The situation worsened in 2009 as the US military transferred detainees to
Iraqi custody (more than 1,200 in the first nine months) under the 2008 US-Iraqi
security agreement. The US military’s remaining detainee population stood at
under 9,000 as of September 2009, from a peak of approximately 26,000 in late
2007.
In June 2009 Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki set up an eight-member special committee,
composed of representatives from the government’s security ministries as
well as human rights and judicial agencies, to investigate allegations of widespread
abuse and torture in Iraq’s prisons. As of mid-November the government
had provided no information about the progress of any investigation or its results.
Accountability for Past Crimes
In August the Iraqi High Tribunal (IHT) sentenced former deputy prime minister
Tariq Aziz and Ali Hassan al-Majid (known as “Chemical Ali”) each to seven years
in jail for their roles in planning the forced displacement of Kurds from northern
Iraq in the late 1980s. The conviction followed a separate 15-year jail sentence
that both received in March for the former government’s execution of merchants
accused of profiteering under sanctions in 1992. Also in March 2009 the IHT sentenced
al-Majid to death for the murder of Shia Muslims in 1999 (he was previously
sentenced to death for his role in the 1988 Anfal campaign against the
Kurds, and suppression of a Shia uprising after the 1991 Gulf War).
In July 2009 a public inquiry was launched in the United Kingdom into the death
of Iraqi civilian Baha Mousa while in British custody in Basra in 2003. A postmortem
examination showed that Mousa had at least 93 injuries to his body,
including a broken nose and fractured ribs. The inquiry is examining the British
military’s treatment of Iraqi detainees, including interrogation techniques.
Gender-Based Violence
Violence against women and girls continues to be a serious problem, with members
of insurgent groups and militias, soldiers, and police among the perpetrators.
Even in high-profile cases involving police or security forces, prosecutions
are rare. Insurgent groups have targeted women who are politicians, civil servants,
journalists, and women’s rights activists. They have also attacked women
on the street for what they consider “immoral” or “un-Islamic” behavior or dress.
“Honor” killings by family members remain a threat to women and girls in Kurdish
areas, as well as elsewhere in Iraq.
Female genital mutilation is practiced mainly in Kurdish areas of Iraq; reportedly
60 percent of Kurdish women have undergone this procedure, although the KRG
claimed that the figures are exaggerated. Girls and women receive conflicting and
inaccurate messages from public officials on its consequences. The Kurdistan parliament
in 2008 passed a draft law outlawing FGM, but the ministerial decree
necessary to implement it, expected in February 2009, was inexplicably cancelled.
Violence against Men Suspected of Homosexual Conduct
In early 2009 a killing campaign against men suspected of being gay, or of not
being sufficiently “masculine,” erupted. Armed gangs kidnapped men and
dumped their mutilated bodies in the garbage or in front of morgues. Men interviewed
by Human Rights Watch in April recounted death threats, blackmail, midnight
raids by masked men on private homes, and abductions from the streets.
The campaign was most intense in Baghdad, but extended to other cities including
Kirkuk, Najaf, and Basra.
Most survivors and witnesses pointed to Moqtada al-Sadr’s Mahdi army, the
largest Shia militia, as the driving force behind the killings. Sadrist mosques and
leaders have warned loudly that homosexuality threatens Iraqi life and culture.
Some Sunni militias may have joined the violence, competing to show their moral
credentials. While there was no accurate tally of the victims, the number may
have well been in the hundreds. Iraqi police and security forces did little to investigate
or halt the killings. Authorities announced no arrests or prosecutions; it is
unlikely that any occurred.
Violence against Minorities
Armed groups continued to persecute ethnic and religious minorities with impunity.
After US forces withdrew from Iraqi cities, assailants launched horrific attacks
against minority groups: in Nineveh province alone, bombings in four towns and
cities killed more than 137 and injured almost 500 from the Yazidi, Shabak, and
Turkmen communities.
As the conflict intensified between the Arab-dominated central government and
the KRG over control of the disputed territories running across northern Iraq from
the Iranian to the Syrian borders, minorities found themselves in an increasingly
precarious position. Leaders of minority communities complained that Kurdish
security forces engaged in arbitrary arrests and detentions, intimidation, and in
some cases low-level violence, against minorities who challenged Kurdish control
of the disputed territories.
Key International Actors
An agreement signed between the United States and Iraq in 2008 requires a complete
US withdrawal—including of non-combat military forces—from Iraq by the
end of 2011. Having withdrawn to bases since the end of June 2009, US forces
must now seek Iraqi permission to launch operations in the cities. As of October
the United States had approximately 120,000 troops in Iraq (down from 160,000-
170,000 at the height of the 2007 “surge”). The United Kingdom, the only other
country with a significant number of military personnel in Iraq, held a ceremony in
April in the city of Basra to mark the official end of the six-year British military
mission in Iraq.
In August the United Nations Security Council voted to extend the mandate of the
UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for one year. The UNAMI Human Rights
Office monitors human rights violations as part of a plan aimed at developing
Iraqi mechanisms for addressing past and current abuses.