Iraq
The human rights situation in Iraq remained grave in 2004, aggravated
by increased armed attacks by insurgents and counterinsurgency attacks
by U.S.-led international and Iraqi forces. Both U.S. forces and insurgents
have been implicated in serious violations of the laws of armed
conflict, including war crimes.
The level of violent attacks on civilians by insurgents, including suicide
bombings and the deliberate killing of Iraqi civilians working with U.S.
and other foreign forces, remained high in 2004. There was also a
marked increase in the number of abductions, and in some cases
killings, of both Iraqi and foreign nationals. This high level of insecurity
had a particularly negative impact on the ability of women and girls to
go to jobs, attend school, or otherwise move outside the home.
U.S. forces have also been responsible for violations of the laws of war.
The photographs from Abu Ghraib prison of torture and other mistreatment
of detainees, made public in April 2004, provided the most
graphic evidence of abuse; further investigations revealed that abuses
against detainees were not limited to Abu Ghraib. Security considerations
have limited monitoring of U.S. military operations against insurgent
strongholds, but reports have emerged of U.S. soldiers killing incapacitated
Iraqi combatants, forcing civilians back into battle zones, and
using unnecessary force against civilians at checkpoints. U.S. forces
continue to detain hundreds of Iraqis on the basis of Security Council
authorization but in accordance with no evident law.
In the aftermath of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq and the overthrow of
the Ba’athist government in April 2003, the occupying power and interim
government have worked to dismantle the repressive apparatus
erected under Saddam Hussein. The U.S.-led coalition’s failure to provide
adequate security following the invasion, the expansion of the insurgency, and insurgent attacks on humanitarian agencies have seriously
impeded this process and efforts at economic reconstruction.
Iraq continues to face the legacy of nearly three decades of authoritarian
rule by Saddam Hussein and his Ba’athist government. The legacy
includes crimes against humanity, war crimes, and genocide that have
long gone unpunished; and a criminal justice system atrophied due to its
subordination to the state security apparatus and corrupted by “revolutionary
courts” that made extensive use of the death penalty, torture,
and arbitrary detention. Many of the victims of the former government
were Kurds, an ethnic minority, and Shi`a, the religion of the Iraqi
majority. Government policies and comprehensive economic sanctions
imposed by the United Nations Security Council left the country’s
infrastructure and economy devastated.
The Governing Authority in Iraq
Following the declared end of occupation by U.S.-led coalition forces
and the dissolution of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) on
June 28, 2004, the U.S.-led coalition transferred sovereignty to the
Interim Iraqi Government. U.S.-led forces have remained in Iraq under
the authority of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1546, adopted on
June 8, 2004, creating the Multi-National Force-Iraq (MNF-I). The
resolution gives the MNF-I “the authority to take all necessary measures
to contribute to the maintenance of security and stability in Iraq,”
working with the interim government.
With the transfer of sovereignty, the Law of Administration for the
State of Iraq for the Transitional Period (TAL) came into effect. The
TAL was promulgated by the CPA on March 8, 2004, and is due to
remain in effect until “the formation of an elected Iraqi government
pursuant to a permanent constitution,” envisaged for the end of 2005
following general elections. The TAL contains a bill of rights for Iraqi
citizens, including the right to freedom of expression and association, religious beliefs, and freedom from discrimination on ethnic, religious
or other grounds. The law also stipulates that all citizens are equal
before the law, and enjoy freedom from arbitrary arrest and unlawful
detention, unfair trials and torture.
Internal Security and Emergency Law
In June 2004, Prime Minister Ayad Allawi announced a major reorganization
of Iraqi security forces, including the creation of new agencies
with responsibility for intelligence gathering and for law enforcement.
An Iraqi National Intelligence Service had already been set up under
CPA authority in April 2004, initially reporting to CPA Administrator
L. Paul Bremer and subsequently to the prime minister. Several
Ministry of Interior agencies were also reorganized and expanded under
the CPA with responsibility for investigating serious criminal offenses—
such as money laundering, abductions, and organized crime—as well as
gathering intelligence on criminal activity.
On July 3, 2004, the interim government passed the Order for
Safeguarding National Security (Number 1 of 2004), introducing emergency
legislation to the statute books and enabling the prime minister
to declare martial law for up to sixty days (renewable with the approval
of the Presidency Council). The Order provides for the imposition of
curfews; the closure of roads, sea lanes, and airspace; restrictions or bans
on public gatherings; surveillance of electronic and other communications;
and wide powers to search property and to detain suspects.
Under the Public Safety Law, a state of emergency may be declared
“upon the exposure of the people of Iraq to a danger of grave proportions,
threatening the lives of individuals and emanating from an ongoing
campaign of violence by any number of people, for the purpose of
preventing the establishment of a broad based government in Iraq, or to
hinder the peaceful participation of all Iraqis in the political process, or
for any other purpose” (Article 1.) 
In announcing the Order, Iraqi officials pointed to provisions requiring
that persons may not be arrested except upon the issuance of arrest warrants
from the judicial authorities, and would be brought before an
investigative judge within twenty-four hours. The law, however, does
provide for such arrests or searches without warrant in “extreme exigent
circumstances,” which are not defined. On November 7, 2004, the
Prime Minister declared a state of emergency for a period of sixty days
on the eve of a U.S.-led military offensive on the town of al-Falluja, targeting
suspected insurgents believed to be based there.
As part of the declared intention to crack down on violent crime, the
interim government reintroduced the death penalty, which had been
suspended by CPA authorities. Order 3 of 2004, passed on August 8,
provides capital punishment for certain crimes affecting internal state
security, public safety, attacks on means of transportation, premeditated
murder, drug trafficking, and abduction.
Several days prior to the reintroduction of the death penalty, Prime
Minister `Allawi announced an amnesty for a range of offenses connected
with the possession of weapons and explosive devices, the failure to
inform authorities about the planning or financing of terrorism or other
acts of violence, participation with terrorist groups in acts intended to
undermine internal state security or public welfare and property, and
the giving of refuge to persons sought by the judicial authorities for terrorist
or violent crimes or in connection with crimes perpetrated by the
former Iraqi government. Order No. 2/2004 excludes from the terms of
the amnesty those found guilty of murder, abduction, rape, robbery, and
harming or destroying public or private assets. It also limited those benefiting
from its terms to Iraqi nationals who committed the said crimes
between May 1, 2003, and the date of the law coming into force. The
amnesty, initially valid for a thirty-day period, was extended for an additional
month in mid-September 2004. It is not known how many people
have benefited. 
The Criminal Justice System
Following the fall of the Saddam Hussein government, Iraq’s criminal
courts began functioning again around June 2003, but have had to rely
on an outdated and deeply flawed legal framework pending comprehensive
reform of Iraq’s judicial system and criminal laws.
Human Rights Watch observed numerous trials and investigative hearings
during 2003 and 2004 involving suspects charged with various
offenses under the Penal Code of 1969 before the ordinary criminal
courts in Baghdad as well as the Central Criminal Court of Iraq
(CCCI). The latter court was set up in July 2003 under CPA authority
to hear cases involving serious felonies such as terrorism, organized
crime, governmental corruption, acts intended to destabilize democratic
institutions or processes, and violence based on race, nationality, ethnicity,
or religion. Defendants brought before the CCCI include those
charged with attacks against U.S.-led coalition forces and those who
currently remain in MNF-I custody. The court also has jurisdiction
over future cases involving suspects arrested and charged in accordance
with July 3, 2004 national security order described above.
In the vast majority of cases observed by Human Rights Watch, defendants
had been detained without judicial warrants and were brought
before the criminal courts without having had prior access to defense
counsel. Many of them had been held for weeks or months in pre-trial
detention, and in some cases had been tortured or ill-treated to extract
confessions from them. Where defendants were unable or unwilling to
engage lawyers to act on their behalf, the courts appointed lawyers for
them. However, such lawyers did not have prior access to the defendants
nor to the evidence against them, and in some cases, lawyers were
not present at investigative hearings. Trials before the criminal courts
were summary, lasting less than thirty minutes in the majority of cases. 
Accountability for Past Crimes
The Statute of the Iraq Special Tribunal, promulgated under the CPA
by the Iraqi Governing Council in December 2003, contains serious
substantive and procedural shortcomings that, independent of questions
of how the tribunal was established and other factors, could undermine
the legitimacy of the tribunal and the fairness of future trials.
Among other problems, the tribunal law contains no prohibition on
using confessions extracted by torture, no right of access to a lawyer in
the early stages of investigation, and no requirement that guilt be
proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Those convicted can face the death
penalty. And while justice efforts worldwide have created a cadre of
judges and prosecutors with invaluable experience prosecuting genocide
and crimes against humanity, the tribunal has been structured to almost
entirely exclude their participation. Instead, the tribunal is to be run by
lawyers and judges who have acknowledged their own lack of experience
in complex prosecutions of this kind.
Human Rights Watch has raised these matters with Iraqi and U.S. officials
and called for key amendments to be introduced to the law to
bring it into line with international fair trial standards. To date the tribunal
law has not been amended.
Since the end of June 2004, the MNF-I has retained physical custody of
“high value detainees,” among them members of the former Iraqi government
who will eventually be tried before the Iraq Special Tribunal.
At this writing, over ninety such persons remained in detention and
most are believed to be held at Camp Cropper in the vicinity of
Baghdad International Airport. To date, only twelve of the defendants
have been arraigned, among them former president Saddam Hussein,
under the jurisdiction of the Central Criminal Court of Iraq, for crimes
punishable under Iraq’s Penal Code.
Accountability for Past Crimes
The Statute of the Iraq Special Tribunal, promulgated under the CPA
by the Iraqi Governing Council in December 2003, contains serious
substantive and procedural shortcomings that, independent of questions
of how the tribunal was established and other factors, could undermine
the legitimacy of the tribunal and the fairness of future trials.
Among other problems, the tribunal law contains no prohibition on
using confessions extracted by torture, no right of access to a lawyer in
the early stages of investigation, and no requirement that guilt be
proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Those convicted can face the death
penalty. And while justice efforts worldwide have created a cadre of
judges and prosecutors with invaluable experience prosecuting genocide
and crimes against humanity, the tribunal has been structured to almost
entirely exclude their participation. Instead, the tribunal is to be run by
lawyers and judges who have acknowledged their own lack of experience
in complex prosecutions of this kind.
Human Rights Watch has raised these matters with Iraqi and U.S. officials
and called for key amendments to be introduced to the law to
bring it into line with international fair trial standards. To date the tribunal
law has not been amended.
Since the end of June 2004, the MNF-I has retained physical custody of
“high value detainees,” among them members of the former Iraqi government
who will eventually be tried before the Iraq Special Tribunal.
At this writing, over ninety such persons remained in detention and
most are believed to be held at Camp Cropper in the vicinity of
Baghdad International Airport. To date, only twelve of the defendants
have been arraigned, among them former president Saddam Hussein,
under the jurisdiction of the Central Criminal Court of Iraq, for crimes
punishable under Iraq’s Penal Code. 