Iraq
Human rights conditions in Iraq remain poor, particularly for detainees, journalists,
activists, and women and girls. Security forces continued to arbitrarily
detain and torture detainees, holding some of them outside the custody of the
Justice Ministry. The Justice Ministry announced a record number of executions
in 2012, but provided little information about the identities of those executed.
Iraq security forces continued to respond to peaceful protest with intimidation,
threats, violence, and arrests of protesters and journalists. Security forces and
pro-government non-state actors harassed journalists and media organizations
critical of the government.
In April, Iraq’s parliament passed a law criminalizing human trafficking, but has
yet to effectively implement it. The Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) has
not taken steps to implement a 2011 law banning female genital mutilation
(FGM).
Hundreds of civilians and police were killed in spates of violence, including targeted
assassinations, amid a political crisis that has dragged on since
December 2011.
Detention, Torture, and Executions
Forces controlled by the Defense, Interior, and Justice Ministries, as well as elite
forces reporting directly to the prime minister’s office, continued arbitrary
detentions of a broad spectrum of detainees, including in secret prisons outside
the purview of the Interior and Justice ministries. Despite a Justice Ministry
announcement in March 2011 that it would close the Camp Honor secret detention
facility—where Human Rights Watch documented systematic torture—HRW
received information from multiple sources that the prison continued to be used
as late as March 2012.
Several detainees reported being tortured after mass arrest campaigns in late
2011 and March 2012, the latter in preparation for an Arab League summit in
Baghdad, in what arresting officers characterized as “precautionary” measures
to prevent terrorist attacks. Six detainees released in April reported that interrogators told them that they were being held to curb criminal activity during the
summit and any “embarrassing” public protests.
Vice President Tariq Hashimi’s former guard, whose body bore wounds suggesting
torture, died in government custody in March, and poet Irfan Ahmed
Mohammed died in KRG police custody in August. Authorities have not released
investigation results for either case.
Government officials reported that 70 percent of prisons are over capacity, with
large numbers of detainees held in lengthy pre-trial detention without judicial
review. Inmates in numerous prisons, including the women’s facility in Rusafa
prison complex in Baghdad, suffer from overcrowding and lack of sufficient
access to food and water.
The Justice Ministry announced 129 executions as of mid-November 2012, up
from 68 in 2011. Under Iraqi law, 48 offenses are subject to the death penalty,
including offenses recently criminalized in the Countertrafficking Law.
Freedom of Assembly
Security forces continued to respond to peaceful protests with intimidation,
threats, violence, and arrests of protesters. On February 17, hundreds of security
forces of the KRG surrounded a peaceful demonstration in Sulaimaniya’s Sara
Square. Dozens of men in civilian clothing attacked protesters and made many
arrests.
In Baghdad, security forces blocked hundreds of protesters from reaching
demonstrations in Tahrir Square on February 25. Up to 1,000 armed personnel
amassed on side streets, informing approaching protesters that they had a long
list of names of people to arrest and that they would arrest even those with
names “similar” to those on the list.
Freedom of Expression
The environment for journalists remained oppressive in 2012. The Iraqi parliament
was at this writing considering a number of laws restricting the media and
freedom of expression and assembly, including the draft Law on the Freedom of Expression of Opinion, Assembly, and Peaceful Demonstration, and a draft law
regulating the organization of political parties that punishes expression “violating
public morals” and conveying “immoral messages.” In September, the
Federal Supreme Court denied a petition by a local press freedom organization
to repeal the Journalists Protection Law on the basis that it fails to offer meaningful
protection to journalists and restricts access to information.
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) ranked Iraq at the top of its 2012
Impunity Index, which focuses on unsolved journalist murders, and reported
that there have been no convictions for murders of journalists since 2003. Iraqi
authorities made no arrests for the murder of Hadi al-Mahdi, a journalist critical
of the government, killed in September 2011. Another journalist, Zardasht
Osman, was abducted and murdered after publishing a satirical article about
KRG president Massoud Barzani in 2010. The KRG never released details of the
investigation into his death.
On May 8, the National Communications and Media Commission of Iraq (NCMC)
asked the Interior Ministry to “take the necessary legal measures” against 44
foreign and Iraqi media outlets it stated were operating illegally. The media outlets
remained open at this writing, but registration is difficult, leaving them vulnerable
to closure.
A draft law on information technology crimes awaits parliamentary ratification.
One article provides for life imprisonment and large fines for vaguely defined
crimes, such as “intentionally” using computer devices and information networks
to undermine the country’s “supreme economic, political, military, or
security interests.”
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Many Iraqi women have lost their husbands as a result of armed conflict, generalized
violence, and displacement. The resulting financial hardship has made
them vulnerable to trafficking for sexual exploitation and prostitution.
The parliament passed a countertrafficking law in April that outlines government
obligations and provides for prosecution of traffickers. Iraqi authorities
announced the arrest of a Baghdad trafficking ringleader in September, but little has been done to prosecute other people accused of trafficking, or to take
measures to prevent it. Victims of trafficking continue to report having passports
confiscated and being prevented from obtaining visas and new identification
papers, leaving them vulnerable to arrest and unable to access health care.
In June 2011, the KRG parliament passed the Family Violence Bill, which
includes provisions criminalizing forced and child marriages; abuse of girls and
women; and a total ban on FGM. Implementation of the law is poor, and dozens
of girls and practitioners said that they had either undergone or performed FGM
since the law was passed. The authorities took no measures to investigate these
cases.
Other Vulnerable Groups
In March, Iraq witnessed a string of attacks against young people with socially
non-conforming appearances, including gender non-conforming and gay men
and those who identify as “emo”—a subculture characterized by distinctive
clothes and musical tastes. Local human rights groups, community activists,
and media reported numerous deaths of these youths. Rather than undertaking
measures to protect targeted individuals, the Interior Ministry said reports of
attacks on those suspected of homosexual conduct or who appeared “emo”
were “fabricated” and “groundless” and took no measure to prosecute or arrest
attackers.
In January, Iraq ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(CRPD). However, Iraq’s government has failed to take the necessary steps to
ensure that persons with disabilities do not face discrimination, as the CRPD
requires, and to ensure access to their rights to education, employment, personal
mobility, health care, and comprehensive rehabilitation services and programs,
among other things. Large numbers of Iraqis with disabilities—including
those resulting from conflicts, disease, and non-war-related injuries—are unable
to find support for integration into their local communities.
In October, a study published in the Environmental Contamination and
Toxicology bulletin found “compelling evidence” to link increased rates of miscarriages and developmental disabilities in children in Fallujah and Basrah to
environmental toxins left by US military operations in those areas.
Refugees and Displacement
According to the United Nations high commissioner for refugees, nearly 30,000
Syrian refugees have fled to Iraq since armed conflict began in Syria in 2011.
Iraq closed the al-Qaim border to Syrian refugees in August. The government
reopened the crossing in September but stated that it would not admit young
Syrian men.
The Iraqi government has no adequate plan for the return of Iraqis who have
been displaced internally or those who have fled to neighboring countries. In
July, Iraq’s government assisted in returning thousands of Iraqis from Syria, providing
flights and bus tickets to returnees, but the government has failed to
assist them in finding housing or jobs. Thousands of displaced persons within
Iraq continue to reside in squatter settlements without access to basic necessities
such as clean water, electricity, and sanitation. Many are widows with few
employment prospects.
In September, the UN nearly completed the transfer within Iraq of about 3,200
members of the exiled Iranian opposition organization, the Mojahedin-e Khalq
(MEK). The UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) oversaw their transfer from
Camp Ashraf, a refugee camp and former military base, where the group had
resided since 1986, to Camp Liberty, another former military base. The United
States secretary of state approved the removal of the group from the State
Department’s list of designated terrorist organizations at the end of the same
month.
Key International Actors
The US government has not sufficiently pressed the Maliki government to rein in
corruption and serial human rights abuses.
Accountability for abuses committed by coalition forces in Iraq remains almost
non-existent. On January 24, a military court sentenced Staff Sgt. Frank Wuterich to a reduction in rank and forfeited two-thirds of his pay for three months for
leading the “Haditha Massacre”—in which US forces killed 24 unarmed Iraqi
civilians, including women and children, in the town of Haditha in 2005.
Wuterich, who pled guilty for negligent dereliction of duty for telling his men to
“shoot first, ask questions later,” was originally charged with murder. He avoided
jail time.
In April, the British Guardian newspaper reported that Australian military personnel
working in Iraq in 2003 transferred 64 detainees to a secret prison where
CIA and MI6 carried out interrogations that year. Two of the detainees died during
the transfer and may have been beaten to death by British soldiers, the
paper said.