Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT)
Following the death of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in November 2004,
Palestinians held their second-ever national elections on January 9, 2005.
The main contender, Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), became the second
Palestinian president with 62.52% of the vote. The Palestinian Authority
(P.A.) postponed Legislative Council elections, which were due to take place
in 2005, until January 2006, but held first-ever municipal elections in four
stages across the West Bank and Gaza, with Hamas gaining a substantial
leadership role in local politics, especially in Gaza. The P.A. has postponed a
fifth and final round of voting, which includes fifty-nine local councils, until
2006.
On February 8, 2005 Mahmoud Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon met in Sharm el-Sheikh for the first Israeli-Palestinian summit in
four years. The summit ended in a loose ceasefire agreement “that all
Palestinians will stop all acts of violence against all Israelis and at the same
time Israel will cease its military activity against all Palestinians everywhere.”
While Islamic Jihad and Hamas said they were not bound by the ceasefire,
they did commit to respecting a mutual period of calm.
As part of the ceasefire, Israel agreed to release nine hundred Palestinian
prisoners, which it did in February and June. Approximately eight thousand
Palestinian political and security prisoners remain imprisoned by Israel. Israel
also currently holds more than six hundred Palestinians under administrative
detention (detention without trial or charge, which can be indefinitely
renewed).
In August and September 2005, Israel unilaterally withdrew approximately
eight thousand settlers, along with military personnel and installations, from
the Gaza Strip and four small settlements in the northern West Bank near
Jenin. While Israel has since declared the Gaza Strip a “foreign territory”
and the crossings between Gaza and Israel “international borders,” under
international humanitarian law (IHL), Gaza remains occupied, and Israel
retains its responsibilities for the welfare of Gaza residents. Israel maintains
effective control over Gaza by regulating movement in and out of the Strip as well as the airspace, sea space, public utilities and population registry. In
addition, Israel declared the right to re-enter Gaza militarily at any time in
its “Disengagement Plan” Since the withdrawal, Israel has carried out aerial
bombardments, including targeted killings, and has fired artillery into the
northeastern corner of Gaza.
While the total number of Israeli and Palestinian casualties fell in 2005 following
the February ceasefire, the overall human rights situation in Israel and
the OPT remained grave. Since the beginning of the current intifada in
September 2000, Israel has killed nearly three thousand Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza, including more than six hundred children. During the
same period, Palestinian fighters have killed more than nine hundred Israelis
inside Israel and in the OPT. Most of those killed on both sides were civilians.
The Israeli authorities continue a policy of closure, imposing severe and frequently
arbitrary restrictions on freedom of movement in the West Bank,
Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem, contributing to a serious humanitarian crisis
marked by extreme poverty, unemployment, and food insecurity. The movement
restrictions also have severely compromised Palestinian residents’
access to health care, education, and other services. As of August 1, 2005, the
U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reported
376 closure obstacles, down from 605 in February. However, this decrease, a
result of the Sharm summit and the subsequent decrease in fighting, is offset
by an increase in the number of “flying checkpoints” (currently an average of
sixty each month), which usually consist of a military jeep blocking a road
and checking all traffic for an undisclosed period of time; an increase in concrete
military towers and “road protection barriers”, which block Palestinian
traffic from entering settler-only roads through the OPT; and the increased
movement restrictions associated with the “separation barrier” or “wall” that
Israel is building mostly inside the West Bank.
During 2005, Israel continued with its construction of the wall, notwithstanding
the International Court of Justice’s Advisory Opinion declaring the
construction of the wall inside the OPT a violation of IHL, and demanding
that Israel cease further construction inside the OPT. While the stated Israeli security rationale for the wall is to prevent Palestinian armed groups from
carrying out attacks in Israel, 85 percent of its route extends into the West
Bank, facilitating the eventual annexation to Israel of most of the large illegal
Jewish settlements constructed over the past several decades as well as some
of the most productive Palestinian farmlands and key water resources.
In July 2005, the Israeli Knesset approved legislation that effectively bars
Palestinians from the OPT from suing Israel for death, injury or damages
caused by Israeli security agents. The amendment to the Civil Wrongs
(Liability of State) Law, 5712-1952 further strips Palestinians of an effective
remedy for serious human rights abuses, which is required under international
human rights law. The Knesset passed the bill at a time when the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) had criminally investigated fewer than ten percent of
the Palestinian civilian deaths since September 2000, and have convicted only
a handful of IDF soldiers for causing death or injury. In August, an Israeli
court handed down an eight year sentence, by far the longest of the past five
years, to the soldier found responsible for lethally shooting Briton Tom
Hurndall in Gaza in 2002. The IDF maintains the policy that killings of
Palestinians will be investigated only under “exceptional circumstances,”
which neither the IDF nor the government has ever defined. The Israeli
authorities’ failure to bring perpetrators to justice fosters a culture of impunity.
The Knesset also passed legislation in July 2005 barring family reunification
between Israeli citizens (mostly Palestinians) and their Palestinian spouses
from the OPT, except in certain age categories. Since 2002 Israel has frozen
family reunification and forced thousands of married couples and their children
to live apart or live together illegally. This law violates the right not to
be subjected to arbitrary interference with one’s family as set out in international
human rights treaties ratified by Israel.
In the OPT, despite Abbas’ pledges of restored law and order and his reorganization
of the security services, including firing long-standing officials
who P.A. authorities deemed inept or corrupt, control of the Palestinian
Authority over Palestinian population centers is frequently nominal at best,
and conditions of lawlessness have increased in the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank in 2005. Palestinian gunmen carried out several assassinations
against persons alleged to have collaborated with Israeli security forces, and
fighting between various Palestinian factions, security services and armed
groups has led to armed clashes on the streets, vigilante killings and even the
kidnapping of foreigners on several occasions in Gaza.
Since taking office, Abbas has overseen the execution of five death row
inmates. At least twenty-two people remain on death row, many of them
tried in the notorious Palestinian security or military courts where minimum
standards of due process are not met. On June 22 Abbas ordered that the
Palestinian justice system retry those whom the State Security Court had
sentenced to death. It is unclear whether this process has begun.
Unlawful Use of Force
The Israeli army and security forces continued to carry out daily arrest raids
and military operations in Palestinian areas during 2005. There have been
over two thousand IDF incursions into Palestinian population centers this
year. The IDF often carried out the operations in a manner that failed to
demonstrate that it had used all feasible measures to avoid or minimize harm
to civilians and their property. In one such incident, an August 24 arrest raid
in the Tulkarem refugee camp, the IDF shot and killed five unarmed
Palestinians, including three seventeen-year-olds. This incident reflects a
growing pattern of IDF “arrest operations” in which security forces kill the
target of arrest or bystanders rather than seeking to apprehend the target.
More than 20 Palestinians were killed in assassinations or extra-judicial
killings in 2005.
In 2005, the number of Palestinian suicide bombings and similar attacks targeting
civilians inside Israel reached their lowest point since the beginning of
the current intifada in 2000. Palestinian armed groups carried out three
lethal suicide bombing attacks inside Israel in 2005, killing fifteen Israelis and
injuring scores more. Armed groups also carried out several roadside shootings
and bomb attacks in the OPT, killing several Israeli civilians. In addition,
on several occasions, Palestinian armed groups in the Gaza Strip fired
home-made rockets, known as Qassams, and mortar shells into Israel and at Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip (up until the withdrawal in August),
which killed several Israelis, Palestinians, and foreign workers. These
weapons are inherently indiscriminate and are generally fired at civilian areas,
in contravention of IHL. Abbas publicly denounced such tactics and called
for an end to the armed uprising. Yet the Palestinian Authority appeared
unable to stop those who have ordered or organized such attacks.
The Wall
On February 20, 2005 Israel modified the planned route of the wall. While
the new route runs closer to the Green Line in some areas, such as the
southern West Bank, in other areas it will run far inside the West Bank in
order to capture key Israeli settlements such as Ariel (twenty-two kilometers
inside the West Bank), the Gush Etzion bloc (with fifty thousand settlers)
near Bethlehem and the Maaleh Adumim settlement east of Jerusalem. The
new route is 670 km, twice the length of the “Green Line” (the 1949
armistice line between Israel and Jordan which served as the de facto border
between Israel and the West Bank after Israel’s 1967 occupation); only about
one-fifth of the route follows the Green Line itself. During 2005 Israel still
failed to make the case why a wall constructed entirely on the Israeli side of
the Green Line would not have been at least as effective in providing security
inside Israel. Instead, the current wall will bring over three hundred thousand
West Bank and East Jerusalem settlers and a minimum of 135,000 acres of
West Bank territory over to the Israeli side. Despite Israel’s contention that
the wall is a “temporary” security measure, it captures settlements that Israel
has vowed to hold onto permanently. On July 21 Sharon said that the Ariel
bloc of settlements “will be part of the State of Israel forever.”
The construction of the wall and settlement expansion essentially have cut off
East Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank. In June the Israeli cabinet
approved the final details of the 60-kilometer fence around Jerusalem that
will cut off some fifty-five thousand Palestinian Jerusalem residents from
their city. Israel also has announced plans to build in the three thousand acre
piece of West Bank land between Jerusalem and the West Bank settlement of Maaleh Adumim, known as E-1, and to surround the entire area with the
wall. This will effectively sever the northern and southern West Bank.
Key International Actors
In April 2005, after meeting with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, U.S.
President George Bush “reiterated that the United States supports the establishment
of a Palestinian state that is viable, contiguous, sovereign and independent.”
Yet while the Bush administration expressed displeasure at Israel’s
decision to build in the E-1 area of the OPT, and paid lip service to the call
for a freeze in settlement expansion, it provided no political or economic
sanctions on Israel’s continued building. Sharon publicly vowed to continue
building despite U.S. displeasure.
Israel remained the largest recipient of U.S. military and economic aid,
receiving almost U.S.$3 billion in 2005. In contrast, after a May meeting
between Bush and Abbas, Bush pledged U.S.$50 million in aid to the P.A. for
housing and other construction following the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza.
However Congress later earmarked part of this money to be used to beef up
“border crossings” along the wall, which are mostly located on occupied
West Bank land. In September 2005, following the Israeli withdrawal, the
United States approved disbursement of a U.S.$3 million supplemental grant
to the P.A. security services.
Also in September, the Quartet (the United Nations, Russia, the European
Union and the United States) foreign ministers met to welcome the successful
conclusion of the Israeli withdrawal and call for renewed efforts to return
to the Road Map (a performance-based plan with three phases which is supposed
to build confidence in preparation for final status negotiations to end
the conflict). Their final statement read: “The Quartet reaffirms that any
agreement on final status issues must be reached through negotiations and
that a new Palestinian State must be truly viable, with contiguity in the West
Bank and connectivity to Gaza.” The Quartet also called for an end to settlement
expansion and expressed concern regarding the route of the wall.