Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories
The human rights situation in Israel and the occupied West Bank and
Gaza Strip remained grave throughout 2004, as armed clashes continued
to exact a high price from civilians. While many see the period after
Arafat’s death on November 11 as the beginning of a new era in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, few changes have occurred on the ground
where the wall regime Israel is building inside the West Bank and the
illegal Israeli settlements continue to expand. On December 3 a top
Hamas leader said that the group would accept the establishment of a
Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and a long-term truce
with Israel. It remains to be seen whether Israel will make reciprocal
declarations and whether words will be translated into action.
In 2004, the Israeli army and security forces made frequent and, in the
Gaza Strip, large-scale military incursions into densely-populated
Palestinian areas, often taking heavy tolls in terms of Palestinian deaths
and injuries as well as property destruction. Palestinian armed groups
fired rockets from areas of the Gaza Strip at Israeli civilian settlements
and populated areas in Israel close to the border, and carried out seven
suicide bombings inside Israel and four around Israeli army checkpoints
in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT). Armed attacks and
clashes in the course of the year brought casualties since September
2000 to well over three thousand Palestinians and nearly one thousand
Israelis killed, and more than 34,000 Palestinians and six thousand
Israelis injured. Most of those killed and injured were civilians.
The Israeli authorities continue a policy of closure, imposing severe and
frequently arbitrary restrictions on freedom of movement in the West
Bank, Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem, contributing to a serious humanitarian
crisis marked by extreme poverty, unemployment, and food insecurity.
The movement restrictions have also severely compromised
Palestinian residents’ access to health care, education, and other services.
Over the past two years these restrictions have become more acute, and
in many places more permanent, with the construction of a “separation
barrier” inside the West Bank. While the stated Israeli security rationale
for the barrier is to prevent Palestinian armed groups from carrying out
attacks in Israel, 85 percent of its route extends into the West Bank,
effectively annexing to Israel most of the large illegal Jewish settlements
constructed over the past several decades as well as confiscating some of
the most productive Palestinian farmlands and key water resources.
In October 2004 the Knesset approved Prime Minister Ariel Sharon’s
plan to “disengage” from the Gaza Strip in 2005 by withdrawing its
military forces and Jewish settlements, although the plan will leave
Israel in control of Gaza’s borders, coastline, and airspace. This move
will not end Israel’s occupation of Gaza or its responsibility for the wellbeing
of its inhabitants.
The control of the Palestinian Authority (P.A.) over Palestinian population
centers is frequently nominal at best, and conditions of lawlessness
prevail in some areas of the Gaza Strip and the northern West Bank.
Palestinian gunmen carried out lethal attacks against persons alleged to
have collaborated with Israeli security forces, and political rivalries
sometimes erupted into clashes between armed factions and attacks on
PA officials and offices.
Unlawful Use of Force
The Israeli army and security forces carried out numerous attacks in
Palestinian areas over the course of 2004. These were most intense and
extensive in the Gaza Strip, and were often carried out in a manner that
failed to demonstrate that the attackers had used all feasible measures to
avoid or minimize harm to civilians and their property. Human Rights
Watch documented serious violations of international humanitarian law
in the course of the Israel Defense Forces’ (IDF) May 2004 assault in
the southern Gaza town and refugee camp of Rafah, in which over two  hundred homes, along with cultivated fields, roads, and other infrastructure,
were razed without regard to military necessity. Israeli forces also
continued to use lethal force in an excessive or indiscriminate manner.
On May 19, 2004, for instance, during the Rafah incursions, an Israeli
tank and helicopter gunship fired on a crowd of demonstrators, killing
nine persons, including three children. In late September 2004, Israel
launched a massive incursion into the northern Gaza Strip. Around 130
Palestinians were killed, more than a quarter of them children. One
thirteen-year-old girl, Imam al-Hams, was shot twenty times by an
Israeli officer. Several children were killed in their classrooms in other
incidents.
There were also numerous instances in the West Bank of civilians killed
by indiscriminate Israeli gunfire, such as the deaths in Nablus in June
2004 of Dr. Khaled Salah, a lecturer at Najah University, and his sixteen-
year-old son. Israel has failed to investigate suspicious killings and
serious injuries by its security forces, including killings of children, thus
continuing to foster an atmosphere of impunity.
While in 2004 the number of Palestinian suicide bombings and similar
attacks targeting civilians inside Israel dropped considerably compared
to immediately preceding years, neither the Palestinian Authority nor
the armed groups responsible have taken any serious steps to act against
those who ordered or organized such attacks. Palestinian armed groups
in the Gaza Strip on numerous occasions fired so-called Qassam rockets,
an inherently indiscriminate home-made weapon, at illegal Jewish
settlements in the Gaza Strip as well as at communities on the Israeli
side of the border. Qassam rockets killed a man and a small child in the
border town of Sderot in June, and in a separate incident killed two
small children in the same town in September. In August 2004 gunmen
apparently affiliated with the Hamas movement threw one or more
grenades into a cellblock in a P.A.-run prison that housed alleged collaborators,
and subsequently entered a Gaza City hospital to kill two of
those who had been seriously wounded in the grenade attack. In July 2004 gunmen attempted to assassinate Palestine Legislative Council
member Nabil Amr after he criticized PA President Yasir Arafat in a television
appearance; Amr was gravely wounded and doctors had to
amputate his leg.
Separation Barrier and Restrictions on Freedom of Movement
The government of Israel cites the significant decrease in suicide bombing
attacks in 2004 to buttress its claim that the separation barrier performs
a valid security function, but it fails to make the case that a barrier
constructed entirely on the Israeli side of the “Green Line” would
not have been at least as effective. The actual route, instead, is designed
to “capture” some 80 percent of the Jewish population now living in
illegal West Bank settlements, and the land and resources they control,
while government policy continues to support the expansion of settlements.
In the case of many Palestinian villages like Jayyous and Isla, the
barrier separates farmers from their agricultural land, greenhouses, olive
and citrus trees, and even water. Other Palestinians who find themselves
on the “Israeli side” of the barrier must have special permits to reside in
their own homes. By making movement and in some cases residence so
difficult, the barrier seems intended to encourage Palestinians to leave
for other areas of the West Bank, or even other countries.
In June 2004, Israel’s High Court of Justice ruled on a petition challenging
a forty-kilometer portion of the separation barrier, finding that
the route in this case violated the principle of proportionality because
the hardship and severe injury caused to the affected Palestinian population,
by separating them from the agricultural lands on which their
livelihoods depended, was excessive compared to the purported security
benefit. The injury caused by the barrier, the court wrote, is not limited
to the immediate inhabitants: “The injury is of far wider scope. It is the
fabric of life of the entire population.” The government responded that
it would revise thirty kilometers of the route in that area to meet the
objections of the court, but neither the court nor the government addressed the issue of proportionality as it pertained to other areas of
the barrier.
The following month, the International Court of Justice (ICJ), in an
advisory opinion responding to a request from the U.N. General
Assembly, held that the barrier is in violation of international humanitarian
law. The court wrote that Israel should cease construction of the
barrier on Palestinian territory, dismantle those portions already constructed
on Palestinian territory, and pay reparations for damage caused
by its construction there. However the construction of the barrier has
continued since the ICJ decision.
Israeli restrictions on freedom of movement in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip are so extensive as to constitute collective punishment, a serious
violation of international humanitarian law. These restrictions are the
result of the barrier, government-sponsored illegal settlements, the network
of Jewish-only roads that support them, and the more than 700
checkpoints that are frequently operated in an arbitrary manner. This
system of collective punishment is also in direct violation of Israel’s
obligation, as the occupying power, to provide to the extent possible for
the welfare of the population it controls.
Gaza “Disengagement”
The Israeli Cabinet adopted Prime Minister Sharon’s Gaza “disengagement”
plan on June 6, 2004, and the full Knesset gave its approval on
October 26. The plan calls for the withdrawal of Jewish settlers and the
redeployment of Israeli troops to posts on the Israeli side of the border
with Gaza, while Israel will retain control of Gaza’s borders, coastline,
and airspace. Israel is reserving the right to launch incursions into Gaza,
and will continue to control Gaza’s economy and trade, telecommunications,
water, electricity, and sewage networks. The plan explicitly envisions
the demolition of hundreds more homes along the Gaza-Egypt
border in order to expand the buffer zone there. The plan states that the disengagement “will serve to dispel the claims regarding Israel’s
responsibility for the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.” In fact, under
international humanitarian law, the steps envisioned will not end Israel’s
occupation of the territory, and Israel will retain responsibility for the
welfare of Gaza’s civilian population.
Key International Actors
Israel remains the largest bilateral recipient of United States military
and economic assistance, amounting to about U.S. $2.7 billion in Fiscal
Year 2004. The IDF continues to use U.S.-supplied weaponry in military
operations in the OPT, including Apache and Cobra helicopters, F-
16 fighter aircraft, and M-16 automatic weapons. Through the Foreign
Military Sales Program, Caterpillar Corporation supplies to Israel bulldozers
built to military specification which have been used to demolish
Palestinian homes and other civilian property in violation of international
humanitarian law. Public reactions by Bush administration officials
to reported Israeli violations of international humanitarian law
continued to emphasize Israel’s right of self-defense without clear reference
to international humanitarian law standards, and the U.S. took no
public steps to pressure Israel to meet its obligations under those standards.
In April 2004, during a visit of Prime Minster Sharon to
Washington, President Bush endorsed the Gaza “disengagement” plan
and voiced support for a West Bank final status in which Israel would
continue to control many of the illegal settlements constructed there.
Although the U.S. calls for a “freeze” on construction of illegal settlements,
in 2004 the administration declined to deduct from the U.S. $9
billion in loan guarantees awarded in 2003 any amount corresponding
to Israeli expenditures on settlements, as it had the previous year. There
were Israeli press reports in 2004 that some U.S. army units were training
at a “special anti-terror school” at an IDF base near Modi’in.
In early May 2004, representatives of the “Quartet”—United Nations
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Irish Foreign Minister Brian Cowen representing the presidency of the European Union, Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov, and U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell—met
at the U.N. and issued a communiqué that, among other things, called
on Israel to exercise its legitimate right to self-defense “within the
parameters of international humanitarian law” and on the P.A. to “take
immediate action against terrorist groups and individuals who plan and
execute such attacks.”