Israel/Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT)
Israel’s blockade of Gaza and restrictions on movement to protect illegal West
Bank settlements, along with indiscriminate Palestinian rocket attacks on Israeli
towns and serious abuses by Fatah and Hamas against each other’s supporters,
were major components of the human rights crisis in the Israeli-occupied
Palestinian territories in 2008.
Palestinian civilians accounted for around half of those killed in Israeli military
operations in Gaza prior to a June ceasefire between Hamas and Israel. More
Palestinians were killed in Gaza by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in the first half
of the year than in all of 2007 in both the West Bank and Gaza.
Israel’s blockade of Gaza has exacerbated the humanitarian crisis affecting
Gaza’s 1.5 million residents. In the West Bank, Israel maintains onerous restrictions
on freedom of movement for Palestinians.
Palestinian armed groups fired rockets and mortars indiscriminately into Israeli
towns, particularly Sderot, killing four civilians and wounding others. Fatah and
Hamas, the dominant Palestinian parties in the West Bank and Gaza, respectively,
were responsible for extensive human rights violations as they sought to
impose their authority, and retaliated for each other’s violations.
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza continued to hold as hostage Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit, captured in June 2006.
Israel
Gaza Strip
Israel’s comprehensive blockade of the Gaza Strip has severe humanitarian and
economic consequences for the civilian population. Even after the June ceasefire,
continued restrictions reduced the availability of basic goods and the provision of
essential services. Imports in September represented 30 percent of what Israel
allowed into Gaza in December 2005. Exports remained completely barred. Israel is Gaza’s major source of electricity and sole source of fuel, so its restrictions
on their supply cripple transportation as well as water-pumping, sewage,
and sanitation facilities.
Israel also continues to restrict the movement of Palestinians out of Gaza. The
restrictions rely on Egypt’s cooperation along its border with Gaza, in particular at
the Rafah crossing.
In the first half of the year, Israel permitted only a small number of persons with
medical emergencies to leave. In July a handful of students with foreign scholarships
left Gaza. In August and September Israel eased some restrictions and
allowed more emergency medical cases to exit. In September over four thousand
Palestinians, including 1,100 pilgrims, entered Egypt via Rafah, but Egyptian
authorities prevented some 800 students from leaving to study abroad. The vast
majority of Palestinians remain unable to travel outside the territory. Foreign
Minister Tzipi Livni wrote in July that this policy was due to a September 2007
security cabinet decision declaring Gaza to be a “hostile entity.”
Israel reintroduced a complete blockade in November in retaliation for a wave of
Palestinian rocket attacks. The complete closure by Israel cut off food and medical
aid, as well as fuel supplies, halted the United Nations’ food distribution to
750,000 people, and caused widespread power cuts.
Palestinian Deaths and Israeli Impunity
Between January and June 2008, Israeli forces conducting military operations
killed 388 Palestinian fighters and civilians in Gaza, about half of whom were
civilians; 59 of the dead were children. Israeli forces killed 41 Palestinians in the
West Bank between January and the end of October, of whom at least 15 were
civilians. The largest Israeli military operation, between February 27 and March 3
in Gaza, killed 107 Palestinians, more than half of them civilians. Human Rights
Watch examined one area occupied by Israeli troops during the operation and
found strong evidence in four incidents that Israeli forces deliberately fired at and
killed five civilians, medical personnel, and incapacitated fighters. In other
attacks, Israeli forces did not appear to take all feasible precautions to ensure targets
were military and not civilian.
As of November 2008, Israeli Military Police launched only one formal investigation
into suspicious killings of civilians.
On August 12, Judge Advocate General Brig.-Gen. Avishai Mandelblit informed the
Reuters news agency that the decision by an Israeli tank crew to target a Reuters
cameraman in Gaza on April 16 was “sound.” The attack killed the cameraman
and eight other civilians, including six children. Mandelblit said the crew acted
properly even though, he acknowledged, they could not identify the cameraman
as a combatant.
Freedom of Movement
Israel increased its extensive, often arbitrary restrictions on freedom of movement
for Palestinians in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. From September 4, 2007,
through September 1, 2008, “closure obstacles” in the West Bank increased from
572 to 630. These restrictions make it difficult or impossible for many Palestinians
to access jobs, education, and health services, as well as to visit family and
friends.
Settlements and the Wall
The route of the “separation barrier” or wall, more than 80 percent of which
extends into the West Bank, further restricts the ability of thousands of
Palestinian residents to access their land, essential services such as education
and healthcare, and water.
As of mid-2008, more than 600 buildings were under construction in illegal West
Bank settlements (not including East Jerusalem) and tenders had been issued for
more than 2,400 others. In July government approval of Maskiot marked the first
official recognition of a settlement in almost nine years.
The Israeli human rights organization B’Tselem, in October, reported 429 cases of
settler violence against Palestinians and their property in 2008, a 75 percent
increase over 2007. These included physical assaults with firearms, beatings, and
destruction of crops and other property. Israeli authorities seldom apprehend or
prosecute perpetrators. In September a bomb placed outside his home injured 77-year-old Hebrew University professor Zeev Sternhall, a prominent critic of the
settlement movement.
Discriminatory Legislation
Israel continues to apply laws and policies that discriminate on the basis of ethnic
or national origin. Since 2002 Israel has prohibited Palestinians from the OPT
who are spouses of Israeli citizens from joining their partners in Israel. In 2007
the Knesset extended the ban through 2008 and expanded its scope to include
citizens of Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon married to Israelis from living with their
spouses in Israel.
In a positive development, since October 2007 Israel approved nearly 32,000
family unification requests in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the first exceptions
to a freeze on family unifications put in place in September 2000. Some 90,000
family reunification requests remain pending.
Israeli laws and practices continue to force tens of thousands of Bedouins in the
Negev region to live in “unrecognized” shanty towns. The state deliberately
excludes Bedouin villages from its national planning process, thus denying them
legal status. Israeli authorities demolished dozens of Bedouin dwellings in 2008.
An official commission headed by retired Supreme Court Justice Eliezer Goldberg
held public hearings to examine the land ownership issues in early 2008, but as
of November had not issued any findings or recommendations.
Expulsion of Asylum Seekers
Between August 23 and 29, the IDF forcibly returned to Egyptian custody 91
Eritreans, Sudanese, and Somalis who illegally crossed the border along the
Sinai. (Egypt has not notified the UN High Commissioner for Refugees of their
whereabouts, and reportedly deported to Sudan some of the 50 Sudanese whom
Israel had forcibly returned in August 2007.)
The Palestinian Authority (PA) and Hamas
Attacks on Israeli Civilians
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza indiscriminately fired locally-made rockets into
the Israeli border town of Sderot and other civilian areas throughout the first half
of 2008. The rocket fire killed four Israeli civilians and wounded others in 2008,
prior to the June ceasefire. Palestinian armed groups, excluding Hamas, continued
to fire small numbers of rockets after the ceasefire came into effect.
According to media reports, Hamas authorities temporarily detained several
Islamic Jihad members for planning or carrying out rocket attacks. In early
November Hamas and other Palestinian armed groups fired over 80 rockets at targets
inside Israel, including civilian populated areas in response to an Israeli military
operation that killed six fighters. As in previous rocket attacks, Palestinian
authorities in Gaza took no action to prosecute any of the individuals involved.
On February 4, a Palestinian suicide bomber killed a 73-year-old woman and
injured 11 other civilians in the southern Israeli town of Dimona. The Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigades and Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed joint
responsibility in a Gaza press conference. Neither of the groups or individuals
who claimed responsibility were arrested by Palestinians authorities in Gaza or
charged with any offense.
On March 3, a Palestinian with an assault rifle killed eight Israeli civilians, four of
them under age 18, in a Jerusalem yeshiva, or seminary. The gunman, who was
apparently acting independently, wounded 10 other students. Senior Hamas
spokesmen appeared to give their support to the attack as well as to four others
in 2008 in which Palestinians targeted Israeli civilians in Jerusalem.
Intra-Palestinian Fighting and Lawlessness
Hamas forces in Gaza and Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority forces in the
West Bank have carried out arbitrary arrests of each other’s supporters, tortured
prisoners in their custody, and closed down scores of charities, political societies,
and other organizations. The PA prosecuted defendants before military courts, circumventing
due process safeguards.
These abuses occurred throughout the period since Hamas took control of Gaza
in June 2007, peaking in July 2008 after a bombing in a Gaza City beach café
killed a four-year-old girl and five members of Hamas’s armed wing, the Izzedin
al-Qassam Brigades. Qassam Brigades members, who have no law enforcement
powers, arbitrarily arrested over 200 people. In the West Bank, PA security forces
responded by arbitrarily arresting over 100 people considered sympathetic to
Hamas.
Palestinian security forces tortured detainees during interrogation, sometimes
leading to their deaths. On February 14, the General Intelligence Services (GIS),
which reports to PA President Mahmud Abbas, arrested Majid al-Barghuti, leader
of a mosque in a village outside Ramallah. Eight days later al-Barghuti was dead,
almost certainly as a result of injuries sustained from torture. On April 13, in Gaza,
armed men arrested Sami `Atiya Khattab, a former GIS captain; 36 hours later he
was dead, his body bearing what a Palestinian human rights defender called
“obvious signs of torture.”
In early August Hamas forces assaulted a Gaza City area controlled by the Hillis
family, whom Hamas accused of sheltering the perpetrator of the beach café
bombing. Of the 12 Hillis members killed, two were reportedly executed, and eyewitnesses
said some of those wounded had been shot after they had surrendered.
In mid-September Hamas forces used excessive force in an attempt to arrest
members of the Dugmush clan in Gaza City. Eleven family members were killed in
the clashes, including three children, and 43 people were injured. Two policemen
were also killed.
Despite the gravity of these violations, the Palestinian Authority took no steps to
investigate them or hold anyone to account. Hamas authorities claimed in early
June that they had punished 35 officers for “violating human rights” but did not
provide details.
The struggle between Hamas and Fatah also contributed to Gaza’s humanitarian
crisis. In August Hamas authorities interrupted regular diesel shipments to the
Coastal Municipalities Water Utility, an agency controlled by the PA in Ramallah.
Death Penalty
A military court in Gaza handed down a death sentence in January and another in
July. In the West Bank a military court in Jenin handed down death sentences in
April and July; a military court in Hebron also sentenced a man to death in April. A
civil court in Gaza handed down death sentences in October to four men, including
to a 22-year-old who was a juvenile at the time of the alleged offense. A military
court in Bethlehem sentenced a 24-year-old man to death in November.
Key International Actors
Israel is the largest recipient of aid from the United States, receiving US$2.38 billion
in military aid in 2008. Washington has not made any funds conditional on
Israel improving its adherence to international human rights and humanitarian
law. The US trained and equipped Palestinian security forces, which took over
some security functions in Jenin and Hebron.
The current European Union-Israel Action Plan only briefly and vaguely mentions
human rights concerns, in contrast to similar plans between the EU and other
countries in the region. As talks commenced in late 2008 about an “upgraded”
relationship with Israel, the EU said any new agreement would include a formal
subcommittee on human rights.
The Quartet (the EU, US, Russia, and UN) provided limited humanitarian aid to
Gaza; the US and EU continued their economic sanctions against the de facto
Hamas government there.
Israel was reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the UN
Human Rights Council in May 2008.