Jordan
King Abdullah dissolved parliament on November 24, 2009, halfway through its
four-year term, setting political rights back in 2010. The government ruled by
decree through most of 2010, pending new elections scheduled for November 9.
In a missed opportunity for refom, the government on May 18, 2010, issued a new
election law that maintained higher parliamentary representation for sparsely
populated rural areas– where mainly tribes loyal to the government live–at the
expense of urban population centers, where most Jordanians of Palestinian origin
live.
A new law decreed on June 16 increased the powers of the Ministry of Justice and
diminished judicial independence, over 100 judges said in a protest.
For the first time, a Jordanian court accepted a civil case by an alleged victim of
torture demanding compensation, but at this writing has not yet ruled on it.
Jordan retains the death penalty but since 2006 has observed a moratorium on
its use.
Jordan’s General Intelligence Department (GID) continued to influence decisions
in most aspects of Jordanian public life, including academic freedom, government
appointments, and the issuing of residency permits to non-Jordanians and “good
conduct” certificates required for Jordanians seeking work abroad. The GID
harassed citizens, including one former senior government advisor, over their criticism
of government policies by summoning them for interrogation and threatening
them with unspecified harm.
On April 25 the GID re-arrested Jordanian citizen Samir al-Barq, and detained him
until summarily deporting him to the Israeli-occupied West Bank on July 11, where
Israeli intelligence forces immediately arrested him. On July 18 al-Barq was
charged by an Israeli military court with membership in and training with an
enemy organization and planning terrorist attacks. The GID had previously
detained al-Barq for over two years between 2006 and 2008 without charge.
Deprivation of Nationality
In violation of Jordanian and international law, Jordan continued to arbitrarily
withdraw Jordanian nationality from Jordanians of Palestinian origin, rendering
them stateless and without rights to education, health care, property, or residency
in Jordan. Children of men stripped of their nationality automatically lost theirs
too, even if they were adults. The Interior Ministry said it withdrew the nationality
of 2,700 Jordanians between 2004 and 2008, but did not discuss numbers for
2009 or 2010.
Torture, Arbitrary Detention, and Administrative Detention
Torture, routine and widespread in recent years, continues, in particular at police
stations, where complaints about ill-treatment increased in 2009 and again in
2010, according to the National Center for Human Rights (NCHR).
Perpetrators of torture enjoy near-total impunity, because the police run the system
for accountability in places of detention. The process for redress begins with
a deficient complaint mechanism, continues with lackluster investigations and
prosecutions, and ends in Police Court, where two of three judges on the panel
are police officers appointed by the police (in 2010 a change in law added one
judge from the regular courts, where judges are more independent). Police Court
tends to impose lenient sentences, if any.
Under the Crime Prevention Law, provincial governors can detain people administratively.
The law requires governors to have evidence of criminal conduct, but in
practice, this is not always the case. Administrative detention is frequently used
to circumvent the obligation to present persons suspected of crimes, usually theft
or disorderly conduct, to the prosecutor within 24 hours. It is also used to overrule
judges who have released suspects on bail. In January 2010, the NCHR
reported 16,000 administrative detentions in 2009, up from 14,000 in 2008, and
adding up to around one in five prison inmates over the year.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Criticism of the king, defamation of government officials and institutions, and
comments deemed to offend Islam or diminish the prestige of the state or harm
international relations carry heavy penalties under the penal code. A June 1 revision
of the penal code increased the penalties for some speech offenses. The
August 29 Law on Information System Crimes extends these provisions to online
expression. Article 5 of the 2007 Press and Publications Law requires publications
to adhere to “Islamic values.”
On July 28 the military prosecutor at the state security court detained university
student Hatim al-Shuli and charged him with insulting King Abdullah and “causing
national strife,” on the basis of a poem al-Shuli denied writing. On September
8 al-Shuli was released and the charges dropped. In July, the state security court
sent Imad al-’Ash to prison for two years for insulting the king in electronic messages
sent to a jihadist website.
Under the Public Gatherings Law of 2008, the governor may deny
permission–without providing a justification–to hold any meeting on public
affairs, including demonstrations. On July 25, police briefly arrested Amina Tariq
under the Public Gatherings Law for conducting an unlicensed peaceful street
protest to promote vegetarianism by covering herself in lettuce. Article 164 of the
penal code also prohibits unlawful gatherings of seven or more persons with the
intention to commit a crime or to disturb public order. The State Security Court on
July 27 used that provision to sentence Muhammad al-Sunaid, head of the
Committee of Day Laborers at Government Offices, to three months in prison for
peacefully demonstrating against the dismissal of day laborers at the Agriculture
Ministry and heckling the minister at a May 10 event in Madaba.
On December 16, 2010, the grace period ends for civic organizations of any type
to comply with a restrictive 2009 Law on Charitable Societies requiring groups
registered as nonprofit companies under the less restrictive Companies Law to
incorporate as charities under the new law, which grants the government discretionary
power to reject applications for new NGOs and to deny their requests for
foreign funding, and wide powers to close existing NGOs.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
A new draft personal status law introduced in April abolishes a 2001 law providing
women with the right to divorce their husbands without having to show fault
(khul). It also continues to allow the marriage of girls as young as 15, if a committee
of Islamic judges approves. In the two years prior to July 2010, 14,000
Jordanian girls under 18 were married, Agence France-Presse reported.
On May 3, 2010, the government decreed amendments to the penal code to
ensure that perpetrators of so-called “honor” crimes receive the full penalty of the
law for killing female relatives suspected of illicit relationships. The new article
345 bis excludes consideration of mitigating circumstances for committing crimes
in a “state of fury” (art. 98) if the victim is under 15 or female. According to Rana
Husseini of The Jordan Times, there were 12 recorded “honor” killings in Jordan
from January to November of 2010.
Changes to the penal code also stiffened penalties for rape from 10 to 15 years in
prison and, in a new provision, stipulated 20 years of hard labor if the victim was
between 15 and 18 years old. New penalties for physical assaults that result in the
death of minors or women were set at a minimum of 12 years in prison.
Labor Rights
Unionized Jordanians may only strike with government permission; non-
Jordanians, although allowed to join unions since 2008, are not allowed to strike.
New regulations on migrant domestic workers, issued in August 2009 following
the inclusion of domestic workers in the Labor Law in July 2008, restricted essential
rights, such as freedom of movement. A Ministry of Labor committee charged
with solving labor disputes failed to secure unpaid salaries of domestic workers,
or adequately protect workers from working long hours and from remaining
trapped in abusive households.
Investigators pursued 34 cases under Jordan’s Anti-Human Trafficking Law of
March 2009 not all of which were prosecuted. The courts had not yet adjudicated
the five cases filed by the Amman prosecutor as of July.
Key International Actors
The United States concluded a five-year agreement, starting in 2010, to provide
Jordan with US$360 million in economic assistance annually, and $300 million in
foreign military financing. This represents an increase over previous annual
requests by the US administration for aid to Jordan, but in the past those were
often supplemented with ad hoc aid, which raised actual US aid to over $1 billion
in 2008 (compared with the European Union’s €265 million, or $369 million for
2007 to 2010).
The EU in November 2009 affirmed its commitment to upgrade relations with
Jordan and in May 2010 signed a €223 million ($310million) aid package over
three years from 2011 to 2013. One of four priority areas is to address democracy,
human rights, media, and justice. This 12 percent increase in EU aid comes
despite a lack of progress, and a number of reverses during 2010, in these areas.