Jordan
In 2007 Jordan regressed in protecting the exercise of basic rights. A proposed
NGO law would severely restrict freedom of association, and new laws on the
press and on the right to information fell short of expectations. A new political
parties bill threatened the existence of small parties by raising the required minimum
number of founding members to 500, representing at least five governorates.
Municipal elections in July were marred by serious fraud, as documented by local
civil society groups, including multiple voting and voter list manipulation.
Parliamentary elections were held in November under the old electoral law, the
government having not fulfilled a 2006 promise to reform it. The existing law
favored pro-regime rural tribal regions against opposition strongholds in urban
population centers.
Arbitrary Detention, Administrative Detention, and Torture
The General Intelligence Department (GID) arrests suspects mostly in the name of
counterterrorism, sometimes without charge and frequently on spurious charges.
Three security detainees—‘Adnan Abu Nujila, Samir al-Barq, and `Isam al-‘Utaibi
(better known as Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi)—have been held for years without
trial. The GID routinely obstructs detainees’ access to legal representation and
delays family visits. Security detainees as recently as 2006 have alleged torture
and ill-treatment to extract confessions in the form of beatings and psychological
abuse such as mock executions, sleep deprivation, and prolonged solitary confinement.
Human Rights Watch inspected the GID facility from August 19 to 30,
2007.
In 2006 provincial governors administratively detained 11,597 persons without
proof of criminal action or to circumvent the obligation to present suspects to the
prosecutor within 24 hours. Administrative detainees must meet a financial bail
guarantee to gain release, but indigent detainees frequently resort to hunger
strikes instead.
In April, and from June through August 2007, prison strikes and riots occurred.
Reasons included withdrawal of visiting and book privileges, prolonged solitary
confinement, delayed trials, and beatings. In visits to six regular prisons in
August and October, Human Rights Watch found rampant beatings of inmates for
perceived infractions of prison rules. Mass beatings took place in Swaqa prison
on August 22, and in Swaqa, Qafqafa, and Juwaida prisons in June after a guard
facilitated an escape. Any officers charged with abusing prisoners face an
appointed police court instead of an independent regular court. Police officials
prosecuting Aqaba prison guards for beating an inmate to death in May only
upgraded charges from neglect of duty to murder following the intervention of
King Abdullah II.
The GID offered the governmental National Center for Human Rights the same
conditions of unannounced visits at any time and private interviews with
detainees agreed with Human Rights Watch; at this writing this offer has not been
taken up. The Public Security Directorate at times allowed the Jordanian
Engineers’ Association’s Freedom Committee to visit imprisoned engineers.
Protective Custody of Women
Governors detain women—in one case for over 20 years—to protect them against
family violence, instead of providing voluntary shelters. Between 400 and 800
women at risk are detained every year. The purpose of the first governmental
women’s shelter for victims of violence, which opened in 2007, is to reconcile the
women with their family rather than offer protection. Judicial accountability for
perpetrators of violence, or threats thereof, remains weak, although improved
prosecutorial performance has secured convictions in 2007.
Freedom of Expression, Association, and Assembly
Criticisms of the king, government officials, and the intelligence forces are strictly
taboo and carry serious penalties. Prosecutors also rely on the penal code to
criminalize speech diminishing the prestige of the state, and harming relations
with other states.
The State Security Court in October found ex-parliamentarian and current head of
the unlicensed Jordan National Movement Ahmad al-`Abbadi guilty of diminishing
the prestige of the state for a web article alleging corruption by the interior minister
and sentenced him to two years in prison; the court did not investigate the
truth of the allegations. A royal court official said the government filed charges to
avoid violence within the large ‘Abbadi tribe. Also in October the State Security
Court sentenced Muhammad al-Zuhairi to 18 months in prison for lese majeste
over online postings he had made.
Parliament reversed its initial position and agreed in March to a new press and
publications law that dropped imprisonment as a sanction for breaching its
requirement for “precision, neutrality and objectivity in presenting national material,
human rights or the values of the Arab and Islamic nation,” among other provisions.
The new law retains fines as high as 20,000 dinars (US$28,000). In
September the government announced that the law extended to material published
on websites. Other laws retain imprisonment for prohibited speech, especially
the penal code. Jordan also passed in April the Arab region’s first law on
access to information, that experts criticized for allowing broad exclusions under
the rubric of national security and for maintaining government control over any
decision to release information
Foreign Minister Abd al-Ilah al-Khatib in January initiated a criminal defamation
suit against weekly newspaper al-Hilal’s editor-in-chief Nasir Qamash and journalist
Ahmad Salama. He objected to the content of a January article, and said his
tribe had threatened to beat up Salama if he failed to take action. The case
remains in the courts at this writing.
Since December 2006 parliamentarians or policemen have assaulted journalists
on four occasions, and intelligence forces twice pre-censored media content, confiscating
an Al Jazeera interview with Jordan’s Prince Hasan in April and in May
stopping the weekly al-Majd’s publication of a plan to aid Palestine’s President
Mahmoud Abbas.
In April the government passed a regulation bringing non-profit companies (primarily
nongovernmental organizations (NGO) registered under the more permissive
companies law) more in line with the stricter measures of the NGO law, giving the government the right to monitor their work and to dissolve them for minor
breaches of their articles of association. In October the Cabinet proposed without
broader consultation a new NGO law that is more restrictive than the current law.
Foreign funding of NGOs or non-profit companies requires government approval
under the new regulation and the proposed new law.
In July 2006 the Ministry of Social Development installed temporary government
management of the Islamic Center Society, and led a massive recruitment of new
members in 2007 to oust the Center’s Muslim Brotherhood leadership in members’
elections for a new management. By law these elections should have happened
within two months of the appointment of a temporary management board.
Similarly, the ministry in September 2006 installed temporary management at the
General Union of Voluntary Services (GUVS), an NGO umbrella group, and in June
2007 at the Amman branch of GUVS. The new management postponed elections.
Jordan’s restrictive law on public gatherings gives local governors the right to ban
any meeting or demonstration, without having to provide a reason. In July, for
example, Amman’s deputy governor refused the `Afaf Society, run by a former
three-time president of parliament, permission to hold a conference entitled “The
Family is the Nursery of Values and Identity.” In other examples, Amman’s governor
in May withheld permission for a rally that 28 opposition parties had planned
to protest the new law on political parties and on several occasions he denied the
student organization Dhabahtuna permission to demonstrate.
Iraqi Refugees
Jordan hosts at least 500,000 Iraqi refugees, the majority of whom arrived after
2003 (only Syria hosts a comparable number of Iraqis). After Iraqis killed 57 people
in the Amman hotel bombings of November 2005, Jordan’s traditional tolerance
toward Iraqis eroded. Jordan’s government, which does not have an established
mechanism to determine refugee status, has practically shut its land borders
and airport to fleeing Iraqis, and continued in 2007 to deport visa overstayers
despite official promises to recognize their right to stay. The office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Jordan greatly expanded its
still inadequate provision of asylum seeker cards to Iraqis, but, in deference to
the government, only exceptionally provides them with refugee documents.
Ending its ban of prior years, Jordan admitted Iraqi children to public schools for
the 2007-2008 school year.
Migrant Worker Rights
Reports documenting abuses of mostly Southeast Asian migrants working in
Jordan’s Qualified Industrial Zones led the government to shut down some factories,
help transfer abused workers to other employers, and waive fines for visa
overstayers. Nevertheless, there are few criminal prosecutions of abusive employers,
and abusive conditions continue including beatings, long working hours,
withholding of passports and paychecks, pay discrimination based on sex or
nationality, preventing workers from leaving the work site at any time, and denying
medical care. The provisions of Jordan’s labor code, including the right to
unionize, exclude non-Jordanians as well as agricultural and domestic workers. In
early October the governor of Zarqa had Bangladeshi workers detained for striking.
Key International Actors
The United States gave Jordan US$532 million in economic and security-related
assistance in 2007 (compared to the European Union’s €265 million for 2007-
2010), praising Jordan’s cooperation in the so-called global war on terrorism. US
Ambassador David Hale was quick to praise Jordan’s municipal elections, and a
US congressional bill further praised these elections, causing disbelief among
Jordanians who witnessed the electoral fraud.
The United Kingdom continues to try to return at least two Jordanians to Jordan,
saying that it relies on a 2005 memorandum of understanding with Jordan to prevent
torture, under which the government permits Adaleh, a Jordanian NGO with
limited experience and little track record of criticizing the government, to monitor
the treatment of a returned detainee.