Jordan
Jordan made little progress in changing law or practice restricting the exercise of
basic rights such as freedom of expression, association, and assembly. The
National Agenda, a project initiated by King Abdullah II in 2005, recommended
reforms but the government and parliament have not yet passed any of the promised
legislation to enact them, such as a political parties bill, an election law, and
amendments to the public assemblies, welfare societies, and journalism and
publication laws.
The king appointed a new prime minister and cabinet in November 2005 and a
new intelligence chief in December. The lower house of parliament, which must
ratify laws and international agreements, approved four international human
rights treaties in 2006, but did not initiate legislation or exercise effective government
oversight.
A new counterterrorism law that maintains provisions allowing a military prosecutor
to detain a suspect for up to seven days without charge, and expands prosecutorial
powers to freeze bank accounts and restrict suspects’ international travel,
came into force November 1. The government withdrew its proposal in an early
draft of the law to extend the time suspects could be held without charge to two
weeks.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and the Death Penalty
The General Intelligence Department (GID) arrests suspects mostly in the name of
counterterrorism and detains them at its own detention facility for prolonged periods
(in excess of the permitted seven days), often without charge or on baseless
charges. The GID routinely denies detainees access to legal representation, and
allows family visits with considerable delay, if at all. Most security detainees
allege torture and ill-treatment to extract confessions, in the form of beatings and
psychological abuse such as mock executions, sleep deprivation, and prolonged
solitary confinement.
Provincial governors detain persons they deem a “danger to society” under the
crime prevention law without proof of criminal action. Such persons, who usually have committed prior offenses, remain in detention until they can meet a bail
guarantee. If no guarantor comes forward, they remain imprisoned. In 2005 there
were 513 such detentions.
2006 witnessed the most serious prison disturbances in recent years. An attempt
in March to extract two convicts scheduled for execution, Yasir Furaihat and Salim
Bin Suwaid, from their cells in Swaqa prison set Islamist inmates rioting in three
prisons (the two were executed 10 days later). In Juwaida prison Islamists took
prison officials hostage, but Islamic Action Front parliamentarians helped mediate
a peaceful end. In April a search of a Qafqafa prison wing holding Islamists
sparked violent clashes during which one prisoner died. Officials had rejected an
offer of mediation. Following these incidents, prison officials put many Islamist
detainees in prolonged solitary confinement and sharply limited the number and
duration of visits as well as visitor eligibility and the items they could bring. In
August Islamist prisoners in Swaqa prison went on hunger strike to demand better
conditions, including an end to solitary confinement.
The execution of Furaihat and Bin Suwaid was for the 2002 killing of US diplomat
Lawrence Foley. The State Security Court in 2006 passed death sentences on several
other persons for involvement in terrorism, including Sajida al-Rishawi, an
Iraqi woman who confessed to participating in the bombing of three hotels in
Amman in November 2005.
In a positive move, the government in August amended four laws to reduce their
penalties from death to hard labor.
Human Rights Defenders
Jordanian human rights organizations published reports highly critical of government
policy and practice, and Jordan became the first Arab country to invite the
UN special rapporteur on torture. The Arab Organization for Human Rights (AOHR)
in July reported on torture, arbitrary detention, inhumane prison conditions, and a
lack of judicial oversight. In response, the head of the Public Security Department
sent the organization a private letter accusing it of slandering public officials. As
a consequence of the prison riots, officials denied a request by the Public
Liberties Committee of the lower house of parliament for access to prisons, as well as a request by the AOHR and the Engineers’ Association’s human rights
committee (which had visited other prisons between October and December
2005) to visit Jafr prison. Only the National Center for Human Rights (NCHR) and
the special rapporteur had access to Jafr prison and the GID detention facility. The
NCHR and the AOHR called for the closure of Jafr—which the special rapporteur
described as a “punishment centre”— and reported allegations of torture at the
GID facility.
The government and parliament increasingly consulted human rights organizations
on draft laws under discussion. The Adaleh Center for Human Rights Studies
advised on changes to the welfare societies law; the Center for Defending
Freedom of Journalists published detailed legal analysis regarding a draft journalism
and publications law; and the NCHR presented its observations on the draft
counterterrorism law. Parliament passed the counterterrorism law without taking
these observations into account, however. The other two laws remain in draft,
with parliamentarians so far rejecting the suggested changes that would make
the laws compliant with international human rights standards.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Criticisms of the king and the intelligence forces are strictly taboo and carry serious
penalties. Articles of the penal code criminalize speech slandering public
officials, criticizing the king, and harming relations with other states. Although
government officials said that these laws would no longer be enforced, and would
eventually be cancelled, criminal charges against government critics remained frequent.
For example, the military prosecutor at the State Security Court (SSC) in
November filed charges, later dropped, of insulting the king and of causing sectarian
strife against Adnan Abu Odeh, a former head of the Royal Court, for
remarks he made in an interview with Al Jazeera. In a highly irregular trial, the
SSC in August also found members of parliament Muhammad Abu Faris and Ali
Abu Sukkar guilty of stirring up sectarian strife for their visit to Abu Mus’ab al-
Zarqawi’s wake, where Abu Faris called al-Zarqawi (the Jordanian-born head of al
Qaeda in Iraq), a martyr, but not the victims of his violence.
Security forces in April detained for six days al-Sabeel journalist ‘Izz al-Din Ahmad
as he was returning from interviewing a senior Hamas member in Syria. Security
forces in June and again in August briefly arrested Yasir Abu Hilalah, Al Jazeera’s
Amman bureau chief, during interviews with relatives or supporters of al-Zarqawi.
Intelligence officers detained Fahd al-Rimawi, chief editor of al-Majd newspaper,
in May for several hours over an article the GID claimed contained false information.
In September reporters covering a Human Rights Watch report on the intelligence
forces’ use of arbitrary arrests and torture received intimidating phone calls
from the GID.
The governor of Amman in May twice refused permission for an Islamic Action
Front demonstration, the first entitled “Yes to the Right of Return, No to an
Alternative Homeland,” and the second, on the occasion of Jordan’s independence
day. In September the governor banned an Islamic Action Front demonstration
to protest Pope Benedict XVI’s remarks regarding Islam. Jordanian law obliges
organizers of public gatherings to seek permission from the relevant governor
three days in advance. A governor can withhold permission without giving a reason.
Iraqi Refugees
Jordan hosts at least 500,000 Iraqi refugees, the majority of whom arrived after
2003 (only Syria hosts a comparable number of Iraqis). After Iraqis killed 57 people
in the Amman hotel bombings of November 2005, Jordan’s traditional tolerance
toward Iraqis eroded. Jordan’s government, which does not have an established
mechanism to determine refugee status, shortened the length of tourist
visas for Iraqis, deported visa overstayers, and prevented increasing numbers of
Iraqis from entering. The office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Jordan only exceptionally recognizes Iraqis as refugees, instead providing
applicants with asylum seeker cards. Jordan does not always respect asylum
seeker status and the protection it entails against deportation. In 2006
Jordan barred Iraqi refugee children without residency permits from attending
Jordanian public and private schools.
Migrant Worker Rights
Reports documenting abuses of mostly Southeast Asian migrants working in
Jordan’s Qualified Industrial Zones induced the government to increase the number
of inspectors and to install an emergency hotline. Reported abuse included
beatings, long working hours, withholding of passports and paychecks, pay discrimination
based on sex or nationality, preventing workers from leaving the work
site at any time, and denying medical care. The provisions of Jordan’s labor code,
including the right to unionize, exclude non-Jordanians as well as agricultural and
domestic workers. In early October the governor of Zarqa had Bangladeshi workers
detained for striking.
Key International Actors
The United States gave Jordan US$510 million assistance in 2006 (compared to
the European Union’s €73 million). Jordan’s dependence on US assistance led
parliamentarians to approve a bilateral immunity agreement with the US in
January that obligates Jordan not to surrender to the International Criminal Court
US citizens (and non-citizens working for the US government) under Jordanian
jurisdiction, even if the ICC seeks their extradition for genocide, war crimes, or
crimes against humanity (US legislation in 2004 conditioned foreign economic
assistance for ICC states parties on countries’ ratifying such an agreement).
The United Kingdom concluded a memorandum of understanding with Jordan in
2005 under which Jordan undertook not to mistreat persons the UK deports to
Jordan. Human Rights Watch has found that such promises do nothing to reduce
the risk of torture or to satisfy the sending country’s obligation not to deport people
to the risk of torture. Jordanian officials have admitted that this agreement is
not enforceable in court, leaving a rupture in UK-Jordanian relations as the highest
sanction. The UK has not in the past strongly criticized human rights violations
in Jordan. Abu Qatada, a Jordanian residing in the UK, has challenged his
deportation to Jordan, claiming a risk of ill-treatment.