Kazakhstan
Despite hopes for meaningful reform, spurred by the country’s selection as the
2010 chair of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE),
human rights in Kazakhstan improved little in 2008. Draft laws on election legislation
and mass media fell short of promised improvements, and parliament is
considering legislation that observers fear would severely restrict the right to
manifest religion or belief.
Kazakhstan’s bid for the OSCE chairmanship was controversial because of its
poor human rights record. Responding to OSCE members’ concerns, Foreign
Minister Marat Tazhin pledged in November 2007 that Kazakhstan would take
several reform steps prior to assuming the chairmanship. These included amending
the media law, reforming the law on elections, and liberalizing the registration
requirements for political parties by the end of 2008. Tazhin further pledged that
Kazakhstan would incorporate recommendations by the OSCE’s Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) into its election legislation
and promised not to weaken the ODIHR during its chairmanship. Minister Tazhin’s
pledges were unprecedented and welcome, but so far have not resulted in meaningful
reform.
Election Legislation
At the start of 2008 the government established a working group of government
and civil society representatives to address election law reform. Members of the
working group reported that they were prevented from considering the repeal of
seriously flawed provisions: for example, there are currently no term limits for
Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbaev, he has sweeping powers to dissolve parliament,
can appoint a third of the members of the upper chamber, and chooses
the chair and two members of the seven-member Central Election Commission.
On November 11, the government sent to parliament a raft of amendments to
election-related legislation. These leave unchanged the requirement that political
parties gain at least seven percent of the vote to be represented in parliament.
They stipulate that at least two political forces must be represented in parliament
(no doubt a response to strong criticism of the 2007 parliamentary elections, which produced a single-party parliament). If only one party gets past the seven
percent threshold, parliamentary seats may be distributed to the party garnering
the next largest number of votes. Other draft amendments include lowering from
50,000 to 40,000 the minimum number of supporters for a party to be registered.
Freedom of Expression and Information
Most media outlets in Kazakhstan remain de facto under government control
through a variety of direct and indirect means. Of some 2,500 functioning media
outlets, the government owns a growing proportion outright. In March 2008
Samgau, a state-owned company, purchased all the remaining privately-held
stock in Khabar, once the country’s most important private media group. In July
the government combined its media assets, including Khabar, into a special holding
company, Arna Media.
In February 2008 the Ministry of Culture, Information and Public Accord declined
for the second time a draft media law—including key reforms on registering
media outlets—proposed by a working group of civil society representatives. After
creating a new working group, the government hedged on supporting reforms,
such that the media rights organization Adil Soz called the resulting draft law at
best “a tiny first step” toward international standards.
One of the weaknesses of this draft law is that it focuses solely on media operations,
while ignoring other relevant criminal and administrative law. For example,
the government failed to enact essential reforms on criminal libel, which is often
invoked to intimidate journalists and political critics. In the first six months of
2008 authorities opened seven criminal cases against journalists for alleged
libel, slander, and defamation. In 2007 there were 27 such cases.
In April 2008 authorities released Kazis Toguzbaev, a journalist sentenced to two
years in prison in January 2007 for insulting President Nazarbaev in articles he
wrote criticizing the government, and expunged his verdict. The judges concluded
that Toguzbaev had “demonstrated by his behavior that he was reformed.” The
release is welcome, but so long as such a broad criminal libel regime remains in
place, others risk spending time and effort in defending themselves against it. In
August 2008 a court in Shymkent ordered the release of Nurlan Alimbekov, a philosopher arrested in 2007 on charges flowing from an email he wrote questioning
Kazakhstan’s close relationship with Russia, which the government
argued constituted incitement of racial hatred. Authorities had confined
Alimbekov to a high-security psychiatric institution. Although the court freed him
to return home, it did not dismiss the charges or conclude that Alimbekov was
mentally fit under the law—only that his “treatment” does not currently require
institutionalization.
In February 2008 an Astana court ordered the independent newspaper Law and
Justice closed on grounds that it was improperly registered. Editors at the paper
believed the case to be politically motivated: it had recently published allegations
of corruption among the judiciary.
Beginning in April, the government-controlled internet monopoly Kaztelecom
blocked access to the English- and Kazakh-language services of Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty for seven weeks. The sites were made available again after
expressions of concern from key international actors. The websites of several
political opposition movements remain blocked.
Freedom of Religion
Kazakh authorities continue to restrict freedom of religion, primarily by pursuing
members of “non-traditional” religions. Addressing members of Kazakhstan’s ruling
political party in January 2008, President Nazarbaev urged lawmakers to take
steps to curb the activities of foreign missionaries. Misleading, fear-promoting
statements about religious minorities in media and government statements continued
during the year. In September a new draft law on religion passed the lower
house of parliament. While the bill was in draft, local human rights groups characterized
it as “repressive,” arguing that it imposes inappropriate restrictions on
religious groups and is open to arbitrary interpretation. The draft law makes a distinction
between religious groups, which have no legal status and therefore no
rights, and religious associations, which must have at least 50 members in a
given locality. A religious association is the only legal entity religious communities
can form. The draft law requires all communities to reregister within 18
months. On October 31 the upper house of parliament returned the draft to the
lower house, requesting several insignificant changes.
Human Rights Defenders
Granting Kazakhstan the OSCE chairmanship has rendered the work of local
human rights groups that press for reform more challenging. On the one hand,
the government has established a number of human rights-related working
groups, including one to draft a National Plan on Human Rights 2008-2011. But
on the other hand, the government deflects or even ignores criticism and proposals
for reform from rights groups, by portraying its 2010 OSCE chairmanship as
evidence that its human rights record is in good order. In July 2008 five local
human rights groups signed a memorandum to jointly monitor the implementation
of the government’s reform promises prior to its OSCE chairmanship.
Key International Actors
The OSCE remained engaged with Kazakhstan throughout 2008 on issues relating
to the promised reforms and the upcoming chairmanship. After a visit to
Kazakhstan in late July, OSCE Chairman-in-Office Alexander Stubb said the OSCE
hoped to see “swift continuation of reforms in fields such as media, elections
and political parties” and encouraged dialogue on other reforms.
Although the United States endorsed Kazakhstan’s bid to chair the OSCE, US officials
remained vocal about the country’s slow progress on democratic and human
rights reforms. In his July testimony before the US Commission on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian
Affairs Richard A. Boucher expressed the administration’s support for
Kazakhstan’s chairmanship but admitted that reforms were uneven. Visiting
Kazakhstan in October, it was reported that Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
raised with President Nazarbaev the commitments for Kazakhstan’s democratic
reform made in November 2007, stressing that the US looked to Kazakhstan “to
show leadership by example and, working closely with OSCE and civil society,
make steady progress toward meeting all of its … commitments, including the
adoption of laws governing independent media and elections,” comments that
suggest the US did not assess Kazakhstan as having made sufficient progress so
far.
In September the European Union underlined “the importance of reforms in view
of the Kazakh Chairmanship of the OSCE, including in the areas of media freedom,
the electoral law and the registration of political parties, as confirmed at the
OSCE ministerial in Madrid in December 2007.” The first round of what is to
become an annual human rights dialogue in the framework of the EU’s Central
Asia strategy was held in mid-October. The EU did not make public what specific
issues it raised or what results the dialogue yielded.