Kazakhstan
Government antagonism toward the political opposition created a hostile
environment in advance of December 2005 presidential elections. New legislation
ostensibly designed to reform the elections process and bolster national
security further weakened civil and political rights in the country.
Kazakh authorities continue to interfere with citizens’ rights to free assembly
and expression, use politically motivated lawsuits to silence independent
media, and limit access to opposition and independent Internet sites. While
laws that would have severely restricted nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) were struck down in 2005, the government intensified pressure on
civil society groups, including foreign NGOs.
Elections
On August 19, 2005, the Constitutional Council of Kazakhstan announced
that presidential elections would be held on December 4—a year earlier than
some had argued was legally mandated. The decision came after heated
debate about the exact length of the president’s term of office, as different
articles of the constitution appeared to contradict one another on this issue.
Opposition politicians complained that holding elections on such short
notice placed them at a significant disadvantage.
The current government dominates all political life in the country, limiting
the options available to the electorate. At the time of the announcement,
only one opposition movement capable of mounting a credible challenge, For
a Fair Kazakhstan (ZSK), was registered. In September, international and
domestic media overwhelmingly predicted a victory for the incumbent,
Nursultan Nazarbaev, who has ruled Kazakhstan since 1989. Opposition
activists warned of popular dissatisfaction if the elections were not free and
fair.
An election law enacted on April 15, 2005 strictly regulates the actions of
foreigners and international organizations. Among other provisions, it bans
foreign support of any political movement and external financing of elections. The law also bans public demonstrations from the day before voting
until after official election results are announced. A new law on national
security, passed on July 8, stipulates heavy fines for international NGOs that
become involved in the election process on behalf of any political movement.
Political Opposition
Kazakh authorities dealt harshly with opposition political groups in 2005.
Reversing one of the most significant steps toward democratic reform it had
taken in recent years, the government filed suit against the leading opposition
party. On January 6, 2005, the Special Economic Court in Almaty shut
down the Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan (DVK), on the ground that a
party statement calling for civil disobedience allegedly posed a threat to
national security. Throughout the appeals process, which the DVK lost, the
authorities harassed and intimidated party supporters. As of this writing, former
DVK leader and co-founder Galimzhan Zhakianov remains in a minimum
security facility where he is serving a seven-year sentence on charges of
abuse of office. He was convicted in 2002 after a trial that was widely condemned
as unfair.
In 2005, supporters of President Nazarbaev attacked the leading opposition
candidate for president, ZSK Chairman Zharmahan Tuiakbai, on at least two
occasions. On April 9, a brick narrowly missed Tuiakbai at a rally in eastern
Kazakhstan and, on May 2, some fifty men stormed a ZSK meeting, declaring
their intention to kill Tuiakbai “for Nazarbaev.” A police investigation
into the incident yielded one arrest, which resulted in probation. On the
night of September 25, an arsonist reportedly used Molotov cocktails to
destroy the Kostanai office of the ZSK.
Civil Society
Although the Constitutional Council in 2005 struck down two laws that
would have substantially circumscribed the activities of NGOs, serious
administrative harassment of such groups continues to mar Kazakhstan’s
rights record. Following political upheavals in other post-Soviet states,
Kazakh tax authorities began audits of at least thirty-three international organizations operating in the country. NGO activists viewed these probes as
government intimidation.
The rights to free assembly and expression continue to be circumscribed. In
one particularly serious incident, police and Special Forces (OMON) officers
detained about eighty people on May 1, 2005, in the capital, Astana, after
they had participated in a public rally and pop concert in support of a presidential
policy initiative. Law enforcement agents detained and beat young
people wearing orange scarves and carrying orange balloons as they left the
rally. Police told the detainees that wearing orange was a problem because of
its symbolic role in the political unrest in Ukraine. Detainees were threatened
with expulsion from university or destruction of their businesses. The
organizers themselves were charged with holding an “unsanctioned procession”
despite the fact that the concert had been approved by the local government.
Press Freedom
The government uses politically-motivated lawsuits extensively to silence
independent media. Government agencies use laws making it a crime to
insult the “honor and dignity” of the president, legislators, or other authorities
(articles 318, 319, and 320 of the criminal code) to punish media outlets
that publish information critical of the president or his government. The law
does not require that the offending statements be false in order to trigger
heavy penalties. In May 2005, the leading independent newspaper,
Respublika, was ordered closed following a court decision dissolving the company
that published it. The decision followed a government lawsuit over the
paper’s reprint of an interview with a Russian politician who allegedly made
disparaging remarks about the Kazakh state and people. Authorities also
interfered with the printing of Set’kz (Network KZ), the successor to
Respublika, under the pretext of problems with the paper’s license.
In March, the newspaper Soz (Voice) lost its appeal against a five-milliontenge
(U.S.$40,000) fine levied in an “honor and dignity” lawsuit filed by the
National Security Committee (KNB, successor to the KGB). Although Soz paid the judgment in full, the KNB pressed the courts to stop publication of
the paper, and printing was halted briefly in early June.
The Kazakh government continues to limit access to opposition and independent
Internet sites through the government-run provider, Kaztelecom,
and another major network, Nursat.
Human Rights Defenders
On March 3, 2005, Kazakhstan’s ombudsman, Bolot Baikadamov, accused the
country’s leading human rights organization, the Kazakh International
Bureau of Human Rights and Rule of Law (KIBHR), of publishing biased
information and distorting the situation in Kazakhstan in its reports on
human rights developments. Baikadamov’s comments were made directly to
the president, but were later publicized. In mid-August the offices of the
KIBHR were burglarized; the organization’s staff believed the incident was
politically motivated.
Key International Actors
United States
The U.S. government budgeted an estimated $74.2 million in assistance to
Kazakhstan in 2004, more than half of which was allocated to security and
law enforcement programs. U.S. aid also went to bolstering health care, civil
society programs, and market reform. An annual report on human rights
released by the State Department’s Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and
Labor in February said the Kazakh government “severely limited citizens’
right to change their government.” In September, members of the
Commission for Security and Cooperation in Europe voiced doubts about
Kazakhstan’s bid for chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The senators pointed to the upcoming
presidential election as a test of Kazakhstan’s commitment to democracy. In
October 2005, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice visited Kazakhstan
on a tour of Central Asian states and praised the republic as an “island of stability.” She held meetings with President Nazarbaev and leading opposition
presidential candidate Zharmahan Tuiakbai. Another opposition figure, Tolen
Tokhtasynov, was arrested en route to his meeting with Secretary Rice.
European Union
The European Union is currently the single largest source of foreign direct
investment in Kazakhstan. It has had a Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement (PCA) with Kazakhstan since 1999. During its annual
Cooperation Council with Kazakhstan, held in July, and in other public statements,
the E.U. “emphasized the need for increased efforts” on the part of
the Kazakh authorities to “comply fully with international norms and standards…
in particular as regards elections, freedom of media, the ability of
political parties to operate freely and the registration of NGOs with the public
authorities.” The conclusions further expressed the “expectation” that the
forthcoming presidential elections would be free and fair, and noted that “any
country applying for the chairmanship of the OSCE must exemplify the principles
of the Organization.” The E.U., however, again stopped short of using
the PCA to articulate specific reform steps with a clear timeline for compliance.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
The OSCE maintains a center in Almaty. During a February visit to Astana,
OSCE Chairman-in-Office Dimitrij Rupel urged the government of
Kazakhstan to implement substantial political reform and lamented the fact
that the parliament was “largely devoid of any opposition party representation.”
After changes to the election law brought about restrictions on free
assembly, the OSCE publicly urged the president to refer the new regulations
to the Constitutional Council. The OSCE also voiced concerns about
new national security legislation and hosted forums on human rights, the
environment, and journalism.
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Kazakhstan hosted the 2005 summit of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) in Astana. The organization’s members are Russia,
China, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan. High on the
agenda was cooperation in the fight against “terrorism, extremism, and separatism,”
which was considered especially pressing given the brewing international
tension over the government of Uzbekistan’s insistence that its neighbors
forcibly return Uzbek citizens wanted by Uzbekistan for terrorism. The
Uzbek government has claimed that terrorists were responsible for the massacre
in Andijan on May 13, 2005. (See Uzbekistan.)
Kazakhstan became involved in an international standoff over the fate of
Lutfullo Shamsuddinov, an Uzbek human rights activist who gathered information
about government abuses on May 13 and who subsequently fled to
Kazakhstan with his family. Shamsuddinov was declared a refugee by the
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Nonetheless,
the Uzbek government demanded that Kazakh authorities extradite
Shamsuddinov on bogus charges of terrorism. The international community
strenuously objected to his forcible return. After detaining him for six days,
the Kazakh government agreed to release Shamsuddinov and he was flown to
safety in another country.