Kazakhstan
During its 2010 chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE), Kazakhstan’s human rights record was marred by continued disappointments.
Restrictive amendments to media and Internet laws remained, and
a number of websites and weblogs were blocked on a regular basis. The government
punished activists for breaking restrictive rules on freedom of assembly.
Several activists were put on trial in 2010 and Kazakhstan’s leading human rights
defender, Evgeniy Zhovtis, remains in prison.
Freedoms of Expression and Information
Government loyalists dominate broadcast media outlets; independent journalists
who criticize government policies and practices face threats and harassment;
there are prohibitive penalties for civil defamation; and criminal penalties for libel
remain in force. Combined, these conditions chill the environment for freedom of
expression. In the first half of 2010 five journalists were physically attacked and
another five accused of criminal libel, according to the media watch dog Adil Soz.
One of the attacked journalists is Igor Larra, of the independent daily Svoboda
Slova. On March 22, 2010, three unidentified men assaulted him in Aktobe,
breaking his nose and jaw and inflicting multiple contusions to his head. In the
weeks prior to the attack Larra had been covering a 19-day strike by oil workers
employed by OzenMunaiGaz. The workers had demanded that the company’s
director resign and that management take back cuts in wages. The biggest shareholder
at OzenMunaiGaz is the state-owned company KazMunaiGaz. According to
Adil Soz, Larra did not file a complaint because he did not trust the authorities to
conduct a proper investigation.
In July 2010 a court upheld an April 21 ruling ordering the independent weekly
Uralskaya Nedelya to pay 20 million tenge (US$136,000) in “moral damages” to
Tengizneftestroi, an oil company. The weekly had published an article in August
2009 criticizing the company for being so sure of winning a tender that it had
hired workers and bought equipment before the tender was even published. The
company confirmed these facts during the trial hearing, raising doubt about the
grounds for the ruling.
The authorities denied parole to imprisoned journalist Ramazan Yesergepov, editor
of the newspaper Alma-Ata Info, after he had completed one-third of his sentence.
Yesergepov was sentenced to three years in prison in 2009 for disclosing
state secrets, because his newspaper had published information from a letter
from the Committee for National Security in which the agency appeared to be
attempting to sway a criminal investiation against a local businessman.
Yesergepov’s trial was not open to the public, and he was denied access to a
lawyer of his choice.
On March 1, 2010 the head of the government’s Agency for Information and
Networks stated that a computer emergency response team had been established
and had started to develop “a blacklist of destructive websites.” The same official
mentioned that religious and political websites in particular would be considered
for the list. Currently blocked are more than a dozen websites, including the popular
Russian-language blogging platform Livejournal and the website of the independent
weekly Respublika.
Freedom of Assembly
On March 26, 2010, a court sentenced Vladimir Kozlov, a leading activist with the
opposition party Alga!, to 10 days of administrative arrest on charges of holding
an unsanctioned protest. The charges were brought because Kozlov had distributed
leaflets criticizing the trial and sentencing of Mukhtar Dzhakishev, the former
director the state-owned nuclear company KazAtomProm, whose imprisonment
many believe is politically motivated. Kozlov had distributed the leaflets
along a pedestrian zone in Almaty; other individuals distributing commercial
leaflets at the same time where not arrested.
On May 2, 2010, Yermek Narymbaev, leader of the Arman (Dream) social movement,
was sentenced to 15 days’ administrative arrest for allegedly holding a
peaceful unsanctioned mass gathering of 500 people on May 1. During his arrest,
he was additionally charged with resisting the police and offending the judge at
his trial on May 2. On June 23, a court sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment.
In June 2010, courts fined at least five individuals—three journalists and two
human rights activists—for organizing and participating in unsanctioned meetings
and disobeying the authorities. In each case, the individual had staged a
one-person picket on Almaty’s main square protesting the highly controversial
law, adopted that month, giving President Nursultan Nazarbaev lifetime immunity
from prosecution.
Detention of Activists
In July 2010 a court in Aktobe sentenced Aidos Sadykov, a longtime opposition
political activist who had assisted oil workers in creating an independent union,
to two years’ imprisonment for “hooliganism accompanied by resistance to the
police,” in what appears to be a politically motivated set-up. On May 27, Sadykov
was arrested for attacking an unknown man, despite evidence that he was himself
attacked and did not retaliate against the attacker. When Sadykov was
already handcuffed he resisted police attempts to put the cell phone of the
attacker in his pocket. During his court hearing the judge twice declined to show
a video that a journalist had recorded shortly after the arrest, which could have
proved Sadykov’s innocence.
September 3, 2010 marked the one-year anniversary of the imprisonment of
Kazakhstan’s most prominent human rights defender, Evgeniy Zhovtis. On
September 3, 2009, Zhovtis, founding director of the Kazakhstan International
Bureau for Human Rights and the Rule of Law, was found guilty of vehicular
manslaughter, following an unfair trial marred by serious procedural flaws that
denied him the right to present a defense. Zhovtis was sentenced to four years in
a settlement colony, a penal establishment which allows for more freedoms than
an ordinary prison. The facilty’s director had the discretion to allow Zhovtis to live
and work outside the establishment but chose not to do so.
On April 26, 2010, the Supreme Court of Kazakhstan declined to review Zhovtis’
verdict.
Risk of Refoulement
Since the entry into force in January 2010 of the Law on Refugees, the Kazakh
government renewed pressure on refugees and asylum seekers from Uzbekistan
who are devout Muslims and fear religious persecution in Uzbekistan. More than
70 asylum seekers and refugees signed a letter to Human Rights Watch stating
that when they applied for asylum, migration officials tried to convince them that
they have nothing to fear in Uzbekistan.
In June Kazakh authorities rounded up more than 40 Uzbek nationals in Almaty,
almost all of whom were registered asylum seekers. Some were released, and at
this writing some 31 remain in detention in Kazakhstan, pursuant to extradition
requests from the Uzbek government. While the charges on which the Uzbek
authorities are seeking extradition have not been made public, they are reportedly
related to religious extremism. There is significant, credible evidence that persons
prosecuted in Uzbekistan on religious extremism charges face a grave risk of
torture or other forms of ill-treatment in detention. Despite these risks,
Kazakhstan extradited to Uzbekistan four men; two of them are ethnic Uzbeks but
citizens of Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan.
Labor Abuses and Child Labor in Agriculture
Farmers employing migrant workers from Kyrgyzstan on farms supplying tobacco
to Philip Morris Kazakhstan (PMK), a subsidiary of Philip Morris International
(PMI) did not provide workers with written contracts or pay them for periods of
eight to nine months of employment. They confiscated some workers’ passports
and subjected some to forced labor. Child labor remains a serious problem in
tobacco and cotton farming, which employs children as young as 10. Experts
agree that tobacco and cotton farming are two of the worst forms of child labor
worldwide owing to the difficulty of the work and the risks associated with exposure
to pesticides and tobacco leaves. Beginning in 2010 PMI and PMK
have revised their contracts with tobacco farmers to ensure that migrant workers
receive regular wages and other protections. PMI and PMK have also committed
to implement a mechanism for complaints; to expand training for workers, farmers,
and PMK employees regarding labor rights and hazards of child labor; and to develop summer camps and work with the government to facilitate access to
schools for migrant workers’ children to prevent child labor.
Key International Actors
Key international actors, notably members of the OSCE, uncritically pledged their
support for and cooperation with Kazakhstan during its OSCE chairmanship in
2010. They generally failed to use the chairmanship and Kazakhstan’s bid to hold
a summit at the end of 2010 as a lever to push for outstanding reforms.
During a United Nations Security Council discussion on February 5, the United
Kingdom stressed that the role of the OSCE chairmanship “brings with it important
responsibilities to promote and embody the principles of human rights … on
which the OSCE is founded.” During a meeting with President Nursultan
Nazarbaev on April 11, 2010, United States President Barack Obama said the US
would continue to support democratic reforms in Kazakhstan, but fell short of
expressing concern about Kazakhstan’s human rights performance.
On February 12, during Kazakhstan’s Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human
Rights Council, UN member states raised many concerns about media freedoms.
They recommended that Kazakhstan adopt a moratorium on criminal libel, establish
a cap on defamation awards in civil suits, stop any attempt to filter internet
content or block access to websites, and refrain from adding further unwarranted
restrictions to Kazakhstan’s media law. Kazakhstan committed to implement
most of these recommendations, but denied that its laws criminalize defamation
by journalists and rejected allegations of abusive regulation of Internet content.
During a visit to Kazakhstan in April, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged the
government to implement the UPR recommendations, noting that “a robust and
engaged civil society—with full guarantees of free speech and media, and tolerance
for ethnic and religious diversity—is a powerful force for modernization.”
Following its May 2010 review of Kazakhstan, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights noted “with concern the low level of awareness of
human rights in general, and of the Covenant in particular” and expressed deep
concern about “the precarious situation of migrant workers.”