Kazakhstan
Mired in an international corruption scandal and taking a heavy hand to
its political rivals, the government of Kazakhstan has done little to dispel
critics’ perceptions of its policies as increasingly predatory and
authoritarian.
Corruption is pervasive in Kazakhstan. In 2004 Transparency
International gave Kazakhstan one of its worst ratings, and identified it
as part of a global phenomenon of oil-rich states with excessive levels of
corruption. The Kazakhgate oil funds corruption scandal, which began
in 1999, has tarnished the government’s reputation at home and abroad.
President Nursultan Nazarbaev wins international praise for taking
half-steps toward human rights reform and for refraining from further
backtracking, though he has presided over few improvements in practice.
Instead, the government continues its aggressive persecution of
independent media and the political opposition. State antagonism
toward critical media was particularly heated in advance of September
2004parliamentary elections.
Persecution of Independent Media
The government of Kazakhstan has made some preliminary moves to
improve its poor reputation with respect to media freedoms. For
instance, in January 2004 it paroled Sergei Duvanov, an independent
journalist and fierce government critic convicted in 2003 on questionable
rape charges. President Nazarbaev also vetoed a highly restrictive
media law after it was widely criticized abroad and deemed unconstitutional
by the country’s Constitutional Council.
But these moves do not indicate a policy shift. Kazakh television, the
main source of news for the country’s population, remains dominated
either by government or pro-government media. The government’s fierce intolerance for critical media reached new heights in the run-up
to parliamentary elections. On July 22, 2004, the president ordered foreign
media to include praise of the government and its policies along
with any criticism, and reportedly said that his lawyers were prepared to
sue foreign media who “discredit the country.”
Indeed, the government uses politically motivated lawsuits to intimidate
and shut down domestic media that are critical of the government or
cover such sensitive issues as corruption. One such lawsuit resulted in
the closure of a leading opposition newspaper, SolDat (Let Me Speak),
in July 2003. In 2004, a bizarre set of events resulted in the closure of
the Assandi Times. On June 2, 2004, a fake version of the Assandi Times
filled with stories that misrepresented the political opposition was circulated
throughout Almaty. The editorial staff issued a statement that disavowed
the fake edition of the paper and expressed the staff’s belief that
“the presidential administration or…people close to it” were responsible.
The administration sued for defamation. The court found in favor
of the government, fined the newspaper, and ordered its bank account
and property seized. This effectively closed down the main opposition
newspaper in the country just two months prior to parliamentary elections.
In August, the paper regrouped and began publishing under its
former name, Respublica.
Critical newspapers are also the targets of anonymous violence presumably
aiming to intimidate dissent. In August 2004, the office of an independent
newspaper in southern Kazakhstan was attacked by unidentified
men who threw Molotov cocktails through the windows. The incident,
which did not cause injuries or the destruction of the office, was
nonetheless reminiscent of the firebombing of the Respublica premises
two years earlier. The editor of the paper speculated that the attack may
have been in retaliation for the newspaper’s coverage of the parliamentary
election campaign or its pieces about local organized crime.
Persecution of Political Opponents
The government harasses members and supporters of Kazakhstan’s
opposition political parties, including through arbitrary criminal and
misdemeanor charges and threats of job dismissal, often aimed at preventing
the individuals from running for public office.
The continued incarceration of Galimzhan Zhakianov, the leader of the
Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan (DVK), revealed the government’s
resistance to genuine political competition. Zhakianov was convicted in
2002, following an unfair trial on charges that have been widely viewed
as politically motivated. In August 2004, authorities transferred him to a
low-security settlement, where he remains under police supervision.
Security officials have repeatedly tried to “convince” him to drop out of
political life altogether in exchange for his release. In apparent response
to his refusal, authorities are threatening new criminal charges against
Zhakianov. He has also been denied his rights to reside in his home
town and work while under the supervision of the settlement authorities.
DVK co-founder Mukhtar Abliazov was also apparently pressured to
disavow his political affiliation and halt his political activities as a condition
for release from prison in May 2003.
Obstacles to Political Participation
President Nazarbaev’s government was rightly applauded for registering
several key opposition parties, including the DVK. However, the government
failed to provide the level playing field necessary for free and
fair parliamentary elections in September 2004.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Council of Europe found that the elections “fell short” of international standards, citing unbalanced election commissions and media bias
favoring pro-presidential parties.
Local groups also voiced concern about the lack of voter education
regarding the introduction of electronic voting, the disqualification of
the leader of the centrist Ak-Zhol party, and unconfirmed reports that
the pro-presidential Asar party, headed by Nazarbaev’s daughter,
coerced people on the government payroll to join the party or risk losing
their jobs.
The OSCE and the Council of Europe criticized the vote count, citing
compromised voter lists, voters turned away at the polling station, and
the significant discrepancy between paper and electronic voter lists. In
many cases domestic observers were reportedly “denied full access to
polling station procedures, in spite of new legislation which allows them
access.” International observers noted with dissatisfaction that the government
failed to implement a number of positive changes that had
been introduced with the April 2004 election law.
In the end, President Nazarbaev’s Otan party swept the elections, claiming
forty-two of seventy-seven possible seats. The pro-presidential
AIST and Asar parties were in second and third place respectively. The
official tally gave the DVK no seats in parliament.
Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs)
In 2003 the government attempted to pass legislation specifying that
NGOs must be found by the government to be engaged in “useful”
activity in order to obtain registration. President Nazarbaev withdrew
the bill in October 2003 only after it met with almost universal condemnation
from the local and international human rights communities.
But local NGOs report continued government harassment through
intimidating visits and threats by security and law enforcement agencies, arbitrary investigations by the tax police, and surveillance by law
enforcement and security agents.
Fueling the AIDS Epidemic
Human rights abuse against injection drug users and sex workers in
Kazakhstan is fueling one of the fastest-growing AIDS epidemics in the
world and threatening the country’s economic and social development.
Human Rights Watch has documented instances of police brutality, lack
of due process, and harassment and stigmatization that drive drug users
and sex workers underground and impede their access to life-saving
HIV prevention services.
The government of Kazakhstan has failed to review government legislation
regarding HIV/AIDS in order to bring it into compliance with
international standards on HIV/AIDS and human rights. It has not
expanded prevention and treatment services for all persons affected by
HIV/AIDS, nor has it addressed abusive police practices toward drug
users, in particular toward those seeking to access, or who have
accessed, needle exchange services for HIV prevention.
International Cooperation
The government has taken several half-steps toward better compliance
with international standards, but still needs to follow through to make
these steps meaningful. For instance, the government at last signed on
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, but
failed to ratify these instruments.
Similarly, the government extended an invitation to the U.N. Special
Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, who visited
the country in June 2004. Local and international rights groups called
for caution in assessing this move as progress, noting that true progress would be made only if and when the Kazakh government implements
the Special Rapporteur’s resulting recommendations.
The government took an important step toward abolition of the death
penalty when it adopted a moratorium on state executions in January
2004.
Key International Actors
The OSCE plays an active role in advocating for improvement in
Kazakhstan’s rights record. On July 22, 2004, the OSCE representative
for media freedom, Miklos Haraszti, expressed his organization’s objections
to the heavy fine against the Assandi Times. “My first concern is
that this decision will force Assandi Times, a major opposition news outlet,
out of business, de facto annihilating the newspaper,” he said.
Following a July 2004 Cooperation Council meeting between the
European Union and Kazakhstan regarding the parties’ Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement (PCA), the E.U. cautioned that “a positive
assessment of the [September parliamentary] elections would be an
essential consideration in any decision on the bid of the Republic of
Kazakhstan to hold Chairmanship of the OSCE in 2009.” The bulk of
the E.U. statement, however, failed to hold Kazakhstan to the standards
set forth in the PCA and instead essentially praised the Nazarbaev government
for its half-measures toward reform.
The U.S. government certified in 2004 that Kazakhstan had complied
with the human rights standards on which military and other assistance
is conditioned. In May 2004, the U.S. State Department announced
that Kazakhstan had made “significant improvements in the protection
of human rights in the last six months.”