K8Q8B?JK8E
Kazakhstan failed to carry out long-promised human rights reforms in the year
following its chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE). Instead, its rights record suffered further setbacks. Control of
the penitentiary systems moved from the Ministry of Justice to the Ministry of
Internal Affairs, putting prisons back in police control, and a new restrictive religion
law was adopted. Websites were blocked and legal amendments limiting
media freedoms remained. A union lawyer was imprisoned for six years for
speaking out on workers’ rights. The government continued to punish activists
for breaking restrictive rules on freedom of assembly and Kazakhstan’s leading
human rights defender, Evgeniy Zhovtis, remains in prison.
National Referendum and Presidential Elections
In January 2011 parliament voted in favor of holding a national referendum to
extend President Nursultan Nazarbaev’s term in office. The European Union and
United States sharply criticized the proposal, with the US calling it a “setback
for democracy in Kazakhstan.”
President Nazarbaev vetoed the referendum, but called for early presidential
elections, which took place on April 3. According to the Central Election
Committee, the incumbent received 95.55 percent of the vote with an 89.99
percent turnout. The OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights (ODIHR) concluded that “serious irregularities” marred the poll, and the
US Mission to the OSCE warned that “such irregularities are not in keeping with
Kazakhstan’s OSCE commitments … to hold elections that meet OSCE standards.”
Opposition groups criticized the early election and urged citizens to
boycott the poll.
Freedom of Expression
The environment for freedom of expression remains restrictive and marked by
government loyalists dominating broadcast media outlets, harassment of independent
journalists, prohibitive penalties for civil defamation, and criminal penalties for libel. Local human rights groups voiced concern over a draft
broadcast bill that would limit independent media broadcasting if adopted.
Media watch dog Adil Soz reported that seven journalists were physically
attacked in the first half of 2011. They included Daniyar Moldashev, director of
the Almaty publishing house that prints the Respublika and Golos Respubliki
opposition newspapers, who was beaten and robbed by unknown individuals
on March 25. In late October, two Stan.TV journalists were attacked with a
baseball bat and shot with rubber bullets by four unknown assailants while
covering the oil strikes in Aktau, western Kazakhstan. Adil Soz reported that
another 12 journalists were accused of criminal libel in the same period,
although in August an Aktobe court dismissed a libel suit against Alima
Abdirova, a human rights activist and journalist.
On August 19 the authorities blocked the popular Russian-language blogging
platform Livejournal after an Astana city prosecutor claimed the site distributed
information of a religious extremist and terrorist nature. In June authorities temporarily
blocked Wordpress.com alleging its publications contain illegal information.
Other popular independent websites, including that of the independent
weekly Respublika, remain blocked.
On August 16 the authorities denied parole for the fourth time to imprisoned
journalist Ramazan Yesergepov, editor of the Alma-Ata Info newspaper, but permitted
him to spend a week with his ill mother in September. In a 2009 closed
trial marred by due process violations, Yesergepov was sentenced to three
years in prison for disclosing state secrets.
Freedom of Assembly
Kazakh authorities maintain restrictive rules on freedom of assembly and
detained and fined activists and other individuals for organizing and/or participating
in unsanctioned protests and pickets. Work on a draft law on peaceful
assembly remained suspended.
In two separate incidents in January small groups of activists in Almaty and
Urals were detained and fined for protesting against the proposed referendum
to extend President Nazarbaev’s rule. In August three activists of the Socialist Movement of Kazakhstan were sentenced to short term administrative sentences
after staging a protest in support of the striking oil workers outside the
Nur-Otan party office in Almaty.
In mid-May workers in the oil sector in western Kazakhstan staged strikes and
labor protests demanding higher wages, revised collective agreements, and
non-interference in union work. On June 5, police dispersed several hundred
workers who tried to protest outside the regional mayor’s office in Aktau, and
temporarily detained and fined several dozen. On July 8 riot police dispersed oil
workers on strike in Zhanaozen, and the following night used force to round-up
workers who remained on a hunger strike. In mid-August Akzhanat Aminov, an
oil worker, was given a two-year suspended sentence for allegedly organizing
an illegal strike.
There was an increased number of protests over housing issues, after the financial
crisis left many unable to pay back home loans. On March 16 an Astana
Court sentenced Esenbek Ukteshbayev, chairman of the unregistered union
Zhanartu and leader of the Almaty-based movement Leave Peoples’ Homes
Alone, to 15 days administrative detention, a day after he participated in a
peaceful rally of estate investors and mortgage holders.
Detention of Activists
On August 8 union lawyer Natalia Sokolova was sentenced to six years in prison
and banned from civil work for three years on charges of “inciting social discord”
for addressing workers about wage disparity and “actively participating in
illegal gatherings” at an oil company in western Kazakhstan. On September 26
her sentence was upheld on appeal, endorsing the government’s violations of
her right to free expression and association.
On August 19 a prison appeals commission rejected political activist Aidos
Sadykov’s latest request to be transferred from prison to a settlement colony, a
penal establishment that allows for more freedoms than an ordinary prison. He
was imprisoned for two years in July 2010 for “hooliganism accompanied by
resistance to the police” in what appears to be a politically motivated set up.
On August 2 Evgeniy Zhovtis, Kazakhstan’s most prominent human rights
defender and head of the Kazakh International Bureau for Human Rights and
the Rule of Law, was denied early release for the second time. On September 3,
2009, Zhovtis was found guilty of vehicular manslaughter, following an unfair
trial marred by serious procedural flaws that effectively denied him the right to
present a defense. Zhovtis was sentenced to four years in a settlement colony.
Risk of Refoulement
On June 9, in blatant violation of international human rights law and the nonrefoulement
principle, Kazakh authorities extradited to Uzbekistan at least 28
men whom Uzbek authorities wanted on various anti-state and religion-related
charges, despite interim measures from the United Nations Committee Against
Torture (CAT) directing the suspension of extraditions, and significant and credible
evidence the men risked being tortured if returned. The men had been
detained a year earlier and were subsequently denied refugee status by Kazakh
authorities. Serious due process violations marred judicial review of their
refugee claims and extradition orders.
On May 30, Kazakh authorities extradited Ershidin Israil to China, despite the
clear risk of torture he faced if returned. Israil, an Uighur refugee who had fled
to Kazakhstan after the July 2009 Urumqi riots, was denied refugee status by
Kazakh authorities.
Labor Abuses and Child Labor in Agriculture
Philip Morris Kazakhstan (PMK), a subsidiary of Philip Morris International,
increased protections for migrant workers on tobacco farms by requiring written
contracts to ensure migrant workers receive regular payments and other protections.
PMK expanded trainings regarding labor rights and child labor and
increased monitoring to prevent abuses frequent in past years such as hazardous
child labor, forced labor, and passport confiscation. The government
continues to prevent migrant workers’ children from accessing education by
blocking them from registering in schools.
Freedom of Religion
In a clear setback for religious freedom, on October 13 President Nazarbaev
signed a restrictive new law, “On Religious Activities and Religious
Associations.” According to Forum 18, an independent international religious
freedom group, the new law “severely restrict[s] freedom of religion and belief”
and “imposes a complex four-tier registration system, bans unregistered religious
activity, imposes compulsory religious censorship and require both central
and local government approval to build or open new places of worship.”
Key International Actors
Kazakhstan’s controversial OSCE chairmanship culminated in a summit in
December 2010 in Astana. NGOs held a parallel OSCE civil society conference
and adopted recommendations to strengthen OSCE states’ implementation of
human dimension commitments and improve cooperation with civil society. On
the eve of the summit, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton held a town hall
meeting with civil society organizations, stressing that fundamental freedoms
such as expression, association, and religion are “are absolutely critical to the
building of sustainable societies.” Clinton honored several Kazakh human
rights groups, including the Almaty Helsinki Committee and the Kazakhstan
Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law.
A July 2011 review by the UN Human Rights Committee criticized the use of child
labor in tobacco and cotton fields and undue restrictions on freedom of association
and assembly. The committee noted “concern at reports that threats,
assaults, harassment and intimidation of journalists and human rights defenders
have severely reduced the exercise of freedom of expression,” and called
on Kazakhstan to “fully comply with the principle of non-refoulement.”
In July Catherine Ashton, EU high representative for foreign affairs and security
policy/vice president of the European Commission, welcomed the launch of
negotiations for a new “enhanced partnership” between the EU and
Kazakhstan, which began in October, stressing that “the successful conclusion
of the negotiations will be influenced by the advancement of democratic
reforms.”
In September the US ambassador to the OSCE and the EU issued critical statements
reacting to developments in Kazakhstan, including Sokolova’s imprisonment
and the transfer of penitentiary control to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
However, such public criticism by the EU and US of human rights violations by
the Kazakhstan government is muted.