Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan’s poor human rights record continued to deteriorate in 2013, with
authorities cracking down on free speech and dissent through misuse of overly
broad laws. Authorities maintain strict controls on freedom of assembly and
religion. Despite flawed trials, courts upheld the prison sentences of people
convicted in the aftermath of violent clashes in December 2011 between police
and people in the western oil town of Zhanaozen. Torture remains common in
places of detention, even as authorities in July adopted a law on a National
Preventive Mechanism on torture.
The government continues work on overhauling its criminal legislation, but
based on a September draft of the criminal code, some amendments, if adopted,
would further restrict freedom of speech, assembly, religion, and association.
Arrest and Detention of Government Critics
On December 7, 2012, civil society activist Vadim Kuramshin was sentenced to
12 years’ imprisonment on extortion charges, despite a trial marred by procedural
violations and concerns his detention was retribution for public criticism
of the government.
On May 28, 2013, Kazakhstan’s Supreme Court upheld labor activist Rosa
Tuletaeva’s conviction and five-year prison sentence (reduced from seven years
by an earlier appeal) for organizing mass riots in connection with the
Zhanaozen violence. Prosecutorial authorities have declined to investigate
Tuletaeva’s allegations of torture in detention.
On August 5, Kazakhstan’s Supreme Court declined to review political opposition
leader Vladimir Kozlov’s seven-and-a-half-year prison sentence, despite
procedural violations and the broad, vague charges, such as inciting social discord,
used to convict him. As recently as mid-November, Kozlov’s wife reported
that Kozlov had not been receiving adequate and timely medical care in prison.
On August 9, Zinaida Mukhortova, a lawyer who in 2009 had alleged a member
of parliament from the ruling party interfered in a civil case in which she was
involved, was detained and forcibly admitted to a psychiatric hospital, violating her rights to liberty and security. She was initially denied access to her lawyer.
Mukhortova was released from psychiatric detention on November 1. Her case
against forcible detention was ongoing at time of writing.
On July 31, government critic Mukhtar Ablyazov was detained in France. His
extradition is sought by Ukraine, Russia, and Kazakhstan on multiple charges,
including embezzlement. Rights groups expressed serious concern that, if
returned, he would be at serious risk of ill-treatment and denied a fair trial. His
wife and child were illegally deported to Kazakhstan from Italy in May. United
Nations experts said that the move resembled an “extraordinary rendition.”
Freedom of Expression
Starting in late 2012, there was a marked escalation in the government’s crackdown
on independent and opposition media. In December 2012, in rushed trials,
courts banned the newspapers Vzglyad, Golos Respubliki, and their affiliated
sites, and prohibited K+ and Stan.TV from broadcasting. In 2013, several
newspapers including Pravda Kazakhstana and Tribuna, were suspended for
three months on technical grounds. In January, the Zhezkazgan youth newspaper
was ordered to close.
Despite widespread criticism of the government’s misuse of the overbroad and
vague criminal offense of “inciting social, national, clan, racial, or religious discord,”
authorities opened new cases. Authorities also proposed broadening the
scope of the criminal offense and increasing penalties on those found guilty of
it. One such case was against journalist Aleksandr Kharlamov in March 2013. In
mid-April, Kharlamov was forced to undergo a month of forced psychiatric
observation. He was later released and put under house arrest. His case was
ongoing at time of writing.
Some websites are blocked in Kazakhstan and libel remains a criminal offense.
Media watchdog AdilSoz reported that between January and August 2013, there
were 10 attacks on journalists, including on Igor Larra in August. In July, 4 men
were sentenced to between 11 and 15 years in prison for attacking independent
journalist Lukpan Akhmedyarov in April 2012.
Legal Reforms
Work on new criminal, criminal procedural, and penal codes continues amid
serious concerns that proposed amendments would further restrict fundamental
freedoms. In September, Dunja Mijatovic, the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe’s media freedom representative, noted the proposed
draft legislation “still contains and even strengthens sanctions that could limit
free expression and freedom of the media,” and in particular highlighted the
“disproportionate sanctions” of suspending newspapers for minor administrative
offenses.
Torture
In 2013, several police officers were convicted for torture and in July, authorities
adopted a law on a National Preventative Mechanism against torture. Despite
this, the Anti-Torture Coalition, a civil society alliance, reported receiving 201
complaints of torture and ill-treatment in the first half of 2013 alone.
Perpetrators of torture often go unpunished. To date, there has been no effective
investigation into serious and credible allegations of torture by detainees
in the aftermath of the December 2011 Zhanaozen violence.
On November 18, a Kostanai court ordered local police to pay Aleksandr
Gerasimov 2 million Tenge (US$13,000) in compensation following a May 2012
United Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT) decision finding Kazakhstan
responsible for torturing Gerasimov in 2007. The committee had urged
Kazakhstan to conduct an impartial investigation and provide full and adequate
reparation.
Counterterrorism
In January 2013, amendments to counterterrorism laws were adopted in
response to stated government concerns about increasing radicalization and
armed attacks by alleged extremists. In October, President Nursultan
Nazarbayev approved a five-year State Program to Counter Religious Extremism
and Terrorism aimed at ensuring security and preventing terrorist attacks.
Forum18, an international religious freedom group, criticized the plan for its
“all-embracing controls” on religious activities.
Vladislav Chelakh, a 19-year-old border guard accused of murdering 14 border
guards and one ranger at a Kazakhstan-China border post in December 2011,
was sentenced to life in prison in December 2012 despite an investigation and
trial marred by irregularities. His sentence was twice upheld on appeal during
2013.
Freedom of Religion
Since the adoption in 2011 of a restrictive law on religion, religious groups have
been subjected to raids, fines, and confiscation of literature. Between January
and mid-November, authorities fined 119 individuals and sentenced 2 to shortterm
administrative detention for violating the religion law, according to
Forum18. In February, a Kazakh court banned the minority Islamic group Jamaat
Tablighi as “extremist.”
In May, Protestant pastor Bakhytzhan Kashkumbayev was arrested on a dubious
charge of “intentional infliction of grievous bodily harm” of a congregation
member. In July, he was subjected to a month of forced psychiatric observation.
In October, authorities brought an additional charge of propagandizing extremism
against him. His case was ongoing at this writing.
Freedom of Assembly
Authorities maintain restrictive rules on freedom of assembly, and throughout
the year detained and fined activists and others for organizing and/or participating
in peaceful unsanctioned protests. For example, in mid-May, a court in
Astana sentenced two civil society activists to between seven and fifteen days
in detention and fined nearly two dozen others for violating the law on public
assemblies.
Labor Rights and Child Labor in Agriculture
Legislation governing the organization, financing, and collective bargaining
rights of trade unions remains restrictive and violates Kazakhstan’s obligations
under international law. Proposed provisions in the new draft criminal code would further restrict workers’ right to strike—already subject to a broad prohibition
in certain sectors of the economy—and continue to criminalize funding of
trade unions by sources outside Kazakhstan. Work on a draft law on trade
unions was ongoing at time of writing.
In response to concerns about debt bondage, forced labor, hazardous child
labor, and other violations against migrant tobacco workers, Philip Morris
International and Philip Morris Kazakhstan continued to implement policies
aimed at decreasing such risks. In August 2012, the Ministry of Education and
Science issued an order permitting children of migrant workers employed in
accordance with migration laws to attend schools in Kazakhstan.
Returns to Risk of Torture
Kazakhstan continues to extradite individuals to Uzbekistan despite the risk of
torture there. On March 13, authorities extradited Khairullo Tursunov to
Uzbekistan, ignoring a February 28 UN Committee Against Torture communication
to stall his extradition until it could fully review his complaint.
Key International Actors
There was criticism of Kazakhstan’s rights record in 2013, notably by the
European Parliament (EP), but overall concern was toned down as Kazakhstan’s
partners prioritized trade and energy interests. In a statement issued following
her November 2012 visit to Kazakhstan, the EU High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton did not mention any human rights
concerns, and asserted that her discussions “focused on economic and trade
issues.”
In June, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso did not raise
publicly any specific human rights concerns during his first trip to Kazakhstan
to discuss the European Union-Kazakhstan Enhanced Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement (PCA). Enhanced PCA negotiations, which had stalled
for over a year, resumed in October.
On April 11, United States Ambassador to the OSCE Ian Kelly voiced concern
that Kazakhstan’s 2011 religion law “falls short of upholding Kazakhstan’s
international obligations and commitments regarding freedom of religion.”
However, a July US-Kazakhstan annual Strategic Partnership Commission meeting
focused on trade and investment without explicit concern about rights
abuses in Kazakhstan.
On April 18, the EP adopted a resolution that flagged serious concerns about
Kazakhstan’s rights record, in particular about the closure of Alga! opposition
party and media outlets and the imprisonment of activists on “vague criminal
charges which could be considered to be politically motivated,” including
Vladimir Kozlov. The resolution stressed the importance of workers’ rights and
called for review of religion legislation. It also called for the EU to closely monitor
developments in Kazakhstan.
British Prime Minister David Cameron visited Kazakhstan in late June, during
which UK businesses concluded trade and other deals worth an estimated £700
million (US$1.1 million). Cameron said he and President Nursultan Nazarbayev
discussed human rights issues “at some length.” President Nazarbayev rejected
concerns, saying “nobody has the right to instruct us how to live and build
our country.”