Kazakhstan
President Nursultan Nazarbaev retained power in the December 2005 presidential
elections, which international observers found did not meet international standards.
In the year since the elections the government of Kazakhstan has flouted
some of its fundamental human rights obligations, tightening control over independent
media, interfering with the political opposition, and initiating politically
motivated lawsuits against its critics.
Harassment and Obstruction of Political Opposition
The Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan Party (DVK), which had been banned in
January 2005, attempted to register under a new name—Forward Kazakhstan!—
but on June 6, 2006, the Supreme Court refused to register it because of “errors”
found in the list of more than 62,000 members (50,000 are required) that was
submitted as part of the application.
The government continues to bringing spurious criminal and administrative
charges against opposition activists and supporters. On May 15, 2006, Alibek
Zhumabaev, of the For A Just Kazakhstan bloc, received a five-year sentence for
insulting the dignity and honor of the president and creating civil disorder. On
July 24 Bolat Abilov, the head of the Naghyz Ak Zhol party, received a three-year
suspended sentence for insulting a police officer, which bars him from running in
the 2009 parliamentary elections. Abilov was also charged in 2005 with embezzlement
and tax evasion, for which he is awaiting trial.
Although DVK leader Galymzhan Zhakianov was released from prison in January
2006 after having completed a four-year sentence for corruption and abuse of
power while governor of Pavlodar region, he and Abilov were reportedly prevented
from traveling internationally and their political activities were obstructed.
Altynbek Sarsenbaev, co-chairman of Naghyz Ak Zhol, and two of his aides were
murdered on February 13, 2006. Ten individuals were convicted in August of the
murders, but Sarsenbaev’s family condemned the trial as a “farce.” On the eve of
the 2005 presidential elections another prominent opposition figure, Zamanbek
Nurkadilov, a former ally of President Nazarbaev who had accused the government of corruption and joined the opposition two years previously, was found
dead in his house in Almaty. The case remains unsolved. For a Just Kazakhstan
claimed both murders were politically motivated and demanded independent
investigations.
Media Freedom
In July 2006 amendments to Kazakhstan’s media law were adopted that give the
government unlimited power to close independent and opposition media outlets
for technical and administrative violations, and creates unduly restrictive registration
procedures for new media outlets and re-registration procedures for existing
media companies.
Opposition newspapers and journalists are routinely charged with criminal libel
for violating “the honor and dignity of the president.” In March 2006 opposition
newspaper Juma Times was sued for having insulted President Nazarbaev, and its
operations were closed. In April the successor to Juma Times, Aina Plus newspaper,
was suspended for three months for changing its thematic focus. In July journalist
Zhasaral Kuanyshalin was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for having
accused Nazarbaev of treason. The Committee on National Security also brought
criminal charges against independent journalist Kazis Toguzbaev in June for
insulting the honor and dignity of the president by blaming him for the murder of
Altynbek Sarsenbaev. Toguzbaev is awaiting trial at this writing.
Independent journalists continue to be the target of physical attacks by unknown
persons, which appear to be intended to intimidate and silence opposition
media. On April 13 the editor for Versiya newspaper, Yaroslav Golyshkin, was
severely beaten by two assailants. Golyshkin claims that the assault was related
to an article he had published about the kidnapping of a financial police officer.
On April 23 Kenzhegali Aitbakiev, an associate editor for the suspended Aina
Plus, was also severely beaten outside his home by a group of unknown
assailants, which Aitbakiev believes was in retaliation for his professional activities.
A former chief editor of the opposition newspaper Alternativa, Albert Zhiger,
was attacked by two people on October 2. The attackers allegedly said they had
warned him before the attack. Zhiger is convinced he was attacked because of his
reporting.
The government routinely censors opposition websites by blocking access to
them through two major internet providers, Kaztelecom and Nursat.
HIV/AIDS
Although by global standards the prevalence of HIV/AIDS remains relatively low in
Kazakhstan, the country suffers from one of the fastest-growing HIV/AIDS epidemics
in the world. Between 1996 and October 2006 the number of officially
registered HIV cases grew more than 50-fold (from 100 to over 5,440). Unofficially,
the number was estimated in 2005 to be as high as 20,000.
The HIV/AIDS epidemic in Kazakhstan is fueled by human rights abuses against
intravenous drug users and sex workers, who are not only the targets of stigmatization,
police abuse, and false criminal charges, but also are routinely denied
humane medical treatment. Police are reported to regularly rape, beat, and extort
money from sex workers. Police brutality and harassment drive injecting drug
users and sex workers underground and increase their unwillingness to access
services. Those infected with HIV/AIDS also face widespread discrimination in
employment, housing, and access to government services.
The government has taken many positive steps in the fight against HIV/AIDS,
including launching a US$53 million program for 2006-2010 to fight the spread of
HIV in Kazakhstan. However, Kazakhstan’s HIV/AIDS laws have not been brought
into compliance with international standards, and government policies, including
mandatory HIV testing and the segregation of HIV-positive prisoners, are discriminatory
and continue to reinforce prejudice. The government has also failed to
ensure access to treatment programs for all HIV-infected persons, and to address
police abuses against drug users and sex workers.
Refugee Crisis
A number of Uzbeks seeking refuge in Kazakhstan from persecution were forcibly
returned to Uzbekistan to risk of torture and ill-treatment, in violation of international
law.
In late November 2005 Kazakh authorities forcibly returned at least nine Uzbeks
who had fled persecution in Uzbekistan, four of whom were registered with the
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Upon their
return to Uzbekistan some of the men were tried and sentenced, while others are
awaiting trial at this writing on various charges related to “religious extremism.”
In addition, seven Uzbeks wanted on religious extremism charges for their
alleged affiliation with Akramia (followers of an independent Islamic religious
teacher) and in connection with the 2005 Andijan uprising are believed to have
been forcibly returned from Kazakhstan in late November and early December
2005. To date, Kazakh authorities have not admitted their involvement in these
returns.
Kazakh authorities detained but later released several other Uzbek refugees, one
of whom they held for two months but then transferred to UNHCR, despite an
Uzbek extradition request.
Key International Actors
Top United States officials, including Vice-President Richard Cheney, who visited
Kazakhstan in May 2006, failed to comment publicly on the government’s human
rights record during their visits. The US ambassador to the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), by contrast, was outspoken in
expressing concern about shortcomings in the Kazakh government’s human
rights record, including the excessively restrictive amendments to the law on
mass media, in a statement on May 16. The ambassador in September also
issued a strongly critical statement on Kazakhstan’s bid for the 2009 OSCE chairmanship,
making clear that the US would not support it due to the Kazakh government’s
poor human rights record. US government assistance to Kazakhstan
during fiscal year 2005 was US$85.31 million, most of which ($55.69 million) was
allocated to security, regional stability, and law enforcement programs. The US
also supported social, economic, and democratic reform programs in Kazakhstan.
The European Union once again failed to give practical effect to the human rights
clause underpinning its relationship with Kazakhstan. The conclusions of the EUKazakhstan
Cooperation Council meeting, held on July 18, 2006, contained disappointingly
vague language on human rights, noting simply that Kazakhstan must comply with OSCE standards on the human dimension if it is to be considered a
viable candidate to chair the organization. The conclusions underlined the need
for the Kazakh authorities to make progress in areas such as freedom of the
media and the ability of political parties to operate freely, and emphasized “the
need for Kazakhstan to follow the path of democratic reforms and full respect of
individual human rights.” During a visit to Kazakhstan on October 17 European
Commissioner for External Relations and European Neighborhood Policy Benita
Ferrero-Waldner noted that the country’s bid for the OSCE chairmanship “cannot
be done at the expense of the [organization’s] core values,” and expressed hope
that “the necessary political reforms” would be implemented in 2007.
The adoption of amendments to Kazakhstan’s media law in July 2006 went ahead
despite warnings by the OSCE’s special representative on freedom of the media
in June that they would impose excessive restrictions on media freedom.
At a summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization—of which Kazakhstan is a
member—held on June 15 in Shanghai, China, leaders of the six member states
reaffirmed that the fight against terrorism, extremism, and separatism remained a
top priority for the organization.