Kazakhstan
Even though the Kazakhstan government launched a campaign to improve its
image and establish itself as a prominent player in international politics, likely
motivated by its bid for chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2009, the human rights situation in the country
remains poor. Despite considerable attention from the international community,
in 2007 respect for human rights failed to improve, and according to Transparency
International corruption in Kazakhstan significantly worsened.
While there were some minor improvements in legislation, there was little meaningful
progress in civil and political rights protection. The lower chamber (Majilis)
parliamentary elections were neither free nor fair, according to international
observers. The government continued to stifle the political opposition and independent
media.
Political Opposition
In May 2007 the Kazakh government passed an amendment to article 42 of the
constitution, which prohibits more than two successive terms as president,
paving the way for President Nursultan Nazarbaev to run for an unlimited number
of terms. The constitutional amendment was condemned by the opposition,
which was prevented by the police from demonstrating against it in Almaty.
Sergei Duvanov, a journalist and the leader of the protest, was detained on May
24, held in police custody, and released later that day.
Other changes made to the constitution include an amendment to article 50,
which increases the number of representatives in the Majilis from 77 to 107. This
was ostensibly intended to give the parliament increased power and strengthen
the role of opposition political parties, but has instead consolidated presidential
power.
The government routinely misuses the criminal justice system against its political
opponents. During 2007 a former member of the president’s own family was the
target of what appear to be politically-motivated charges. Rakhat Aliev, formerly
the president’s son-in-law until his recent divorce, who was considered at one time a possible successor to Nazarbaev, was dismissed as Kazakhstan’s ambassador
to Austria in May. He is now wanted in Kazakhstan on suspicion of having
kidnapped and assaulted two employees of Nurbank, a commercial bank he partially
owned. Austrian authorities refused to extradite Aliev because of fair trial
concerns. His trial started in absentia on November 8.
The day after Aliev was charged, on May 28, the television station Kommerchesky
Televizionny Kanal (KTK) and the weekly newspaper Karavan, both owned by
Aliev, were ordered by an Almaty court to suspend operations. Aliev is currently
seeking asylum in Austria.
Courts upheld a five-year sentence for Alibek Zhumabaev of the For a Just
Kazakhstan Party for insulting the president in May 2006. Activists promoting free
speech in Kazakhstan have called for Zhumabaev’s release.
Elections
In Majilis elections held on August 18, Kazakhstan’s ruling party, Nur Otan, won
88 percent of the vote. No opposition parties cleared the 7 percent threshold to
win seats. Opposition leaders denounced the elections as fraudulent and called
for new elections in an August 28 letter to the president. The OSCE said the elections
reflected some democratic progress but still fell short of international standards.
President Nursultan Nazarbaev brushed off all criticism and claimed that the oneparty
parliament was a “wonderful opportunity to adopt all the laws needed to
speed up our country’s economic and political modernization.”
Two opposition parties, Nagyz Ak Zhol and the National Social Democratic party,
merged in June ahead of the August elections, but still failed to gain any seats in
Majilis. The Social Democratic Party was registered in January, three months after
it had applied. The Alga! (Forward!) Party and the Atameken (Homeland) Party
were not able to register.
Freedom of Press
Although Kazakhstan’s laws guarantee the media the right to report on political
events, the independent media continues to be threatened and harassed for criticizing
the president or government, and journalists run serious risks.
For example, Oralgaisha Omarshanova, an independent journalist working on corruption
for the weekly publication Zakon i Pravosudiye (Law and Justice), was
reported missing March 30. At this writing her whereabouts remain unknown.
Saken Tauzhanov, a journalist for several opposition websites was killed in a traffic
accident on August 2. While the authorities concluded that Tauzhanov’s death
was a routine accident, some observers called for an investigation, pointing to
the fact that at least six journalists have died in similar circumstances since 2002
and raising concern that they may have been targeted because of their political
reporting.
Criminal libel laws are routinely used against opposition media. For example, in
January 2007 Kaziz Toguzbayev, a reporter for the independent newspaper Azat,
was given a two-year suspended sentence for “insulting the honor and dignity” of
President Nazarbaev in two articles he published on the website Kub in April and
May 2006.
Also in January, government officials in the city of Uralsk began to harass the
newspaper Uralskaya Nedelya after the paper published a series of articles on
local government corruption. Government officials repeatedly threatened local
printing houses that they would be shut down if they printed or distributed the
paper. Ultimately, the paper had to be printed outside the region.
The government continues to censor the internet and in 2007 “deregistered” or
suspended several websites. The government also blocked several opposition
websites that reported on Nazarbaev’s feud with Rakhat Aliev.
HIV/AIDS
The HIV/AIDS epidemic in Kazakhstan, one of the fastest-growing in the world,
continues to accelerate, despite a US$53 million government program for 2006 2010 to fight the epidemic. There were 1,165 new cases of HIV/AIDS in the first
half of 2007, compared to 958 cases for the same period in 2006.
The government has failed to take steps to end the human rights abuses that fuel
the epidemic. Most infections are among injecting drug users and commercial sex
workers, who face widespread stigmatization, police harassment and brutality,
and false criminal charges. These abuses decrease the likelihood that such
groups will access preventive and post-infection services; they are often denied
humane medical treatment.
Uzbek Refugees
The Kazakh government admitted in August 2007 that in November 2005 security
forces had forcibly returned nine Uzbeks who had fled persecution to Uzbekistan.
Of the group, also known as the “Shymkent 9,” four had been registered with the
Kazakh office of United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). While
the government’s admission is welcome, the authorities have still taken no steps
to hold those responsible to account.
Key International Actors
Kazakhstan’s bid for the OSCE chairmanship for 2009 has been the dominant
recent theme in its international relations. After failing to come to a consensus on
the issue in 2006, the OSCE in late November 2007 awarded Kazakhstan the
chairmanship for 2010, despite the country’s failure to improve its human rights
situation. Opinions differed among Kazakhstan’s international partners—the UK
and the Czech Republic pointed to deteriorating political and social freedoms in
the country to say that Kazakhstan was not appropriate for the role—while
Germany took the lead in supporting Kazakhstan’s bid, along with Russia and the
Commonwealth of Independent States. The US, which initially opposed the bid,
wavered on the issue and ultimately supported the chairmanship in exchange for
commitments by Kazakhstan not to undermine the autonomy of the OSCE’s Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR), as well as to reform its
election law and to ease restrictions on political parties and the media.
In February ODIHR made public statements urging Kazakhstan to make progress
on fair trial standards, including allowing the public to attend court hearings,
equality between the parties, and the presumption of innocence. In March it
called on the government to stop a draft amendment that would require all printing
presses to be licensed.
Meeting in late April with Kazakh Prime Minister Karim Massimov and other officials
in Astana, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise
Arbour pushed for Kazakhstan to adopt the optional protocol to the Convention
Against Torture and the Convention for the Protection of Migrant Workers. Both
Arbour and the OSCE called for increased media freedoms and for the decriminalization
of libel.
The EU adopted a Central Asia Strategy in June, setting out its ambition to deepen
cooperation with the region. While, in contrast to earlier drafts, the final strategy
acknowledged the centrality of human rights in the EU’s relations with the region,
it fell short of formulating specific benchmarks for improvement the EU would
seek as part of its engagement.
The UN high commissioner on refugees, Antonio Guterres, met with President
Nazarbaev in mid-November 2007, calling for a national mechanism to give
refugees protection and for the country to cooperate more fully with international
practices.
The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child conducted a review of Kazakhstan in
May, and was critical of the government for failing to address the economic
exploitation, sexual exploitation, and trafficking of children, among other issues.