Kenya
In a historic move, Kenya’s citizens voted overwhelmingly in favor of accountability
and reform when they supported a new constitution by a two-thirds majority in
August 2010. Constitutional reform was among the steps to which the coalition
government agreed after the 2007 post-election violence. It paves the way for
restructuring the government, establishing a land commission, and carrying out
sweeping changes to the police and judiciary. The year also saw the prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court open an investigation into the post-election violence.
Kenya continues to suffer the regional effects of Somalia’s crisis, with a
steady flow of refugees entering the country; some suffered serious abuses at the
hands of Kenyan police as they tried to find safety.
A New Constitution
The new constitution, supported by 67 percent of Kenyan voters on August 4, was
the culmination of four decades of effort. The new coalition government committed
to a new constitution, among other reforms, after post-election violence in
2007 in which 1,300 people died and hundreds of thousands were displaced.
The new constitution addresses several longstanding concerns, namely the concentration
of power in the executive, the absence of checks and balances, and
the use of land as a tool of political patronage. It creates a smaller cabinet of ministers
who do not have to be parliament members; reforms the legislature by creating
an upper house, the Senate; and devolves considerable power to a new tier
of county governments and governors. In an effort to address the judiciary’s lack
of independence, the new constitution creates a new judiciary service commission
to nominate judges, creates a new post of director of public prosecutions,
and requires parliamentary approval for appointing the attorney general. It also
enshrines in law a land commission, which removes the president’s ability to
allocate land, review existing land holdings, and set minimum and maximum
holdings of land.
Celebration of the constitution was marred by the presence of Sudanese
President Omar al-Bashir, who is wanted on ICC arrest warrants for genocide,
crimes against humanity, and war crimes. The government’s invitation to al Bashir and its failure to cooperate with the ICC to arrest him call into question its
commitment to cooperate with the court’s investigation.
Impunity and Accountability for Post-Election Violence
Impunity remains a pervasive problem in Kenya. In 2008 the coalition government
promised to establish a national tribunal to investigate and prosecute those most
responsible for the post-election violence, or refer the crimes to the ICC. It failed
to do either, and in November 2009 the ICC prosecutor sought authority from an
ICC pre-trial chamber to begin investigations in Kenya. On March 31, 2010, the
chamber granted permission by a vote of two judges to one, after which the ICC
prosecutor announced an ambitious agenda to bring at least two cases against
four to six individuals by the end of 2010.
While a limited number of cases are being investigated by the ICC, Kenya has not
credibly and effectively investigated and prosecuted other perpetrators of the
post-election violence.
Witness protection emerged as a key challenge to investigations. Threats against
individuals who witnessed post-election violence, including some who testified
before the Commission to Investigate the Post-Election Violence, increased after
the prosecutor announced that he would seek to open a Kenya investigation. In
May the president signed into law amendments to the Witness Protection Act, a
key step in reforming Kenya’s witness protection system. The amendments create
a new witness protection agency with increased independence, but resources and
time are needed to implement changes.
There have been no investigations or forthcoming prosecutions for war crimes
committed by the insurgent Sabaot Land Defence Force or Kenyan security forces
during the 2006-2008 Mount Elgon conflict; abuses by Kenyan army and police
units implicated in using excessive force in disarmament operations in Mandera
and Samburu districts; or extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances of
suspected Mungiki gang members by police officers. There were no developments
in finding the killers of Oscar Kamau Kingara and John Paul Oulu, human rights
defenders from the Oscar Foundation Free Legal Aid Clinic who were gunned
down in Nairobi in 2009.
There were two achievements in the efforts against impunity during 2010.
In a landmark ruling on February 4, 2010, the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights condemned Kenya’s government for expelling the Endorois people
from their traditional land for tourism. It ruled the eviction—with minimal compensation—
violated the Endorois’ right as an indigenous people to property,
health, culture, religion, and natural resources. It ordered Kenya to compensate
and restore them to their historic land. It was the first international tribunal ruling
to find a violation of the right to development.
In another unprecedented judgment, Kenya’s constitutional court awarded
US$500,000 compensation to 21 political prisoners who were tortured during the
government of former president Daniel Arap Moi, who left office in 2002. The
court had previously ruled that the case, from the period when Moi was in office,
could not be heard.
Police Reform
In January 2010 President Mwai Kibaki set up the Police Reforms Implementation
Committee to monitor the progress of reforms. The committee included members
of civil society. Key aspects of the reforms, such as establishing an independent
police oversight board, are provided for in the new constitution, but other recommendations,
such as merging the administration police with the regular force, are
not.
Eight Kenyans were transferred illegally to Uganda following the bombings in
Kampala, Uganda’s capital, in July and were allegedly mistreated in detention.
Refugees
The overstretched refugee camps in Dadaab, northeastern Kenya, continued to
receive thousands of new arrivals during the year, including some 34,000 people
between January and September.
Many of the new refugees from Somalia endured serious abuses at the hands of
Kenyan police when they crossed the officially closed border. These included violence,
arbitrary arrest, unlawful detention in inhuman and degrading conditions, threats of deportation, and wrongful prosecution for “unlawful presence” to extort
money from the new arrivals—men, women, and children alike. In some cases,
police raped women. Police also failed to diligently investigate and prosecute
rapes within the refugee community.
In early 2010 hundreds, and possibly thousands, of Somalis unable to pay extortion
demands were sent back to Somalia in flagrant violation of Kenyan and international
law. The Kenyan government announced an internal investigation into
the allegations. In October the government promised to reconstruct the screening
center at Liboi on the Somali border “soon.” However, Kenya continued to deny
almost 400,000 camp-based refugees the right to free movement in the country,
in violation of international law.
Women’s and Children’s Right to Health
Partly due to health care system failures, tens of thousands of Kenyan women
and girls die each year in childbirth and pregnancy, while more suffer preventable
injuries, serious infections, and disabilities. Maternal deaths represent 15 percent
of all deaths for women of reproductive age—one in 39 women in Kenya die during
childbirth according to the United Nations—while an estimated 300,000
women and girls are living with untreated fistula. Kenya’s restrictive abortion
laws, which criminalize abortion generally, contribute to maternal death and disability.
Unsafe abortions cause about 30 percent of maternal deaths.
The Kenyan government fails to provide adequate pain treatment and palliative
care for hundreds of thousands of children with diseases such as cancer or
HIV/AIDS. Oral morphine, an essential medicine for pain treatment, is currently
out of stock. Kenya’s few palliative care services, which provide pain treatment
but also counseling and support to families of chronically ill patients, lack programs
for children.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Kenya continues to punish consensual adult sexual conduct with up to 14 years
imprisonment. On February 11, following unsubstantiated rumors of a “gay wedding”
in the coastal town of Mtwapa, influential Muslim and Christian religious leaders demanded the closure of the Mtwapa office of the Kenya Medical
Research Institute (KEMRI), which conducts research on HIV/AIDS with men who
have sex with men. The religious leaders issued a statement promising to “flush
out gays” in Mtwapa.
On February 12, a group of over 200 individuals–armed with sticks, stones, and
other makeshift weapons–surrounded KEMRI. Smaller mobs went to the homes of
people suspected of being gay. The police attempted to protect the individuals
targeted by the mob by taking them into custody. Another mob severely beat up a
KEMRI volunteer on February 13. Two individuals were beaten up in Mombasa on
suspicion of being gay, on February 13 and 16 respectively.
In Mtwapa, Mombasa, and elsewhere, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
people went into hiding in fear for their lives, and HIV/AIDS outreach, testing, and
treatment among men who have sex with men remains compromised by the
attacks and the continuing climate of homophobia.
Key International Actors
Kenya’s partners in Europe and North America are united in pushing for accountability
for the election violence and an end to impunity, key conditions of the
reform agenda that Kofi Annan brokered in early 2008. The United States and the
European Union continued to threaten travel bans against key suspects and government
members to encourage Kenya to pursue reform. The US continues to support
Kenya’s military and police, particularly their counterterrorism efforts, and
thus has some influence over the conduct of those forces.
Kenya cited a July 2009 decision by the African Union not to cooperate with the
ICC in arresting al-Bashir to justify its failure to do so during his August visit. In
the face of criticism over al-Bashir’s visit, including from many of Kenya’s international
partners, officials repeated their commitment to work with the ICC in its
Kenya investigation. Kenya also concluded an agreement in September with the
ICC to facilitate the court’s work within its territory. Nonetheless, concerns over
Kenya’s willingness to fulfill its commitments to cooperate with the ICC persist in
the wake of al-Bashir’s visit.
Regionally, the conflict in Somalia where the al-Shabaab militia continues to
strengthen and the fragility of Somalia’s transitional government remain pressing
security concerns for Kenya. The 2011 referendum on the status of neighboring
Southern Sudan is a key issue that could have major implications for Kenya as a
frontline state and host to refugees.