Kenya
Only two years after the election of the National Rainbow Coalition
Party (NARC), after twenty-four years of autocratic rule by President
Moi, the public euphoria that greeted its entry into power has begun to
wane. The record of the Mwai Kibaki government has been a source of
both hope and disappointment.
The current human rights situation in Kenya is one of few serious abuses.
However, the potential is growing for serious problems in the future
as much of the repressive state machinery from the Moi era remains
intact. And while this government has made some commendable steps
to address human rights concerns, it has demonstrated insufficient willingness
to commit to any institutional changes that would fundamentally
limit the extensive presidential and executive powers it inherited.
Change at the highest levels of power is not being institutionalized, and
high-ranking Kibaki officials are not being held to account for abuses in
the same way as former Moi government officials. The government’s
commitment to the rule of law is increasingly coming under question,
amid a backdrop of internal power-brokering and unpunished corruption
scandals within the ruling party. Since the election, the political
divisions among NARC coalition members have deepened along ethnic
lines. Increased political jockeying is rapidly emerging as factions seek
to entrench power before the next election in 2007.
Signs of Hope
Commendable and promising steps have been taken to address human
rights issues. The government appointed to high office several well
known rights activists. Officials enforced universal free primary education.
A more independent government National Human Rights
Commission staffed with qualified persons was sworn in.
A major reform program was initiated for the judiciary, police and
prison services. Public pressure forced out former High Court Chief
Justice Bernard Chunga, accused of complicity in torture and cruel,
inhuman, and degrading treatment of suspected members of Mwakenya,
a clandestine political movement in the 1980s. A massive shake-up of
the judiciary followed an internal report that accused twenty-three
judges of corruption. While the removal of corrupt and politically compliant
judges was a welcome step, the process attracted criticism for the
lack of due process. The process commenced with a committee of
inquiry which did not always take affidavits from accusers, arrived at its
findings without seeking a response from the accused judges, and its
findings were widely publicized in the newspapers before consideration
by the appointing authority. In some cases, there has been no fixed
charge, but a process of new allegations introduced serially as the
inquiry has proceeded so that the affected party does not know what
new allegation he/she may face as the hearing progresses. The expulsion
of judges considered—but not yet found—guilty of corruption, ineptitude
or improper conduct amounts to a denial of due process. The new
judges have been appointed as acting judges and are serving without
tenure until they are formally appointed.
The freedom of the press and electronic media flourished and there has
been a real expansion of FM radio. This resulted in an increase in public
participation and critical commentary of government actions.
However, the government’s response to its own policy has not always
been welcoming. It has threatened curbs and failed to dismantle some
of the restrictive statutory amendments of the Moi years. Thus, an
exorbitant security of one million shillings [U.S.$12,500] for new publications
still remains; Information Minister Raphael Tuju appointed an
extra-legal committee of “inquiry” in a radio station’s operations in displeasure
at their commentaries; and the old Media Bill of the Moi
regime passed in 2002 remains a threat to press freedom.
With strong calls for accountability for past abuses, President Kibaki
mandated three transitional justice initiatives to address human rights
abuses, economic crimes (corruption), and the widespread illegal expropriation
of public lands. The government created a task force to examine
whether a truth and reconciliation commission should be established,
although it has since ignored the recommendation of the task
force to create such a commission. In closely-followed public hearings,
the Goldenberg Commission of Inquiry began to unearth evidence
about the Goldenberg scandal, viewed as the single worst case of corruption
during the Moi era, implicating President Moi and others.
President Kibaki also set up a Land Commission to provide him with a
report on “land grabbing” by former government officials. That report
was handed to the president in June 2004 with detailed recommendations.
It remains to be seen whether these initiatives will lead to any
prosecutions or reparations.
Disappointments and Concerns
The broadening of human rights space in Kenya since the 2002 election
is a most welcome development, but important human rights concerns
remain. The repressive state machinery that permitted the misrule that
characterized the Moi era remains in place. The fact that this institutional
framework is being retained and can be used by the Kibaki government
remains a continuing danger to sustainable human rights in
Kenya.
Additionally, the government’s reform efforts to address the ills of the
past are not always being undertaken with care for due process and
rights protections. In some cases, the approach and justification of the
Kibaki government has been that good intentions can allow it to forego
safeguards in the process of redressing past wrongs.
Constitutional Reform
The NARC government came to power on a campaign promise that it
would make the new constitution a cornerstone of its rule. The draft
constitution has become a symbol of the hopes and aspirations of
Kenyans for a participatory democracy. It contains a strong non-derogable
bill of rights, separation and devolution of powers, and a weaker
presidency through the creation of a prime minister position. Although
a product of consensus and political compromise, it is the most widely
consultative rights document that Kenya has ever seen and contains better
human rights guarantees than the current constitution. Its passage
would be a good first step towards a devolution of executive power and
the creation of an institutional framework for the protection of rights
through an enlarged and enforceable Bill of Rights.
Twice the government has publicly announced deadlines by which the
constitution would be passed; both times it has failed to deliver. On July
3, 2004, peaceful protests in support of the constitution in Nairobi were
met with police using water cannons and tear gas, and during demonstrations
in Kisumu on July 7, live ammunition was fired by police
killing one person and injuring several demonstrators.
Political wrangling among ruling NARC members has scuttled the likelihood
that this draft constitution will be passed in its current form, if at
all. The split is between NARC’s two predominant coalition partners:
the National Alliance of Kenya (NAK) headed by President Kibaki, and
the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) headed by Raila Odinga. LDP
members complain that they have been marginalized and are pushing
for Odinga to be appointed prime minister following the passage of the
draft constitution. Appearing unwilling to devolve power from the presidency—
and particularly not to a member of the Luo tribe—the NAK
faction are blocking passage of the constitution.
The thwarting of the constitutional review process signals an apparent
unwillingness to allow an institutional framework that would devolve or
share power, in particular with other ethnic groups in the country. This
has had an immediate and adverse impact on the issue of the executive
devolution of power and accountability, the rebuilding of independent
state institutions, and the passage of a strong Bill of Rights.
Also, there is growing impunity for actions by those in the inner-circle
of government. Since the new government came to power, there have
been several instances of government ministers publicly expressing their
intention to disregard court injunctions; property expropriated by executive
order, and reluctance to prosecute violations by the president’s
supporters. As corruption scandals or other excesses by current government
officials come to light, the government has been unwilling to dismiss,
investigate or prosecute its members the same way that it is dealing
with former government officials.
Key International Actors
One of the most significant developments came in late 2003 when
numerous international donors officially resumed aid to Kenya. These
renewed pledges indicated widespread support for the Kibaki government’s
economic and political reforms.
Donor aid to Kenya had previously been suspended because of rampant
corruption, abuses, and economic mismanagement under President
Moi. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) suspended lending in
December 2000 and shortly thereafter the World Bank followed suit. In
2003, the European Union was the first to announce that it would
resume aid, pledging 50 million euros in budget support and 225 million
euros for development projects. Days later, the IMF announced
that it would also resume dealings with Kenya, approving a U.S.$252.8
million loan, of which roughly U.S. $36 million will be available immediately.
Then, in the last week of November, a group of donors— including the World Bank, the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the United States and the United Kingdom—
announced pledges totaling U.S. $4.1 billion for 2004-2006, the greatest
portion of which would be available in 2004. Unlike the majority of
aid, to support infrastructure and development projects, the U.S. aid
(approximately U.S. $78 million) was earmarked for its “Draining the
Swamps that Feed Terrorism” program, to focus specifically on good
governance and security initiatives designed to curb corruption and terrorist
threats.
Many donor pledges still have not been delivered in full due largely to
their concerns about the stalling of constitutional reform, the political
in-fighting in NARC, and corruption scandals in the new government.