Kenya
Controversial presidential elections in December 2007 dominated events in 2008,
exposing the longstanding lack of accountability in Kenyan political culture.
Politicians on both sides of the political fence organized violence in the Rift Valley
and western Kenya in January and February 2008, killing at least 1,133 people and
displacing at least 300,000. International mediation produced a coalition government
in March, returning a fragile stability to the country. Commissions established
to investigate electoral fraud and post-election violence concluded that
profound electoral reforms and a special tribunal to prosecute those most
responsible for the violence were urgently needed.
Patterns of impunity by state security forces persist, with allegations of excessive
use of force and extrajudicial killings shadowing the police. Military deployment
in March to suppress a brutal insurgency in Mt. Elgon was characterized by mass
arrests, detentions, disappearances, and systematic torture. Officials denied the
military’s responsibility for abuses.
Electoral Violence
Kenya is still reeling from the widespread violence following the presidential elections
that saw President Mwai Kibaki returned to office. After the results were
announced, youths allied to the opposition Orange Democratic Movement (ODM)
began attacking Kikuyu and other tribes perceived to be supporters of the incumbent
Party of National Unity (PNU) across the Rift Valley and in urban slums.
Kikuyu gangs struck back, targeting Luo and other perceived opposition supporters,
first in the Nairobi slums, and later, at the end of January, in the Rift Valley.
Some violence was prompted by spontaneous anger at the results, leading to the
burning of cars and street protests. Police dispelled the crowds with live ammunition,
killing over 400 people. However, the majority of the attacks on both sides
were premeditated and coordinated by local leaders and politicians seeking to
gain from the forced displacement of certain ethnic groups. According to the Waki
Commission (see below), at least 1,133 people died and over 300,000 were displaced.
After several months of unrest, Kenyans pulled back from the brink when former
UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan brokered a National Dialogue and Reconciliation
Accord. The negotiations resulted in a government of national unity, agreement
on the need for constitutional and land reforms, and the creation of commissions
to investigate the crisis.
In September, the Independent Review Committee, chaired by South African
judge Justice Kriegler to investigate electoral fraud, concluded that the electoral
process had been so disrupted that it was impossible to tell who won the presidential
poll. It recommended a series of reforms to the electoral law and procedures,
including the replacement of the Electoral Commission.
In October, the Commission to Investigate the Post-Election Violence, chaired by
Kenyan judge Justice Waki, published a damning report implicating senior politicians
from both parties in organizing and encouraging the violence. The report
also accused the police of excessive force. The commission recommended the
creation of a special tribunal to investigate and prosecute those most responsible,
along a strict timeline. In the event of non-compliance by the coalition government,
the commission recommended that the Panel of Eminent African
Personalities, headed by Kofi Annan, should forward a confidential list of individuals
implicated in the violence, including ten senior politicians, to the
International Criminal Court. The press and civil society strongly support the recommendations
but the government, including both the president and the prime
minister, has given mixed feedback.
Tens of thousands of people remain displaced. The government claimed at the
end of October that 3,170 households remained in displaced persons camps.
However, many have simply returned to “transit camps,” with no reliable services
and no government support to rebuild their homes. In November the UN estimated
113,761 people still to be in such camps. The UN, NGOs, and the Kenyan
National Commission for Human Rights criticized the government for violating the
UN Guiding Principles on Internally Displaced Persons, mismanaging resettlement
programs and forcibly returning displaced people.
Atrocities in Mt. Elgon
The Kenyan government refuses to investigate and prosecute members of the
police and army accused of committing systematic torture in Mt. Elgon. Security
forces deployed in March 2008 in a joint operation to combat a two-year insurgency
by the Sabaot Land Defence Force (SLDF), a militia allied to the local
Member of Parliament, which had been terrorizing the district. Following the operation,
the SLDF were much diminished and the extent of their crimes emerged:
over 600 people killed since 2006; hundreds tortured, mutilated, and raped; and
houses looted and destroyed.
However, members of the security forces also committed serious crimes, including
extrajudicial killings and torture, in the course of counterinsurgency. Much of
the male population was rounded up and beaten to force disclosure of the whereabouts
of militia. Over 4,000 people were taken to military camps for “screening”
where victims describe beatings, torture, and some deaths. More than 40 people
are missing, last seen in military detention, and at least one grave containing
seven bodies of people taken into military custody has been identified.
The United Kingdom and the United States have trained units of the 20th
Parachute Regiment which was deployed in Mt. Elgon. Due to allegations of abuses,
the UK announced in July 2008 that it was suspending training of 20 Para but
resumed its military engagement two months later.
Police Impunity
Police were responsible for hundreds of deaths during the post-election violence
and serious questions remain about the chain of command— who ordered the
use of live rounds, and under what circumstances. The reluctance of the police to
investigate its own conduct follows a well established pattern of impunity.
Extrajudicial killings of members of the Mungiki criminal gang in Nairobi continued,
adding to the more than 450 Mungiki linked killings last year. The Waki
Commission recommended extensive reform of the police force, including the setting
up of an independent agency to investigate police conduct.
Regional Renditions
In October, eight Kenyan nationals were repatriated from Ethiopia, some 21
months after they were first arrested in Kenya in 2007 and deported to Somalia
and then Ethiopia, along with at least 90 other men, women, and children.
Another Kenyan—Abdikadir Mohammed Adan—remains in incommunicado detention
in Addis Ababa, some 15 months after he was first arrested, and the whereabouts
of others who have claimed Kenyan citizenship remains
unknown. Altogether in 2006 and 2007, the Kenyan government detained approximately
150 individuals fleeing Somalia, including women and children. The government
did not take any steps to secure the release of its citizens until August
2008, and still disputes the Kenyan citizenship of Adan. Another Kenyan citizen,
Mohammed Abdulmalik, disappeared for a month after he was arrested by
Kenyan officials in February 2007, before ultimately ending up in Guantanamo
Bay.
Women’s, Children’s, and LGBT Rights
The Kenyan government scaled up HIV/AIDS services across the country, though
the drugs still did not reach an estimated 250,000 HIV-infected people in urgent
need of antiretroviral treatment. Only about nine percent of those receiving treatment
are children. Barriers for children include a reluctance of caregivers to test
children, food insecurity, transport costs, unavailability of child treatment at local
health facilities, and the neglect and abuse of AIDS orphans.
Following violent school strikes in June, there was debate in government whether
to reintroduce corporal punishment in schools. Child rights groups protested vigorously.
Kenya’s current abortion law criminalizes abortion except to save a woman’s life.
As a result, many women resort to clandestine, unsafe abortions that cause up to
40 percent of maternal deaths. The proposed Reproductive Health and Rights Bill
2008 would legalize abortion in some cases.
Article 162 of Kenya’s criminal code, an inheritance from British colonialism, punishes
consensual homosexual conduct with up to 14 years’ imprisonment.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
During the violence in January and February, human rights defenders and journalists
were threatened by individuals and groups affiliated with the incumbent PNU
party. Journalists and human rights activists who criticized security force abuses
in Mt. Elgon are still being threatened by the military and the police. Two were
forced to leave the country for a short period after publishing a press release
detailing abuses by the SLDF and the military in April 2008.
Key International Actors
Following the electoral violence, a spectrum of international actors including the
United Nations, African Union, and the US secretary of state applied significant
pressure on the government of Mwai Kibaki to compromise and share power with
the opposition. The cooperation between Kenya’s neighbors and donors in bringing
Kenya back from the brink was unprecedented and demonstrated the potential
of sustained diplomatic engagement in a crisis.
All Kenya’s foreign partners and Kenyan civil society at large agree on the need for
far-reaching reform of the justice sector, the constitution, land distribution and
ownership, and major measures to stem corruption and impunity. Without major
changes, including the prosecutions recommended by the Waki Commission, the
risk of violence recurring remains high. The government will need significant sustained
pressure from all sides to set up the special tribunal recommended by
Waki and bring those responsible for political violence to justice. The
International Criminal Court indicated that crimes committed in Kenya are under
analysis by its prosecutor.
Due to their close relationship with the Kenyan military, the UK and the US have a
particular responsibility and an opportunity to encourage an independent investigation
into atrocities committed in Mt. Elgon.