Kenya
Kenya’s multiparty political system has developed considerably since the retirement
of President Daniel Arap Moi in 2002. The new pluralism, though flawed
and very fractious, has helped stabilize the country, along with economic growth,
a less divisive executive style and increasingly independent media and legislature.
In 2007, the human rights situation was shaped by the run-up to the
December elections and the persistent corruption that has plagued the nation for
decades. In addition, the escalating conflicts in neighboring Somalia and the
Somali region of Ethiopia contributed to instability throughout the region,
strengthening fears of further terrorist attacks in Kenya. Kenya’s borders were
closed to refugees and terrorism suspects fleeing Somalia were sent back, for
rendition to Ethiopia.
A brutal police clampdown on a renegade criminal gang in Nairobi’s slums resulted
in the extrajudicial killings of hundreds of people.
In the Mount Elgon region, clashes among clans of the Kalenjin tribe left nearly
200 people dead and some 116,000 displaced.
Elections and Governance
Kenya’s political climate has improved considerably since the 1990s, when elections
were regularly marred by state-sponsored violence and harassment of journalists
and human rights defenders.
The run-up to the December 2007 elections was far less violent than that of past
election years, although, as of this writing, there were sporadic clashes in various
parts of the country, and a series of attacks on women candidates in local and
parliamentary elections threatened the prospects for fair elections in those areas.
Kenya has one of the most assertive, independent Parliaments in Africa today.
Government frequently struggles to get its legislative initiatives enacted. In turn,
President Mwai Kibaki has on occasion successfully vetoed bills passed by the
legislature. During 2007, Kibaki rejected two publicly controversial bills passed by
parliament—a restrictive media bill and a bill limiting the activities of the Kenya Anti-Corruption Commission (KACC). Public outcry over the bills, and parliament’s
vote to award a huge pay rise to its own members coupled with ongoing revelations
about corruption and patronage, made it likely that large numbers of parliamentarians
would not retain their seats.
Mistreatment of Refugees from Somalia
In December 2006, Ethiopian forces with US assistance ousted the Union of
Islamic Courts (UIC) and installed the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) in
Mogadishu. Several terrorism suspects believed to have been responsible for the
1998 bombing of the US Embassy in Nairobi and the 2002 Mombasa hotel bombing
were alleged by the US to be living in Somalia under UIC protection.
In an attempt to stem the flow of refugees, the Kenyan government closed the
border with Somalia in January 2007 and only gradually opened up limited crossborder
access for humanitarian relief convoys as the year progressed. In January
and February 2007 Kenyan security forces, including the Anti-Terrorism Police
Unit, held scores of individuals who fled Somalia in incommunicado detention for
weeks. At least 85 individuals were then expelled from Kenya to Somalia on several
flights, and were subsequently rendered to Ethiopia, where they were held
for several months without charge.
Among the group detained in Kenya and rendered to Ethiopia were Kenyan citizens
and more than twenty women and young children, most of them under the
age of fifteen. Several individuals were deported from Kenya in the midst of pending
habeas corpus applications in the Kenyan courts. At least 40 individuals,
including the women and children, were released from Ethiopian custody
between April and June, but the whereabouts of scores of others, including the
alleged Kenyan citizens, remain unknown.
The Mungiki Sect and Subsequent Police Crackdown
In June 2007 Kenyan police launched a crackdown on the Mungiki sect, a quasireligious
Kikuyu criminal gang responsible for a spate of recent attacks in
Nairobi’s shanty towns, especially Mathare.
The Mungiki sect engages in mafia-like economic and political activities and
claims to have connections to the nation’s political elite, although the group is
not connected to the state. Its members raise funds through protection rackets,
and by levying extra charges on public transportation as well as water and electricity
connections. Those who are not able or refuse to pay have not only been
denied services but have in some cases have also been kidnapped, tortured,
and, in several notorious cases, beheaded. The victims to date include several
policemen and tourists.
The brutality of the police crackdown matched or even exceeded that of the
Mungiki itself. Police searching for weapons ransacked homes and shops and carried
out brutal interrogations of suspects involving torture and beating. In
November, the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights reported that there
had been over 450 extrajudicial police killings related to the Mungiki violence.
Many of the victims were found with a bullet in the back of the head. The police
denied responsibility for the killings, but many slum dwellers corroborated the
report’s claims.
Media Freedom
Press freedom has improved considerably in Kenya since the elections of 2002.
However, there have been some instances of official intolerance of political criticism.
In March 2006 the Standard newspaper published an article describing a
secret meeting between President Kibaki and an opposition politician. The government
ordered the police to raid the newspaper’s offices, as well as the office
of their broadcast affiliate, KTN channel. The case drew international condemnation,
and there were no similar incidents in 2007. However, certain controversial
issues, such as the Mount Elgon clashes (see below) and the rounding up and
rendition of individuals fleeing Somalia in Kenya are seldom reported on, perhaps
due to wariness about the government’s reaction.
In September, President Mwai Kibaki rejected legislation that included a controversial
amendment introduced by a member of his own party, requiring journalists
to reveal their sources. The move was greeted with widespread relief by the
human rights community.
Corruption
Action to address Kenya’s longstanding problems with corruption continue to be
desultory. The Kenyan Anti-Corruption Commission—established after the 2002
elections—has arrested numerous chiefs, policemen, taxi touts, and others on
charges of bribery. However, since the first KACC head John Githongo fled the
country in 2005, claiming he had been threatened, no effort has been made to
recover the vast sums of government money—which some estimates place in the
billions of dollars—that have been lost in major scandals such as Anglo-Leasing
and Goldenberg. Many senior politicians and judges are alleged to have been
involved, and some officials did resign when these allegations came to light.
In September 2007, parliament passed the Statute Law (Miscellaneous
Amendments Bill) permitting the Anti-Corruption Commission to investigate only
offenses committed after 2003. Since the most serious scandals date from before
that time, this was seen as a move to protect many parliamentarians from prosecution.
President Kibaki rejected the legislation.
Women’s and Children’s Rights
In 2007, Parliament passed a new Sexual Offenses Bill that broadens the definition
of sexual and gender-based violence and imposes harsher penalties on perpetrators.
Women’s rights groups are now actively working to implement the bill.
Kenya also made considerable progress in expanding access to free AIDS treatment
services for the approximately six percent of the population living with HIV.
At present, these programs tend to prioritize adults over children, however.
Poverty and lack of information also prevent many children and adults with AIDS
from obtaining services to which they are entitled.
Human Rights Defenders
Most human rights groups functioned without interference in 2007. However,
Maina Kiai, the head of the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights
(KNCHR) was investigated by the Kenya Anti-Corruption Commission. Independent
non-governmental human rights monitors have claimed the charges may have been related to KNCHR investigations of corruption on the part of the Kenyan government,
including the purchase of a fleet of expensive cars for government officials,
and the use of public funds for by-election campaigns. A full investigation
of the allegations against Kiai is still pending.
In the Mount Elgon region, fighting among clans of the Kalenjin tribe left nearly
200 people dead and around 116,000 displaced. Human rights groups, journalists
and even the International Committee of the Red Cross were temporarily
barred by Kenyan security services from entering the area.
In August, a legal protest against the extremely generous raises that Parliament
voted for itself was violently disrupted by police using tear gas. Many of the
demonstrators were rounded up, beaten and held overnight in police cells. They
were all released the next day.
Key International Actors
Foreign donors, originally optimistic that President Kibaki would crack down more
vigorously on corruption, have lowered their expectations and generally remained
silent about Kenya’s human rights performance. For the US, Kenya is a frontline
state in counterterrorism efforts, and since 2001 US military aid to Kenya has
increased eight-fold, most of it for weapons and training.
Kenya derives only seven percent of its budget from foreign aid, so donor leverage
on human rights issues may be more limited than in other countries in the
region. The World Bank and IMF, which pulled out of Kenya during the Moi regime,
have begun lending again, especially in the areas of public sector management,
fighting corruption and simplifying the legal procedures for starting a business or
selling land.
Despite the nation’s ongoing struggle with corruption, the World Bank has
praised Kenya’s economic reforms and Kenya has also been commended, both
locally and internationally, for its Universal Primary Education Program and for
expanding access to primary health care.