K<EP8
Human rights developments in Kenya were dominated by the implementation of
a new constitution and related judicial and police reforms, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) cases against six Kenyans whom the ICC prosecutor
accused of crimes against humanity. The alleged crimes were committed
during Kenya’s post-election violence in 2007 and 2008. Kenyan politicians
resisted the ICC process, claiming the judicial and police reforms underway
gave sufficient cause to return the cases to Kenya. But there was little progress
on the ground in terms of accountability for post-election violence or human
rights violations by security forces.
The New Constitution and the Reform Process
The new 2010 constitution propelled a series of reforms, including in the judiciary
and the police. It transferred many powers of the attorney general—a political
appointee—to the newly autonomous Directorate of Public Prosecutions;
this was a critical shift, given that outgoing Attorney General Amos Wako’s
record was marked by refusing to prosecute, or arbitrarily terminating, cases
against political heavyweights, including for political violence and large-scale
corruption.
The constitution provided for new appointments for chief justice, deputy chief
justice, director of public prosecutions, and attorney general. In an initial false
start in January, President Mwai Kibaki unilaterally announced appointments for
the first three positions. Civil society groups filed a lawsuit against Kibaki,
charging that the move violated the constitutionally mandated consultative
process for appointments, and a court ruled in their favor. Parliament also
rejected the appointments as unconstitutional. Under pressure, Kibaki withdrew
the appointments. In May the Judicial Services Commission conducted a
transparent interview process, leading to the naming of Dr. Willy Mutunga and
Nancy Baraza, well-respected reformers, as chief justice and deputy chief justice.
However, the procedure for selecting the director of public prosecutions
was not transparent. Further reforms included the naming of judges to a new
Supreme Court.
Police reform proceeded slowly. In August and September parliament passed
two police reform bills that bring the Kenya Police and the previously separate
(and often politicized) Administration Police under one command structure, and
establish a civilian National Police Service commission, which will play a role in
police recruitment, training, and disciplinary proceedings. In November, parliament
passed an Independent Policing Oversight Authority bill, which could be
critical in assuring accountability. Police attempted to initiate a purely internal
vetting process in June, but the process was suspended over criticism of the
lack of civilian oversight.
The ICC Kenya Cases
In December 2010 ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno Ocampo requested summonses
for six Kenyans suspected of organizing and funding crimes against humanity
during Kenya’s post-election violence in 2007 and 2008. Although the government
has regularly pledged cooperation with the ICC, the naming of suspects—
Francis Muthaura, Uhuru Kenyatta, and Hussein Ali in one case, and William
Ruto, Henry Kosgey, and Joshua arap Sang in another—provoked attempts by
the government and parliament to avoid ICC jurisdiction.
In December 2010 parliament called on the government to withdraw from the
Rome Statute. The government did not heed parliament’s call, but launched an
unsuccessful campaign to convince the United Nations Security Council that
the Kenya cases should be deferred, claiming they posed a threat to international
peace and security.
Kenya then filed an “admissibility challenge,” claiming the ICC could not exercise
its jurisdiction as a court of last resort because Kenya was already investigating
the election violence. The ICC rejected the challenge, finding no evidence
that Kenya was investigating the same suspects for the same crimes.
In September the court initiated “confirmation of charges” hearings to determine
whether the cases should continue to trial. The hearings were marked by
attempts by opponents of accountability to intimidate persons perceived to
support the ICC. In September relatives of one ICC witness were physically
assaulted and forced to relocate.
Accountability and Impunity in Kenya’s National Justice System
Efforts to convince the ICC of progress toward bringing election violence suspects
to book in Kenya were not matched by concrete actions. President Kibaki
announced in December 2010 that the government would establish a local tribunal,
but took no steps toward doing so. A few election violence cases proceeded
through the justice system, with one new murder conviction in 2011, but
cases that resulted in convictions did not target planners of the violence. At
this writing no security officers had been convicted for hundreds of killings and
scores of rapes attributed to them during the election violence. At least 19 victims
of police shootings have won civil suits, but the government has not paid
the court-ordered compensation.
The government continued to deny responsibility for extrajudicial executions,
enforced disappearances, and torture during a 2008 security operation in Mt.
Elgon region. NGOs filed cases against the government at the East African Court
of Justice, the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,
and the African Commission on Human and People’s Rights. Local organizations
documented over 300 cases of persons “disappeared” between 2006 and
2008, some by the Sabaot Land Defence Forces, a militia, but most by the
army. The government took no new steps to investigate the “disappearances,”
with the exception of one inquest, or to exhume mass graves.
Extrajudicial killings attributed to the police remained unpunished. No one was
arrested for the killings of police whistleblower Bernard Kiriinya in 2008;
human rights activists Oscar Kamau King’ara and John Paul Oulu in 2009; or
Kenneth Irungu, a teacher killed in March after inquiring into the abduction and
murder of two of his cousins by suspected police. Police caught on camera
shooting unarmed civilians on Nairobi’s Langata Road in January 2011 were suspended
but later reinstated. In one exception to the impunity trend, in May a
Kilifi magistrate filed murder charges against four police suspected of killing
unarmed civilians in 2007; the case was proceeding at this writing.
The Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission began public hearings in April
on human rights violations committed in Kenya from 1963 to 2008. The hearings
afforded victims an important opportunity to testify about abuses by state agents in an official forum, but the commission’s insufficient funds, short operational
time frame, and organizational shortcomings limited its impact.
A witness protection agency was formally launched in mid-2011, but has been
unable to operate due to inadequate funding.
Human Rights Defenders
In September 2010, Ugandan police arrested Al-Amin Kimathi, director of the
Nairobi-based Muslim Human Rights Forum, when he visited Uganda to observe
proceedings against Kenyans accused of the July 2010 Kampala bombings who
had been rendered to Uganda without due process. Kimathi, charged with terrorism,
murder, and attempted murder, was held in pre-trial detention in
Uganda for a year before the charges were dropped in September 2011. In May
Kenya deported Clara Gutteridge, a British fellow with the Open Society Justice
Initiative who was researching abuses by East African governments in the context
of counterterrorism operations, including Kimathi’s case. Kenya claimed
Gutteridge’s activities were “a threat to national security.”
Somalia and Refugee Rights
In March Kenya intervened in Somalia’s civil war, supporting pro-Transitional
Federal Government militias that committed human rights violations. In
October, following the abduction of four foreigners from Kenya by Somali militants
or pirates, Kenyan troops invaded areas of Somalia controlled by the militia
group al-Shabaab.
Police arrested and unlawfully returned some Somali asylum seekers crossing
into Kenya. Most reached Kenya’s refugee camps via dangerous back roads to
avoid police arrest and extortion, exposing themselves to bandits who rob and
rape. The Liboi screening center near the border remained closed.
Kenya delayed opening two new camps—Ifo Extension and Kambios—claiming
they would attract more Somalis. Instead, it proposed building new camps in
Somalia, a dangerous proposition given the ongoing fighting. By August when
the two camps finally opened, over 400,000 refugees lived in three camps built for 90,000. Movement to the new camps encountered delays due to local community
opposition. Reports of rape in the camps increased dramatically and
almost always went unpunished. People with disabilities, especially mental
disabilities, had limited access to medical and social services.
Women’s, Children’s, and LGBT Rights
The Kenyan government undertook to improve access to pain treatment and
palliative care. Access to such care has been poor, particularly for hundreds of
thousands of children suffering pain from cancer, HIV/AIDS, or other diseases.
Eleven government hospitals are in the process of creating palliative care units,
and at least three were functional by September. In August the government
launched the first National Cancer Control Strategy, which recognizes the
importance of pain treatment and palliative care.
Kenya’s maternal mortality ratio remains high, at 488 deaths per 100,000 live
births. About 3,000 fistula injuries occur annually. The department of reproductive
health is developing a fistula policy, but the government has failed to effectively
address recurrent health system problems, including inadequate emergency
obstetric care facilities and lack of accountability, which contribute to fistula
and maternal deaths.
In December 2010 the Kenyan High Court ruled in favor of Richard Muasya, an
intersex individual, for the inhuman and degrading treatment Muasya suffered
at Kamiti Maximum Prison. Muasya and other intersex individuals are appealing
the court’s decision not to recognize intersex persons in Kenyan law. Kenyan
law continues to criminalize homosexual conduct, despite mounting evidence
that the law inhibits effective HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment programs.
Key International Actors
The African Union supported Kenya’s drive to defer ICC cases against post-election
violence suspects, increasing concerns over the body’s commitment to
accountability. The UN Security Council, however, did not grant the deferral
request.
The United States supported counterterrorism initiatives in Kenya and East
Africa. FBI agents were involved in the interrogations of Kimathi and other
Kenyans held in Uganda, despite their knowledge of due process violations
against the suspects.
The UN and most donor states appropriately rejected Kenya’s suggestion that
camps be built in south-central Somalia to house Somalis fleeing conflict,
human rights abuses, and famine.