KENYA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Amid an ongoing political crisis, constitutional reform remained critical to
Kenya’s future and promised to grow in urgency with the approach of the 2002
national election. From January 2001, when the chairman of the governmentappointed
Kenya Constitutional Review Commission was sworn in, progress on
substantive issues was bogged down in controversy about its composition and the
administration of its finances, and dissipated the public hopes initially vested in it.
The repeated efforts of the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) to control
the commission, to exclude or reduce significantly the input of civil society
groups, and to use police to prevent or violently disrupt civic education gatherings
or political opposition meetings further dashed public expectations.
In June 2001, the commission promised a draft of a new constitution by June
and then September 2002. Both dates were viewed as unrealistic. The political
opposition and civil society groups expressed concerns that the process would be
rushed through to completion without sufficient civic education or participation,
or if it proved patently impossible to meet the deadline that President Daniel arap
Moi would seize the opportunity to introduce “interim reforms” by decree. Overshadowing
reform efforts was the question of whether or not President Moi would
step down in 2002 in accordance with the existing constitution’s two-term limit.
When the ruling party and an opposition party merged in June, some saw the move
as a stratagem by Moi to stay in power after the 2002 election.
There was one hopeful development in May, when President Moi agreed to
include civil society representatives within the constitutional review commission.
This concession ended the stalemate that had existed since 1999,when the Ufungamano
group, a coalition of the political opposition and civil society, boycotted the
parliamentary committee originally charged with the task of reviewing the constitution.
As ofAugust 2001, the expanded twenty-seven-member commission,which
included members put forward by civil society groups, was gathering views from
citizens on how they want to be involved in the review process.
In addition to the debate over constitutional review, there were important discussions
over the grant of amnesty for economic and political crimes and over a
motion in parliament to establish a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to
explore human rights violations since 1966. But there was a lack of consensus in
parliament on the need to confront past abuses: the motion was defeated.
the year before, the country’s United Nations human development ranking sank to
123 out of 162 countries.
Many of the loans pledged by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (U.S.
$198 million), and the World Bank (U.S. $150 million) remained suspended due to
the lack of progress on anti-corruption efforts. In December 2000, the IMF suspended
its funding until the moribund Kenya Anti-Corruption Authority (KACA)
resumed work. The World Bank also suspended some development loans. In
August, hopes dimmed for resumption of IMF funding when Parliament failed to
pass a fresh anti-corruption bill, despite personal lobbying by President Moi. The
Constitutional Amendment Bill would have entrenched the new KACA in the constitution.
Opponents of the bill charged that it was too weak and saw in Moi’s advocacy
of it a cynical attempt to please donors without engaging in genuine reform.
In response, Moi immediately ordered the police to investigate corruption cases
pending before the KACA. Without a special session of parliament called by the
president, the bill could not be reintroduced and voted on again until March 2002.
Awaiting action were two other bills the IMF had also tied to renewed funding:
a Code of Ethics bill for public servants and an Economic Crimes bill. In July, the
IMF expressed satisfaction with the latter,which it helped draft, but flagged its dismay
with its most controversial clause—a blanket amnesty for all economic crimes
committed before December 1, 1997. President Moi and his cabinet approved the
amnesty measure, which was sharply criticized.
After initially wooing donors for renewed funding, a backlash against the international
pressure built among KANU politicians, increasing tension between the
donor community and the government. In March, soon after a meeting with World
Bank and IMF officials, the president fired the health minister and his assistant for
mounting a stinging attack on the two institutions. That month, the World Bank
issued a scathing report on ten African countries, including Kenya,which the report
charged was not serious about reform. Transparency International, a Berlin-based
watchdog group, ranked Kenya the fourth most corrupt country in the world
according to the perceptions of international business.
Shortly after, anti-corruption efforts were dealt a blow with the firing of Richard
Leakey in March, following twenty-one dramatic months as head of Kenya’s civil
service. President Moi had lured Leakey from the opposition camp and appointed
him and his “Dream Team” to streamline the civil service, root out corruption, and
revive the economy. Leakey’s appointment was instrumental in obtaining the
pledges of renewed assistance from the international financial institutions. In
Leakey’s short time in office, he was successful in reinvigorating the anti-corruption
initiative and tightening the economy. Resentful of the clout he wielded, a
group of parliamentarians pushed for Leakey’s ouster.
European Union
European Union (E.U.) representatives also pegged disbursement of future
funds to progress in fighting corruption, following a May meeting with President
Moi.While commending Kenya on progress in constitutional review, they said the
E.U. attached particular importance to effective preparation for the coming
national election.They also expressed concern over violations of freedom of speech and assembly, treatment of suspects and prisoners, and an increase in extrajudicial
executions. Denmark announced it would not increase aid until significant
progress was made on governance and fighting corruption, and called for respect
for human rights. And the United Kingdom, a traditionally staunch supporter of
the Moi government, issued two warnings that it would halt funding if reforms
continued to slip.
United States
President Moi held high level meetings with President George Bush and Secretary
of State Colin Powell, and used the opportunity to appeal for United States
intervention for renewed IMF and World Bank funding. In May, Powell visited
Kenya and pledged U.S. $8 million to fight AIDS and urged economic reform
efforts. Powell stressed that the U.S. would closely watch the 2002 elections, and
underscored the importance of democratization. The State Department issued a
formal statement in August urging passage of anti-corruption legislation. On June
27, President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney met with Moi in Washington,
and encouraged him to ensure continued progress on democratization and economic
reform.However, in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, anti-terrorism
efforts came to the forefront of U.S. policy regarding Kenya. In October, Powell
met with Kenyan foreign minister Christopher Obure on Kenya’s cooperation in
anti-terrorism efforts. In November, President Bush met again with President Moi;
this time the discussion centered around anti-terrorism efforts and peace initiatives
for Sudan and Somalia.
Other concerns included regional conflict and proliferation of small arms,
which the State Department warned had reached crisis proportions. President Moi
stepped up efforts to control arms flows by ordering his security and immigration
departments to get involved.Unfortunately, the government’s attempts resulted in
renewed harassment and indiscriminate crackdowns against refugees in Kenya.
The U.S. responded to outrage over the previous year’s shooting of Father John
Kaiser by sending a Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) team to investigate.
Kaiser, a U.S. citizen, was a Catholic parish priest in the Rift Valley and a human
rights activist. He was an outspoken critic of government sponsored “ethnic” violence.
The FBI’s finding of suicide created an uproar among Kenya’s clergy and
human rights community,who were convinced he was murdered.U.S. Senator Paul
Wellstone called for a new inquiry that took into account findings of the U.S.
Embassy’s own investigation. “Reports of ethnic cleansing, provocation of land
clashes, rapes of young women, and harassment of priests and human rights workers
are widespread,”Wellstone said in June.
U.S. assistance to Kenya in FY 2001 was approximately U.S. $66.7 million,
including development assistance, child survival, and food aid, and some $450,000
in International Military Education and Training (IMET) funding.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
In the Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Children’s Rights in Kenya, 6/01