Kyrgyzstan
Popular demonstrations swept through Kyrgyzstan in March 2005, leading to
the ouster and resignation of President Askar Akaev. Echoing the “rose” and
“orange” revolutions that brought regime change in Georgia and Ukraine,
the country-wide protests and disintegration of the Akaev government dramatically
altered the political landscape in Kyrgyzstan.
Following deeply flawed parliamentary elections in February and March
2005, people took to the streets. Outraged by the corruption and repression
that characterized the parliamentary vote—including attacks on independent
media and the perceived unfair advantage given to candidates who were relatives
of the president—protestors in southern Kyrgyzstan and later in the
capital took over administrative buildings and defiantly expressed their dissatisfaction
with the status quo. A variety of grievances merged into a single
demand: the resignation of President Askar Akaev.
Violent clashes between police and protestors flared over several days, and
eyewitnesses reported the presence in the crowd of government saboteurs
who attacked protestors and police alike, causing chaos and panic. Dozens of
people were reportedly injured and government and private property was
damaged. However, police dropped their weapons and refused to use violence
to suppress the protestors who arrived at the Kyrgyzstan White House on
March 24, 2005. The demonstrators forced their way in and took over the
seat of government. One of the leaders during the weeks of protest, longtime
politician Kurmanbek Bakiev, was named the new president. President
Akaev fled the country and later formally resigned his post.
Political prisoner Feliks Kulov was released by protestors on March 24, 2005.
On April 6, the Supreme Court overturned his conviction on charges of
abuse of power; a second conviction, for embezzlement, was quashed on
April 11. Kulov withdrew as a candidate for the July presidential election and
President Bakiev, whose leadership was confirmed in that election, later
appointed him Prime Minister.
Promises of Reform
In the immediate aftermath of the revolution, the people of Kyrgyzstan had
high hopes that the Bakiev government would put a stop to the corruption
and repression that had undermined the Akaev administration.
As of this writing, promises of reform made during the early days of the
Bakiev administration had not materialized. While Bakiev twice in 2005
announced his support for the abolition of the death penalty in Kyrgyzstan
and called for constitutional amendments, no such legislation had been introduced
as of late November.
One of the main reforms urged by civil society activists is the creation of a
new constitution that would restore freedoms stripped during the Akaev era
and would settle important issues regarding the structure of the government,
such as whether Kyrgyzstan should be a presidential or parliamentary republic.
The Constitutional Committee, set up to draft a new constitution, initially
received praise for including civil society representatives in addition to
government officials among its members. However, observers later criticized
the body as ineffective and marred by infighting and noted that President
Bakiev had increased the number of government representatives vis-a-vis representatives
of civil society.
Continuing reports of police abuse in 2005, including torture of adult and
children detainees, further undermined people’s confidence in the government’s
promises of reform.
In a positive development, local rights groups and media watchdogs reported
increased freedom of the media following the change in government.
Human Rights Defenders
During the final months of the Akaev government, as the country geared up
for parliamentary elections, human rights defenders suffered intense persecution.
Tursunbek Akun, a prominent human rights defender and leader of the
NGO Human Rights Movement of Kyrgyzstan, was kidnapped on
November 16, 2004. He was held for fifteen days by men he believed to be
associated with police and national security services. Akun was discovered on
December 1 at a Bishkek hospital where doctors found he was suffering from
“deep psychological trauma.” A private doctor later diagnosed him with a
brain concussion.
Kyrgyz government officials denied that Akun was the victim of kidnapping
or forced disappearance and failed to investigate the possible role of law
enforcement agents in the crime. The spokesman for the Ministry of Internal
Affairs and the deputy chairman of the National Security Service publicly
accused Akun of staging his own disappearance for self-promotion and to discredit
law enforcement bodies. Akun claimed that he had been held by members
of the security forces in the basement of an unknown house, where his
kidnappers allegedly demanded that he stop collecting signatures in support
of Akaev’s resignation. Prior to his abduction, Akun had been actively advocating
for the early resignation of President Akaev. As of September 2005, no
one had been held accountable for the kidnapping and police had halted their
investigation.
Aziza Abdurasulova, head of the human rights NGO Kylym Shamy (Candle
of the Century), was active in the search for Akun while he was missing. On
November 26, 2004, a person who identified himself as a police officer tried
to force her into his car, claiming she had a stolen cell phone and that she
had to be taken to the police station. Her phone had in fact been given to her
by the Bishkek office of the U.S.-based organization Freedom House.
Abdurasulova fled from the officer. She later received calls on her cell phone
from senior police officers asking to meet with her. At a press conference, the
spokesman for the Ministry of Internal Affairs accused her of trying to draw
public and political attention to herself with allegations that police officers
had attempted to abduct her.
With a new government in place, the long-exiled head of the Kyrgyz
Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), Ramazan Dyryldaev, was able to
return to the country. The KCHR continued to face serious obstacles to its operations, however. During the Akaev government, the KCHR had been
stripped of its registration and an alternate group was granted registration
under the same name; it is illegal in Kyrgyzstan for two groups with the same
name to be registered. As of this writing, the genuine KCHR had not been
re-registered.
Key International Actors
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) criticized
the former Akaev government for failing to ensure that the February and
March 2005 rounds of parliamentary elections complied with international
standards. In its report on the July elections that followed President Akaev’s
ouster, the OSCE noted that the “election marked tangible progress by the
Kyrgyz Republic towards meeting OSCE commitments, as well as other
international standards for democratic elections.”
Following a meeting with then-Foreign Minister Roza Otunbaeva in
September, European Commissioner for External Relations Benita Ferrero-
Waldner stressed the “unique window of opportunity for the Kyrgyz government
to show its political commitment to fully embrace democratic values,
develop economic and social policies, which will benefit the Kyrgyz population,
and tackle corruption.”
With relations already at a low point after Uzbek president Islam Karimov
condemned the March “revolution,” tensions between Kyrgyzstan and
Uzbekistan escalated further when hundreds of Uzbeks sought refuge in
Kyrgyzstan following the May 13 massacre of largely unarmed protesters by
security forces in the Uzbek city of Andijan. Uzbek authorities pressured the
Kyrgyz government to return Uzbek asylum seekers and obtained the handover
of four men on June 9. Under strong international pressure, the government
of Kyrgyzstan vowed not to return any more of the refugees.
On July 29, 2005, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees airlifted 439
Uzbeks from Kyrgyzstan to Romania. One month later, the government of
Uzbekistan cancelled its contracts to supply natural gas to Kyrgyzstan. Uzbek
authorities went on to implicate Kyrgyzstan in what they claimed was an Islamic insurgency in Andijan. The state prosecutor’s office charged that the
“rebels” had trained in southern Kyrgyzstan. The Kyrgyz authorities denied
these allegations.
Kyrgyz-Russian cooperation grew closer in 2005 after Kyrgyz authorities
allowed Russia to double the number of its troops at the Kant airbase.
Relations between Kyrgyzstan and the U.S. government deteriorated in the
final months of the Akaev administration. The U.S. Ambassador to
Kyrgyzstan, Stephen M. Young, strongly criticized the government for not
allowing free and fair parliamentary elections. During the March unrest in
southern Kyrgyzstan, the U.S. government called for dialogue and expressed
hope that political changes in Kyrgyzstan would be non-violent. The United
States engaged with the newly-installed Bakiev government on issues ranging
from the use of the Manas airbase near Bishkek to the Uzbek refugee issue.
In April 2005, a group of visiting senators pledged to support the country’s
political transition. During the fiscal year 2004 (October 1, 2003 through
September 30, 2004), U.S. foreign assistance to Kyrgyzstan was U.S.$50.8
million. U.S. expenditures to Kyrgyzstan were expected to increase in 2005.
At a summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) held in
Astana in July 2005, Kyrgyzstan joined Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Russia,
China, and Tajikistan in signing a declaration on strengthening cooperation
in the “fight against terrorism, separatism and extremism.” Despite an official
SCO statement urging the U.S. to set a date for withdrawal from military
bases in Central Asian countries, President Bakiev assured U.S. Secretary of
Defense Donald Rumsfeld that the U.S. could use the base in Kyrgyzstan for
as long as necessary. At the present time, there are more than nine hundred
U.S. troops stationed at Manas airbase.