Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan moved further from its reformist past and ever closer to
joining the ranks of the more authoritarian states of Central Asia. Since
the country’s last national elections in 2000, the government has been
closing space for political competition and civil society. President Askar
Akaev’s chief political rival, Feliks Kulov, remains imprisoned on arbitrary
grounds, and the government is presiding over the steady erosion
of the independent media, violations of free assembly, and unfair elections.
Independent Media
Almost all of Kyrgyzstan’s national television stations, the source of
news for most people in the country, are run by the government, the
president’s relatives, or supporters of the president. The lone exception
has been the television station Pyramida, which in the past occasionally
gave airtime to government critics. But even this relative independence
was compromised after new investors obtained a significant interest in
Pyramida in 2004. Rumors that President Akaev’s son was behind the
deal increased fears that the station would be unwilling to broadcast
critical content.
The November 2003 opening of a U.S.-funded independent printing
press has helped to bolster the independent print media, but the government
uses heavy-handed lawsuits to intimidate and silence these outlets.
A particularly outrageous example of such tactics was a complaint
filed by the government newspaper Vicherny Bishkek, along with several
other private and pro-government newspapers, against the independent
newspaper MSN, formerly known as Moya Stolitsa-Novosti. The complaint,
filed with the government’s antimonopoly agency, said that MSN
was charging too little for its newspaper, thereby undercutting the competition.
The antimonopoly agency ruled that MSN had committed “monopolistic actions,” ordered the paper to raise its prices, and recommended
that the complainants sue the paper for damages.
Recent years have seen a pattern of physical attacks by unknown
assailants on the children of independent journalists and human rights
activists. The most recent of these was an April 24 attack on Chingiz
Sydykov, the twenty-one-year-old son of Zamira Sydykova, editor-inchief
of the independent newspaper Respublica. Sydykov sustained serious
injuries.
Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs)
Fear spread throughout the Kyrgyz human rights community after
rights defender and political activist Tursunbek Akunov went missing.
As of November 22, 2004 his whereabouts remained unknown. Akunov,
the leader of the Human Rights Movement of Kyrgyzstan and a former
presidential candidate in 2000, was last seen on November 16, 2004,
when he allegedly told his wife he was going out to meet with officers
from the National Security Services (NSS, formerly the KGB).
Following his disappearance, the NSS denied that any meeting took
place or that it had Akunov in custody. In the days before he went missing
Akunov was actively campaigning for President Akaev’s resignation
from office.
Government officials use aggressive tactics to disrupt the work of
NGOs. In April 2004 local officials in Issyk-Kul province reportedly
obstructed the convening of several meetings on human rights organized
by NGOs. The Bishkek Helsinki Group was essentially dissolved
after its two leading members were forced to flee the country in 2003
because of government persecution.
In September 2003, the Ministry of Justice stripped the leadership of a
prominent human rights group, the Kyrgyz Committee for Human
Rights (KCHR), of its registration, instead recognizing an alternate executive body using the KCHR’s name. On July 3, 2004, unknown
men broke into the home of Ainura Aitbaeva, the daughter of KCHR
chairman Ramazan Dyryldaev, and beat her, rendering her unconscious.
KCHR also reported that a car tried to run over Aitbaeva when she was
walking with her husband on the evening of November 4. The car hit
Aitbaeva lightly, but the couple escaped uninjured.
In October 2003, the government re-registered the Coalition for
Democracy and Civil Society, an election monitoring and civic education
group, following a significant international outcry. The government
had denied the group re-registration three times in September
2003.
Freedom of Assembly
The state failed to resolve contradictions in the law regarding whether
advance written notification and permission are necessary for holding
public assemblies. The vagueness of the law allows for its arbitrary
enforcement. For instance, the authorities allowed a protest against the
Renton group, a company that allegedly defrauded investors, to proceed.
Police also did not intervene when protestors allegedly publicly
burned signs and threw condoms at officials during a demonstration
against a sex-education text.
However, police commonly disband demonstrations in support of the
political opposition. For example, on April 15, 2004, dozens of peaceful
protestors gathered in Bishkek to call for the release of Feliks Kulov.
Participants say they provided the authorities prior notification, but
police intervened before the march could begin, detaining eighteen
people, including leading civil society activists. Ironically, they were
held at the Pervomaiskiy District Police Department, the site of a pilot
project of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to aid and reform the police. One of the department’s police
officers punched rights defender Aziza Abdirasulova, who was observing the demonstration as part of a project monitoring the right to free
assembly in Kyrgyzstan. Several protestors were charged with holding
an unsanctioned march and fined before being released.
Political Participation
The government refused to release political prisoner Feliks Kulov, head
of the opposition Ar-Namys party, who was President Akaev’s chief rival
in the 2000 presidential election. The Ministry of Justice stated that
Kulov will not be released before November 2005. Presidential elections
are scheduled for October 2005.
Revelations that opposition members of parliament were under surveillance
shocked the country. On January 14, 2004, listening devices were
found in the government offices of several leading opposition parliamentarians.
Such surveillance of citizens is illegal in Kyrgyzstan, except
in cases of ongoing criminal investigation and with the sanction of the
prosecutor’s office. A parliamentary report accused the NSS of illegally
placing the listening devices; the NSS denied responsibility. The report
revealed that prominent civil society leaders were also the targets of illegal
surveillance operations during past years.
Elections
While dozens and even hundreds of political rivals fought for positions
in local council elections in the cities, many local council seats in villages
went uncontested in the October 10, 2004 election. Rural apathy
may be explained partly by the fact that villages are virtual “information-
free zones” and receive little or no news. Many village residents
simply may not have been aware that local councils’ responsibilities
were recently increased to include authority over local budgetary matters
and so did not view them as significant. Potential candidates may
have been dissuaded from running because of the new 1,000 som (about
U.S. $24) fee imposed this year. 
The Coalition for Democracy and Civil Society reported problems with
the composition of the elections commissions and inaccuracies in voter
lists—some of which reportedly included the names of people who had
left the country or died. Independent monitors were prevented from
entering at least one polling station, and there were also complaints that
police stationed themselves inside polling places.
Pro-presidential parties swept the elections. The opposition won only a
handful of local council seats.
Parliamentary elections will be held in February 2005, and developments
to date, including the conduct of local council elections, bode
badly for a free and fair vote. The new pro-government party Alga,
Kyrgyzstan! (Forward, Kyrgyzstan!), reportedly run by President
Akaev’s daughter, has been accused by numerous and credible sources of
forcing people paid from the state budget—teachers, doctors, government
officials, students—to become members of the party, under threat
of losing their jobs.
Torture
Police torture is widespread in Kyrgyzstan. The most commonly
reported forms of torture and ill-treatment are beatings, asphyxiation,
threats of sexual violence, and deprivation of food and sleep.
In November 2003, the Criminal Code of Kyrgyzstan was amended to
specifically outlaw torture, creating penalties of three to five years of
imprisonment. However, Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Internal
Affairs (MVD) officials failed to acknowledge the extent and gravity of
Kyrgyzstan’s torture problem or to formulate a plan to resolve it. The
MVD controls temporary detention facilities in police stations while
other places of pre-trial detention and prisons have been transferred to
Ministry of Justice jurisdiction.
Key International Actors
U.S. officials were rightly proud of the positive contribution made by
the new independent printing press they established in Kyrgyzstan. U.S.
diplomats continued efforts to ensure that Akaev would relinquish the
presidency in 2005.
The U.S. continued to station 1,150 troops at Manas airbase for operations
in Afghanistan. Kyrgyzstan appeared to try to leverage Russia as a
counterweight to U.S. influence, even allowing the Russians to establish
a military base in Kant, outside Bishkek. Economic and political relations
with China also grew closer during the year.
In September 2004 Kyrgyzstan hosted a meeting of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) at which members—Russia, China,
Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan—vowed to make
economic cooperation and counter-terrorism priorities.
The E.U. failed to take serious issue with Kyrgyzstan’s deteriorating
human rights record during its annual meeting regarding the parties’
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA). A statement issued on
July 13, 2004, said only that the E.U. welcomed measures by
Kyrgyzstan toward further democratization and that the parties “reaffirmed
their commitment to tackling terrorism in accordance with fundamental
principles of human rights.”
There were serious, persistent concerns that the OSCE’s project to provide
material support to Kyrgyz police lacked sufficient human rights or
reform focus and might serve only to reinforce an abusive government
agency. The assistance is part of a pilot project meant to be replicated in
other former Soviet countries. 