Kyrgyzstan
Having come to power after the March 2005 “tulip revolution” on the promise of
reform and a commitment to democracy, openness, and respect for fundamental
human rights, the government of President Kurmanbek Bakiev largely failed to
promote these principles. In the year-and-a-half since the ouster of former
President Askar Akaev and his administration, citizens have grown disillusioned
with the revolution and lost confidence in the new government and its promises.
Under growing pressure from the opposition, parliament, and thousands of protesters,
President Bakiev signed a new constitution on November 9, 2006, giving
greater power to parliament.
Uneasy Path to Reforms
The Bakiev government in 2006 revealed itself to be fragile and unable to implement
key components of its reform agenda. The government also failed to curb
organized crime and bring members of crime syndicates to justice. Civil society
groups strongly criticized the government for corruption and abuse of power.
A deeply disillusioned political opposition formed the movement “For Reforms” in
the spring of 2006 that unites civil society and political activists, including members
of parliament. The movement held several peaceful mass protests demanding
that the government either adhere to the principles of the March 2005 revolution
or resign. Activists demanded immediate constitutional reform, freedom of
expression, independence of the mass media, and an effective government campaign
against corruption and organized crime. On November 7, 2006, police used
teargas and flash-bang grenades to disperse crowds after clashes broke out
between Bakiev supporters and opposition protesters who had been in the central
square of Bishkek since November 2.
On November 9 Bakiev and the opposition reached a compromise agreement on
a new constitution that reduces presidential powers. Under the new constitution,
the number of members of parliament will increase from 75 to 90, half of whom
are to be elected from party lists and the other half from single-mandate districts.
Parliament will form the government. The opposition believes that the new constitution
paves the way for reforms.
Although in 2005 local rights groups reported greater freedom of the media following
the change in government, in 2006 these achievements were rolled back.
In September President Bakiev rejected the “Law on the State TV and Radio
Corporation,” adopted by parliament on June 8, that would have transformed the
State TV and Radio Corporation into a public broadcasting entity.
Although Bakiev announced his support for the abolition of the death penalty in
2005, as of November 2006 no such legislation had been introduced. At least five
people were sentenced to death in murder cases in 2006, although a moratorium
on executions introduced under Akaev remained in force.
Civil society activists continued to report frequent incidents of police abuse,
including torture.
Refugee Crisis
Hundreds of Uzbeks have sought refuge in Kyrgyzstan from religious and political
persecution; the vast majority fled in the aftermath of the May 13, 2005 massacre
in Andijan. Uzbek asylum seekers in Kyrgyzstan face harassment and a serious
risk of forced return to Uzbekistan.
On August 9, 2006, the Kyrgyz government violated international law by forcibly
returning to Uzbekistan five Uzbeks, four of whom the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had recognized as mandate refugees and
one asylum seeker. The five had fled to Kyrgyzstan following the Andijan massacre.
The Uzbek government has accused them of violence during the Andijan
events.
Kyrgyzstan ignored repeated calls from local and international rights organizations,
the UN, the European Union, and the United States to refrain from returning
the refugees. The returns violate the 1951 Refugee Convention, which forbids the
return of refugees and asylum seekers to countries where they face persecution.
Because the five men were likely to face torture in Uzbekistan, their return also
violates the absolute prohibition on the return of persons to places where they
risk torture, as articulated in the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
During the summer of 2006 Kyrgyz authorities carried out policing operations in
the south, allegedly in cooperation with Uzbek security services, targeting socalled
religious extremists or alleged terrorists. Many Uzbek asylum seekers were
caught up in the sweeps, and UNHCR in a public statement on August 25
expressed its concern over “repeated incidents involving Kyrgyz police and migration
personnel harassing asylum seekers during document checks, including
alleged verbal abuse and threats of forcible return to Uzbekistan.”
At least five registered asylum seekers “disappeared” in July and August from the
city of Osh in southern Kyrgyzstan. Two were later reported to be in Uzbekistan, in
the custody of the Andijan branch of the National Security Service.
Domestic Violence and Bride-Kidnapping
Despite progressive laws on violence against women, police and other authorities
allow domestic violence and abduction for forced marriage to continue with
impunity. Authorities encourage women to reconcile with their abusers instead of
securing their safety and guaranteeing them access to justice. Bride-kidnapping,
which is a violent and traumatic experience, is often portrayed by Kyrgyz officials
as a harmless tradition.
Human Rights Defenders
Kyrgyz authorities were increasingly hostile toward civil society groups during
2006. On January 24 the minister of justice publicly instructed the ministry’s registration
department to launch an investigation into all nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) operating in Kyrgyzstan that receive foreign funding. Minister
Marat Kaipov specifically called on the registration department to determine
which NGOs funded from abroad might threaten Kyrgyzstan’s national security. In
March the ombudsman sent a letter to Prime Minister Feliks Kulov suggesting a
ban on foreign NGOs working in Kyrgyzstan and on domestic NGOs receiving foreign
funding. Civil society groups were deeply concerned about these initiatives
and called on the Bakiev government not to implement them. To the government’s
credit, both initiatives were rejected.
Government officials launched civil and criminal charges against several rights
defenders—including Valentina Gritsenko, Makhamadjan Abdujaparov,
Abdumalik Sharipov, and Azimjan Askarov of the group Justice, and Maksim
Kuleshov of the group Peace, Light, Culture, apparently in retaliation for their
work protesting the use of torture by Kyrgyz law enforcement agencies.
The Bakiev government also failed to protect civil society activists from assault by
persons believed to be affiliated with organized crime. On April 12 Edil Baisalov,
the head of the Coalition for Democracy and Civil Society and an outspoken critic
of the increased power and influence of organized crime syndicates in the country,
was physically assaulted, sustaining a skull fracture and concussion. Four
days before the attack, Baisalov had led an estimated 2,000 people in a peaceful
march that called for law and order in the country and protested the growth of
organized crime and attempts by criminal groups to gain access to political
power. Prime Minister Kulov decried the attack as politically motivated. At this
writing no one had been charged with the attack.
The Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) remained unregistered. The KCHR
was stripped of its registration under the Akaev government for politically motivated
reasons, when an alternate group was granted registration under the same
name. It is illegal in Kyrgyzstan for two groups with the same name to be registered,
so the genuine KCHR was denied re-registration.
Key International Actors
Kyrgyz-Russian cooperation continued to grow closer in 2006. In April President
Bakiev paid his first official visit to Russia (also his first official visit abroad).
Bakiev and Russian President Vladimir Putin agreed to enhance economic and
military cooperation, including by increasing Russian investment in Kyrgyzstan
and expanding the Russian airbase in Kant. Some suggested Russia’s influence
was behind the tighter restrictions on NGO activity that were proposed during the
year.
The governments of Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan pursued a rapprochement after
heightened tensions following the massive flows of Uzbek refugees into
Kyrgyzstan in 2005, closer relations being signaled by the illegal return of Uzbek refugees and close cooperation between Kyrgyz and Uzbek security forces in
southern Kyrgyzstan. Bakiev and Uzbek President Islam Karimov met several
times during 2006 within the framework of various multilateral bodies. In October
Bakiev paid an official visit to Tashkent, during which he and Karimov once again
stressed the importance of cooperation in fighting terrorism and extremism.
At a summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) held in Shanghai,
China, in June, the leaders of Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Russia, China,
and Tajikistan also agreed to intensify the fight against terrorism, separatism, and
extremism within the framework of the SCO.
Relations between Kyrgyzstan and the US government were close but uneasy in
2006. Following lengthy and reportedly intense negotiations, on July 12
Kyrgyzstan and the US agreed terms for further US use of Manas airbase. As
reported, the US intends to allocate more than US$150 million in total assistance,
including compensation for use of the base, during 2007. US Assistant Secretary
of State Richard Boucher traveled to Kyrgyzstan twice during 2006. Although
Boucher raised a variety of issues with the Bakiev government ranging from the
Manas airbase to the problem of corruption in Kyrgyzstan, he did not make full
use of the opportunity to put human rights concerns high on the agenda. In July
Kyrgyzstan expelled two employees of the US embassy for allegedly having “inappropriate
contact” with leaders of local NGOs.
On July 18, 2006, the EU held its eighth meeting with Kyrgyzstan within the framework
of its Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA). With the exception of a
call for the release of Uzbek refugees held in Kyrgyz custody (and later forcibly
returned to Uzbekistan), the meeting conclusions were generally weak on human
rights and failed to articulate specific benchmarks for progress required of the
Kyrgyz government.