Kyrgyzstan
In 2010 Kyrgyzstan experienced its worst violence and upheaval since independence
in 1991, with disastrous results for human rights.
Unrest surrounding President Kurmanbek Bakiyev’s ouster in early April led to 85
deaths, hundreds of injured, and contining violence. Between June 10 to 14 ethnic
violence shook southern Kyrgyzstan, killing hundreds, injuring thousands,
destroying more than 2,600 homes, and resulting in the temporary mass exodus
to Uzbekistan of nearly 100,000 ethnic Uzbeks from the country’s southern
provinces. For several days Kyrgyz authorities failed to contain or stop the killings
and large-scale destruction, and did not appear to take every possible measure to
protect all citizens.
The country remained extremely volatile after the June violence, especially in the
south, where lack of security and accountability has allowed vigilantism and rule
of force to prevail over the rule of law. As trials related to the violence began,
angry mobs—mostly comprised of relatives of ethnic Kyrgyz killed in June violence—
attacked defendants and their relatives, human rights defenders, journalists,
and lawyers.
A constitutional referendum on June 27, 2010—just two weeks after the mayhem—
transformed Kyrgyzstan to the first parliamentary republic in Central Asia.
Parliamentary elections on October 10 were largely peaceful despite the tense
atmosphere. With five parties passing the five percent threshold, international
observers praised the elections as “pluralistic.”
April Turmoil
On April 7, 2010, demonstrators ousted President Bakiyev from office, throwing
the country into political turmoil. In precedeing weeks, the political opposition
had held a series of demonstrations to air various grievances, including concern
regarding President Bakiyev’s growing authoritarianism, persecution and imprisonment
of influential opposition political leaders, alleged government nepotism
and mismanagement, increased energy tariffs, growing corruption, and government
closure of several media outlets.
Authorities detained several opposition leaders on the eve of nationwide opposition
gatherings planned for early April. Political violence erupted in response to
the first detention and was eventually quelled on April 6 in Talas, a city in northwestern
Kyrgyzstan. Violence erupted again on April 7 in Bishkek, when security
forces tried to disperse a peaceful protest against the detention of more opposition
leaders. Thousands of people eventually gathered in front of the White
House, the main government building in Bishkek, in a standoff with security
forces. Some demonstrators were armed with weapons they had seized from
police. As the situation escalated security forces fired on the demonstrators with
live ammunition.
Clashes ended in the early morning hours of April 8 when opposition supporters
took control of the White House, forcing Bakiyev to abandon his office. He fled
the country on April 15, and a 14-member interim government of opposition leaders
took charge.
The authorities’ investigation into April’s events has focused on members of the
ousted government. It is unclear to what extent, if any, the authorities have investigated
crimes committed by demonstrators, including illegal seizure and use of
weapons.
Mayhem in Southern Kyrgyzstan in June
The political power struggle that followed Bakiyev’s ouster acquired an ethnic
dimension in southern Kyrgyzstan when the area’s large Uzbek minority sided
with the interim government and helped prevent Bakiyev staging a comeback. The
growing role of the ethnic Uzbek community in the political arena led to escalating
tensions and violent clashes between ethnic Uzbeks and Kyrgyz in May 2010.
On the evening of June 10, violence erupted in Osh when a large crowd of ethnic
Uzbeks gathered in the city center in response to several fights between small
groups of ethnic Kyrgyz and Uzbek men earlier that day; the fighting escalated,
with crowds clashing throughout the night.
Outraged by the violence and concerned about their bretheren in Osh, crowds of
ethnic Kyrgyz from neighboring villages descended on the city and joined local residents in clashing with ethnic Uzbeks, looting and torching Uzbek shops and
neighborhoods, and even killing Uzbeks.
Widespread use of heavy military vehicles in the attacks on Uzbek neighborhoods
indicated that, in at least some cases, government forces facilitated the attacks
by knowingly or unwittingly giving cover to violent mobs. It remains unclear
whether government forces actively participated in these attacks, and if so, to
what extent.
On June 13, 2010, violence spread to neighboring Jalal-Abad province, causing
more deaths, injuries, and destruction.
According to official statistics, more than 400 people died during the violence
and around 2,600 homes were destroyed, most of them owned by ethnic Uzbeks.
Aftermath of the Violence
The government’s investigation into the violence has included serious violations
of Kyrgyz and international law. Arbitrary arrests and extortion were widespread,
and there is credible evidence in numerous cases that detainees were ill-treated
and tortured. One man died from injuries he sustained in custody.
The authorities systematically denied defendants due process rights, such as the
right to representation by a lawyer of their choice and the right to consult with a
lawyer in private, which made it impossible for clients to complain confidentially
about ill-treatment, extortion, and other violations. Lawyers also said the authorities
have routinely refused to order medical examinations of detainees in cases of
suspected ill-treatment.
In the vast majority of cases authorities claimed that they had been unable to verify
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and refused to launch criminal investigations.
At this writing no official has been charged or prosecuted for the use of
torture and ill-treatment.
In August the government acknowledged that most individuals detained in connection
with the violence were ethnic Uzbeks, raising concern that the investigation
into the violence was biased. As the post-violence crackdown by police on the ethnic Uzbek community intensified in late June and July, ethnic Uzbeks wanting
to flee to Uzbekistan could not do so due to the closed land border.
At numerous trials related to the June violence, aggrieved relatives of ethnic
Kyrgyz victims attacked ethnic Uzbek defendants, defendants’ relatives, lawyers,
and journalists, before, during, and after trial hearings. Police did little to stop or
prevent these attacks.
For example, on September 15, 2010, a court in southern Kyrgyzstan sentenced
Azimjon Askarov, an ethnic Uzbek human rights defender and head of the NGO
Air, to life in prison for his alleged role in an incident in which an ethnic Kyrgyz
policeman was killed during the June violence. During the trial the victim’s relatives
and supporters threatened and struck Askarov’s lawyer, shouted threats and
insults at the defense team, and beat relatives of the defendant. Police were present
but did not act. The court heard numerous witnesses for the prosecution, but
defense lawyers felt they could not endanger witnesses by calling them to the
stand. On two occasions prior to the trial angry groups, allegedly including the
policeman’s relatives, threatened and physically attacked Askarov’s lawyer. Local
authorities did not respond.
Similar attacks continued at trials through October.
Threats to Human Rights Defenders
Several of Kyrgyzstan’s most prominent human rights leaders received threats in
connection with their investigation into the June violence and its aftermath.
In late June Tolekan Ismailova of Citizens Against Corruption, a human rights NGO,
fled the country for several months with her family after the Osh prosecutor’s
office falsely accused her and Aziza Abdirasulova of Kylym Shamy, another
human rights NGO, of distributing inaccurate information about a police operation
that followed the violence. A few days later Ismailova’s neighbors in Bishkek
reported that strangers had come to the neighborhood to inquire about her family
and where she lived. Abdirasulova received numerous threats. For example in
August, angry residents of Bazar-Kurgan threatened to kill one of Abdirasulova’s
children if their mother monitored Askarov’s trial.
In October two unknown men threatened the program coordinator of
Spravedlivost (Justice), based in the southern city of Jalal-Abad, for providing free
legal assistance to defendants in cases related to the June violence.
Elections
Parliamentary elections on October 10 and the election campaign that preceded
them were conducted in a peaceful and rather pluralistic manner—an important
step towards future free and fair elections. The Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) noted a number of shortcomings though, especially regarding election
legislation and the accuracy of voter lists.
Key International Actors
A unified international community expressed concern about the April 2010 disturbances,
quickly condemned the June violence, and called for the restoration of
law and order. It also called for objective investigations into the events. However,
key governments and international organizations such as Russia, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), and the UN Security Council were much more
hesitant to take necessary measures to protect the civilian population. Despite
calls from the Kyrgyz authorities during the June violence, no international body
proved ready to deploy stabilization forces.
Six weeks after violence erupted in June OSCE participating states reached an
agreement, at the Kyrgyz government’s request, to deploy a small unarmed international
police force to the region in a monitoring and advisory role. The Kyrgyz
government also requested the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly’s special envoy for
Central Asia establish an independent international commission of inquiry into
the June 2010 violence. Due to disagreement within the Kyrgyz government about
both initiatives, their deployment was postponed until after the October 10 election.
At this writing the international commission has commenced its work, while
the government continues to hold up the deployment of the police advisory
group.
During his visit to Kyrgyzstan on April 3, 2010—just before the overthrow of the
Bakiyev government—United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said he was
“troubled” by the crackdown on independent media in Kyrgyzstan and urged
authorities to respect all human rights, including free speech and freedom of the
media.
On May 3, 2010, during Kyrgyzstan’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the UN
Human Rights Council, UN member states issued a number of important recommendations,
including ensuring an early return to constitutional order; rule of law
and respect for human rights; ending all forms of intimidation, harassment,
aggression, arbitrary arrest and detention, and torture against all persons, especially
human rights defenders, peaceful demonstrators, and journalists; ensuring
judicial independence; ensuring the rights of minorities; and inviting the special
rapporteur on torture to visit in 2010. Kyrgyzstan accepted these and other recommendations.
On June 18, 2010, the Council adopted a resolution condemning ethnic
violence in Kyrgyzstan and called on the high commissioner to keep it
appraised of the situation.