Cambodia
Cambodia’s veneer of political pluralism wore even thinner in 2006. The year saw
the jailing of government critics; attempts to weaken civil society, independent
media, and political dissent; crackdowns on protests by villagers and peaceful
public demonstrations; and the continuing pillaging of Cambodia’s land and natural
resources. Prime Minister Hun Sen in March demonstrated his contempt for
human rights by labeling United Nations human rights monitors as “human rights
tourists,” and demanding that the UN secretary-general’s special representative
for human rights in Cambodia be dismissed after he issued a critical evaluation.
Iron Fist
Hun Sen continued to consolidate his power through strategic weakening or cooptation
of his coalition partner, Funcinpec, and the opposition Sam Rainsy Party
(SRP). He ordered the dismissal or forced the resignation of dozens of Funcinpec
officials and parliamentarians.
Opposition leader Sam Rainsy’s reconciliation with his former foe Hun Sen led to
a noticeable decline in his party’s traditional role as government watchdog and
advocate for the poor. After striking a deal with Hun Sen, Rainsy, who had been
convicted in absentia for defamation in December 2005, was pardoned and
allowed to return to Cambodia in February 2006 from a year of self-imposed exile.
SRP parliamentarian Cheam Channy, who had served one year of a seven-year
sentence for allegedly forming an illegal army, was also pardoned in February and
released from prison. The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention had
announced in January that it deemed Channy’s imprisonment arbitrary and illegal.
The National Assembly handed more power to the ruling Cambodian People’s
Party (CPP). In March it approved a constitutional amendment allowing its decisions
to be made by a simple majority rather than a two-thirds vote, virtually
ensuring passage of all legislation proposed by the CPP. In August the Assembly
approved a law that allows parliamentarians to be prosecuted for criminal defamation and to be arrested without prior lifting of their immunity. Both practices
have been used against CPP opponents.
Suppression of Political Dissent and Free Expression
By early January 2006, five human rights leaders and government critics had been
imprisoned after Hun Sen ordered their arrests on charges of criminal defamation,
disinformation, or incitement for criticizing his Vietnam policy. While he subsequently
ordered their release on bail, the charges have not been dropped. In
response, some activists curtailed their activities, while others fled the country
and sought political asylum abroad.
Hun Sen pledged in February to decriminalize defamation, but instead only
removed the penalty of imprisonment, retaining punitive fines. Incitement and
disinformation remain criminal offenses.
Authorities continued to disperse or reject most requests for peaceful public
demonstrations, rallies, and marches, such as the International Labor Day rally in
May. Riot police blocked roads leading to the capital to prevent thousands of
workers from attending. Authorities continued to censor slogans on signs and
banners at rallies that received permits.
Forced Evictions and Illegal Exploitation of Resources
The rural poor continued to lose their land to illegal concessions controlled by foreign
firms, senators, and people with connections to government officials.
Authorities threatened, attacked, and arrested villagers opposed to land confiscation,
logging, and concessions, or prohibited them from airing grievances in public.
For example, in August Koh Kong villagers protesting a land concession controlled
by tycoon and CPP senator Ly Yong Phat were attacked by military
police. At 20,000 hectares, the concession is twice the maximum size permitted
by the Land Law. In several cases during the year, villagers were jailed on charges
of destruction of property or defamation when they protested against the loss of
their land.
Syndicates comprising relatives of senior officials and elite military units continued
illegal logging operations with impunity in several provinces, notably
Kompong Thom. A relative of the prime minister who shot at two community
forestry activists in Tumring commune in 2005 after they attempted to stop his
illegal logging activities has yet to be arrested or charged. In the same
province the HMH company started logging a 5,000-hectare swathe in an illegal
operation that is being protected by armed government soldiers.
In Phnom Penh, the government forcibly evicted thousands of families, claiming
the land was owned by private companies or needed for public projects. Many of
these poor urban families had lived in their settlements for more than a decade.
Police used unnecessary force during evictions. In June, for example, 600 armed
military police officers were dispatched to evict Sambok Chap residents.
Afterwards, the 1,000 displaced families were dumped at a one-hectare relocation
site 20 kilometers from Phnom Penh. It lacked houses, running water, sanitation
facilities, and electricity.
Performance of the Judiciary
The courts—widely viewed as corrupt and incompetent—continue to be used to
advance political agendas, silence critics, and strip people of their land. The
Ministry of Justice continues to have oversight over the Supreme Council of the
Magistracy’s secretariat, a disciplinary body for the judiciary that is meant to be
independent.
Excessive pre-trial detention continued, with accused people routinely detained
for more than the six months allowed by law. In addition, hundreds of prisoners
who have served their sentences remained behind bars because of a judicial
practice in which prisoners must remain in prison until their appeals have been
heard.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
In July, the 30 international and Cambodian judges and prosecutors for the Khmer
Rouge tribunal, which is to be established as an extraordinary chamber within the
Cambodian court system, were sworn in and prosecution investigations began.
Many of the Cambodian judicial officials have poor track records in terms of judicial
independence and competence. The US$56 million tribunal is expected to
commence its trial phase in mid-2007, at a military base outside of Phnom Penh.
Khmer Rouge leader Chhit Chhoeun (Ta Mok), 82, died in July. He had been
detained without trial since 1999, along with Kaing Khek Lev (Duch), chief of the
Khmer Rouge’s S-21 (Tuol Sleng) prison. Other senior Khmer Rouge leaders,
including Leng Sary, Khieu Samphan, and Nuon Chea, continued to live freely in
Cambodia.
Key International Actors
Donors, whose aid constitutes roughly half Cambodia’s national budget,
increased their annual pledge in 2006 to US$601 million, from $504 million in
2005. Cambodia’s largest donors included the European Union, Japan, the United
States, France, Australia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Germany.
Some, including the EU, Germany, UK, France, and the US, publicly condemned
the arrest and harassment of civil society leaders in January, but were less vocal
about other serious, ongoing abuses by the government. Such behavior sent
mixed signals to the Cambodian government.
In March the US ambassador praised National Police Chief Hok Lundy’s cooperation
in addressing human trafficking and drug smuggling, and the FBI awarded a
medal to him for his support of the US global “war on terror.” Hok Lundy has long
been linked to political violence. The US continued to withhold direct funding for
the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, largely because of concerns about the incompetence
and bias of the Cambodian judges.
China, Cambodia’s largest investor, pledged US$600 million in grants and loans
in April, outside of the more structured Consultative Group process. As is typical
with Chinese aid, no conditions were attached to the package.
In June the World Bank announced suspension of several of its Cambodian projects
because of fraud and corruption by Cambodian officials. Instead of investigating
the allegations, Hun Sen claimed that if money was being siphoned off,
World Bank consultants should also be held responsible.
The UN special rapporteur on adequate housing and the special representative
on human rights defenders issued statements condemning forced evictions in the
capital, the “humanitarian emergency” at relocation sites, and the arrest and
harassment of rights defenders. During a May visit, the UN high commissioner for
human rights said that the human rights situation had “deteriorated” and identified
the lack of an independent judiciary as the single most important problem.
“Hun Sen’s government continues its repressive, undemocratic governance,
nowhere near the fulfillment of its international human rights obligations,” she
stated.
