Cambodia
Cambodia became engulfed in a human rights crisis after national assembly
elections on July 28, 2013. Final results announced by the National Election
Committee (NEC), a body controlled by the ruling Cambodian People’s Party
(CPP), returned the CPP, in power since 1979, to a majority in the National
Assembly. The assembly then chose Hun Sen as prime minister, a post he has
held since 1985. Large-scale demonstrations ensued amidst credible allegations
that electoral irregularities and CPP control over election bodies affected
the final outcome. Security forces repeatedly used excessive force to suppress
post-election protests and social unrest, resulting in two deaths and many
injuries.
Although Cambodia’s rapidly growing social media sector remains largely unrestricted,
almost all state and private television stations and almost all print
media, domestic radio stations, and news websites are controlled by or are
loyal to the CPP. While many labor unions exist, strikes are often violently broken
up by the security forces.
National Elections
Cambodian King Norodom Sihamoni amnestied the leader of the opposition
Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), Sam Rainsy, on July 14, 2013, making
it possible for Rainsy to return to Cambodia without facing imprisonment for
previous convictions on trumped-up charges. However, his right to vote and run
in the July 28 elections was not restored.
The CPP controls the media, security forces, and all election management bodies,
including the NEC and its provincial and local affiliates, and the
Constitutional Council. Voter registration in 2013 was marred by CPP-orchestrated
fraud and other irregularities. The NEC announced that the CCP won 68 seats
and the CNRP won 55 seats in the election, a much closer result than the CPP
expected, but it rejected CNRP demands for an independent investigation into
the irregularities.
In the run-up to elections, commanders of the army, gendarmerie, and police
openly campaigned for the CPP and Hun Sen. After the ballot, they proclaimed their support for the contested CPP victory. Hun Sen then ordered a massive
deployment of troops and police in Phnom Penh and elsewhere in an attempt to
prevent demonstrations. A security force lockdown of the capital, Phnom Penh,
on September 15 was accompanied by excessive force against social unrest following
the demonstrations, killing one person and injuring approximately two
dozen others.
On September 20 and 22, security force operations broke up small peaceful
protest vigils in Phnom Penh, on the second occasion deliberately attacking
human rights monitors and journalists along with protesters, injuring at least
20 people. On November 12, 2013, security forces again employed excessive
force, this time while obstructing a march by striking workers, shooting and
killing one person and wounding nine others.
Attacks on Civil Society and Imprisonment of
Human Rights Defenders
In the months before the July 28 elections, security forces violently broke up
peaceful gatherings by civil society groups, especially those protesting alleged
land-grabbing. Excessive force resulted in serious injuries to protesters. After
the elections, government-backed religious authorities threatened and in some
cases assaulted Buddhist monks in order to prevent them from joining opposition
demonstrations.
At time of writing, at least five human rights defenders were serving prison
terms and three others sentenced in absentia were facing prison if apprehended.
All were tried on politically motivated charges, mostly in connection with
defending land tenure rights. They included Bun Roatha, a key figure opposed
to land grabbing in Kratie province, who was sentenced in absentia to 30 years
in prison. Yorm Bopha, sentenced to prison on trumped up charges for leading
a protest against illegal evictions in Phnom Penh, was temporarily released on
November 22, 2013, when the Supreme Court referred her case to a lower court
for further review.
Impunity
Forces under Hun Sen and the CPP have committed frequent and large-scale
abuses, including extrajudicial killings and torture, with impunity. Instances in
2013 included the case of the CPP governor of Bavet municipality, Chhouk
Bandit: although convicted of “unintentional injury” on June 25, 2013, in connection
with his shooting of three women workers during a strike near the town
in February 2012, he was not detained for trial and was allowed to abscond
despite his guilty verdict. Disregarding considerable evidence implicating government
authorities, no one was convicted in a 2013 trial for the brutal murder
of journalist Hang Serei Udom in September 2012 after he published reports
alleging official involvement in illegal logging. No serious investigations were
carried out into the killing and injury of protesters and bystanders during postelection
protests and unrest in September and November 2013.
Those responsible for the 2004 killing of labor leader Chea Vichea remain at
large. After the killing, the government arrested and then instructed the courts
to convict Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun. The two were released in 2009
after the prosecution admitted that there was no evidence against them, but a
court later re-imprisoned them in 2012, sentencing them to 20 years in prison.
Under intense international pressure on the government, the Supreme Court
acquitted and released both men on September 25, 2013. The court, however,
refused their demand for compensation.
Land Rights
A government moratorium remained in place on the granting of Economic Land
Concessions (ELCs) for industrial-scale corporate agriculture on state lands.
Such ELCs have adversely affected hundreds of thousands of people.
Economically and politically powerful actors, however, continue to grab land to
which impoverished residents and cultivators have legitimate tenure claims,
provoking sometimes violent confrontations.
A program organized and run by Hun Sen in his own name to bestow land titles
on some people living within the peripheries of ELCs and other state lands
ended just before the elections with claims the program had benefited up to
360,000 needy households. While many indeed benefitted, in many places wealthy and powerful interests diverted the program to increase their landholdings.
Hun Sen suspended the program in the run-up to the election.
However, in November 2013, the government announced it would resume the program
shortly.
Arbitrary Detention
The authorities routinely detain alleged drug users, homeless people, “street”
children, sex workers, and perceived people with disabilities in “correction centers”
around the country holding at least 2,000 people each year without due
process, where the mainstays of ostensible “treatment” are exhausting physical
exercises and military-like drills. Guards and other staff whip detainees with
rubber water hoses, beat them with bamboo sticks or palm fronds, shock them
with electric batons, sexually abuse them, and punish them with physical exercises
intended to cause intense physical pain. Detainees from some centers are
forced to work on construction sites, including in at least one instance to help
build a hotel.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
The United Nations-assisted Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
(ECCC) continues to suffer the long-term effects of government obstruction of
and non-cooperation with efforts to bring leaders of the Khmer Rouge to justice
for genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes committed during their
rule from 1975 to 1979. The ECCC has fully tried and convicted only one person
since it was established in 2006, the head of the infamous Tuol Sleng torture
center. It is currently trying just two alleged Khmer Rouge senior leaders, Nuon
Chea and Khieu Samphan, both elderly and in ill-health, and only for a few of
the crimes for which the ECCC originally indicted them in 2010. Another ECCC
indictee, Leng Sary, died on March 14, 2013.
Government non-cooperation slowed UN investigations into five other suspects
begun in 2006, one of whom died in 2013. Popular interest and support for the
ECCC has greatly waned.
Key International Actors
The Cambodian government remained heavily dependent on foreign assistance.
Japan was the major aid donor, while China was the largest direct foreign
investor. Vietnam continued to maintain close connections at national and
local levels with government and security force agencies.
The United States provided some non-lethal military aid plus military training,
but was the most forthright foreign government in raising human rights concerns.
Meeting in September, the United Nations Human Rights Council extended
for two years the mandate for a special rapporteur on the human rights situation
in Cambodia.