C8D9F;@8
Twenty years after the signing of the Paris Agreements in 1991, Cambodia’s
human rights record remains poor. The government of the ruling Cambodian
People’s Party (CPP) continues to use the judiciary, penal code, and threats of
arrest or legal action to restrict free speech, jail government critics, disperse
peaceful protests by workers and farmers, and silence opposition party members.
In 2011 it threatened one of the key accomplishments of the Paris
Agreements—the spectacular growth of NGOs, community-based civic groups,
informal associations, and grassroots networks—by proposing a law that would
give it wide discretion to shut down associations and NGOs.
In 2011 the government failed to take meaningful steps to ensure that the judiciary
was impartial and independent. The courts continued to operate as an
arm of the CPP, symbolized by the chief justice of the Supreme Court, Dith
Munthy, remaining a member of the party’s highest decision-making body.
Allegations that Prime Minister Hun Sen was pressuring Khmer Rouge tribunal
officials to drop cases dealt a further blow to the judiciary.
Opposition party leader Sam Rainsy remains in exile rather than face long
prison sentences as a result of politically motivated and manifestly unfair trials.
Noting that criticism of policy decisions is “one of the basic functions of leaders
of opposition parties,” Surya Subedi, the United Nations special rapporteur
on human rights in Cambodia, wrote that opposition leaders “should not be
subjected to criminal proceedings for discharging their responsibilities in a
peaceful manner.”
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Association
The Cambodian government in 2011 pressed forward with a vaguely worded
draft law on associations and NGOs that would require NGOs to register and
would enable the government to order the closure of organizations on arbitrary
grounds. Civil society groups fear that the law will be used to intimidate groups
and associations into silence. National and international NGOs mounted a campaign
opposing the draft law and the UN and key donors such as the United
States and European Union made their concerns known publicly and privately.
NGO fears were deepened on August 2 when the Ministry of Interior (MOI) sent
a letter to local NGO Sahmakum Teang Tnaut (STT) suspending its activities for
five months without specifying the legal grounds for the action. On August 13
the MOI publicly accused STT of “incitement” of persons to oppose development
projects. Authorities issued formal warning letters to two other groups,
Bridges Across Borders Cambodia (BABC) and NGO Forum on Cambodia, and
threatened a fourth group, the Housing Rights Task Force.
The government increasingly is using criminal defamation and incitement laws
to intimidate critics. NGOs identified at least 12 persons imprisoned under such
laws for peaceful expression of views since December 2010. They include Seng
Kunnakar, UN World Food Program employee; Sam Chankea, provincial field
coordinator of Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association
(ADHOC); Leang Sokchouen, staff member from Licadho; and Hang Chakra, editor
of the Khmer Machas Srok newspaper.
The government continues to use a 2009 law on demonstrations to deny
protest requests or compel smaller protests to use remotely placed, so-called
freedom parks for rallies. Many people have staged protests regardless, particularly
over land. In March the government denied permission for a public rally
organized by the Cambodian Women’s Movement Organization and women
workers in central Phnom Penh to celebrate the 100th anniversary of international
women’s day, even though the minister of women’s affairs was scheduled to
speak.
The government also continues to push for a trade union law that would significantly
weaken union rights by amending registration, collective bargaining, and
strike provisions. The draft provisions violate international labor rights standards.
Authorities have prevented at least three public showings in Phnom
Penh of a documentary about the 2004 assassination of labor leader Chea
Vichea. There has been no progress in his case or that of two other union leaders
killed in 2004.
Torture and Arbitrary Detention
Police and the military police routinely use torture to extract confessions that
are used to obtain convictions. Cambodia’s prisons continue to be overcrowded
and lack sufficient food, water, sanitation, and healthcare. A survey by Licadho
found that prisons are “bursting at the seams,” with reported occupancy at 179
percent in April 2011. Campaigners have demanded reforms to limit widespread
use of pre-trial detention and step up implementation of parole procedures and
non-custodial sentences.
Reportedly, Cambodian authorities are arbitrarily detaining more than 2,000
people—including the homeless; street children, some as young as 13; and
people with mental disabilities—in 11 government drug detention centers created
to “treat” and “rehabilitate” drug users. Detainees in such centers are subjected
to torture; violence, including electric shocks and whippings; forced
labor; and military-style drills. Vietnam continued to strongly influence
Cambodian drug treatment policies.
Women and girls—including transgender women—involved in sex work face
beatings, rape, sexual harassment, extortion, arbitrary arrest, and detention by
police and government-hired security guards. A 2008 law on trafficking and
sexual exploitation that criminalizes trafficking also makes “solicitation” illegal,
which has exposed sex workers to arbitrary detention and abuse. Homeless
children, families, beggars, people with mental disabilities, and other indigent
people gathered in police sweeps have been detained and mistreated in government
social affairs centers.
Land Confiscation and Forced Evictions
Illegal land confiscation and forced evictions by government officials and security
forces on behalf of powerful companies and individuals remains a pressing
issue. Land rights activists face violence and arrest, with more than 60 people
imprisoned or awaiting trial at this writing, for protesting forced evictions and
land grabbing.
In August more than 100 protesters from the Prey Lang forest reserve were
arrested in Phnom Penh, the capital, while distributing pamphlets advocating preservation of the forest. Ten people were injured in June in Kompong Speu
when a prosecutor led over 100 soldiers and police to forcibly take control of
disputed land awarded by courts to a Taiwanese company.
Since 2007 Phnom Penh municipal authorities, supported by military and
police, have sought to evict the approximately 4,200 families living in the
Boeung Kak Lake area.The land was transferred by the government in a 99-year
lease to a joint venture between a Chinese company and Shukaku, a
Cambodian company owned by Lao Meng Kim, a senator and senior CPP member.
Intimidation and violence by security forces have forced many families to
accept paltry compensation packages and resettle in remote sites on the city
outskirts.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
Prime Minister Hun Sen has continued to undermine the independence of the
Extraordinary Chambers of the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC), demanding that the
court not pursue cases 003 and 004 against five suspects submitted for indictment
by the international co-prosecutor. In April You Bunleng and Siegfried
Blunk, the co-investigating judges, closed their investigation into case 003
without having appeared to give the cases the rigorous scrutiny warranted. The
international co-prosecutor Andrew Cayley challenged this decision in early
May; a month later the co-prosecuting judges refused his request and threatened
him with contempt of court on specious grounds of violating judicial confidentiality.
The co-investigating judges also significantly narrowed their definition
of “victim,” thereby largely shutting down civil party applications to present
evidence in those cases. In October Human Rights Watch called for the coinvestigating
judges to resign for failing to perform their judicial duties. One
week later Blunk resigned, citing government interference in the court.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Asylum seekers, especially from Vietnam and China, remain at risk of forced
repatriation in violation of the Refugee Convention. On February 15 the government
ordered closed the refugee center in Phnom Penh sheltering Montagnard
refugees from Vietnam. Despite international urging, the government did not amend its sub-decree on determining refugee status, which fails to incorporate
the Refugee Convention’s definition of refugee and otherwise to fulfill
Cambodia’s obligations as a party to that convention.
Cambodian authorities still do not grant asylum to Khmer Krom—ethnic Khmer
from southern Vietnam—who fled Vietnam. Despite promises to treat them as
Cambodian citizens, authorities have failed to grant many of them citizenship
or residence rights.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Since 2008, 40,000 to 50,000 Cambodian women and girls have been recruited
as migrant domestic workers in Malaysia. Recruitment agents often forge fraudulent
identity documents for children, offer cash and food incentives as “loans”
that leave migrants deeply indebted, confine recruits in training centers in
Cambodia for months, and intimidate those who try to escape. Many recruitment
centers have inadequate food, water, and access to medical care. In 2011
three women recruits died while confined in the centers; authorities failed to
undertake thorough investigations into their deaths or hold anyone accountable.
A revised labor regulation in August fell far short of guaranteeing minimum
rights protections for Cambodian migrants going abroad. Drafted with little consultation
with migrants or civil society organizations, the regulation fails to
tackle forced confinement, debt bondage, and child recruitment. Cambodian
embassy officials in Kuala Lumpur and recruitment agencies frequently fail to
protect workers fleeing abuses and in some cases have returned workers to
abusive employers. In October Cambodia announced a ban on sending domestic
workers to Malaysia.
Key International Actors
Cambodia’s donors pledged US$2.8 billion in development aid for the 2009 to
2012 period. From 1998-2008, donors annually contributed approximately $600
million a year. Foreign assistance accounts for over 50 percent of Cambodia’s budget, yet donors have said little about Cambodia’s worsening human rights
environment.
A notable exception was a strong donor response to the draft NGO law, which at
this writing had still not been enacted.
The World Bank suspended provision of new loans after the Cambodian government
failed to address critical problems in a World Bank-supported land titling
program. The bank had for many years raised concerns about high-level corruption
but had rarely taken action.
Japan, Cambodia’s largest donor, said little about human rights, the draft NGO
law, or the Khmer Rouge tribunal debacle. China, another major investor and
donor, continued to increase aid to Cambodia without conditions, undermining
efforts by others to address human rights concerns.