Cambodia
Ten years after the 1997 coup, in which Prime Minister Hun Sen ousted his then
co-Prime Minister Norodom Ranariddh, impunity for human rights violations in
Cambodia remains the rule. 2007 was marked by ongoing illegal confiscation of
farmers land, forced evictions of urban poor, and attacks on rights defenders, as
well as the murders of a trade union leader, a community forestry activist, and a
monk. The judiciary continued to operate at the behest of the executive, and no
progress was made to address rampant corruption or widespread plundering of
natural resources. More than halfway through its three-year mandate, the Khmer
Rouge Tribunal faced serious allegations of corruption and government interference.
Commune council elections, held in April with less political violence than in the
past, were won by Hun Sens ruling Cambodian Peoples Party (CPP). Ranariddh
remained abroad, and in March was sentenced in absentia to 18 months imprisonment
for breach of trust over the sale of his former partys headquarters.
Suppression of Freedom of Expression, Association, and
Assembly
The government continues to control all television and most radio stations, with
media that criticized the government subject to suspension or threats of legal
action. In June 2007 the government banned dissemination of a report by the
international nongovernmental organization (NGO) Global Witness that alleged
complicity of top government officials in illegal logging. Journalists who covered
the report and people who helped prepare it received anonymous death threats.
The French-language newspaper Cambodge Soir suspended publication in June
after a staff strike protesting a reporters dismissal for covering the report.
In August a reporter in Pursat was the victim of two attempted arson attacks on
his home, which the commune police chief attributed to the reporters logging
coverage. Community activists involved in forest protection who came under
attack included Seng Sarom, murdered in July in Stung Treng, and Sath Savuth,
forced to flee his Oddar Meanchey home after a grenade was thrown at it in July.
In July the government-controlled Cambodian Bar Association claimed that
lawyers cannot be legally employed by NGOs or provide legal services unless the
NGO has signed an agreement with the Association. In June Finance Minister Keat
Chhons sister, Keat Kolney, filed a complaint with the Association against nine
legal aid lawyers, accusing them of inciting villagers to file complaints against
her in a Ratanakiri land dispute.
On February 24 Hy Vuthy, president of the Free Trade Union of Workers in the
Kingdom of Cambodia (FTUWKC ) at the Suntex factory in Phnom Penh, was shot
dead. He was the third FTUWKC official to be killed in three years. In May riot
police dispersed 1,000 striking workers from a factory in Kandal protesting the firing
of workers organizing a union there.
Authorities continue to disperse or reject requests for many demonstrations. In
October the government approved a demonstrations law that requires organizers
to give local authorities five days notice and holds organizers responsible for any
misconduct that occurs.
Crackdown on Kampuchea Krom Monks
On February 27, 2007, heavily armed police dispersed a demonstration near the
Vietnamese Embassy in Phnom Penh by Kampuchea Krom (ethnic Khmer originally
from Vietnam) monks. They were protesting religious and ethnic persecution in
Vietnam. That night one of the protesting monks, Eang Sok Thoeun, was found
dead in his pagoda. Police labeled it a suicide, ordered his immediate burial, and
prohibited monks from conducting funeral proceedings. On April 20 Phnom Penh
police forcefully dispersed another Kampuchea Krom protest in which counterdemonstrators
physically attacked the monks. In June Cambodias Supreme
Buddhist Patriarch Tep Vong and the Ministry of Cults and Religion issued an
order banning monks from participating in demonstrations.
On June 30, Cambodian officials defrocked Kampuchea Krom monk Tim Sakhorn,
a Cambodian citizen who was the representative of the Khmer Kampuchea Krom
Federation (KKF) in Takeo, and escorted him to the border. Tep Vong alleged that
Sakhorn had conducted propaganda harming Cambodia-Vietnam friendship by
allegedly distributing leaflets about the KKF. In November Sakhorn was sentenced in a Vietnamese court to one years imprisonment on charges of undermining
national unity.
Rule of Law
In June 2007 the National Assembly passed a long-awaited Criminal Procedures
Code, but it lacked safeguards regarding pretrial detention, rights of suspects
after arrest, and extradition. In July the Constitutional Council ruled that
Cambodia should consider its commitments under the Convention on the Rights
of the Child when sentencing children.
Despite new eyewitness statements, in April the Appeals Court upheld the conviction
of Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun for the murder of labor leader Chea
Vichea in 2004. The original trial and appeals court decision were criticized for
failing to meet fair trial standards by United Nations officials and rights groups.
Land Confiscation
The rural and urban poor continue to lose their land to illegal concessions awarded
to foreign firms, government officials, and those with connections to government
officials. Hun Sen failed to implement a public pledge made in March 2007
to dismiss CPP members involved in land grabs. On several occasions police used
excessive force in evictions, such as in November when soldiers and police shot
dead two unarmed villagers during a forced eviction of 317 families in Preah
Vihear.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
Five senior Khmer Rouge (KR) officials were placed in a detention facility at the
Khmer Rouge Tribunal during 2007: Kaing Khek Iev (Duch), the former chief of S-21
(Tuol Sleng) prison; Pol Pots deputy, Nuon Chea; former KR Foreign Minister Ieng
Sary; former KR Social Affairs Minister Ieng Thirith; and former KR head of state
Khieu Samphan. They were all charged with crimes against humanity and war
crimes, except for Ieng Thirith, who was charged only with crimes against humanity Problems with the work of the tribunal included serious allegations of mandatory
kickbacks by Cambodian staff to government officials in exchange for their positions.
In February, after the Open Society Justice Initiative (OSJI) called for an
investigation of these corruption allegations, government officials threatened to
bar OSJI staff from the tribunals premises and expel their international staff from
Cambodia. International pressure caused the government to back down.
The tribunal has yet to establish satisfactory victims support and witness protection
units. Trials are expected to start in April 2008.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Cambodia continues to violate its obligations under the Refugee Convention by
forcibly returning dozens of Vietnamese Montagnards before they could apply for
asylum with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). As of September
2007 there were 360 Montagnards under UNHCR protection. In April three
Cambodians in Ratanakiri who helped Montagnard asylum seekers make contact
with UNHCR were arrested on human trafficking charges for allegedly accepting
money from Montagnards. Charges were later dropped.
Key International Actors
In June 2007 international donors, whose aid covers half Cambodias national
budget, increased their annual pledge to US$690 million, with Chinas pledge for
the first time included as part of the formal donor package. Top donors were
Japan, China, and the European Union. In June the International Monetary Fund
criticized Cambodias high cost of informal fees and failure to pass an anti-corruption
law. In August the World Bank, which froze some funding for Cambodia in
2006 because of corruption by Cambodian officials, pledged $70 million for
poverty reduction projects.
In August an announcement by the United States that it would increase its counterterrorism
cooperation with Cambodia coincided with Cambodia awarding US
petroleum giant Chevron an offshore mining contract. In February the US lifted a
ban on aid to the Cambodian government instituted after the 1997 coup. New aid
included Foreign Military Financing for the Cambodian military to purchase non lethal excess defense articles and International Military Education and Training
funds. In April the US Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) hosted National
Police Chief Hok Lundy for counterterrorism discussions in Washington, despite
Lundys alleged involvement in political violence, drug smuggling, and human
trafficking.
In March Cambodia endorsed the Oslo Declaration, which bans cluster munitions.