Cambodia
2005 saw a sharp reversal in progress Cambodia had made in observing
human rights and developing political pluralism since the signing of the 1991
Paris Peace Accords. The political opposition was effectively dismantled with
the arrest or threat of arrest of opposition parliamentarians. Activists and
journalists speaking out about fraudulent confiscation of farmers’ land, illegal
logging, or a controversial border treaty with Vietnam were arrested, physically
attacked, threatened with death, or prosecuted and imprisoned on spurious
charges of defamation. Continuing the trend from 2003, authorities dispersed
public demonstrations, at times using excessive force. Impunity for
perpetrators of human rights abuses continued. Political trials demonstrated
the government’s ongoing control, interference, and intimidation in the work
of the courts. Despite an agreement between the United Nations and
Cambodia to bring senior Khmer Rouge leaders to justice, it became increasingly
doubtful that a tribunal established within the Cambodian court system
could ensure fair and impartial trials.
Political Intimidation
The government of Prime Minister Hun Sen moved to silence dissent in
2005, targeting not only the opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP), but independent
media, and civil society. Rights activists, union leaders, and opposition
party members fled the country or went into hiding. In October Hun
Sen threatened to abolish the monarchy.
The assault on the SRP began in February when the National Assembly lifted
the immunity of three opposition parliamentarians. SRP president Sam
Rainsy and Chea Poch fled the country and remained in self-imposed exile
during the year in the face of criminal defamation suits. Cheam Channy was
arrested, initially on allegations of forming an illegal rebel army, and on
August 8 he was sentenced by the National Military Court to seven years’
imprisonment for organized crime and fraud. The judge blatantly prevented
Channy’s lawyers from presenting a proper defense.
Legal action, notably prosecution for defamation or incitement, is increasingly
used to obstruct the work of human rights defenders and other civil society
figures. At least six critics of the controversial new border treaty with
Vietnam faced criminal defamation suits initiated by Hun Sen, including
Rong Chhun, president of the Cambodian Independent Teachers
Association, and Chea Mony, who replaced his murdered brother, Chea
Vichea, as head of the Free Trade Union Workers of the Kingdom of
Kampuchea.
The Judiciary
The courts—widely viewed as corrupt, incompetent, and biased—continue to
be used to advance political agendas, silence critics, and strip people of their
land. In May 2005, the prime minister strengthened his control over the judiciary
by placing the Supreme Council of the Magistracy (SCM)—a disciplinary
body for the judiciary that is meant to be independent—under the
Ministry of Justice.
In addition to the Cheam Channy case, above, a second high-profile political
trial concluded at the beginning of August 2005, when two men were sentenced
to twenty years’ imprisonment on charges of murdering union leader
Chea Vichea. The decision was based not on eyewitness testimony or forensic
evidence, but on a confession—later withdrawn—extracted after one of
the defendants was tortured by police.
The Cambodian Bar Association (CBA) remains subject to political manipulation
and continuing controversy over its 2004 elections. In July 2005, the
Appeals Court reinstated incumbent Ky Tech, supported by the ruling
Cambodian Peoples Party, as CBA president following intimidation and legal
wrangling aimed at ousting elected president Suon Visal.
Freedom of Association and Assembly
Threats to human rights defenders have intensified, with grass roots activists
and human rights workers being subjected to harassment, intimidation,
restrictions of movement, legal action, and physical violence. Authorities continue to impose restrictions on public demonstrations instituted after
anti-Thai riots in 2003.
Conflicts over land rights in 2005 went hand-in-hand with attacks against
activists defending those rights. The potential for unrest has intensified as
villagers are increasingly dispossessed of their land, often through violence or
threats by officially backed forces. In March, police and military police in
Banteay Meanchey fired into a crowd of villagers protesting forced eviction
from their land, killing at least five. Charges were later dropped against the
police officers who allegedly fired on the villagers. Police used excessive force
in dispersing other protests in 2005, including demonstrations in June by
ethnic Pnong in Mondolkiri protesting land confiscation for the Wuzhishan
concession, and a sit-down strike by Montagnard asylum seekers protesting
deportation in July (see below).
In an ominous development for international advocates working in
Cambodia, in July immigration officials refused entry to foreign staff of
Global Witness, an international nongovernmental organization (NGO) that
has exposed abuses in Cambodia’s forestry sector. Cambodian staff members
were threatened, and the group closed its Phnom Penh office.
Freedom of Expression
Opposition media was effectively silenced in 2005. Under threat of litigation,
arrest, or physical attack, journalists increasingly engage in self-censorship.
Only one opposition newspaper and radio station, and one independent radio
station, continue to operate. In September a Radio Free Asia reporter was hit
and dragged by a vehicle with government license plates while reporting on
illegal logging in Ratanakiri. In October, authorities arrested Mom Sonando,
director of the independent Beehive radio station, after he aired an interview
with a critic of Hun Sen’s policy towards Vietnam.
Prisons and Torture
Torture continues to be used by police officers, particularly those attempting
to extract confessions from suspects in detention. In March 2005, police opened fire on convicts during a prison escape from CC3 prison in Kompong
Cham. Nineteen prisoners and one warden were killed and many wounded.
Rights groups later reported torture of prisoners believed responsible for the
break.
Trafficking
Government officials, police, and military continue to operate and profit
from trafficking of women and children. The Cambodian government has
failed to prosecute perpetrators of a December 2004 attack on a safe house
operated by the NGO Afesip, in which more than eighty trafficking victims
were abducted. In a report issued in February 2005, the government stated
the girls had left the shelter voluntarily.
Refugee Rights
Vietnam’s repressive policies against indigenous minority Montagnards continue
to generate a flow of refugees into Cambodia. A January tripartite
agreement between the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), Cambodia and Vietnam was heavily criticized by international
and Cambodian rights groups for authorizing forced repatriation of recognized
refugees who refused resettlement abroad, and providing inadequate
monitoring of returnees in Vietnam. Access by UNHCR and NGOs to asylum
seekers in border areas remains difficult. Provincial authorities continue
to forcibly return Montagnard asylum seekers to Vietnam, including four
from a UNHCR shelter in Phnom Penh in January 2005 and ninety-four
from a shelter in July. In 2005, officials harassed and threatened to arrest
Cambodian villagers suspected of providing food or assistance to asylum
seekers who were not yet under the protection of UNHCR.
Key International Actors
In 2005 Hun Sen warned donors not to interfere in rights issues, stating that
“international pressure only keeps detainees behind bars longer.” The international
community appears to have heeded the warnings, offering little tangible influence on human rights issues. At the annual Consultative Group
meeting in June 2005, donors pledged U.S.$504 million in aid.
In April 2005, Peter Leuprecht, then the U.N. secretary-general’s special
representative for Cambodia, delivered a blistering attack before the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights on Cambodia’s dismal human rights record.
In July he condemned the use of electric batons by Cambodian police on
Montagnard asylum seekers, and called for cancellation of the Wuzhishan
land concession. In November, Kenyan constitutional lawyer Yash Ghai was
appointed by the secretary-general to replace Leuprecht, upon the latter’s
resignation. During a visit in August 2005, the U.N. special rapporteur on
the right to adequate housing criticized officials and military for land-grabbing.
The International Labour Organization criticized the government’s
anti-union activity, notably its concealment of information regarding the
assassination of union leaders. The World Bank exposed evidence of government
corruption, and threatened in January 2005 to freeze U.S.$297 million
in loans, but nonetheless continued to provide new loans.
As foreign governments pledged their required share of the U.S.$56 million
budget of a Cambodia-based, internationally-assisted tribunal under
Cambodian law to bring Khmer Rouge leaders to justice (as agreed in 2004),
Cambodia in 2005 reneged on most of its own financial commitment of
U.S.$13 million, stating it could only pay U.S.$1.5 million. Japan continued
as Cambodia’s lead donor and pledged a major share of funding for the
Khmer Rouge Tribunal. Support for the Khmer Rouge Tribunal was also
pledged by France, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, Norway,
Germany, Netherlands, Denmark, Austria, Sweden, South Korea,
Luxembourg and India.
In 2005, the European Parliament condemned the crackdown on the SRP,
human trafficking, violations of freedom of expression, and Cheam Channy’s
imprisonment. China, one of Cambodia’s most important donors and
investors, refrained from commenting on domestic politics or rights abuses.
In May, Cambodia’s National Assembly approved a bilateral immunity agreement
with the United States that exempts U.S. citizens from the authority of the International Criminal Court, whose treaty Cambodia ratified in 2003. In
response, in August, the United States lifted its ban on military aid to
Cambodia. However, the United States. announced sanctions against
Cambodia for lack of progress on trafficking issues.