Cambodia
Cambodia continued its drift toward authoritarianism in 2008 as Prime Minister
Hun Sen and his Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) consolidated power through
flawed national elections in July. The elections were criticised by the European
Union and the United Nations special representative for human rights in
Cambodia for failing to meet international standards.
Authorities continue to use the criminal justice system to silence critics. Human
rights defenders, journalists, trade unionists, and opposition party members face
intimidation, violence, spurious legal action, imprisonment, and even death.
Endemic impunity, rampant corruption, and illegal plundering of natural resources
remain pressing issues.
National Elections
The CPP won National Assembly Elections on July 27 by a wide majority, taking 91
of 123 seats. While there was less political violence than in past elections, the
vote was marred by the CPP’s near monopoly over the media, bias within the
electoral apparatus, and coerced defections of opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP)
members to the CPP. Lucrative offers of high-paying government positions and
threats of reprisals, including arrest or violence against those who refused, led
hundreds of opposition party members to join the CPP.
In March 2008 police arrested and detained SRP leader Tuot Saron in Kampong
Thom. He was charged with illegal confinement after assisting a distressed former
party colleague following her alleged defection to the CPP under controversial circumstances.
He remains in prison at this writing.
Freedoms of Expression, Association, and Assembly
The Cambodian government controls all television and most radio stations and
regularly suspends, threatens, or takes legal action against journalists or news
outlets that criticize the government. Freedom of speech is hampered by provisions
in Cambodian laws that allow individuals to be criminally prosecuted for peaceful expression of their views. Reporters risk dismissal, physical attack, or
even death for covering controversial issues.
In July gunmen shot and killed Khim Sambo, a journalist for Moneaksekar Khmer
(Khmer Conscience), an SRP-affiliated newspaper. In June, the newspaper’s editor,
Dam Sith, an SRP electoral candidate, was arrested after the paper reported
allegations that the foreign minister had served the Khmer Rouge regime. Sith
was released after one week, but still faces criminal defamation and disinformation
charges. In May, Radio Free Asia journalist Lem Piseth, who was covering
alleged involvement of government officials in a drug trafficking and murder case,
fled the country after receiving death threats.
The government confiscates, bans, or suspends controversial publications. In
May 2008 the government shut down an independent radio station in Kratie after
it sold air time to opposition parties. Cambodian authorities also threatened
Buddhist monks for circulating bulletins advocating for the rights of Khmer Krom
people (ethnic Khmer from southern Vietnam).
A 2007 law on demonstrations requires organizers to give local authorities five
days’ notice and holds organizers responsible for any misconduct that occurs.
Authorities reject requests or forcibly disperse many demonstrations. For example,
in May 2008 authorities in Ratanakiri province prohibited indigenous ethnic
minority villagers from conducting a peaceful march to protest land confiscation.
The government continues to fail to resolve cases involving violence against trade
union activists. Four years after the murder of labor leader Chea Vichea, the perpetrators
remain at large while two men unfairly convicted for the crime are serving
20-year prison sentences. In September 2008, judicial authorities closed the
investigation into the murder of labor leader Hy Vuthy in 2007, despite previous
police statements that warrants had been issued for two suspects.
Workers who organize or strike for better wages and working conditions are subject
to harassment, physical attacks, and unfair dismissal. In February 2008
police and military police forcefully dispersed a strike by garment factory workers
at the Kingsland factory in Phnom Penh who were demanding reinstatement of
fired union representatives. In March union activist Keo Sokun was attacked and
beaten by four men.
Land Confiscation
The rural and urban poor continue to lose their land to illegal concessions awarded
to foreign firms, government officials, and those with connections to government
officials. This has become one of the most critical economic and social
problems in Cambodia. In Phnom Penh, 85,000 people have been forcibly evicted
during the last 10 years, with another 70,000 currently facing eviction proceedings.
Authorities often provide insufficient notice of impending evictions and
inadequate housing and compensation to displaced people afterwards. For example,
more than two years after 1,000 families were forcibly evicted from Sambok
Chap village in Phnom Penh, the government had not yet provided adequate
health care, water, sanitation, schools, and other basic services to the evictees,
relocated to a remote site far from the city.
On numerous occasions police and soldiers have used excessive force in evictions.
In February 2008, 100 police and military police officers fired AK-47 rifles
into the air and used tear gas to forcibly evict 23 families from Russey Keo district
in Phnom Penh. In July villagers in Kampot were beaten and arrested when soldiers
dismantled their houses and evicted them for a land concession.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal
The Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, a hybrid tribunal presided
over by both Cambodian and international judges to address Khmer Rouge era
crimes, continued in 2008 to make slow progress toward holding its first trials. At
this writing, five senior Khmer Rouge officials remain in detention, including
Kaing Khek Iev (Duch), the former chief of Tuol Sleng prison; Pol Pot’s deputy,
Nuon Chea; former Khmer Rouge Foreign Minister Ieng Sary, former Khmer Rouge
Social Affairs Minister Ieng Thirith, and former Khmer Rouge head of state Khieu
Samphan. All are charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes, except
for Ieng Thirith, who was charged only with crimes against humanity.
Serious concerns remain about political interference in the court from the
Cambodian government, corruption among Cambodian personnel, lack of sufficient
victim and witness protection, and the limited number of cases brought to
address the deaths of as many as 2 million people from 1975-1979. Criticism of the tribunal has mounted, with many in Cambodia saying they are losing interest
as the process drags on without tangible results.
Prisons and Arbitrary Detention
Prisons remain overcrowded, with inadequate food, water, health care, and sanitation.
Police routinely use torture to force confessions from detainees. In
February 2008 a police officer in Kep municipality involved in a land dispute with
Princess Marie Ranariddh was arrested, beaten, and detained for a month—part
of the time in shackles—without a court order. In June, Cambodian human rights
organization Licadho uncovered abusive conditions—including lack of food, medical
care, and physical mistreatment—at government-run “social rehabilitation
centers” where sex workers, homeless children and families, beggars, and drug
addicts are detained after arbitrary police round-ups.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
Cambodia continues to violate its obligations under the UN Refugee Convention
by forcibly returning Vietnamese Montagnards before they are able to apply for
asylum with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). During 2008
UNHCR provided shelter in Phnom Penh to approximately 500 Montagnard asylum
seekers, including about 200 new arrivals.
Cambodians who help Montagnard asylum seekers exercise their right to seek
asylum are subject to arrest. In June, the Phnom Penh Court sentenced two men
to four months’ imprisonment for sheltering Montagnards after they had entered
Cambodia to seek asylum.
In October UNHCR announced that Cambodian immigration police, and not
UNHCR, would begin screening all asylum seekers in Cambodia other than ethnic
minority Montagnards from Vietnam.
Rule of Law
No progress was made in 2008 on legal and judicial reform. The Supreme Council
of Magistracy, established to ensure judicial independence, remains politicized and ineffectual, while the Constitutional Council fails to safeguard the constitutionality
of legislation. Despite 15 years of commitments, the government and parliament
have still not passed a new criminal law, anti-corruption law, or other legislation
critical to the protection of human rights.
Key International Actors
Cambodia’s donors still have not seriously pressed Hun Sen and the Cambodian
government to keep their annual promises to promote and protect human rights
and establish the rule of law and judicial independence.
Instead of demanding that the Cambodian government allow the US Federal
Bureau of Investigation to complete its investigation into the March 30, 1997
grenade attack on a rally led by opposition party leader Sam Rainsy—in which at
least 16 were killed and which the US branded a terrorist act—the US in 2008
worked with individuals implicated in that attack and other incidents of political
violence in counterterrorism programs with the Cambodian government. In June
the US raised Cambodia’s anti-trafficking ranking to Tier 2 to reflect its assessment
that the country’s practices had improved. The US continues to provide
funding and training to the Cambodian military.
In September the UN Human Rights Commission decided to create the post of a
special rapporteur on Cambodia to replace the former functions of the secretarygeneral’s
special representative. The last special representative, Yash Ghai,
resigned in September 2008, noting that Cambodia still faces serious human
rights challenges and “deep-seated systematic deficiencies in the judiciary and
other key institutions charged with upholding the rule of law and protecting the
rights of individuals.”
Cambodia is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism
of the HRC in December 2009.