Cambodia
Political stalemate went hand in hand with only minor human rights
improvements in 2004. The country suffered an eleven-month political
deadlock over formation of a national government following inconclusive
parliamentary elections in July 2003. King Norodom Sihanouk
abdicated the throne due to his advanced age and was replaced by his
son, Prince Norodom Sihamoni, in October 2004.
Authorities continue to ban or disperse most public demonstrations.
Politicians and journalists critical of the government face violence and
intimidation and are barred from equal access to the broadcast media.
In addition, the judiciary remains weak and subject to political influence.
Trafficking of women and children for sexual exploitation through
networks protected or backed by police or government officials is rampant.
The government continues to turn a blind eye to fraudulent confiscation
of farmers’ land, illegal logging, and widespread plundering of
natural resources.
Despite an agreement between the U.N. and Cambodia to bring senior
Khmer Rouge leaders to justice, serious doubts remain as to whether a
tribunal established within the Cambodian court system can ensure fair
and impartial prosecutions and trials.
Political Violence and Intimidation
All three national elections conducted in Cambodia since the signing of
the Paris Peace Agreements in 1991 have been conducted in an atmosphere
of violence and intimidation. Political violence continued after
elections in July 2003. In October 2003 a radio journalist and a popular
singer were killed, both of whom were affiliated with FUNCINPEC,
the royalist party led by Prince Ranariddh. In January 2004, five political
activists were murdered, including prominent labor leader Chea Vichea. Another labor activist, Ros Sovannareth, was killed in May
2004.
A political standoff after the 2003 elections, in which no one party
received the required two-thirds majority needed to form a new government,
was resolved in July 2004, when FUNCINPEC entered into a
power-sharing agreement with the Cambodian People’s Party (CPP.)
The opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) and some nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) questioned the legality of the new government,
which was formed on the basis of controversial amendments to the
Constitution.
Weak Judiciary and Impunity
Cambodia has made little progress in reforming its judicial system,
which has been widely condemned for its lack of independence, incompetence,
and corruption. Cases of politically related violence and crimes
committed by government authorities or those with ties to high-ranking
officials are often not prosecuted or even investigated. Chea Vichea’s
high profile murder case has been marred by reports of torture being
used to extract confessions from the alleged suspects, threats against
witnesses, and political pressure on the investigating judge, who publicly
questioned the legality of the suspects’ arrests and called for the case to
be dismissed for lack of evidence.
The Cambodian Bar Association has become increasingly politicized. In
September 2004 the prime minister and three other senior CPP government
officials, none of whom are trained lawyers, were admitted to
the Bar. In November, the Appeals Court nullified the results of a Bar
Association election, in which a legal aid lawyer was elected president.
The court ordered the defeated incumbent, a CPP supporter, to temporarily
reassume the position while a new election was organized. 
Vichea. Another labor activist, Ros Sovannareth, was killed in May
2004.
A political standoff after the 2003 elections, in which no one party
received the required two-thirds majority needed to form a new government,
was resolved in July 2004, when FUNCINPEC entered into a
power-sharing agreement with the Cambodian People’s Party (CPP.)
The opposition Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) and some nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) questioned the legality of the new government,
which was formed on the basis of controversial amendments to the
Constitution.
Weak Judiciary and Impunity
Cambodia has made little progress in reforming its judicial system,
which has been widely condemned for its lack of independence, incompetence,
and corruption. Cases of politically related violence and crimes
committed by government authorities or those with ties to high-ranking
officials are often not prosecuted or even investigated. Chea Vichea’s
high profile murder case has been marred by reports of torture being
used to extract confessions from the alleged suspects, threats against
witnesses, and political pressure on the investigating judge, who publicly
questioned the legality of the suspects’ arrests and called for the case to
be dismissed for lack of evidence.
The Cambodian Bar Association has become increasingly politicized. In
September 2004 the prime minister and three other senior CPP government
officials, none of whom are trained lawyers, were admitted to
the Bar. In November, the Appeals Court nullified the results of a Bar
Association election, in which a legal aid lawyer was elected president.
The court ordered the defeated incumbent, a CPP supporter, to temporarily
reassume the position while a new election was organized.
In mid-2003 four men were arrested in Cambodia on charges of being
members of the Indonesia-based terrorist group, Jemaah Islamiya,
which has links to al-Qaeda. As of this writing, the men still had not
faced trial, far exceeding the legal pre-trial detention limit of six
months.
In January 2004 the Cambodian government dropped extradition
demands for the return from Thailand of political prisoner and SRP
activist Sok Yoeun, whom the Cambodian government has accused of
organizing a 1998 rocket attack on a convoy that included Prime
Minister Hun Sen. Sok Yoeun, a UNHCR-recognized refugee, was
released from Thai prison in January 2004 and allowed to resettle in
Finland.
Khmer Rouge Tribunal and the ICC
After seven years of negotiations, in 2004 Cambodia approved an agreement
with the United Nations to establish an internationally-assisted
tribunal under Cambodian law to bring Khmer Rouge leaders to justice.
However the Cambodian government’s record of interfering with courts
and intimidating judges, as well as the grossly inadequate training of
many judicial officials, gives reason for concern that prosecutions could
be politically influenced.
Pursuant to the agreement with the U.N., the government is to establish
an extraordinary chamber to try senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge
and those who were most responsible for genocide, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity committed while the Khmer Rouge was in
power (1975-79). Based in Cambodia, this “mixed tribunal” will be
comprised of a majority of Cambodian judges working alongside international
judges, with Cambodian and international co-prosecutors.
In 2002, Cambodia became the first Southeast Asian country to ratify
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. In June 2003, however, Prime Minister Hun Sen agreed to a bilateral immunity agreement
with the U.S. that exempts U.S. citizens from the authority of the
court. The draft agreement is expected to be approved by the National
Assembly by 2005.
Restrictions on Freedom of Assembly
The government placed strict new restrictions on freedom of assembly
in January 2003. Since that time, other than during officially-prescribed
electoral campaign periods, the government has denied virtually all
requests for permission to demonstrate on the ground that such gatherings
would jeopardize national security and public order. Authorities
have rejected requests for rallies by students, victims of domestic violence,
environmentalists, opposition parties, and garment workers.
During 2004, authorities banned, dispersed, or intervened during at
least sixteen public demonstrations in Phnom Penh, sometimes using
excessive or disproportionate force. In January 2004, for example, more
than one hundred garment workers were injured when dozens of riot
police beat protestors with batons and fired into they air as they
marched into a rally of two thousand striking workers from the MSI
Garment Factory.
Freedom of Expression
More than one hundred privately owned newspapers are published in
Cambodia, including some affiliated with opposition groups. However
Cambodia’s reputation for having one of the freest presses in Southeast
Asia has been tarnished by official attempts to silence free speech and
block access by opposition parties to the broadcast media, the main
source of information for Cambodia’s largely rural society. Cambodian
television stations are still owned fully or partly by the government.
The government continues to deny a radio broadcast license to the SRP.
In 2003, Chou Chetharith, the deputy editor of the royalist radio station
Ta Prohm, was shot and killed outside the station’s Phnom Penh
offices after Hun Sen publicly warned the station to stop broadcasting
insults directed at the CPP.
Conflicts over Land and Resource Rights
Land confiscation continues to be a major issue throughout the country,
with many land conflicts involving ownership claims by individuals or
private concessions backed by military commanders or government officials.
Concessions granted to private companies by the government have led
to increasing landlessness and destruction of the natural resources on
which Cambodia’s rural population depends for its livelihood. In
October 2004 Hun Sen called for a review of major new land transactions
and a moratorium on new concessions until a subdecree on concession
policy is approved.
Volunteers and staff from human rights groups and environmental
organizations have been threatened, attacked, arrested, and even killed.
In November 2004, six people were wounded in a grenade attack when
hundreds of villagers gathered to peacefully protest commencement of
forest clearing in a long-disputed paper pulp concession granted by the
government to the Pheaphimex Company in Pursat province. Later that
month in Kratie province, community forestry activists were threatened
and one was reportedly beaten by members of the military after villagers
confiscated several chainsaws being used by illegal loggers in a
wildlife sanctuary.
Refugee Rights
Vietnam’s crackdown on ethnic minority Montagnards in its Central
Highlands region across the border from Cambodia (see Vietnam) continues to generate a steady flow of refugees into Cambodia. While
Cambodian authorities have taken some action to assist refugees when
pressured, political considerations often prevail over refugee rights.
In March 2002 Cambodia closed both of its provincial refugee camps
and began to refuse to accept new Montagnard asylum seekers from
Vietnam. In a positive move, in July 2004 the government authorized
the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to travel to
northeastern Cambodia to retrieve hundreds of Montagnard asylum
seekers. By year’s end UNHCR had registered close to six hundred new
arrivals.
At the same time, however, in violation of its obligations under the 1951
Refugee Convention and the Convention against Torture, provincial
authorities—under instruction from the Ministry of Interior—have continued
to forcibly return hundreds of Montagnard asylum seekers back
to Vietnam, where they face ongoing persecution and in some cases
arrest, unfair trials, and torture. In addition, officials have harassed and
threatened to arrest Cambodian villagers suspected of providing food or
assistance to asylum seekers before they have come under UNHCR
protection.
In September 2004 Cambodian authorities deported twelve Vietnamese
members of the Cao Dai church. They had come to Phnom Penh from
Vietnam to deliver a letter requesting religious freedom to international
delegates at an ASEAN meeting. UNHCR was refused access to them
before their deportation. In a positive move, seven North Korean asylum
seekers who were detained for several weeks by Cambodian immigration
police were allowed to seek asylum in South Korea in late
September 2004.
Torture
Torture continues to be used with impunity in Cambodia, particularly
by police officers attempting to extract confessions from suspects
detained without access to lawyers. Under Cambodia’s amended
Criminal Procedure Code, suspects can be held in police detention—
the period when police commonly use torture to extract confessions—
for up to seventy-two hours. In June 2004 the deputy director general
of the National Police publicly condoned the use of torture to obtain
information from suspects during interrogation. Under pressure, he
later retracted his statement.
Human Trafficking
Despite periodic police raids and temporary closure of brothels, powerful
figures running human trafficking networks, and their accomplices—
many of them government officials, soldiers, or police—continue to be
largely immune from prosecution. The government provides little in
the way of social services, counseling, or job training to child prostitutes
“rescued” in high-profile aids, resulting in many returning to the hands
of brothel owners or traffickers. Cambodian men, women, and children
continue to be trafficked to Malaysia and Thailand for forced labor and
forced prostitution.
Key International Actors
Cambodia receives more than half of its annual budget from foreign aid
and loans. Cambodia’s international donors have expressed concerns at
the slow pace of legal and judicial reform, unchecked exploitation of
natural resources, and corruption. In mid-2004 several donors, led by
the Canadian ambassador, successfully pressed the government to
authorize UNHCR to resume field operations in northeastern
Cambodia.
Japan remains the largest bilateral donor to Cambodia and provided the
bulk of the funding for the 2003 national elections, along with the
European Union, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. China is playing
an increasingly influential role in Cambodia, both as a donor and an
investor. The United States has pressed the government to address
political violence and advocated that Khmer Rouge leaders be brought
to trial but it has hesitated to contribute toward the costs of a tribunal.
By December 2004, only three U.N. member states have publicly
announced pledges towards the tribunal’s projected three-year budget of
US$60 million: Australia ($2 million), France ($1 million), and Japan
($3 million).
In 2003 the World Bank reduced its $18 million loan for Cambodia’s
demobilization program and called for $2.8 million to be paid back
because of corruption in the administration of the program. In August
2004 the Bank issued a report harshly critical of rampant corruption
within Cambodia’s investment sector.
The Cambodia Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
continues to downsize its staff and in 2003 closed all of its provincial
offices. During a visit to Cambodia in November 2004 the U.N.
Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Cambodia highlighted
problems with the government’s land concession policies and called for
an investigation into the grenade attack against villagers peacefully
protesting a land concession in Pursat.