Kuwait
Recurring political disputes between the government and Parliament paralyzed
political institutions and the passage of most new legislation. A constitutional
court ruling in June 2013 dissolved the parliament formed in December 2012.
However, the court upheld controversial amendments to the electoral law that
had prompted the opposition’s boycott of the polls in 2012 and sparked violent
street protests. Elections in July 2013 led to the formation of a new parliament,
including two women among its 50 members, one less than in 2012.
Kuwait continues to exclude thousands of stateless people, known as Bidun,
from full citizenship, despite their longstanding roots in Kuwaiti territory.
The government has aggressively cracked down on free speech, often resorting
to a law forbidding any offense to the ruler (emir).
A new effort to dramatically reduce the number of migrant workers in Kuwait
has led to the implementation of regulations to allow for swift and unlawful
deportation.
Treatment of Minorities
There are at least 105,702 stateless people in Kuwait, known as Bidun. After an
initial registration period for citizenship ended in 1960, authorities shifted
Bidun citizenship claims to a series of administrative committees that for
decades have avoided resolving the claims. Authorities claim that many Bidun
are “illegal residents” who deliberately destroyed evidence of another nationality
in order to get the generous benefits that Kuwait provides its citizens.
In March 2011, the government granted Bidun certain benefits and services,
such as free health care and education, as well as registration of births, marriages,
and deaths. Some Bidun have complained there are still administrative
hurdles to accessing these benefits.
In March 2013 the Parliament passed a law to naturalize 4,000 “foreigners” in
2013, touting this as a measure to address the citizenship of Bidun. Activists in
the Bidun community have said this measure has not benefitted their community,
but is being used to grant citizenship to children born to Kuwaiti mothers and foreign fathers. The government confirmed to Human Rights Watch that so
far no Bidun had benefited from the law.
Some Bidun activists say that the real number of Bidun in Kuwait is closer to
240,000, reflecting the government’s failure to update its statistics.
Members of the Bidun community frequently take to the streets to protest the
government’s failure to address their citizenship claims, despite government
warnings that Bidun should not gather in public. Article 12 of the 1979 Public
Gatherings Law bars non-Kuwaitis from participating in public gatherings.
Women’s Rights
In January, Kuwait gave women the right to apply for posts as prosecutors,
which until then were only open to male candidates. This will allow women to
pursue careers as judges in the future. However women continue to face discrimination
in many other aspects of their lives, and large legal gaps remain in
protections for women. Kuwait has no laws prohibiting domestic violence, sexual
harassment, or marital rape. In addition, Kuwaiti women married to non-
Kuwaiti men cannot give their spouses or children Kuwaiti citizenship. Kuwaiti
law does not let women marry a partner of their choice if their father will not
grant permission.
In May, the Kuwaiti authorities announced that Saudi Arabian women would not
be provided with drivers’ licenses while in Kuwait without the permission of
their male guardians; women are not allowed to drive in Saudi Arabia.
Freedom of Assembly
According to local activists and lawyers, government forces responded with
excessive violence to multiple demonstrations by Bidun and Kuwaiti citizens.
Human Rights Watch documented one case where special forces officers beat a
demonstrator in April 2013 when detaining him, and heard allegations of many
more cases.
Freedom of Expression
The year 2013 saw increased violations of free speech in Kuwait. The authorities
brought cases against at least 29 people who expressed critical views of the
government over Twitter, Facebook, blogs, other social media platforms, and at
protests. Human Rights Watch knows of nine cases in 2012.
Most of these cases have been brought under article 25 of Kuwait’s penal code
of 1970, which prescribes a sentence of up to five years in prison for anyone
who publicly “objects to the rights and authorities of the emir or faults
him.” The article gives no detail on what constitutes an offense. Kuwait would
have to demonstrate incitement to violence or similar crimes for these cases to
meet international standards on permissible restrictions of free speech. Human
Rights Watch documented eight cases of political commentary that did not
amount to incitement to violence, but that Kuwaiti courts in 2013 found violated
article 25.
In July, during the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan, Kuwaiti ruler Emir Sabah
al-Ahmad al-Jaber Al Sabah issued a pardon for all those been jailed under article
25. However, the authorities subsequently brought charges against at least
one individual under that article, indicating that the pardon does not represent
a change in government policy.
Migrant Workers
Migrant workers make up around 2 million of Kuwait’s population of 2.9 million,
including more than 600,000 domestic workers. In March 2013, the government
announced that it intended to reduce the number of expatriate workers
by 100,000 every year for the next 10 years, in order to bring the total down to
one million. Kuwait has since adopted a number of mechanisms facilitating
quick, non-judicial deportations in order to reach its goals.
In April, Kuwait implemented a policy of deporting migrants after they had committed
their first major traffic violation. By September, according to local human
rights organizations, the Ministry of Interior had deported 1,258 expatriates for
traffic violations. In August, the health ministry announced that it would deport
any expatriates with confirmed cases of infectious diseases, though Human Rights Watch had not documented any such deportations at time of writing.
These deportations occur without any judicial review.
Kuwait has also adopted indirect methods to push migrants to leave. In March,
Kuwait adopted regulations requiring expatriates applying for a driving license
to be 18 or over, pass a driving test, be a legal resident for at least two years,
have a university degree, and earn at least KWD400 (US$1,400) per month.
Local media reported in August that authorities began evicting expatriate tenants
from private homes owned by Kuwaiti citizens. According to local NGOs,
residential buildings that are rented out to expatriates must be classified as
“investment accommodations.”
Death Penalty
On June 18, 2013, Kuwaiti authorities hanged two Egyptian men, one convicted
of abduction and rape, and the other on murder charges. It was Kuwait’s second
round of executions in 2013, and the first time it had applied the death
penalty since 2007.
Key International Actors
The United States, in its 2013 US State Department’s annual Trafficking in
Persons report, classified Kuwait as Tier 3—among the most problematic countries—
for the seventh year in a row. The report cited Kuwait’s failure to report
any arrests, prosecutions, convictions, or sentences of traffickers for either
forced labor or sex trafficking, and weak victim protection measures.