L<98EFE
2011 was mostly a year of political paralysis for Lebanon. The country had no
government for the first six months, and while political life resumed in July following
the formation of a new government, there was no progress on draft laws
to prevent torture, improve the treatment of migrant domestic workers, and protect
women from domestic violence.
Following multiple riots by inmates demanding better conditions, parliament
approved in September the building of additional prisons to reduce overcrowding,
but failed to tackle the underlying causes of lengthy pre-trial detention.
Activists and artists who usually operate freely faced increased harassment for
criticizing the army and certain high-ranking officials.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Prison Conditions
Despite repeated pledges by the Lebanese government to prevent torture,
accountability for acts of torture remains elusive. A number of detainees, especially
suspected spies for Israel and armed Jihadists, told Human Rights Watch
that their interrogators tortured them in detention facilities, including in the
Ministry of Defense and the Information Branch of the Internal Security Forces.
Lebanon has not yet established a national preventive mechanism to visit and
monitor places of detention, as required under the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture, which it ratified in 2008.
Conditions in prisons remain poor, with overcrowding and lack of proper medical
care a persistent problem. In April the Interior Ministry stated that the country’s
main prison in Roumieh, a facility built for 1,500 inmates, held 3,700. Of
those, 2,757 were awaiting trial. Prisoners rioted on multiple occasions to
protest their conditions of detention. On April 6, security forces killed two
inmates during a raid to end a four-day riot. In September parliament approved
the building of additional prisons to reduce overcrowding in prisons, but failed
to tackle the reasons behind lengthy pre-trial detention periods.
According to the Internal Security Forces, around 13 percent of detainees in
Lebanese prisons were foreigners who had finished serving their sentences.
The group included asylum seekers and refugees who cannot safely return to
their countries.
Lebanon maintained its de facto moratorium on executions, but military tribunals
passed at least three death sentences in 2011 against men suspected of
spying for Israel.
Freedom of Expression
2011 saw increased harassment of activists, bloggers, and artists who criticized
the army and certain high-ranking officials. In March the general prosecutor
opened a criminal investigation against the Lebanese Center for Human Rights
(CLDH) after Amal, a leading political party, filed a complaint against CLDH for
alleging that some detainees reported being tortured by members affiliated
with Amal. In July Military Intelligence summoned Saadeddine Shatila of the
international human rights group Alkarama for his work documenting torture by
security forces and detained him for seven hours. At this writing a military
investigative judge was investigating Shatila for “publishing information harmful
to the reputation of the Lebanese Military.” Also in July Lebanese judicial
authorities detained musician Zeid Hamdan for several hours based on an
accusation that he had defamed the Lebanese president in a song calling on
the president to “go home.”
Refugees
Since April Lebanon has witnessed an influx of Syrians escaping the crisis in
their country. While many subsequently returned to Syria, by mid-October there
were 3,149 Syrian refugees registered with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and Lebanon’s High
Relief Commission. Most of the Syrians reside with host families, often in difficult
circumstances. Lebanese authorities have provided some material assistance:
around 200 refugees are accommodated in two schools in northern Lebanon. In May security forces detained at least 15 Syrian refugees for crossing
illegally into Lebanon, but subsequently released them.
The estimated 300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon live in appalling social
and economic conditions. 2011 saw no improvement in their access to the labor
market, despite a labor law amendment in 2010 that was supposed to ease
such access. The main reason was the government’s failure to implement the
amendment. Lebanese laws and decrees still bar Palestinians from working in
at least 25 professions requiring syndicate membership, including law, medicine,
and engineering. Palestinian refugees are still subject to a discriminatory
law introduced in 2001 preventing them from registering property. In
September, after repeated delays, authorities completed the reconstruction of a
first batch of houses in the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp, which was destroyed
in the 2007 battle between Lebanon’s army and the armed Fatah al-Islam
group. The new houses can accommodate 317 families; at least 8,000
Palestinians from the camp remain displaced.
As of September 30 there were 11,295 non-Palestinian refugees and asylum
seekers registered with the UNHCR, more than 80 percent of them from Iraq.
Since Lebanon has not ratified the 1951 Refugee Convention, it does not give
legal effect to UNHCR’s recognition of refugees and generally treats most as illegal
immigrants subject to arrest; 17 recognized refugees or asylum seekers were
in detention solely for illegal entry.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Following a visit to Lebanon in October, the UN special rapporteur on contemporary
forms of slavery urged the government to enact laws to protect the estimated
200,000 migrant domestic workers who face exploitation and abuse by
employers, including excessive work hours, non-payment of wages, confinement
in the workplace, and in some cases, physical and sexual abuse.
The minister of labor had proposed a draft law to regulate the work of migrant
domestic workers in February but no steps have been taken since. Migrant
domestic workers suing their employers for abuse face legal obstacles and risk
imprisonment and deportation due to the restrictive visa system.
In August the Lebanese parliament enacted an anti-trafficking law strengthening
legal protections for victims of trafficking. It enacted the measure after the
United States government downgraded Lebanon to tier 3, the worst possible
level, in its 2011 report on trafficking in persons.
Male migrant workers—mostly from Syria and Egypt—working in construction
and other manual jobs face hazardous working conditions and are regular targets
for robbery and violent attack. State authorities have not made any concerted
effort to protect them or bring perpetrators to justice.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
In August parliament annulled a provision of the criminal code that had mitigated
sentences for so-called honor crimes. However, parliament has yet to consider
a bill referred to it by the government in April 2010 that would protect
women from domestic violence. The bill requires anyone who witnesses domestic
violence to report it, and obliges perpetrators to provide the plaintiff with
alternative living arrangements, an allowance, and medical expenses. Both Dar
al-Fatwa, the country’s highest Sunni Muslim authority, and the Higher Shia
Islamic Council, oppose the draft bill, and it is feared that their opposition has
paralyzed parliamentary action.
Discriminatory provisions that significantly harm and disadvantage women continue
to exist in personal status laws, determined by an individual’s religious
affiliation, in matters pertaining to marriage, divorce, child custody and
guardianship, and inheritance, as well as in nationality laws and penal laws
relating to violence in the family. In September the minister of labor introduced
a regulation to exempt foreign husbands of Lebanese women and their children
from many restrictions placed on foreign workers, but Lebanese women, unlike
Lebanese men, still cannot pass their nationality to foreign husbands and children.
Legacy of Past Conflicts and Wars
In March, as part of the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review
process, the government pledged to establish a national commission to investigate the fate of the Lebanese and other nationals who “disappeared” during
and after the 1975 to 1990 Lebanese civil war and to ratify the International
Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances.
However, the government took no steps to fulfill these pledges.
An official joint Syrian-Lebanese committee established in May 2005 to investigate
cases of Lebanese who “disappeared” at the hands of Syrian security
forces had not published any findings at this writing. In February three Syrian
brothers from the Jasem family were kidnapped in Lebanon. Military
Intelligence had detained one of them two days earlier for distributing flyers
calling for reform in Syria. The Lebanese judicial investigation stalled despite a
leaked report showing that the Internal Security Forces had information linking
the kidnapping to a Lebanese security official working at the Syrian embassy. In
May Shibli Aisamy, an 86-year-old Syrian dissident, was abducted in the mountain
town of Aley; at this writing there was no information regarding his whereabouts.
Hariri Tribunal
In June the UN’s special tribunal for Lebanon indicted four members of
Hezbollah for the killing of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005. The four
have not been arrested, and the pre-trial chamber is seeking to initiate in
absentia proceedings. The government’s ongoing support for the tribunal was
in doubt as leading parliamentary blocs, including Hezbollah and the Free
Patriotic Movement, criticized the tribunal.
Key International Actors
Multiple international and regional actors compete for influence in Lebanon.
Regionally, Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia maintain a strong influence on
Lebanese politics through their local allies.
France, the US, and the European Union provide assistance for a wide range of
programs, including military training, seminars on torture prevention, and civil
society activities. However, these countries have not fully used their leverage to
push Lebanon to adopt concrete measures to improve its human rights record, such as investigating specific allegations of torture or adopting laws that
respect the rights of refugees or migrant workers.
The UN deploys over 12,000 peacekeepers at Lebanon’s volatile southern border
with Israel as part of its 33-year-old peacekeeping force in the country.