Lebanon
Reforms in Lebanon were stagnant in 2012 as draft laws to stop torture, improve
the treatment of migrant domestic workers, and protect women from domestic
violence, remained stalled in parliament. Women face discrimination under personal
status laws, and vulnerable groups report being mistreated or tortured by
security force members during arrest and in custody. Lebanese authorities and
humanitarian organizations have provided material assistance to the influx of
Syrians fleeing their country’s fighting, but needs are increasing. Approximately
300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon live in appalling social and economic
conditions.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Prison Conditions
Despite repeated pledges by the Lebanese government to prevent torture and
ill-treatment, accountability remains elusive. A number of former detainees,
including refugees, migrants, drug users, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
(LGBT) persons, and sex workers told Human Rights Watch that security
force members ill-treated them during arrest or while they were in detention
facilities, including the Ministry of Defense, the General Security detention facility
in Adlieh, and the Hobeish police station in the capital, Beirut, which houses
the Internal Security Forces’ (ISF) vice squad.
In July, the ISF vice squad arrested 36 men during a raid on a theater suspected
of screening pornographic movies. The men were transferred to Hobeish police
station, where they were subjected to anal examinations. Forensic doctors conduct
the examinations on orders of the public prosecutor to “prove” whether a
person has engaged in homosexual sex. The tests violate international standards
against torture, including the Convention Against Torture and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which Lebanon has
ratified. The Lebanese Doctor’s Syndicate denounced the tests as a form of torture
and issued a directive in August calling on doctors not to conduct the
examinations. In September, Justice Minister Shakib Qortbawi called for an end
to the anal examinations.
In August, ISF arrested 14 Sudanese refugees and asylum seekers as they
engaged in a sit-in in front of an entrance to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) office in Beirut to protest the refugee
agency’s handling of their cases. The refugees reported that ISF officials kicked,
insulted, and threatened some of them while arresting them, and that when the
group arrived at the General Security detention facility in Adlieh some of them
were subjected to beating, humiliation, and threats, including threats of deportation.
On August 30, unidentified armed gunmen detained Lebanese Palestinian journalist
Rami Aysha while working on an arms smuggling story. They beat him and
transferred him hours later to Military Intelligence, who also beat him. He was
released on bail on September 26.
In September, at two separate protests in front of the Lebanese parliament, one
calling for electoral reform and the other for a non-religious personal status law,
security forces also beat several protesters.
In October, members of the Lebanese army beat at least 72 male migrant workers
in the Beirut neighborhood of Geitawi. The soldiers did not interrogate them
about any specific incident, but accused them of “harassing women.” According
to the Lebanese Army, they detained 11 of the migrants but did not specify the
charges against them.
Lebanon has not yet established a national preventive mechanism to visit and
monitor places of detention, as required under the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture (OPCAT), which it ratified in 2008. In October, the
parliamentary Administration and Justice Committee began considering draft
legislation that would establish a National Human Rights Institute, with a permanent
Committee for the Prevention of Torture that would fulfill this obligation.
The committee must approve the draft law before it is reviewed by parliament.
Refugees
Lebanon has witnessed an influx of Syrians escaping the crisis in their country.
Most of the Syrians reside with host families or in ad hoc shelters, often in difficult
circumstances, and in public accommodations, such as schools or rented apartments. At this writing, 95,452 Syrian refugees had registered with the
UNHCR with an additional 34,275 waiting to be registered. Registration does not
grant Syrians legal status, only a right to receive assistance. As a result, they
face the risk of detention and deportation. Lebanon deported 14 Syrians back to
Syria in August, four of whom said they feared persecution upon return.
Many Syrian refugees in Lebanon also report feeling insecure, particularly following
the kidnappings of Syrians and other retaliatory attacks in August for the
kidnapping of Lebanese by armed opposition groups in Syria.
The estimated 300,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon live in appalling social
and economic conditions. 2012 saw no improvement in their access to the official
labor market, despite a labor law amendment in 2010 that was supposed to
ease such access. A survey conducted by the International Labour Organization
(ILO) in 2011 found that only 2 percent of Palestinians have obtained work permits,
that the majority earn less than the minimum wage, and that they are paid
20 percent less on average than Lebanese workers. Lebanese laws and decrees
still bar Palestinians from working in at least 25 professions requiring syndicate
membership, including law, medicine, and engineering, and from registering
property.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Migrant domestic workers are excluded from the labor law and subject to restrictive
immigration rules based on employer-specific sponsorship—the kafala system—
which put workers at risk of exploitation and abuse. In January, Labor
Minister Charbel Nahhas announced that he would look at abolishing the kafala
system, but he resigned over unrelated matters a month later. The newly
appointed labor minister, Salim Jreissati, has yet to put forward legislation that
would protect the estimated 200,000 migrant domestic workers from excessive
work hours, non-payment of wages, confinement in the workplace, and in some
cases, physical and sexual abuse. Migrant domestic workers suing their employers
for abuse also face legal obstacles, and risk imprisonment and deportation
due to the restrictive visa system.
In March, Alem Dechasa-Desisa, an Ethiopian domestic worker, committed suicide
at the Deir al-Saleeb psychiatric hospital. Six days earlier, a video aired
showing a labor recruiter physically abusing her outside the Ethiopian consulate
in Beirut. Following a public outcry, the labor and justice ministers announced
that they were opening investigations into Dechasa-Desisa’s beating and illtreatment,
but the outcome of the investigation had not been made public at
this writing.
Women’s Rights
Parliament is still considering a 2010 draft bill that would protect women from
domestic violence. In August 2012, a parliamentary subcommittee put forward
an amended version of the bill limiting protections dealing with marital rape. As
of November, parliament had yet to consider the amended bill.
Discriminatory provisions that significantly harm and disadvantage women continue
to exist in personal status laws, determined by an individual’s religious
affiliation. Women suffer from unequal access to divorce and, in the event of
divorce, are often discriminated against when it comes to child custody.
Lebanese women, unlike Lebanese men, still cannot pass their nationality to
foreign husbands and children, and continue to be subject to discriminatory
guardianship and inheritance law.
Legacy of Past Conflicts and Wars
In 2011, as part of the UN Human Rights Council’s (HRC) Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) process, the government pledged to establish a national commission
to investigate the fate of those Lebanese and other nationals who “disappeared”
during and after the 1975-1990 Lebanese civil war and to ratify the
International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced
Disappearances (ICCPED). In October 2012, Justice Minister Shakib Qortbawi put
forward a draft decree to the cabinet to establish the commission, which in turn
formed a ministerial committee to examine the draft. Representatives of certain
families of the disappeared and other groups proposed a draft law to set up the
committee.
In 2011 and 2012, reports continued to emerge of Syrians and Lebanese kidnapped
in Lebanon being taken to Syria. Suleiman Mohammed al-Ahmad, a
Lebanese man, was kidnapped in June in Hisah, Lebanon, and transferred illegally
into Syrian custody. He was returned after his relatives conducted a series
of retaliatory kidnappings in Lebanon. An official joint Syrian-Lebanese committee
established in May 2005 to investigate cases of Lebanese who “disappeared”
at the hands of Syrian security forces had not published any findings at
this writing.
In February, the UN’s special tribunal for Lebanon announced that it would proceed
with an in absentia trial of four indicted members of Hezbollah for the
killing of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005. In July, the trial court rejected
motions by the defense arguing that in absentia proceedings violate human
rights. The trial is set to begin in March 2013.
Key International Actors
Multiple international and regional actors compete for influence in Lebanon.
Regionally, Syria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia maintain a strong influence on
Lebanese politics through their local allies.
France, the United States, and the European Union provide assistance for a wide
range of programs, including military training, seminars on torture prevention,
and civil society activities. However, these countries have not fully used their
leverage to push Lebanon to adopt concrete measures to improve its human
rights record, such as investigating specific allegations of torture or adopting
laws that respect the rights of refugees or migrant workers.
As of August 2012, the UN deployed 11,360 peacekeepers at Lebanon’s volatile
southern border with Israel as part of its 33-year-old peacekeeping force in the
country.