Liberia
Throughout 2008 the government of President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf made tangible
progress in addressing endemic corruption, creating the legislative framework
for respect for human rights, and facilitating economic growth, but little headway
in strengthening the rule of law. Numerous incidents of violent crime, mob and
vigilante justice, and bloody land disputes claimed tens of lives and exposed the
systemic and persistent weaknesses within the police, judiciary, and corrections
sectors. The disappointing progress in these sectors, five years after the end of
armed conflict, highlighted the fragility of the security situation and prompted
calls for urgent action.
Disturbing witness accounts of atrocities at hearings of Liberia’s Truth and
Reconciliation Commission did more to generate controversy than to promote reconciliation,
largely due to the lack of remorse or responsibility expressed by perpetrators
who testified. Meanwhile, there have been few efforts to pursue justice
for the egregious human rights violations committed during Liberia’s 14 years of
armed conflict that ended in 2003.
Ongoing Insecurity and Abuses in Law Enforcement
The internal security situation in Liberia worsened in 2008, characterized by frequent
violent criminal acts, including armed robbery and rape, violent protests on
rubber plantations, and deadly land disputes. Lack of public confidence in the
police and judicial system led to mob attacks on police stations and courthouses
to free or attack suspects; incidents of vigilante justice resulted in at least 10
deaths. United Nations peacekeepers deployed to Liberia since 2003 were, on
several occasions, called in to restore calm.
Since 2004 the UN Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has vetted and trained over 3,500
police officers, and together with donors, set up numerous police stations and
barracks. Nonetheless, Liberian police continued to engage in unprofessional and
sometimes criminal behavior, including extortion, bribery, and armed robbery;
frequent absenteeism; and failing to adequately investigate and later freeing
alleged criminals. Few of these infractions resulted in investigation, suspension,
or arrest. Lack of funding for transportation, communications, and forensic equipment further undermined the effectiveness of the national police, especially in
rural areas. These continued problems prompted an increase by 250 of UN police
officers and generated concern about the need for a thorough re-vetting of the
police force.
Performance of the Judiciary
Persistent deficiencies within the judiciary led to widespread abuses of the right
to due process, undermined efforts to address impunity, and prompted calls for
more leadership within the Justice Ministry and international support to strengthen
the sector.
Weaknesses were attributable to insufficient judicial personnel, including prosecutors
and public defenders, limited court infrastructure and logistics, archaic
rules of procedure, and poor case management. Unprofessional, corrupt, and, in
a few cases, criminal practices by judicial staff continued to lead to rights abuses
and undermine progress.
Prisons and detention centers remain overcrowded and lack basic sanitation and
healthcare for detainees. In 2008 hundreds of people were held in prolonged pretrial
detention; only ten percent of the some 1,000 individuals detained in
Liberia’s prisons had been convicted of a crime.
Some improvements were evident, including the continued renovation of courthouses
and detention facilities, construction of separate blocks for female and
juvenile detainees, revival of the Case File Management Committee, establishment
of the Judicial Training Institute, and slight increases in the numbers of public
prosecutions.
Legislative Developments
During 2008 the Liberian government made strides in creating the legislative
framework for respect for human rights and good governance, with two important
exceptions. Progress included the passage of the Freedom of Information Act, creation
of the Anti-Corruption Commission and Governance Commission [mandated
to conduct a much-needed constitutional review], and elaboration of the Poverty Reduction Strategy. Disappointing was the failure to establish either the Law
Reform Commission or the Independent National Commission on Human Rights,
and the passage in July of a law that allowed for the death penalty for certain
offenses. The legislation, passed in response to high rates of violent crime, contravened
Liberia’s obligations under the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Harmful Traditional Practices
Serious abuses resulting from harmful traditional practices continued to occur in
2008, due in part to the absence or distrust of judicial authorities. These included
the killing of alleged witches and “trials by ordeal,” in which suspects are
forced to swallow the poisonous sap of a tree or endure burning—their alleged
guilt or innocence is determined by whether they survive. At least 16 people were
tried, convicted and sentenced for administering the practice, but were months
later granted clemency. Their release, conditional on community service, was part
of a wider public education campaign by the government and UN to discourage
the practice.
Sexual Violence
The incidence of rape of women and girls continued to be alarmingly high in
2008, despite positive efforts by the government and UNMIL, including a sustained
nationwide anti-rape campaign and the establishment of a dedicated court
for sexual violence. While police response to reports of rape improved somewhat,
efforts to prosecute these cases are hampered by deficiencies in the justice system
and the regular dismissal of cases due to out-of-court settlements between
families of the victims and the perpetrators.
Corruption
The potential for corruption to undermine recent gains in establishing the rule of
law and in providing the most vulnerable with basic services such as education,
water, and healthcare received considerable attention by the government and
Liberia’s international partners. Concrete steps to reduce corruption included the creation in September of
Liberia’s first Anti-Corruption Commission, the dismissal and arrest of a number
of corrupt officials, the nullifying of contracts awarded without due adherence to
the legal bidding process, and the continued trials of some 10 public officials
from the 2003-2005 transitional government for the embezzlement of over US$5
million.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Accountability
The Liberian Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), which had since its creation
in 2006 been plagued with leadership, transparency, and operational problems,
showed significant improvement in 2008. Throughout 2008 the TRC conducted
well-attended, countrywide hearings in which over 500 victims and some
35 former faction leaders testified. The victims recounted horrific accounts of war
crimes committed by all sides, while perpetrators often failed to admit violations
or ask forgiveness, and appeared to use the hearings to absolve perceptions of
their guilt. TRC commissioners were praised for having brought the perpetrators to
testify, but criticized for a lack of rigorous questioning to ensure a more accurate
historical account.
In September, Charles “Chuckie” Taylor, Jr., the son of former Liberian president
Charles Taylor, went on trial in the United States accused of torture while he
headed Liberia’s Anti-Terrorist Unit (ATU). On October 30, the jury found the
defendant guilty on all counts. The case against Taylor, an American citizen, is the
first brought under a US federal law that allows charges against a person accused
of torture abroad if the accused is in the United States or is an American citizen. It
is also the first prosecution for war crimes committed in Liberia.
The TRC hearings and the trial of “Chuckie” Taylor generated considerable public
debate about the ongoing need to hold accountable perpetrators of war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed during Liberia’s wars. Questions remain
about whether TRC commissioners would act on their power to recommend individuals
for prosecution, as included in the commission’s mandate; and whether
the Liberian judicial system would be able and willing to try these cases.
Liberian Army
Since 2004 the US has led the recruitment and training of 2,100 soldiers for a
new Liberian army, which, in contrast to the police, has been involved in few
reports of abuse and indiscipline by its members. Recruits were vetted for past
abuses by the American contractor DynCorp.
Disarmament of Former Combatants
Since the end of the war in 2003, 101,000 former combatants have been disarmed.
During 2008 the final group of some 7,250 former combatants received
vocational training or education, but most remain unemployed. A joint program
by the World Bank, UN, and Liberian government to offer short-term employment
to some 60,000 was a welcome initiative. However, increases in global food
prices and continuing high unemployment remain a serious concern for sustained
peace.
Key International Actors
Liberia’s post-war reconstruction needs remained high on the international agenda
in 2008, evidenced by visits by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and US
President George Bush, and the receipt of considerable bi-lateral and multi-sectoral
aid.
The United States is Liberia’s largest donor, and in fiscal year 2007-2008 contributed
more than US$141 million to support democratization, security and
reconstruction efforts. In January the US infused the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission with $500,000, nearly doubling total US support for the TRC since its
establishment.
From a high of US$4.7 billion in debt in June 2007, Liberia has set itself towards
debt relief by clearing its arrears and securing an agreement in April 2008 with
donor nations for 97 percent of Liberia’s debt to be canceled.
In December 2007, the UN Security Council renewed for one year the arms and
travel bans on associates of former President Charles Taylor. In 2008, Liberia was declared eligible for US$15 million in funds administered by the UN Peacebuilding
Commission.