Liberia
During 2010 the Liberian government made some gains in consolidating the rule
of law, ensuring sound fiscal management, and improving access to key economic
rights, including health care and primary education.
However, inadequate police response to persistent violent incidents, continued
deficiencies in the judiciary and criminal justice sectors, and the failure to prosecute
civil servants implicated in large-scale embezzlement resulted in increased
domestic and , to a lesser extent, international criticism of the government of
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf. Concern about these weaknesses was heightened
by several risk factors, notably high unemployment, communal tensions, and the
upcoming 2011 presidential and parliamentary elections.
Meanwhile, there was little progress in ensuring justice for victims of war crimes
committed during Liberia’s years of armed conflict, or in implementing the recommendations
of the 2009 report of Liberia’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission
(TRC).
Insecurity and Police Conduct
High rates of crime, including armed robbery and rape, as well as violent protests
over layoffs and land disputes, including one in Lofa county that left four dead,
continued to be of major concern in 2010.
The undisciplined, poorly managed, and ill-equipped Liberian police were challenged
to maintain law and order. On several occasions, their failure to do so
necessitated the intervention of United Nations peacekeepers, deployed to
Liberia since 2003. Lack of public confidence in the police and criminal justice
systems led people to take justice into their own hands, resulting in mob attacks
on alleged criminals and others, causing several deaths.
Liberian police continue to engage in unprofessional and sometimes abusive and
criminal behavior, including frequent absenteeism, extortion, bribery, assault,
and rape. They frequently fail to adequately investigate alleged criminals, and
when they make arrests, suspects are often freed. Lack of funding for transportation and communications equipment further undermines the effectiveness of the
national police, especially in rural areas.
However, the police demonstrated some improvement in 2010. Crime levels in
Monrovia, the capital, dropped somewhat as a result of more proactive patrolling.
The actions of two new elite squads – the Emergency Response Unit and the
Police Support Unit – led to multiple arrests and showed promise in responding
to unrest. The police leadership showed an increased willingness and ability to
respond to complaints of misconduct within the force, and implemented a performance
appraisal system to monitor individual officers, and a database to track
cases of misconduct.
Judiciary Weaknesses
Persistent deficiencies in Liberia’s judiciary led to widespread abuses of the right
to due process and undermined efforts to address impunity for the perpetrators
of crimes. The problems include insufficient judicial personnel, including prosecutors,
public defenders, and clerks; an inadequate number of courtrooms; logistical
constraints, including insufficient computers, photocopiers, and vehicles to
transport prisoners and witnesses to court; archaic rules of procedure; and poor
case management. Witnesses’ refusal to testify, jurors’ willingness to accept
bribes, and unprofessional and corrupt practices by judicial staff also undermined
progress.
Because of the courts’ inability to adequately process cases, hundreds of prisoners
were held in extended pretrial detention in overcrowded jails and detention
centers that lack basic sanitation, nutrition, and health care; in 2010 just over 10
percent of the roughly 1,700 individuals detained in Liberia’s prisons had been
convicted of a crime. The number of jailbreaks—at least 12 in 2010—illuminated
continuing weaknesses in the criminal justice system. Improvements included the
deployment of over 20 public defenders throughout Liberia and a mobile “fast
track” court operating out of the Monrovia Central Prison, which helped to clear
the backlog of pretrial detainees.
Harmful Traditional Practices
Serious abuses and some deaths resulting from harmful traditional practices continued
to occur in 2010, in part because of distrust of the judicial system and the
absence of law enforcement and judicial authorities. These included ritual
killings, including one case in which alleged perpetrators were local government
officials; killings of alleged witches; and “trials by ordeal” in which suspects of
crimes are forced to swallow the poisonous sap of a tree or endure burning, their
guilt or innocence determined by whether they survive. The government condemned
these practices and on several occasions the police and judiciary took
action against alleged perpetrators.
Sexual Violence
The incidence of rape of women and girls continued to be alarmingly high in
2010, despite the establishment in 2009 of a dedicated court for sexual violence.
The majority of victims were under the age of 16. While public reporting and the
police response to reports of rape improved, deficiencies in the justice system
and the reluctance of witnesses to testify hampered efforts to prosecute cases.
Corruption
While authorities made progress in conducting regular audits and putting programs
in place to improve public finance management, these efforts made little
headway in curbing official malfeasance. Corruption scandals—including allegations
involving the ministers of information, interior, and gender; the inspector
general of police and police deputy commissioner for administration; the head of
the Telecommunications Authority and high-level members of the Finance
Ministry and Central Bank—resulted in few investigations and only two convictions,
with a third case pending. The work of the Anti-Corruption Commission, created
in 2008, was hampered by insufficient funds, personnel, and authority to
independently prosecute cases. The government’s refusal to prosecute some
high-ranking civil servants and to take action against individuals cited in a controversial
financial audit led to the perception that the president lacks the will to
address the problem. Corrupt practices in large part gave rise to the armed conflicts that wracked Liberia in the 1990s and ended in 2003, and have long undermined
the provision of basic education and health care to the most vulnerable.
The Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, in effect since 2009, was
implemented over the course of the year, but the lack of government control over
some mining areas undermined adherence to the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, the global effort to end the trade in conflict minerals.
Legislative Developments
In September the parliament passed the Freedom of Information Bill, and also
finally constituted the Independent National Commission on Human Rights, seven
years after it was mandated by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to protect
human rights and oversee the implementation of the TRC’s recommendations.
Problems marred the selection of the commission’s members—including a flawed
vetting procedure, inadequate involvement of civil society groups, and the initial
selection of a member with close ties to the president, and of other members
who lacked relevant experience—generating concerns about the president’s commitment
to the commission and its potential for independence.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Accountability
The Liberian government made no progress in ensuring the prosecution of those
responsible for war crimes committed during the armed conflicts, and made little
effort to implement the recommendations of the TRC.
The TRC, mandated to investigate human rights violations committed between
1979 and 2003, presented its final report to the government in December 2009,
and concluded its four-year mandate in June 2010. Its key recommendations
included dispensing reparations; establishing a criminal tribunal to prosecute the
most notorious perpetrators; barring from public office scores of former supporters
of the warring factions, including the current president; and instituting an
informal village-based reconciliation mechanism. Implementing the recommendations
was slowed by disagreement about whether the executive, legislature, or
the Independent National Commission on Human Rights should take the lead, as
well as legitimate questions about the constitutionality of some recommendations. The poor quality of sections of the report, notably the lack of solid factual
evidence about those recommended for prosecution and bans from public office,
further undermined its findings. During the year the president asked the Justice
Ministry, the Law Reform Commission, and the Liberian National Bar Association
to study the legal and constitutional implications of the recommendations.
However, the slow pace of this consultation process raised questions about the
president’s will to move things forward.
Liberian Army
The program funded and led by the United States to recruit and train a new
2,000-member Liberian army completed its work in December 2009. Continued
training and mentoring of the officer corps was conducted throughout the year by
some 60 US military personnel. Soldiers nonetheless committed numerous criminal
acts, which were mostly addressed by the judiciary. The new army has yet to
put in place a court martial board or military tribunal.
Key International Actors
Persistent weaknesses in security and rule of law institutions despite considerable
foreign aid generated concern among Liberia’s key international and development
partners, most notably the UN and US.
In July Liberia reached the completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, bringing the total external debt cancelled since 2007 to
US$4.6 billion. The US is Liberia’s largest donor, and in fiscal year 2009-2010
contributed more than $450 million to support democratization, security sector
reform, girls’ education, and reconstruction efforts, including some $250 million
in support of the UN Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).
In December 2009 the UN Security Council renewed for one year the travel ban on
persons deemed a threat to peace in Liberia, as well as asset freezes on those
sanctioned. The council also renewed the mandate for the panel of experts monitoring
the implementation of sanctions and resource exploitation, but lifted an
arms embargo in place since 2003. In September 2010, the council renewed
UNMIL’s mandate for one year. The UN Peacebuilding Commission will provide a $25 million grant to support programs in justice and rule of law, as well as to
combat high youth unemployment.