Liberia
The peace agreement signed between the Liberian government and two
rebel groups in August 2003 ended more than three years of internal
armed conflict and provided for a transitional government, largely made
up of members of the three former warring parties, to guide Liberia to
elections in 2005. In 2004, the deployment of some fifteen thousand
United Nations peacekeepers and one thousand civilian police, and the
disarmament of more than ninety thousand combatants contributed to a
marked decrease in abuses against civilians and attacks against human
rights defenders. However, the human rights situation remains precarious
as a result of frequent criminal acts by ex-combatants in the face of
inadequate police and civil authorities; striking deficiencies within the
national judicial system; infighting and allegations of corruption within
the transitional government; serious shortfalls in financing the program
to reintegrate and train demobilized combatants; and continued regional
instability, most notably in neighboring Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea.
There has been little discussion on how to ensure accountability for
past human rights abuses. The selection of commissioners for the truth
and reconciliation commission mandated by the 2003 peace agreement,
lacked transparency. The Nigerian government, which offered former
president Charles Taylor a safe haven in August 2003 when rebels
threatened to take the capital Monrovia, has refused to hand him over
to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which indicted him for war
crimes connected with his support for rebels in Sierra Leone.
Meanwhile, several of Taylor’s close associates have been implicated in
plans to attack neighboring Guinea, which once served as a haven for
the rebels which led to his removal from power.
Ongoing Insecurity and Related Abuses
Protection of the civilian population remains an urgent priority, particularly
given serious institutional deficiencies within the national police force and judicial system. By the end of 2004, peacekeepers from the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) were deployed in all
major towns and along most highways. Prior to this deployment and the
disarming of ex-combatants there were frequent reports of harassment
of civilians, forced labor in rubber and diamond producing areas, extortion
at market places, looting of foodstuffs intended for aid distribution,
assaults against aid workers, illegal checkpoints, and looting. Civilians
living in rural areas beyond the reach of UNMIL peacekeepers remain
particularly vulnerable to attacks by demobilized combatants from all
former factions. Women and girls living within camps for the internally
displaced remain vulnerable to sexual violence and exploitation, primarily
by other camp residents.
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration of Former
Combatants
During 2004, over ninety thousand combatants including some 12,600
women and six thousand children were disarmed and demobilized.
However, concern was raised about the quantity of arms turned in—
only one rifle, rocket launcher, pistol or mortar round for every three
fighters on average—and because combatants were reluctant to surrender
heavy weapons. A key challenge for Liberia is the degree to which
disarmed combatants can be successfully reintegrated and trained. This
is jeopardized by significant shortfalls in funding to support promised
education or skills training programs. The dearth of programs, particularly
in the capital Monrovia where the majority of ex-combatants have
concentrated, makes them vulnerable for re-recruitment; since at least
June 2004, commanders claiming to represent a fledgling Guinean
insurgency and others claiming to support Guinean President Lansana
Conte have engaged in the recruitment of ex-combatants, including
children. In December 2003, the U.N. Security Council voted to reapply
the arms embargo and a travel ban on individuals involved in previous
attempts to destabilize the region. 
Re-establishing the Rule of Law
Decades of corruption and mismanagement, and fourteen years of war
led to the near collapse of most state institutions, including the judicial
system. Over the next several years the international community must
devote significant resources to create a functioning police force, and
professional and independent judiciary. An ambitious rule of law strategy
consisting of four components: police, judicial, corrections, and
human rights, has been integrated into UNMIL. Developing all four
components of the program simultaneously is essential to promoting
the rule of law.
Under former president Taylor the Liberian Police was an arm of
repression and exploitation. Over the next two years, the 1090 strong
civilian police component of UNMIL will train a force of some 3,500
police officers, 1,800 of whom are to be functional in time of the projected
October 2005 elections. UNMIL has undertaken to thoroughly
vet and screen any previous human rights abusers from the new force.
The new Liberian Police Service must be free of political influence, balanced
along gender and tribal lines, and adequately trained in human
rights standards.
Court personnel including magistrates, lawyers and judges have for
decades been subject to poor conditions of service including low
salaries. Their judicial independence has been compromised by political
interference and corruption. Numerous courtrooms were looted and
destroyed during the war and at present the judicial system lacks basic
resources and personnel. There are very few detention facilities and
prisons. Funding to rehabilitate court and prison infrastructure, and
adequately train and remunerate court staff, including public defenders,
prosecutors and judges, is urgently needed and should be a priority for
the international community. 
Accountability for Past Abuses
Civil society has expressed interest in having those most responsible for
atrocities during Liberia’s fourteen year internal conflict held accountable
for their crimes. However they maintain that the disarmament
process must first be completed and a greater modicum of security
established before any such process is initiated. Meanwhile, the chairman
of the National Transitional Government of Liberia (NTGL) and
several ministers and high-level functionaries, themselves former commanders
within a warring faction, have expressed opposition to trying
war criminals. Through inclusion of an amnesty in the 2003 peace
agreement was avoided, article XXXIV of the accord commits the government
to “give consideration to a recommendation for general
amnesty” at an unspecified date. The international community should
continue to pressure the Liberian parliament to desist from passing an
amnesty, and must begin to explore ways for those most responsible for
war crimes and other serious violations of international law to be
brought to justice. In preparation, local and international human rights
groups should continue the process of investigating and documenting
atrocities committed since 1989.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
A truth and reconciliation commission was mandated by the 2003 peace
agreement and in January 2004, eight Liberians were appointed as commissioners
by NTGL Chairman Bryant. However, the commissioners
lack the relevant experience, and among them is one of Bryant’s close
family members. The selection process lacked transparency and there
was insufficient consultation with civil society. After significant input
from the UNMIL human rights section and local and international
human rights organizations, an act which called for the reconstitution of
the commission to include the appointment of international and national
commissioners was drafted and is under consideration by NTGL
members. The selection process for commissioners will require significant input and monitoring by local and international human rights
organizations.
Corruption
Successive Liberian administrations have been characterized by widespread
nepotism and corruption. President Taylor siphoned off public
funds, largely derived from the exploitation of local timber, diamonds
and iron ore. Consistent allegations of corruption by members of the
NTGL, including numerous scandals about lavish spending and the
awarding of contracts have been made. Two commissions envisioned to
stem corruption—the Governance Reform Commission and the
Contract and Monopolies Commission —were set up under the 2003
peace agreement, but have yet to adequately address the allegations.
The U.N. Security Council should refuse to lift sanctions on the sale of
diamonds and timber, imposed respectively in 2001 and 2003, until the
new government is able to assert effective and transparent control over
these revenue sources.
Key International Actors
International Actors, notably the United Nations and Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) were committed to
bringing Liberia’s recent conflict to an end and filling the security vacuum
left after former President Taylor departed into exile in August
2004. They have yet to address the issue of justice for atrocities committed
during Liberia’s fourteen year internal conflict and refused to
call on Nigeria to surrender former president Taylor to the SCSL,
despite concerns that he might destabilize Liberia and the region.
ECOWAS took the lead on resolving internal disputes within the
NTGL, but did little to pressure the warring parties to desist from
committing abuses against civilians and address concerns about corruption.
ECOWAS members actively lobbied members of the Liberian parliament to vote against a resolution calling on Nigeria to surrender
Taylor to the SCSL. The United States’ refusal to commit ground
troops during the rebel assault on Monrovia in 2003 provoked disappointment.
However, the U.S. Congress committed U.S. $200 million
in humanitarian assistance to Liberia and approved US $240 million for
U.N. peacekeeping in Liberia. The U.S. took the lead on the restructuring
of the Liberian Army, which is estimated to be ongoing through
2005 and include a comprehensive vetting component to screen out
notorious human rights abusers. While U.S. $ 520 million was in
January 2004 pledged to reconstruct Liberia, donating nations had by
years’ end only delivered U.S. $244 million of this amount.