Liberia
Throughout 2007 the government of President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf made tangible
progress in rebuilding Liberia’s failed institutions, fighting corruption, and
promoting the rule of law. However, longstanding deficiencies within the judicial
system and security sector continue to undermine basic human rights.
Meanwhile, there have been few efforts to pursue justice for the egregious human
rights violations committed during Liberia’s 14 years of armed conflict that finally
came to an end in 2003.
Ongoing Insecurity and Abuses in Law Enforcement
The 2003 Peace Agreement was followed by the deployment of 15,000 United
Nations peacekeepers. In 2007 this force, along with some 1,200 international
civilian police, appeared to have little impact on Liberia’s escalating rates of violent
crime including armed robbery, rape, and murder. Lack of funding for transportation
and for essential forensic and communications equipment severely
undermined the effectiveness of the national police, especially in rural areas. Of
the over 3,500 police vetted and trained by the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), fewer than 700 have been deployed outside the capital, Monrovia.
Liberian police have also continued to engage in unprofessional and sometimes
criminal behavior including extortion, soliciting bribes from detainees, and excessive
use of force. There were several reports of detainees being subjected to
physical abuse by policemen, including torture and male rape. While a few of
these cases resulted in internal police investigations and suspension from duty,
there was little effort to hold those involved accountable for their alleged crimes.
Performance of the Judiciary
Persistent deficiencies within the judicial and corrections systems also resulted in
human rights abuses. Some weaknesses were attributable to insufficient judicial
personnel including prosecutors and public defenders, and limited court infrastructure,
particularly outside Monrovia. However, unprofessional and corrupt
practices by judicial staff, such as chronic absenteeism and the release of criminal
suspects in exchange for bribes, also occurred. Lack of public confidence in the judicial system led to incidents of vigilante justice, resulting in at least one
death.
Even so, some improvements were evident including the deployment of state
prosecutors to most courts outside the capital and the renovation and reconstruction
of several court houses and detention facilities. UNMIL in particular has
trained judicial and corrections personnel, improved judicial infrastructure, and
subsidized the salaries of prosecutors and public defenders.
Prisons and detention centers nevertheless remain severely overcrowded and
lack basic sanitation and health care for detainees. In 2007 hundreds of people
were held in prolonged pretrial detention, including some children, who were
held with adult detainees in violation of international standards. Of the some
1,000 individuals detained in Liberia’s prisons at this writing, fewer than 50 had
been duly tried and convicted of a crime. Insufficient numbers of and unprofessional
conduct by corrections officers led to numerous jailbreaks and disturbances
in prisons and detention facilities.
Harmful Traditional Practices
Serious abuses resulting from harmful traditional practices continued to occur in
2007, due in part to the absence or distrust of judicial authorities. These included
the killing of alleged witches and “trials by ordeal,” in which suspects are forced
to swallow the poisonous sap of the local sassywood tree or endure burning or
other forms of pain—their alleged guilt or innocence is determined by whether
they survive. These local practices often involve extortion, extracting statements
under torture, and other forms of physical and sexual assault. In February 2007
then-Minister of Justice Frances Johnson-Morris instructed all county attorneys to
arrest and prosecute anyone caught engaging in “sassywood” ordeals, but the
practice has continued.
Women’s and Children’s Rights
According to government figures there were some 1,000 recorded female rapes in
2007, up from 568 in 2006. The 2006 Rape Amendment Act, which imposes heavier
penalties for the most serious cases, appeared not to reduce the incidence of rape, prompting calls by Liberian civil society and others to establish specialized
police units and a dedicated rape court.
Poor working conditions and child labor on rubber plantations were reported in
2007. Substandard conditions within dozens of Liberian orphanages—including
inadequate food, water, bedding, clothing, and heath care—continued, yet resulted
in few closures by the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare.
Corruption
Corruption involving public monies has long been endemic, and is widely recognized
as having contributed to Liberia’s political instability and failure to provide
the country’s most vulnerable with basic services such as education, water, and
health care.
Throughout 2007 the government and its international partners took concrete
steps to reduce corruption and improve economic governance. President Johnson-
Sirleaf had numerous senior government officials dismissed for corrupt practices,
and some 7,000 “ghost workers” removed from the payroll. In addition, Liberia’s
attorney general brought charges for the embezzlement of several million dollars
against two former high-ranking public officials, one of them Charles Gyude
Bryant, the former chairman of the 2003-2005 National Transitional Government
of Liberia.
The Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program (GEMAP), a
three-year anti-corruption plan drafted and imposed by key donors as a condition
for development aid, continued to make progress in economic governance
despite resistance from some government officials. Meanwhile, in July Liberia
became the 14th African country to join the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI).
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Accountability
Since its creation in 2006 the Liberian Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)
has been plagued with leadership and operational problems including lack of
transparency and proper process in hiring staff, awarding contracts, and other fiscal matters; lack of strategic leadership by the commissioners; and an inadequate
workplan and budget. In January 2007 these problems led to the suspension
of funds and grounding of operations, including public hearings scheduled
to commence that month. In October, after a joint working group comprising
members of the International Contact Group on Liberia and the TRC drew up a
revised workplan and budget, approximately US$100,000 of pledged donor funds
were released. However, at this writing the work of the commission remains
extremely hindered by lack of funds and it remains unclear whether donor confidence
will be fully restored.
The TRC is mandated to investigate gross human rights violations and economic
crimes that occurred between January 1979 and October 14, 2003, and is empowered
to recommend for prosecution the most serious abuses of human rights. For
a variety or reasons including the 2006 surrender of former Liberian President
Charles Taylor to the Special Court for Sierra Leone (where he is currently on trial
for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during Sierra Leone’s
armed conflict), debate was much reduced in 2007 within Liberian civil society
and among Liberia’s partners about the ongoing need to hold accountable perpetrators
of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during Liberia’s
wars. Yet questions remain about whether prosecutions should take place during
or after the completion of the TRC’s work; whether TRC commissioners would act
on their power to recommend individuals for prosecution; and whether the
Liberian judicial system would be able and willing to try these crimes.
Liberian Army
Since 2004 the United States has taken the lead in recruiting and training a new
Liberian army of some 2,000 soldiers, all of whom will be vetted for past abuses.
However, the exercise is running months behind schedule, and by late 2007 only
600 recruits had completed basic training. Local human rights groups expressed
concern that excessive expenditures on army barracks and equipment may be
occurring at the expense of civic and human rights education for recruits.
Disarmament of Former Combatants
Since the end of the war in 2003, 101,000 former combatants have been disarmed.
All but 9,000 have received vocational training or education but most
remain unemployed. During 2007 disgruntled ex-combatants staged several
demonstrations protesting inadequate reintegration opportunities. Fears about
the potential risks posed by unemployed ex-combatants were raised in July when
two former commanders were arrested and charged with planning to destabilize
the government.
Key International Actors
Throughout 2007 the top priorities of Liberia’s international partners were the creation
of mechanisms to fight corruption and ensure proper management of
Liberia’s natural resources. Donors are also helping to rebuild Liberia’s judicial
system and strengthen the rule of law.
The United States, Liberia’s leading bilateral donor, committed $252 million for
2006-2007 to support democratization, security, and reconstruction efforts. In
February 2007 the US announced the cancellation of $391 million in bilateral debt
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
Since the end of the armed conflict, Liberia’s government has also received support
from the European Commission including almost €100 million for peace support
operations and post-conflict rehabilitation and institution building. China is
also increasingly involved in Liberia’s development and reconstruction.
In April 2007 the UN Security Council voted unanimously to lift a ban on Liberian
diamond exports. The ban, imposed in 2001, was intended to prevent the export
of “conflict diamonds” whose proceeds were fuelling the civil war. In May 2007
Liberia was admitted to the Kimberly Process Certification Scheme and in
September the first consignment of diamonds was shipped abroad. UN and
European Union arms and travel bans on associates of former President Charles
Taylor, and an asset freeze against Taylor and his top officials, remain in place.