Liberia
The completion in October and November 2005 of presidential and parliamentary
elections marked a major step towards the consolidation of Liberia’s
transition from a near-failed state rife with human rights abuses to a democratic
state governed by the rule of law. The elections followed a 2003 peace
agreement which ended three years of internal armed conflict and the
deployment in 2003 of some fifteen thousand United Nations peacekeepers.
At year’s end there were solid grounds for optimism including the disarmament
of more than 101,000 combatants; the return home of tens of thousands
of civilians who had fled during the war; the recognition by both
Liberia and the international community of the role corruption played in
fomenting armed conflict; and the ability of journalists and civil society to
function after years of being silenced, persecuted and targeted. A Truth and
Reconciliation Commission empowered to recommend prosecutions for the
worst offenders was also established. However, the human rights situation
remained precarious as a result of frequent criminal acts in the face of inadequate
police and civil authorities; striking deficiencies within the judicial system;
financial shortfalls for programs to train demobilized combatants; and
continued regional instability, most notably in neighboring Côte d’Ivoire.
Moreover, there was little progress on ensuring accountability for past atrocities.
Ongoing Insecurity and Related Abuses
During 2005, United Nations peacekeepers and civilian police consolidated
their control throughout all major Liberian towns leading to significant
improvements in protection for civilians. However, serious institutional deficiencies
within the national police force and judicial system remain. The illegal
occupation of rubber plantations by former rebel leaders who refused to
recognize the legitimacy of the Liberian Transitional Government of Liberia
(NTGL), rioting by ex-combatants mostly in response to delays in reintegration
programs, as well as the emergence of vigilante groups formed to combat
rising crime in the face of an incompetent police force were worrying developments in 2005. There are ongoing risks associated with the election
or appointment into public office of individuals known to have committed
human rights abuses in the past. A former faction leader, several individuals
subject to United Nations sanctions for their engagement in activities aimed
at undermining security in Liberia and the sub-region, and a few former
high-level military commanders against whom there are credible allegations
of responsibility for serious human rights abuses were elected into office in
the 2005 elections. The abusive records of these persons raises concerns that
they may in the future resort to force and other extra-legal measures to
undermine the rule of law in Liberia. As well, unidentified individuals made
verbal and, in some cases, physical threats against human rights defenders
believed to be providing information to the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Throughout 2005, there were consistent reports of former president Charles
Taylor interfering in Liberian political affairs and fomenting instability in the
region.
Disarmament of Former Combatants and Re-recruitment into
Regional Conflicts
From 2003-2005, more than 101,000 individuals were disarmed and demobilized.
The disarmament exercise was criticized for not having strict admittance
criteria and for letting in numerous individuals who were not real combatants,
a factor which contributed to the shortfall of funds from international
donors to support education or skills training programs. At years end, this
shortfall left some 43,000 ex-combatants outside of the reintegration program.
During 2005, the dearth of training and education programs, particularly
along the border with neighboring Cote d’Ivoire, contributed to rerecruitment
by the Ivorian government and rebel forces, of hundreds of excombatants,
including children. According to interviews with Liberian fighters,
the majority went to fight alongside militias associated with the Ivorian
government. In 2005, two periods of intense recruitment occurred: at the
beginning of March and September 2005, in anticipation of future attacks on
Ivorian rebel-held positions.
Rule of law
Liberia’s history of armed conflict and human rights abuses reflect profound
and deep-rooted weaknesses in institutions which should guarantee the rule
of law. In 2003, the U.N. Security Council mandated the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to assist in the restructuring and training of the
police, army and judiciary. 2005 saw some progress in the rehabilitation of
these institutions. However, serious problems in reform of the Liberian
police force, delays in demobilizing the former army, and lack of donor support
to rebuild the decimated judicial infrastructure stalled progress in establishing
the rule of law.
Liberian National Police
One feature of the restructuring of the Liberian police was a vetting procedure
to screen out applicants alleged to have committed serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. The civilian component of
UNMIL administered the vetting that took place in 2004 and 2005. The vetting
process appears to have been disorganized, inefficient, and most likely
ineffective in screening out human rights abusers. Problems with the process
included the lack of clear criteria for the elimination of potential human
rights abusers, the failure to allocate adequate human resources to conduct
thorough and systematic background checks on applicants, and inadequate
involvement of Liberian human rights groups and the general population in
the process. Meanwhile, countrywide, the newly trained and vetted Liberian
police continue to engage in unprofessional and at times criminal behavior
including extortion.
The Liberian Army
The United States has the lead in recruiting and training a new Liberian
army of some two thousand soldiers. In early 2005, the US contracted the
project to a privately owned security company, DynCorp. The restructuring
exercise is running months behind schedule and is set to begin in late 2005.
Although DynCorp has a detailed plan to screen recruits for past human rights abuses, it remains to be seen whether this plan will be successfully
implemented.
Judiciary
In 2003, UNMIL proposed an ambitious strategy to rebuild the justice system.
In 2005, however, reforms progressed at an alarmingly slow pace. The
judiciary remains severely dysfunctional: only half of 145 magistrate positions
are staffed, and of these none holds a law degree. Only five of Liberia’s fifteen
circuit courts are operational. Of grave concern is that only 3% of all
inmates in Liberia’s prisons and holding cells are convicted felons. The 97%
remaining are being held in pre-trial detention, often for extended periods of
time.
Even when judicial authorities have been assigned to a courtroom, the dearth
of prosecutors and public defenders undermines the quality of justice dispensed.
Judges and other staff often fail to fulfill their duties, sometimes by
neglecting to attend proceedings. Magistrate and local tribal courts often try,
sentence, fine and imprison people for criminal and civil matters that are outside
their jurisdiction. Frequent reports exist of judicial authorities releasing
suspects charged with criminal offenses after having received a bribe, or
soliciting money from them to stop the case from proceeding to a higher
court. Prisons and detention centers continue to operate far below international
standards with overcrowded cells and lack of food and water for
detainees.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
On June 10, 2005, an act establishing the Liberian Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC) was signed into law. The TRC is mandated to investigate
gross human rights violations and economic crimes that occurred
between January 1979 and October 14, 2003. It is empowered to recommend
amnesty in cases not involving serious violations of international humanitarian
law and to recommend prosecution for the most serious cases. The TRC
was set to begin work in early 2006.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Neither the Liberian government nor the international community have
developed a concrete strategy to bring perpetrators of serious war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed during Liberia’s armed conflicts to justice.
However, throughout 2005 there was public debate on whether to prosecute
these individuals: civil society leaders stressed the importance of perpetrators
of gross violations facing justice for their crimes while Liberian transitional
government officials and the international community maintained that
prosecutions could undermine efforts to consolidate the peace. While the
TRC is empowered to recommend prosecution for the most serious cases,
there was no indication as to whether or not TRC commissioners would act
on this power and, if they did, whether the Liberian judicial system would be
able and willing to try these crimes.
Corruption
Corruption in the public and private sectors of Liberian society has long
been endemic, and is widely recognized as having contributed to the country’s
political instability and ensuing armed conflicts. Throughout 2005, there
were numerous scandals and allegations made against members of the
NTGL including the manipulation of contract bidding, the looting of state
coffers, and the misappropriation of development aid. The international
community financed audits of the Central Bank and other state-owned enterprises
and proposed a hard-hitting three-year anti-corruption plan—the
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Programme (GEMAP)—
which was approved by the NTGL in September 2005. The plan provides
for foreign financial experts to be placed in and empowered to co-sign all
financial and operational matters within the National Bank of Liberia, the
Finance Ministry, and several other revenue generating agencies. It also calls
for the establishment of an independent anti-corruption commission.
However, the original proposal for using foreign judges to adjudicate cases
was dropped.
Key International Actors
International actors, notably the United Nations and Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) were committed to full implementation
of the 2003 Accra Peace Accords, which included the completion of elections
in October 2005. ECOWAS took the lead inn resolving internal disputes
within the NTGL. Throughout 2005, the international community’s top priorities
were ensuring that the election exercise was a success and putting in
place mechanisms to fight corruption. However, other key rule of law issues,
including the imperative to rebuild Liberia’s fractured judicial system and the
merits of pursuing justice for the past atrocities, received little attention.
Despite mounting international pressure, the Nigerian government, which
offered former president Charles Taylor a safe haven in 2003, refused to hand
him over to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which indicted him for war
crimes connected with his support for rebels in Sierra Leone. The United
States continued to be the largest donor to both reconstruction efforts and
the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Liberia. In June 2005, the U.N.
Security Council voted to reapply the largely successful arms embargo and
travel ban against individuals involved in previous attempts to destabilize the
region, and to continue sanctions on the sale of diamonds and timber.