Liberia
Since general elections in 2005 and the January 2006 inauguration of President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Liberia has made tangible progress in transitioning from a
near-failed state to a democratic state governed by the rule of law. The elections
followed a 2003 peace agreement and the deployment of 15,000 United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) peacekeepers. From 1989 to 2003 Liberia had been
engulfed in two armed conflicts characterized by egregious human rights violations.
As 2006 ended, solid grounds for optimism existed including a stated and
demonstrated commitment on the part of government to fight corruption;
progress in the retraining and restructuring of the police and army; increased
control of the country’s natural resources; the return of some 40,000 civilians
who had fled during the war; the ability of free media and civil society to function
after years of persecution; and the coming into operation of a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission empowered to recommend prosecution for the worst
offenders. However, the human rights situation remained precarious as a result of
rising criminal acts, and civil disturbances by former combatants, met by inadequate
policing; deficiencies within the judicial system; financial shortfalls for programs
to train demobilized combatants; and continued regional instability, most
notably in neighboring Côte d’Ivoire.
Ongoing Insecurity and Abuses in Law Enforcement
Despite the deployment of UN peacekeepers and some 1,000 civilian police, violent
crime increased including hijacking, armed robbery, and murder. This was
indicative of weaknesses in the Liberian National Police, including very poor
logistic and transport facilities and low deployment outside the capital. UN police
increased patrols in high crime areas but, in a worrying development, the justice
minister called on Liberians to form vigilante groups. Numerous individuals
accused of common crimes were beaten to death by mobs.
Several violent demonstrations took place by demobilized personnel from the
Armed Forces of Liberia, AntiThe newly trained Liberian police continued to engage in unprofessional and
sometimes criminal behavior including extortion, excessive use of force, and sexual
harassment. Concerns remain regarding the vetting of past human rights
abusers in a 2004-05 screening and selection exercise administered by UNMIL.
Problems with the process included lack of clear criteria for the elimination of
potential human rights abusers, failure to allocate adequate human resources to
conduct thorough and systematic background checks on applicants, and inadequate
involvement of Liberian human rights groups and the general population.
Performance of the Judiciary
The judiciary remains dysfunctional, making justice not accessible to the vast
majority of Liberians. Some improvements to the judicial infrastructure were evident
including the renovation and reconstruction of several court houses and
detention facilities. However, the system has few prosecutors and public defenders,
few resources, and suffers from absenteeism by judges and other staff.
Reports of unprofessional and corrupt practices by judicial staff were frequent,
including releasing suspects charged with criminal offenses on payment of a
bribe, or soliciting money to stop cases from proceeding to a higher court. The circuit
courts of five counties did not operate at all. Magistrate and local tribal
courts often try, sentence, fine, and imprison people for criminal and civil matters
that are outside their jurisdiction. More than 90 percent of the prison population
is being held in prolonged pre-trial detention.
Prisons and detention centers operate far below international standards, with
overcrowded cells and lack of food and water for detainees.
Harmful Traditional Practices
Numerous serious abuses resulting from harmful traditional practices also
occurred in 2006. These included the killing of alleged witches; killing of people
for their refusal to be inducted into a secret society; and deaths and maimings
associated with traditional justice practices. One such practice by local authorities
requires alleged offenders to drink the poisonous sap of the local “sassywood”
tree in order to prove their guilt or innocence. These local practices were often characterized by a lack of due process standards, extortion, elicitation of
statements under torture, physical and sexual assault, and extrajudicial killings.
Women’s and Children’s Rights
The Rape Amendment Act, which stipulates heavier penalties for the most serious
cases, came into force in January 2006. However, a general reluctance to prosecute
rape cases persists, and rape and other forms of sexual assault and exploitation
remain very serious problems for Liberian women and girls, including young
girls.
From January through November UNMIL investigated 28 cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse by UNMIL personnel against Liberia civilians, including 10 cases
involving minors. At this writing none of the investigations had been concluded.
Poor labor conditions on rubber plantations including the use of child labor were
reported. Substandard conditions in Liberian orphanages led the Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare to announce the intended closure of 69 facilities in
March 2006. Unfortunately, this was not properly implemented by government
authorities and resulted in few actual closures.
Corruption
Corruption involving public monies has long been endemic, and is widely recognized
as having contributed to the country’s political instability and to robbing
the population of funds needed to provide vital services such as education,
water, and healthcare. Throughout 2006 the Liberian government and the international
community took concrete steps to reduce corruption and improve economic
governance. President Johnson-Sirleaf dismissed numerous senior government
officials for corrupt practices and ordered an evaluation of all government contracts.
In August the House of Representatives ratified the UN Convention against
Corruption and the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating
Corruption. The Governance Reform Commission elaborated a code of conduct
calling for public servants to declare their income, assets, and liabilities. Also in
2006 the Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program (GEMAP), a
three-year anti-corruption plan drafted and imposed by key donors the previous year as a condition for development aid, came into operation. It empowers foreign
financial experts to co-sign all financial matters within the National Bank of
Liberia, the Finance Ministry, and several revenue generating agencies.
Accountability and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
In February 2006 the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) was inaugurated.
In October, after months of preparation and training, some 190 statement-takers
began to obtain testimonies for use in formal hearings to begin in early
2007. The TRC is mandated to investigate gross human rights violations and economic
crimes that occurred between January 1979 and October 14, 2003, and can
recommend amnesty in cases not involving serious violations of international
humanitarian law, and prosecution for the most serious cases. The TRC requested
some US$10 million, but deficits in donor pledges and funds remained.
Civil society made increased calls for a mechanism to hold accountable perpetrators
of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Liberia’s wars. The surrender of
former Liberian President Charles Taylor to the Special Court for Sierra Leone in
March 2006 appeared to foster these calls. Debate occurred on whether accountability
should take place during or after the completion of the TRC’s work;
whether TRC commissioners would act on their power to recommend individuals
for prosecution; and whether the Liberian judicial system would be able and willing
to try these crimes.
Liberian Army
The United States has taken the lead in recruiting and training a new Liberian
army of some 2,000 soldiers. During 2006 the first 560 recruits began training
after being selected from a pool of more than 7,000. The restructuring exercise is
running months behind schedule, with the first fully trained battalion expected to
be operational in 2008. However, the US contractor DynCorp’s detailed plan to
screen recruits for past human rights abuse appears to have been successfully
implemented.
Disarmament of Former Combatants
More than 101,000 individuals were disarmed and demobilized in 2003-05. The
disarmament exercise was criticized for not having strict admittance criteria and
for including individuals who were not real combatants. The excessive numbers of
individuals taking part in the disarmament exercise contributed to the shortfall of
funds from international donors to support education and skills training programs.
At this writing some 30,000 ex-combatants have yet to enter reintegration
programs. The dearth of training and education programs was believed to have
contributed to the rise in violent crime and the recruitment of Liberian ex-combatants,
including children, by the Ivorian government and rebel forces.
Key International Actors
Throughout 2006 Liberia’s international partners’ top priority was to establish
mechanisms to fight corruption and ensure proper management of Liberia’s natural
resources. Other rule of law issues, including the imperative to rebuild
Liberia’s judicial system and the pursuit of justice for past atrocities, received
less attention and funding.
After considerable pressure from the European Union and the United States, and
a courageous request from President Johnson-Sirleaf, the Nigerian government
surrendered former president Charles Taylor to Liberia. He was then transferred to
the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which had indicted him for war crimes and
crimes against humanity connected to his support for rebels in Sierra Leone. The
move was viewed as a positive step for stability in West Africa.
As Liberia’s leading bilateral donor, the United States committed $270 million in
2006 to support democratization and reconstruction efforts, bringing its total aid
funding to some $1.16 billion for fiscal years 2004-06. Since establishing peace,
Liberia’s government has received support from the European Commission
including almost €100 million for peace support operations and post-conflict
rehabilitation and institution building. China’s role in Liberia’s development and
reconstruction is also expanding.
Following Liberia’s progress in regaining control over the exploitation of timber,
the UN Security Council in June 2006 lifted a UN ban on timber exports. It left in place a similar ban on diamond exports until the Kimberly Certificate of Origin
regime is functioning. The UN Security Council also relaxed a 2001 ban on the
sale of arms to Liberia.