Liberia
Striking deficiencies within Liberia’s rule of law sectors resulted in persistent
human rights violations and undermined President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf’s postwar
recovery, anti-corruption, and development agendas. The increasing incidence
of violent crime as well as protests by disgruntled youths, mob and vigilante
justice, and bloody land disputes claimed numerous lives and exposed the
systemic and persistent weaknesses within the police, judiciary, and corrections
sectors. Concern about inadequate progress in strengthening the rule of law was
exacerbated by several risk factors, notably the global economic crisis, high
unemployment, and growing insecurity in neighboring Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire.
Sweeping changes in the leadership of the security and justice sectors in mid-
2009 brought some hope of improvement and dispelled growing criticism at
home and from donors. Meanwhile the government made tangible progress in
creating the legislative framework for respect for human rights and improving
access to key economic rights, including healthcare and primary education.
The June release of the draft concluding report of Liberia’s Truth and
Reconciliation Commission (TRC) generated considerable controversy about its
recommendations to establish a tribunal to prosecute abusers and publicly sanction
erstwhile supporters of the warring factions, including President Johnson
Sirleaf.
Ongoing Insecurity, Police Conduct, and the Criminal
Justice System
The security situation deteriorated in 2009 as evidenced in an increasing incidence
of violent crime, including armed robbery and rape; violent protests over
layoffs and employment disputes by youths and former combatants; and deadly
land disputes. The undisciplined, poorly managed, and ill-equipped Liberian
police were challenged to maintain law and order, on several occasions necessitating
the intervention of United Nations peacekeepers deployed to Liberia since
2003. Lack of public confidence in the police and judicial system perpetuated the
culture of impunity and led to mob attacks on alleged criminals, resulting in at
least eight deaths.
Since 2004 the UN Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has vetted and trained over 3,500
police officers, and, together with international donors, has set up numerous
police stations and barracks. Nonetheless, Liberian police continue to engage in
unprofessional and sometimes criminal behavior, including extortion, bribery,
and armed robbery; frequent absenteeism; and failure to adequately investigate
and later freeing alleged criminals. Lack of funding for transportation, communications,
and forensic equipment further undermine the effectiveness of the
national police, especially in rural areas.
The police did, however, show some progress in 2009 in their ability to detain
and arrest alleged suspects and escaped criminals, and police leadership
showed an increased willingness to investigate complaints of misconduct within
the force.
Persistent deficiencies within Liberia’s judiciary led to widespread abuses of the
right to due process and undermined efforts to address impunity. Weaknesses
are attributable to insufficient judicial personnel, including prosecutors and public
defenders, limited court infrastructure and logistics, archaic rules of procedure,
and poor case management. Unprofessional, corrupt, and, in a few cases,
criminal practices by judicial staff continue to lead to rights abuses and undermine
progress.
Because of the courts’ inability to adequately process their cases, hundreds of
prisoners continued to be held in extended pretrial detention in overcrowded jails
and detention centers that lack basic sanitation and healthcare; in 2009 only 10
percent of the some 800 individuals detained in Liberia’s prisons had been convicted
of a crime. Meanwhile, hundreds of prisoners escaped in jailbreaks, illuminating
the stark inability of the corrections sector to secure Liberia’s prisons.
In June the president took concrete action to improve the weak leadership underpinning
these problems by replacing the ministers of justice and national security,
the solicitor-general, and the director of the Liberia National Police, among
others. The president also ordered a review of pretrial detainees within
Monrovia’s central prison, resulting in the release of hundreds of prisoners
detained on minor charges or who had already served sufficient time.
Harmful Traditional Practices
Serious abuses resulting from harmful traditional practices continued to occur in
2009, due in part to the absence or distrust of judicial authorities. These included
the killing of alleged witches and “trials by ordeal,” in which suspects are
forced to swallow the poisonous sap of a tree or endure burning; their alleged
guilt or innocence is determined by whether they survive.
Sexual Violence
The incidence of rape of women and girls continued to be alarmingly high in
2009, despite positive efforts by the government and UNMIL, including the establishment
of a dedicated court for sexual violence. While public reporting of and
police response to reports of rape improved somewhat, efforts to prosecute these
cases are hampered by deficiencies in the justice system.
Corruption
Fighting endemic corruption was high on the president’s agenda throughout
2009, but weaknesses within the judicial system undermined these efforts. The
June acquittal of high-ranking public officials from the 2003-05 transitional government
for the embezzlement of several million dollars was a blow to these
efforts and in part led to the sweeping leadership changes in the Ministry of
Justice. Over the course of the year the president sacked and referred for investigation
scores of public officials, including high-level ministry personnel, county
superintendants, and senior central bank officials. Corrupt practices have long
undermined the provision of basic education and healthcare to the most vulnerable.
In July 2009 the president signed into law the Liberia Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative; Liberia is the first country in the world to include forestry
and rubber into an EITI mandate.
Legislative Developments
During 2009 the government made further strides in creating the legislative
framework for respect for human rights and good governance. Progress included
the establishment of the Constitutional Review Task Force, the Law Reform
Commission mandated to review Liberia’s outdated laws, and the Land
Commission to address the growing number of land disputes.
After a disappointing delay of four years, the proposed amendments holding up
the establishment of the Independent National Commission on Human Rights
were finally signed by the president, although at year’s end the commission was
yet to be constituted due to delays in parliamentary confirmation of its commissioners.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Accountability
Liberia has not to date brought prosecutions against those allegedly responsible
for serious crimes of international law committed during its armed conflicts. In
June Liberia’s TRC concluded its four-year mandate and began finalizing its report
for submission to the legislature and president, as well as civil society and international
partners. A published draft highlighted the role played by corruption and
poor management of natural resources in giving rise to Liberia’s armed conflicts,
and concluded that all warring factions were responsible for gross human rights
violations, including war crimes and crimes against humanity. The report’s recommendations,
which included the establishment of an extraordinary criminal tribunal
to prosecute over 100 of the most notorious perpetrators and the barring from
public office of some 50 former supporters of the warring factions, were greeted
with considerable controversy and some threats by former faction leaders. The
legislature’s formal debate of the report was postponed until early 2010.
Throughout the year there was significant civil society support for prosecutions,
although serious questions remain about the political will of both the Liberian
government and the international donor community to establish the recommended
accountability mechanism, which calls for the inclusion of foreign judges.
Efforts at justice are further complicated by problems with the quality of the TRC’s
report, weaknesses within the Liberian judicial system, the potential for the legislature to block accountability efforts, and the existence of a 2003 act that granted
immunity for war crimes committed from 1989 through 2003.
Disarmament of Former Combatants
Since the end of the war in 2003, 101,000 former combatants have been disarmed
and some 97,000 have received vocational training or education in association
with the demobilization program, which formally closed in July 2009.
Violent demonstrations staged by former combatants, rising unemployment, and
reports that many Liberian former fighters have joined Ivorian militia and rebel
groups and Guinean security forces, remain a serious concern for sustained
peace.
Liberian Army
The program funded and led by the United States to recruit and train a new
2,000-strong Liberian army completed its work in December 2009. During the
exercise, implemented by the US contractor DynCorp, recruits were vetted for past
abuses. Continued training of the officer corps will be conducted by the United
States, the Economic Community of West African States, and the United Nations.
The army is not expected to be fully operational until 2012.
Key International Actors
Threats to regional stability and weaknesses in security and rule of law institutions
that could reverse hard-earned post-war gains generated considerable concern
among Liberia’s key international and development partners, most notably
the UN and US. Visits by the UN Security Council, UN under-secretary-general for
peacekeeping operations, and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton pressed home
these concerns.
The United States is Liberia’s largest donor, and in fiscal year 2008-09 contributed
more than US$200 million to support democratization, security, and
reconstruction efforts.
In December 2008 the UN Security Council renewed for one year the arms and
travel bans on associates of former President Charles Taylor, as well as the mandate
for the panel of experts charged with monitoring the implementation of
sanctions and resource exploitation. In September 2009 the Council renewed
UNMIL’s mandate for one year. In 2008 Liberia was declared eligible for US$15
million in funds administered by the UN Peacebuilding Commission.