L@9P8
2011 was a dramatic year for Libya. A popular uprising and government crackdown
led to an armed revolt, NATO intervention, and the death of a dictator
who had amassed a deplorable human rights record over 42 years. At this writing
Libya’s new interim leadership, the National Transitional Council (NTC), was
struggling to rein in the many militias and local security forces across the country,
secure unguarded weapons, and build a new Libya based on independent
institutions and the rule of law. A weak criminal justice system, torture and mistreatment
of detainees, and revenge attacks against Gaddafi officials and supporters
were pressing concerns, as was the apparent execution of Libyan leader
Muammar Gaddafi, his son Muatassim, and dozens of his supporters.
The Uprising
On February 15, 2011, anti-government protests began in Libya’s second-largest
city, Benghazi, following popular uprisings in neighboring Tunisia and Egypt.
The protests were triggered by the arrests of government critics, including a
lawyer representing the families of an estimated 1,200 prisoners who had been
killed at Tripoli’s Abu Salim prison in 1996.
Government forces responded by arresting and attacking peaceful demonstrators
in Benghazi and other eastern cities. The government used excessive force
when protests spread to the western cities of Tripoli, the capital, Misrata,
Zawiya, Zuwara, and Zintan. Human Rights Watch documented the government’s
lethal use of live fire on peaceful protesters, as well as the arrest and
disappearance of hundreds of people suspected of involvement in anti-government
demonstrations.
The international response to Gaddafi’s crackdown was swift. On February 25
the United Nation Human Rights Council condemned “gross and systematic”
violations in Libya and called for the creation of a commission of inquiry. The
next day the UN Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1970, imposing
an arms embargo, sanctions on Gaddafi and key members of his family and
government, and referring the situation in Libya to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The resolution gave the ICC jurisdiction over war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Libya from February 15. In June ICC judges
authorized arrest warrants for crimes against humanity against three suspects:
Muammar Gaddafi, his son Saif al-Islam, and Gaddafi’s intelligence chief and
brother-in-law Abdullah Sanussi. Muammar Gaddafi died on October 20, but at
this writing the other two suspects remained at large.
Faced with violent government repression, the uprising rapidly evolved into an
armed conflict, especially after opposition forces seized arms from abandoned
government military depots in eastern Libya. On March 17, as Gaddafi’s military
forces closed in on Benghazi, the key opposition stronghold, the UN Security
Council passed Resolution 1973 imposing a no-fly zone over Libya and authorizing
the use of “all necessary measures”—with the exception of an occupation
force—to protect civilians. This led to NATO’s Operation Unified Protector, with
a mandate to protect civilians, which prevented Gaddafi forces from retaking
Benghazi and eastern Libya. The NATO mission expanded over time beyond its
mandate to give air support for anti-Gaddafi forces. France, Qatar, the United
Arab Emirates, and possibly other governments provided weapons and training
to opposition fighters. Qatar later said it had deployed hundreds of its own
forces on the ground.
The Armed Conflict
From February until August, when Tripoli fell, Gaddafi forces arrested thousands,
if not tens of thousands, of people across the country, including antigovernment
protesters, suspected government critics, and people alleged to
have provided information to international media and human rights organizations.
Many of those arrested were fighters, but many others were civilians,
including doctors, journalists, and people caught in areas where fighting took
place. The Gaddafi government provided no information regarding how many
people it had arrested, where they were being held, or the charges they faced.
Detainees who were released from government custody during and after the
conflict reported frequent torture, including beatings with wooden sticks and
plastic pipes, and the use of electric shock. Some prisoners apparently died
from the abuse or the subsequent lack of medical care.
In the fighting, government forces repeatedly launched indiscriminate attacks
with mortars and GRAD rockets into civilian-inhabited areas, especially in
Misrata and towns of the western mountains. The coastal city of Misrata suffered
a two-month siege with near daily attacks that killed scores of civilians
and for a while blocked delivery of humanitarian aid. Human Rights Watch confirmed
the government’s use in Misrata of mortar-fired cluster munitions in residential
areas, and the use of “parachute” antivehicle mines fired by GRAD rockets.
The government laid thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of antipersonnel
and antivehicle landmines in various parts of Libya, including in Ajdabiya,
Brega, Misrata and the western mountains. Human Rights Watch confirmed the
use of five types of landmines in six separate locations, which will likely endanger
civilians for many years. The Brazilian T-AB-1 antipersonnel landmine
appears to have been the most frequently used mine; its low metal content
makes the mine more difficult to detect and clear.
Human Rights Watch documented 10 cases of apparent gang rape and sexual
assault of men and women by Gaddafi forces during the conflict, including of
detainees in custody. The extent of sexual violence during the conflict remains
unknown, due in part to the stigma surrounding rape in Libya and the dangers
that survivors may face when they publicize such crimes.
During the conflict, and especially just before the fall of Tripoli, Gaddafi forces
executed prisoners in their custody. Members of the Khamis Brigade, a powerful
military force run by Gaddafi’s son Khamis, appear to have summarily executed
at least 45 detainees in a warehouse in Tripoli in August. Thirty-four bodies
exhumed from a mass grave near the town of al-Qawalish in western Libya
in August seemed to be those of men detained by Gaddafi forces in early June.
In September the bodies of 18 detainees, who died by suffocation when
detained by Gaddafi forces in June in al-Khoms, were discovered buried in
western Libya. In May security forces apparently executed 10 antigovernment
protesters in Bani Walid.
At this writing Libya was still dealing with the problem of missing persons from
the conflict. The number of missing and dead remains unclear. Mass graves continued to be discovered, but the lack of forensic expertise complicated the
identification process.
Rebel forces also committed human rights and humanitarian law violations during
the armed conflict. The most significant documented case came in October,
when militias from Misrata appeared to have executed 53 Gaddafi supporters in
Sirte.
In areas of eastern Libya under NTC control since late February and early March,
volunteer security groups arbitrarily arrested dozens of suspected Gaddafi loyalists.
This led to serious abuses, including torture. Human Rights Watch documented
one apparent death in custody by a local security group in Baida, and
heard credible reports of other such deaths. At least 10 former Gaddafi security
officials were found dead in Benghazi and Derna in what appear to be revenge
killings.
When the Gaddafi government retreated from the east, tens of thousands of
sub-Saharan African foreign workers came under threat of violence and arbitrary
arrest, forcing thousands to flee. These migrants, along with dark-skinned
Libyans, were widely accused without evidence of having fought as mercenaries
for Gaddafi, although mercenaries from some countries did come to fight.
In July the commander of the opposition forces, Gen. Abdul Fatah Younes, was
killed with two aides in unclear circumstances. Despite promises, the authorities
appear not to have conducted an independent investigation.
In the western mountains, rebel forces engaged in revenge attacks in some
towns they captured, including looting, arson, and some physical violence.
As NTC forces took control of western Libya in late August, local militias arbitrarily
arrested hundreds, if not thousands, more sub-Saharan migrant workers
and dark-skinned Libyans from the south, accusing them of being mercenaries.
In some cases, the militias subjected these detainees to physical abuse and
forced labor in detention. Thousands of African migrants sought shelter in
makeshift camps with very poor living conditions and security.
Prison conditions in post-Gaddafi western Libya were sub-standard, with overcrowding,
inadequate food and water, and consistent reports of abuse, including
beatings and some use of electric shock. The NTC has failed to provide most
detainees with prompt judicial reviews, let alone access to a lawyer.
A key problem was the large number of local security forces in Tripoli and other
cities and towns, many of which maintained their own makeshift detention
facilities. At this writing the NTC was struggling to bring these disparate forces
under a unified civilian command.
Revenge attacks against populations deemed to have supported Gaddafi also
grew in September and October. In particular, militias from Misrata prevented
about 30,000 people from returning to their homes in Tawergha, a town near
Misrata, because they accused them of having committed atrocities in Misrata
together with Gaddafi forces. Displaced Tawerghans were subject to arbitrary
arrests and torture in detention, in some cases leading to death. Members of
the Mesheshiya tribe in the western mountains, accused of past loyalty to
Gaddafi, also reported harassment and revenge attacks.
On October 20, after weeks of fierce fighting in Sirte, NTC forces captured
Muammar Gaddafi and his son Muatassim. Video footage strongly suggests
that they were executed in custody. The NTC said it will form a commission of
inquiry to examine the deaths.
Three days after Gaddafi’s death, Human Rights Watch found 53 bodies of
apparent Gaddafi supporters outside the Mahari Hotel in Sirte, where rebel
forces from Misrata had been based. Some victims had their hands bound
behind their backs; they all seemed to have been shot at that location. The NTC
said it will investigate.
Despite promises, the NTC had failed through October to secure some of the
military weapons and munitions depots abandoned by Gaddafi forces. These
stockpiles included unsecured surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and vast amounts
of explosive weapons. Many of these sites were extensively looted by civilians
and armed groups.
The NTC responded positively to some requests from human rights organizations
during and after the conflict, for instance by granting Human Rights Watch
and other groups unrestricted access to their detention facilities. The NTC publicly
promised to respect the laws of war and to cooperate with the ICC, and
political leaders repeatedly condemned revenge attacks. On April 28 the NTC
officially pledged not to use antipersonnel and antivehicle landmines, and to
destroy all mines in its forces’ possession. At the same time, NTC leaders said
they had limited control over the many local militias and brigades who had
committed abuses during and after the fighting.
NATO forces led by the French and British, with significant support from the
United States, launched thousands of air strikes on government targets during
the conflict, some of which killed civilians. Based on a partial Human Rights
Watch investigation, the number of civilian deaths appeared far lower than
claimed by the Gaddafi government, but higher than acknowledged by NATO.
In early August Human Rights Watch investigated four sites in Gaddafi government-
held territory of western Libya in which about 50 people appear to have
died, some of them clearly civilians. It was not possible under the circumstances
to determine at any of the sites whether these civilians had died in an
unlawful NATO attack. NATO has failed to provide detailed information about
these targets and the reasons for the civilian casualties. NATO forces were also
accused of failing to rescue African migrants at sea who were fleeing the conflict,
on one occasion leading to 63 deaths.
Key International Actors
Many countries played crucial roles in Libya in 2011, especially those who participated
in the NATO campaign. Qatar and the United Arab Emirates provided
significant support to the anti-Gaddafi opposition, and then to some post-
Gaddafi groups. All these countries, and the European Union, have a major
stake in seeing that future Libyan governments respect human rights and the
rule of law. A UN mission is tasked with assisting Libya’s transition, especially
democratic elections and transitional justice.
Libya’s new leaders face an enormous challenge: to build a country based on
the rule of law after 42 years of one-family rule, while preventing revenge
attacks, ensuring accountability for abuses by all parties to the conflict, and
promoting reconciliation. All these processes will take time and will require outside
assistance. But the events of 2011 have given Libyans the opportunity to
begin this arduous process.