Libya
Libya’s international reintegration accelerated in 2007 despite the government’s
ongoing human rights violations. In July the government released six foreign
medical workers who had been tortured, unfairly tried, and imprisoned for eight
years for allegedly infecting children with HIV. In October Libya won a seat on the
UN Security Council. Driven by business interests and Libya’s cooperation on
counterterrorism, the United States and some European governments
strengthened ties with Libya throughout the year. Yet the Libyan government
continues to imprison individuals for criticizing the country’s political system or
its leader, Mu`ammar al-Qadhafi, and maintains near-total restrictions on
freedom of expression and assembly. It forbids opposition political parties and
independent organizations. Torture remains a concern.
Political Prisoners
Libya continues to detain scores of individuals for engaging in peaceful political
activity. According to the Geneva-based group Libyan Human Rights Solidarity,
Libya has forcibly disappeared 258 political prisoners, some for decades. Many
were imprisoned for violating Law 71, which bans any group activity opposed to
the principles of the 1969 revolution that brought al-Qadhafi to power. Violators
of Law 71 can be put to death.
In February 2007 Libyan security agents arrested 14 organizers of a planned
peaceful demonstration intended to commemorate the anniversary of a violent
crackdown on demonstrators in Benghazi in 2006. At least 12 of the detainees are
on trial and could face the death penalty on charges of planning to overthrow the
government, arms possession, and meeting with a foreign official. Dr. Idris
Boufayed, the demonstration’s main organizer, is an outspoken critic whom the
government previously detained in November 2006. Jamal al-Haji, also detained,
is a Danish citizen to whom Libya has refused consular access. Two other
detainees, Ahmad Yusif al-`Ubaidi and Al-Sadiq Salih Humaid, are reportedly not
being treated for medical ailments. The government has “disappeared” `Abd al-
Rahman al-Qotaiwi, a fourth-year medical student involved in planning the
demonstration, and Jum`a Boufayed, who had given media interviews following the arrest of his brother Idris Boufayed. To Human Rights Watch’s knowledge,
none of the men has advocated violence.
Fathi al-Jahmi remains Libya’s most prominent political prisoner. Libya has
imprisoned al-Jahmi since March 2004 for calling for democratization and
criticizing al-Qadhafi. Authorities have prevented al-Jahmi’s family from visiting
him since August 2006.
Freedom of Association and Freedom of Expression
Libya has no independent nongovernmental organizations. Law 19, “On
Associations,” requires a political body to approve all such organizations and
does not allow appeals of negative decisions. The government has refused to
allow an independent journalists’ organization and has reportedly imposed
unwanted leaders on the lawyers’ union.
Freedom of expression is severely curtailed. Negative comments about al-Qadhafi
are strictly punished, and self-censorship is rife. Uncensored news is available via
satellite television and Libyan websites based abroad, which the government
occasionally blocks. In April Libya’s legislative body, the General People’s
Congress, passed Decree 146, creating a committee to examine the statecontrolled
media. In a bold statement, journalists and writers inside Libya
described “press content” as “dependent solely on propaganda and positive
government messages,” and called on the committee to promote a free press.
The government has announced no further information about the committee’s
work.
The exception to these rules are organizations run by one of Mu`ammar al-
Qadhafi’s sons, Seif al-Islam al-Qadhafi, who has criticized the lack of
representative government and called for a free press. His quasi-official Qadhafi
Development Foundation helped negotiate the release of the six healthcare
workers. In August his al-Ghad company launched Libya’s first private
newspapers and television station. One of these papers criticized the secretarygeneral
of the General People’s Congress for poorly planned building demolitions
in Tripoli, and another urged the authorities to allow exiled opposition members
to return.
Benghazi HIV Case
In July Libya released five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor who had
been jailed since 1999 and convicted of deliberately infecting 426 children with
HIV, based on dubious evidence. The Libyan High Judicial Council commuted the
healthcare workers’ death sentences, following a deal with the European Union to
compensate the victims’ families with a reported US$1 million per child. In an
interview in August, Seif al-Qadhafi said the release was also tied to arms deals
worth over $400 million.
The case raised serious concerns about due process and torture. Four of the
healthcare workers told Human Rights Watch that they had confessed under
torture by Libyan authorities, but a Libyan court had acquitted 10 security officials
charged with their torture in 2005. The healthcare workers reportedly waived their
right to seek redress from Libya shortly before their release.
Violence against Women and Girls
Although the extent of violence against women in Libya is unknown, the
government’s position in 2007 continued to be one of denial, leaving victims
unprotected and without remedies. There is no domestic violence law in Libya,
and laws punishing sexual violence are inadequate. The government prosecutes
only the most violent rape cases, and judges have the authority to propose
marriage between the rapist and the victim as a “social remedy” to the crime.
Rape victims themselves risk prosecution for adultery or fornication if they
attempt to press charges. Many victims’ families coerce them into marriage in
order to avoid public scandal.
Government services for victims of violence against women remain inadequate.
Police officers are not trained to handle cases of violence against women, and
there are no women’s or girls’ shelters. Instead, the government detains dozens
of victims, particularly rape victims, in “social rehabilitation” facilities. Many are
denied legal representation and the opportunity to challenge the legality of their
detention. The authorities subject them to forced virginity examinations and punitive
treatment, including solitary confinement. The only way out of these facilities is if a male relative takes custody of the woman or girl, or if she consents to marriage.
Abu Salim Prison
The government still has not released any findings on the large-scale killings in
Tripoli’s Abu Salim prison in June 1996. According to an ex-prisoner interviewed
by Human Rights Watch, Internal Security Agency forces killed as many as 1,200
inmates who had revolted over prison conditions. In 2005 the government said it
had established an investigatory committee, but it has released no information
since. In October 2006 guards fired on another group of prisoners after a
reported revolt, killing at least one and reportedly injuring nine.
Treatment of Foreigners
The government continues to forcibly deport foreigners who lack proper
documentation, sometimes to countries where they could face persecution.
Foreigners reported arbitrary arrests, beatings, and other abuse during their
detention and deportation. On July 8, 2007, Libya reportedly rounded up
approximately 70 Eritrean men, some of whom may have fled conscription into
the Eritrean military. (Eritrea has no conscientious objector status, and military
offenders are frequently subjected to torture.) Reportedly at Eritrea’s request,
Libyan security agents photographed the 70 men, who said guards had
threatened them with deportation. The men remain in detention at this writing.
Libya has no asylum law, has not signed the 1951 Refugee Convention, and has
no formal working agreement with the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). However, the government is drafting a law on asylum and
reportedly grants UNHCR representatives regular access to detention facilities.
Promises of Reform
In 2007 the government continued to review proposals for a new penal code and
code of criminal procedure, a process that began at least three years before. In
2005 the secretary of justice stated that, under the new penal code, the death
penalty would remain only for the “most dangerous crimes” and for “terrorism.”
However, a 2004 draft of the new code suggests the government might accept a
very broad definition of terrorism, which could be used to criminalize people
expressing peaceful political views. The government has yet to present either
draft code to the General People’s Congress.
Key International Actors
In 2007 the US and European governments upgraded relations with Libya despite
its human rights abuses. In March the US State Department’s annual human
rights report found that Libya’s “human rights record remained poor.”
Subsequently, President Bush nominated an ambassador to Libya and the US
secretary of state met with Libyan officials in New York. EU representatives signed
a memorandum of understanding in July on trade and other issues. In October the
Council of the EU proposed negotiating a framework agreement on “areas of
mutual interest, such as human rights [and] migration among others.” Since 2004
the US, European, and other governments have approved billions of dollars in
business deals with Libya, notably in the oil and gas sectors.
Libya continues to share intelligence on militant Islamists with Western
governments. On April 27, 2007, a British court ruled that the United Kingdom
could not return two terrorism suspects to Libya due to the risk of torture and
unfair trials. In September the US government sent a Libyan citizen, Sofian
Hamoodah, back to Libya after over five years of detention at Guantanamo Bay;
the whereabouts of Hamoodah, who consented to return, are currently unknown.
Another Guantanamo detainee returned in 2006, Mohamed al-Rimi, also remains
missing.
Cooperation continued in controlling illegal migration from Libya to southern
Europe, often without adequate regard for the rights of migrants or the need to
protect refugees and others at risk of abuse on return to their home countries.