Libya
After 42 years of dictatorship under Muammar Gaddafi, Libya held elections for
a General National Congress (GNC) in July, but a weak interim government failed
to disband a myriad of armed groups around the country, end arbitrary detention
and torture against detainees, or address the forced displacement of
groups perceived to be pro-Gaddafi.
Throughout the year, Libyans suffered from ongoing violence, with tribal clashes,
deadly attacks on foreign diplomatic missions and international organizations,
the destruction of Sufi religious sites, kidnappings for financial and political
reasons, and targeted killings of former Gaddafi security officers. Non-
Libyans from sub-Saharan Africa faced arrests, beatings, and forced labor.
Political Transition
Libya’s National Transitional Council (NTC), which governed Libya during and
after the 2011 conflict to oust Gaddafi, was dissolved with the GNC’s election on
July 7, 2012. International observers largely viewed the elections as fair, despite
some violence and attacks on polling stations. The transfer of power to the 200-
member Congress marked the first step of democratic governance. The GNC is
mandated to form a government, prepare a new electoral law and hold new
elections. It was originally tasked to form a body to draft a constitution, but the
NTC revoked that power just prior to elections in an attempt to defuse tension
between eastern and western Libya. The mechanism for drafting a constitution
is currently under review.
Libya’s first elected government was sworn in amid tension surrounding the
exclusion of four proposed ministers by the Integrity and Patriotism Commission
for failing to meet set criteria for public office.
Security and Militias
Despite some positive steps, the interim authorities struggled to establish a
functioning military and police that could enforce and maintain law and order.
Many of the armed groups that came into existence to fight Gaddafi refused to disarm and filled the security void. Some cooperated with the government and
provided security services. Others operated without state sanction; the state
proved unable to confront these well-armed groups.
The authorities’ failure to demobilize the armed groups contributed to an escalation
of violence in the Nafusa Mountains, in northwestern Libya, in the southern
towns of Kufra and Sebah, and in the towns of Sirte and Bani Walid. As of
October, an array of government and militia forces from Misrata had surrounded
Bani Walid and enforced a partial siege, demanding the arrest of wanted persons
suspected to be in the town.
Libya’s national military deployed in the south after tribal clashes between
Arabs and Tabu over border control, land rights, and trafficking routes. Spread
thin, the army at times served as an intermediary between clashing regions and
tribes.
The police force remained weak, and depended largely on the Supreme Security
Committee (SSC) for ensuring law and order—a quasi-official body of former
anti-Gaddafi fighters that is cooperating with the Interior Ministry—for ensuring
law and order. The SSC’s lack of vetting criteria and scant training contributed to
abuse by its members.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Deaths in Custody
As of October, roughly 8,000 people were in detention. The majority of them
were held for more than a year without charge or due process rights, including
judicial review and access to a lawyer. The Ministry of Justice holds around
3,000 detainees, around 2,000 are held by the Ministry of Defense or Supreme
Security Committee. The rest were being held illegally by various armed groups.
Conditions in militia-run facilities varied, with detainees in some facilities
reporting repeated torture and deaths in custody. Conditions in state-run facilities
appeared to improve, although there continued to be cases of abuse and
some deaths in custody.
Non-Libyans from sub-Saharan Africa, mainly migrant workers, are particularly
vulnerable to abuse, facing harassment, arrests, ill-treatment in detention, forced labor and no regulated access to United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR).
Failure to Investigate Killings
Apparently targeted killings occurred throughout the year, particularly of former
members of Gaddafi’s intelligence and security services. At this writing, at least
15 former officers were killed in seemingly targeted attacks in Benghazi. The
authorities did not announce any investigations into these killings, or arrest any
suspects.
Judicial System and Transitional Justice
The judicial system remained weak, especially in its ability to pursue criminals
affiliated with anti-Gaddafi militias. Threats and physical attacks on prosecutors
and judges further inhibited the rule of law.
On May 2, the NTC passed Law 38, which granted amnesty to those who committed
crimes if their actions were aimed at “promoting or protecting the revolution”
against Gaddafi.
At this writing, no one has been charged or arrested for the apparent execution
of 53 Gaddafi supporters in Sirte in October 2011, or for the apparent execution
of Muammar Gaddafi and his son Muatassim. An NTC-formed commission to
look at Gaddafi’s death released no results.
In contrast, the judicial authorities began proceedings against several former
Gaddafi officials. Detained officials complained that they did not have access to
a lawyer and did not know the charges against them.
Abuzaid Dorda, the former prime minister and head of foreign intelligence, was
injured after jumping from a two-story building while detained by a militia.
Dorda said he jumped in order to avoid abuse.
International Justice and the International Criminal Court
Muammar Gaddafi’s son Saif al-Islam and former intelligence chief Abdullah
Sanussi—both in Libyan custody—remain subject to arrest warrants by the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for crimes against humanity for their roles in
attacks on civilians, including peaceful demonstrators, in Tripoli, Benghazi,
Misrata, and other Libyan cities and towns after the start of anti-government
protests in eastern Libya on February 15.
Libya says that Gaddafi is under domestic investigation for corruption and
wartime abuses, and Sanussi is being investigated for serious crimes before
and during the conflict, including his suspected involvement in the 1996 killing
of about 1,200 prisons in Tripoli’s Abu Salim prison. Gaddafi is being held by a
militia in Zintan; Sanussi is under full state control after his extradition to Libya
from Mauritania in September. The Libyan government has challenged the
admissibility of the case against Gaddafi at the ICC, and that proceeding is
ongoing. Pending the challenge, the ICC judges have authorized Libya to postpone
Gaddafi’s surrender to the court in The Hague. However, at this writing
Libya was still under an obligation to surrender Sanussi to the court pursuant to
UN Security Council resolution 1970.
From June 7 to July 2, the militia in Zintan holding Gaddafi arbitrarily detained
ICC staff members, who traveled to Libya to meet with Gaddafi in a visit authorized
by the ICC judges and agreed to by Libya.
Forced Displacement
Approximately 35,000 people from the town of Tawergha are still displaced
around Libya and prevented from going back to their homes. The Tawerghans
are accused of siding with Muammar Gaddafi’s forces during the 2011 conflict
and of having committed serious crimes, including rape and torture, against residents
of nearby Misrata. Militias from Misrata have harassed, beaten, arrested,
and killed Tawerghans in custody.
Other displaced groups include residents of Tamina and Kararim, also accused
of having sided with pro-Gaddafi forces. Armed groups have barred the Mashashiya tribe from returning to their villages in the Nafusa Mountains due to
tribal and political disputes.
Freedom of Speech and Expression
In May, the NTC passed Law 37, which criminalized a variety of political speech,
including “glorifying the tyrant [Muammar Gaddafi],” “damaging the February 17
Revolution,” or insulting Libya’s institutions. A group of Libyan lawyers challenged
the law and in June the Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional.
The fragile security environment has hindered free speech, with journalists,
human rights activists, and members of the GNC facing threats by armed
groups. The government’s inability to implement a coherent visa-management
system has made it difficult for international media and nongovernmental
organizations to access the country.
Freedom of Religion
Attacks against religious minorities started in October 2011, and intensified in
2012. Armed groups motivated by their religious views attacked Sufi religious
sites across the country, destroying several mosques and tombs of Sufi religious
leaders. Armed groups attacked churches in at least two incidents in Tripoli in
May and September. The government’s security forces have failed to stop the
attacks and have made no significant arrests.
Women’s Rights
The 2012 elections for the GNC marked a positive step for female political participation;
33 women were elected (out of 200 seats) after the NTC adopted an
electoral law requiring each party run an equal number of male and female candidates.
Libya’s penal code considers sexual violence to be a crime against a woman’s
“honor” rather than against the individual. The code’s provisions permits a
reduction in sentence for a man who kills a wife, mother, daughter, or sister whom he suspects is engaged in extramarital sexual relations. The law does not
specifically prohibit domestic violence and there are no voluntary shelters for
victims of violence.
Key International Actors
The US, European Union, and UN all played significant roles throughout the
year. The EU sought to build on migration cooperation agreements with Libya.
The US expanded cooperation in the economic and security sectors particularly
after the attack on its embassy in Benghazi on September 11, 2012, which
resulted in the killing of the US ambassador Christopher Stevens and three
other embassy staff. The UN Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) continued its
focus on elections and transitional justice.
To date, NATO, which waged the air campaign against Gaddafi’s forces, has
failed to investigate properly at least 72 civilian casualties caused by its
airstrikes.
Security Council members that initially championed resolution 1970 referring
Libya to the ICC have been largely silent on Libya’s obligation under that resolution
to cooperate with the court.
The Commission of Inquiry for Libya (COI) expressed concern that human rights
violations continue to be committed especially by armed militias, and recommended
continued monitoring by the Human Rights Council (HRC) to ensure the
implementation of its recommendations. Yet the resolution that the council
adopted on March 23, 2012, at its 19th session, failed to acknowledge specific
violations, to recognize the extent and gravity of ongoing rights abuses, and to
include a mechanism to ensure monitoring of the human rights situation by the
council.