Libya
Libya’s interim government faced multiple challenges in 2013. Myriad armed
groups controlled security in many parts of the country, thousands of detainees
remained in government and militia-controlled detention facilities without
access to justice, and rampant ill-treatment and deaths in custody persisted.
Forced displacement of tens of thousands of people from the town of Tawergha
by militias from nearby Misrata had yet to be resolved.
Authorities failed to conclude any investigations into politically motivated
assassinations, attacks on protesters in Benghazi and Tripoli, and attacks on
journalists and foreign diplomatic missions, citing lack of resources and the
precarious security situation.
Political Transition
The General National Congress (GNC), Libya’s first elected parliament, has yet
to fulfill its core mandate to organize elections for the Constituent Assembly
(CA). On July 16, the GNC approved a law for electing the 60-member CA, which
will draft Libya’s constitution but at time of writing the law had not been
issued, and the elections date had not been fixed.
The GNC suffered from political discord between its main political parties, in
particular the Muslim Brotherhood-affiliated Justice and Construction Party
(JCP) and the more liberal leaning National Forces Alliance (NFA); resignations
by some Congress members; and removal of some congress members due to a
sweeping lustration law that banned from office persons who had held any
office in the Gaddafi era.
Security and Militias
The interim government failed to control deteriorating security in the country,
especially in the capital, Tripoli, and in Benghazi, Libya’s second largest city.
Myriad armed groups with varying agendas and allegiances, some affiliated
with the government, controlled large swathes of the country and its
resources—including Libya’s oil terminals, its main income source—and operated
with impunity. The government failed to demobilize militias or merge fightOn September 19, Libyan authorities started the pre-trial stage of domestic proceedings
against one of Gaddafi’s sons, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, his intelligence
chief, Abdullah Sanussi, and 36 other senior Gaddafi-era officials. They faced
charges of murder, torture, and indiscriminate killings committed during the
2011 uprising. The trials of these former officials were expected to start in
December.
At time of writing, the GNC had yet to pass the draft transitional justice law,
which calls for a commission to investigate abuses, refer perpetrators for prosecution,
and compensate victims directly. It would cover abuses committed during
the Gaddafi era and during the transitional phase following the 2011 conflict.
A draft law that would provide some compensation for mainly female victims
of physical and sexual violence had yet to pass.
Death Penalty
Military and civil courts imposed at least 28 death sentences, 12 of them
passed in absentia, since Gaddafi’s fall in October 2011. The Misrata Military
Court sentenced two members of Gaddafi’s military to death for violations committed
during the 2011 conflict, including indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and torture. A civil court in Misrata sentenced a former Gaddafi official and
pro-Gaddafi fighter to death for unlawful killings during the 2011 uprising. Civil
courts in Misrata, Benghazi, Zawiya, and Tripoli sentenced 12 civilians to death
on charges related to the 2011 conflict and common crime charges, including
murder. Lawyers and family of the accused alleged serious due process violations,
including the inability to call defense witnesses. The Supreme Court had
yet to approve the death sentences at time of writing.
International Justice and the International Criminal Court
Saif al-Islam Gaddafi and Abdullah Sanussi, who are wanted by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for crimes against humanity, remained in
Libyan custody, without access to lawyers.
Libya filed a legal bid at the ICC to prosecute Gaddafi domestically in May 2012,
and was told it could postpone surrendering him to the court until the ICC made
its decision. In May 2013, the ICC judges rejected Libya’s bid and reminded the Libyan authorities of their obligation to surrender him. Libya has appealed the
decision rejecting its bid.
On October 11, the ICC ruled Sanussi’s case inadmissible thereby granting Libya
the right to try him domestically. Sanussi’s lawyers at the ICC appealed that
decision. At time of writing, the ICC had yet to rule on the appeal.
Forced Displacement
Approximately 35,000 people from the town of Tawergha, in Libya’s northeast,
remained forcibly displaced at the end of 2013, with militias from nearby
Misrata preventing them from returning to their homes. The militias accuse
Tawerghans of supporting Gaddafi and committing serious crimes, including
rapes and torture, against people in Misrata in 2011.
Militias mainly from Misrata continued to arbitrarily detain, torture, harass, and
kill Tawerghans in custody. At time of writing, 1,300 people from Tawergha were
detained, mainly in Misrata, or unaccounted for. The same militias also prevented
residents of Tomina and Karareem, towns near Tawergha, from returning
home.
Freedom of Speech and Expression
Attacks on journalists increased amid instability. In August, unknown
assailants killed a journalist in Benghazi, two other journalists escaped separate
assassination attempts. Throughout the year, militias threatened and beat
scores of other media workers, mainly in Tripoli and Benghazi
Two politicians faced blasphemy charges and possible death sentences if
found guilty for using posters during the GNC elections campaign in June 2012
that militia members claimed insulted Islam.
An editor of al-Ummah newspaper faced charges of insulting members of the
judiciary after he published a list of allegedly corrupt judges and prosecutors. If
found guilty, he could face up to 15 years in jail.
Freedom of Religion
Attacks on Sufi religious sites across the country continued in 2013, although
fewer in number than in 2012. Authorities made no effort to protect the religious
sites of minorities or arrest those responsible for attacks. In August,
unknown persons desecrated Sufi graves in Tripoli and, in September, desecrated
a Sufi gravesite in Mizdah, southern Libya. In September, a Sufi religious
leader was assassinated by unknown gunmen in the Eastern city of Derna.
Women’s Rights
In February, Libya’s Supreme Court lifted restrictions on polygamy, enabling a
man to marry up to four wives without the prior consent of his first wife. In April,
the Ministry of Social Affairs suspended issuing marriage licenses for Libyan
women marrying foreigners after a call by Grand Mufti al-Sadeq al-Ghariani to
avoid spreading “other” religions in Libya. In the absence of a Personal Status
Law, the law Concerning the Specific Provisions on Marriage and Divorce and
their Consequences, Law No. 10 of 1984 is the only current legislation dealing
with domestic violence, but enforcement remains weak.
Political Isolation
After months of controversy, the GNC in May passed the Political Isolation Law,
barring Gaddafi-era officials from holding public office for 10 years. The law’s
sweeping provisions, vague procedures, and lack of judicial review, meant it
violated human rights standards. Armed groups surrounded the Foreign Affairs,
Justice, and Interior ministries, as well as the GNC, demanding that the GNC
pass the law.
Key International Actors
The United States, European Union countries, and the United Nations played
significant roles throughout the year. In May, the EU signed a border assistance
agreement with Libya supporting border security efforts. The US, UK, Germany,
France and Italy expanded cooperation, particularly in the security sector,
although promised trainings of security forces for the most part did not
materialize.
In March, the UN Security Council adopted resolution 2095, which extended the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Libya (UNSMIL) for one more year.
The resolution modified the arms embargo to allow Libyan authorities access to
non-lethal weapons and equipment in certain circumstances. Also in March
2013, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted a resolution that urged the
government to implement reform, but failed to condemn ongoing and serious
violations. The HRC asked the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights to
report back in March 2014 on the situation on the ground.
On May 8, the US, UK, and France expressed concern for the armed protests
and violence during the democratic transition. On September 10, the US, UK
and Italy issued a statement supporting the Libyan government in its efforts to
restore security and build its institutions and cautioning against disruption of
Libyan oil exports due to protests by armed groups at Libya’s main exporting oil
terminals.
In response to ongoing insecurity, the US, UK, France, Italy, and Turkey
announced plans to train more than 8,000 militia members for a General
Purpose Force to be merged into Libya’s army and police forces.