Sri Lanka
The human rights situation in Sri Lanka worsened in 2005. The December
2004 tsunami wrought tremendous destruction, particularly to the areas
already most affected by the country’s protracted civil war. Thirty thousand
people died and up to eight hundred thousand were displaced. Sectarian
interests hijacked aid distribution mechanisms, compromising the modest
successes of the post-tsunami recovery and rehabilitation effort. Killings, particularly
of Tamils in opposition to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE), an armed group advocating a separate homeland for Tamils, reached
an alarming rate of one per day by June 2005, and included the assassination
of Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar in August. The LTTE continued
to recruit child soldiers. Torture and mistreatment by police continued to be
a problem.
Presidential elections were held on November, 17, 2005, with Mahinda
Rajapakse, of the ruling party, winning by a slim margin. There was very low
voter turnout at the polls in the north and the east after the LTTE discouraged
Tamils from voting. Rajapakse’s candidacy was backed by hard-line
Sinhala nationalist parties.
Political Killings
Since February 2002, when the government and the LTTE signed a ceasefire
agreement (CFA), an estimated two hundred Tamils have been killed for
apparently political reasons. Most of the killings have been attributed to the
LTTE. As of September 2005, the Norwegian-led Sri Lanka Monitoring
Mission (SLMM) had received 1,466 reports of abductions for politically
motivated reasons, and had certified at least 641 cases of abduction as violations
of the CFA.
On February 11, 2005, E. Kaushalyan, the LTTE’s Batticaloa-Amparai district
political head, was killed together with five other members of his convoy.
He was the most senior member of the LTTE to be killed since the
CFA.
In May 2005, Dharmeratnam Sivaram, a senior journalist and the outspoken
editor of the pro-Tamil news website www.tamilnet.com, was killed by
unknown assailants in Colombo. Relanghai Selvarajah, a Tamil radio producer
fiercely critical of the LTTE, was shot dead in Colombo on August 13. On
October 12, K. Rajadorai, the president of Jaffna Central College, and also a
LTTE critic, was shot dead by a suspected LTTE cadre. Rajadorai had close
connections with the Eelam People’s Democratic Party, an anti-LTTE Tamil
party disarmed under the CFA. Numerous EPDP members have been victims
of attack allegedly by the LTTE.
On August 13, 2005, unknown gunmen shot and killed Sri Lanka’s foreign
minister, Lakshman Kadirgamar, at his home in Colombo. Kadirgamar, a
Tamil member of the ruling party, the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, had led the
campaign to have the LTTE labeled a terrorist organization by several countries.
It was widely acknowledged that he topped the LTTE’s list of political
targets.
President Chandrika Kumaratunga immediately announced emergency rule
following Kadirgamar’s assassination. In contrast to her past responses to the
killings of Tamils, she immediately called for a thorough investigation,
deploying thousands of police officers throughout Colombo.
In the context of the political killings, many human rights defenders, particularly
Tamils in the north and east, have been forced to either stop their work
or go into hiding. Several human rights defenders have had to flee the country
over the last year as a direct result of the intimidation generated by the
killings.
Child Soldiers
The LTTE has a history of recruiting children to serve in combat. Sri Lanka
has ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, which prohibits all use of children under eighteen in armed conflict
and all recruitment of children by non-state armed groups.
Under a 2003 action plan signed by the LTTE and the Sri Lankan government,
the LTTE agreed to release children from its forces. But not only has the LTTE failed to comply, human rights and other groups have reported
ongoing child recruitment by the LTTE, which in spite of international condemnation
refuses to acknowledge the practice. Recruitment rates dropped
during the first half of 2005 following the tsunami, but increased significantly
in mid-2005, with numerous reports of child recruitment taking place at temple
festivals in the east. During July alone the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) documented 139 cases of child recruitment, the highest
level recorded during any single month since late 2003. During the first nine
months of 2005 UNICEF documented a total of 483 cases of child recruitment;
the true total is believed to be higher, as many cases are never reported.
During the same period, 146 children were released from the LTTE.
Those who campaign against child conscription are at risk. On October 11,
2005, the principal of Kopay Christian College in Jaffna, who publicly voiced
his criticisms, was shot dead in his home.
Police Torture and Deaths in Custody
In 2003 the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and the Police
Commission agreed on measures including ensuring that families and lawyers
have access to detainees, displaying written summaries of detainees’ rights in
police stations, and holding officers in command responsible for torture in
their stations. In spite of these attempts at reform, the NHRC reported an
increase in custodial deaths, with at least nineteen cases reported in 2005
alone, and cases of police torture continue to be reported. For example, on
February 2, 2005, D.D. went to visit a friend in Kiriella police custody.
While there, two police officers detained and assaulted D.D. They also made
him place his fingerprints on an item of evidence, and forced him to sign a
false statement. On May 19, twenty-six-year-old H.F. was severely tortured at
Panadura police station. He was forced to sit with his head between his
knees, and was beaten and kicked all over. The police took him to a doctor
who insisted on hospitalizing H.F., but the police refused and returned him
to the police station. He was further forced to sign a statement claiming that
his injuries had occurred prior to his arrest.
There are reports of police torture of children as well. On June 11, 2005, an
eleven-year-old boy accused of stealing money was beaten and sexually tortured
in the Kahawatte police station. The police officers squeezed his genitals,
tied his legs, and beat him severely in order to extract a confession. In
another case, a twelve-year-old boy was severely beaten by police from the
Wattegama police station. The police had come to his house to look for his
father, and, not finding the father there, assaulted the young boy instead.
The police continue to enjoy great impunity. While some cases of deaths in
custody and torture have been investigated, no one has been prosecuted or
punished as yet. In May 2005 the Supreme Court acquitted all the defendants
in the October 2000 mob killing of twenty-seven Tamil detainees at the
Bindunuwewa detention facility. The youngest inmate in the camp was
twelve years old at the time of his death. An independent commission of
inquiry into the killings faulted the local police commissioners, A.W.
Dayaratne and Jayantha Senivaratna, for failure to protect the inmates from
the attack despite prior knowledge that a planned demonstration might turn
violent. Neither officer has been indicted or even disciplined, and all others
who were tried were acquitted.
Tsunami
Reconstruction work is taking place in the communities affected by the
December 26, 2004 tsunami, but not at a pace to match the needs. Nearly a
year on, government bureaucracies and delays in international financing have
left most of the displaced still in temporary shelters.
Since early 2005, minority Tamil and Muslim communities have accused the
government of discrimination in the distribution of post-tsunami aid. In an
attempt to address some of these concerns, the government of Sri Lanka and
the LTTE signed an agreement known as the Post-Tsunami Operational
Management Structure (P-TOMS, also known as the “joint mechanism”),
intended to ensure fair and equitable distribution of aid to the north and east.
However, the implementation of P-TOMS has stalled due to political parties’
quarrels over who has the right to participate in and control the process.
Those opposed to the LTTE, particularly rival Tamil parties, objected to the
government-like authority given to the LTTE under the joint mechanism.
The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress complained about its exclusion from the
joint mechanism, and interpreted it as further evidence of discrimination
against its community. The JVP, a Sinhala nationalist party, decried any
agreement signed with the LTTE, left the ruling coalition in protest, and
launched a legal challenge that led the Supreme Court to issue a stay order
on the implementation of sections of P-TOMS.
Key International Actors
The donor community has increasingly spoken out against political killings
in the past year, notably in a March 2005 statement by the European Union’s
commissioner for external relations. The SLMM, which has resisted including
human rights monitoring, finally acknowledged that such killings do fall
within its mandate. Following the killing of Lakshman Kadirgamar, the international
community, and particularly the four co-chairs of the donor conference,
stressed the need to re-examine the CFA and to strengthen respect for
it by all parties to the conflict. In September the E.U. imposed a travel ban
on the LTTE, announcing that its member states would no longer receive
LTTE delegations. It also reiterated its condemnation of political killings and
child recruitment by the LTTE.