SI@ L8EB8
The aftermath of Sri Lanka’s quarter century-long civil war, which ended in May
2009 with the defeat of the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE),
continued to dominate events in 2011. In April United Nations Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon released a report by a panel of experts that concluded that both
government forces and the LTTE conducted military operations “with flagrant
disregard for the protection, rights, welfare and lives of civilians and failed to
respect the norms of international law.” The panel recommended the establishment
of an international investigative mechanism. Sri Lankan officials responded
by vilifying the report and the panel members.
The government has failed to conduct credible investigations into alleged war
crimes by security forces, dismissing the overwhelming body of evidence as
LTTE propaganda. The government’s Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission (LLRC), characterized as a national accountability mechanism, is
deeply flawed, does not meet international standards for such commissions,
and has failed to systematically inquire into alleged abuses.
In August the government allowed emergency regulations in place for nearly
three decades to lapse, but overbroad detention powers remained in place
under other laws and new regulations. Several thousand detainees continue to
be held without trial, in violation of international law.
Accountability
Sri Lanka has made no progress toward justice for the extensive laws of war
violations committed by both sides during the long civil war, including the government’s
indiscriminate shelling of civilians and the LTTE’s use of thousands
of civilians as “human shields” in the final months of the conflict. Since the war
ended the government has not launched a single credible investigation into
alleged abuses. The lack of investigation was especially conspicuous with
regard to several incidents featured in a June 2011 program on the British television
station Channel 4, showing gruesome images of what appear to be summary
executions of captured and bound combatants. Incredibly, the government repeatedly has dismissed the footage as fabricated despite several independent
expert reports finding it authentic.
In May the Sri Lankan Defense Ministry held an international conference in
Colombo, the capital, on defeating terrorism that gave scant attention to government
abuses. In August the Defense Ministry issued its own report, conceding
for the first time that government forces caused civilian deaths in the final
months of the conflict, but taking no responsibility for laws of war violations
and concluding peremptorily without further investigation that the deaths were
the unfortunate collateral damage of war.
Impunity for serious violations also continues for older cases. Despite strong
evidence of involvement by government forces in the execution-style slayings of
17 aid workers and five students in separate incidents in 2006, government
inquiries continue to languish and no one has been arrested for the crimes.
The government has repeatedly extended the deadline for the LLRC. The LLRC’s
mandate focuses on the breakdown of the 2002 ceasefire between the government
and the LTTE, and does not explicitly require it to investigate alleged war
crimes during the conflict. The LLRC heard testimony but undertook no investigations
into such allegations. The LLRC was due to submit its report to
President Mahinda Rajapaksa on November 15. The government has stated that
the report will be made public but has not indicated when it will do so. The government
has not acted on the LLRC’s preliminary recommendations.
Torture, Enforced Disappearances, and Arbitrary Detention
While the government allowed longstanding emergency regulations to lapse in
August, it failed to rescind other legislation granting police and other security
forces overbroad detention powers and it adopted new regulations that in effect
continue several of the emergency provisions. The president continues to issue
monthly decrees granting the armed forces search and detention powers.
Despite the end of the formal state of emergency, the government also continues
to hold several thousand people initially detained under the emergency
regulations. Many have been held for years without trial, in violation of international law. The government has so far refused to even publish lists of those
detained.
The government has gradually released many, but not all, of the more than
11,000 suspected LTTE members detained at the end of the war and sent to socalled
rehabilitation centers. The government denied detainees important due
process guarantees, such as access to legal counsel, and thousands spent two
years or more in detention. There are reports that some people released from
the rehabilitation centers were harassed by security forces after they returned
home.
In 2011, new reports of “disappearances” and abductions in the north and the
east emerged, some linked to political parties and others to criminal gangs. The
government has lifted its restriction on travel to parts of the north, although it
maintains a very high security presence. Violence, including sexual assault, by
so-called grease devils, some of whom could allegedly be traced to military
camps, highlighted insecurity in the north and east.
The Prevention of Terrorism Act gives police broad powers over suspects in custody.
Sri Lanka has a long history of torture by the police forces, at times resulting
in death.
Civil Society and Opposition Members
Free expression remained under assault in 2011. Gnanasundaram Kuhanathan,
editor of a Jaffna-based newspaper, was beaten with iron bars by a group of
unidentified youths in late July. He was severely injured and required hospitalization.
In July a team of Radio Netherlands journalists were harassed by police
and later robbed and attacked at gunpoint by a gang in a white van, a notorious
symbol of terror in Sri Lanka. Lal Wickrematunge, chairman of the Sunday
Leader and brother of Lasantha Wickrematunge (who was gunned down in
2009), received a phone call from President Rajapaksa in response to an article
on high-level corruption in which the president said to Wickrematunge, “You
are writing lies, outrageous lies! You can attack me politically, but if you attack
me personally, I will know how to attack you personally too.”
There have been no further developments regarding the killing of Lasantha
Wickrematunge or the disappearance of Prageeth Ekneligoda, a contributor to
Lanka e-news, who has been missing since January 24, 2010.
Members and supporters of the Tamil National Alliance (TNA), campaigning
ahead of local elections in Jaffna in June, were attacked by army personnel
wielding rods, batons, and sticks. Among the injured were TNA members and
police officers assigned to provide security to the parliamentarians. The results
of an investigation into the incident ordered by the secretary of defense are not
known.
In November the government blocked at least six news websites claiming that
they had maligned the character of the president and other top government
officials.
Reconciliation Efforts
Reconciliation efforts, meant to address longstanding grievances of the ethnic
Tamil population, have been slow at best. Local elections in March, July, and
October further consolidated the hold of Rajapaksa’s ruling alliance, although
the TNA garnered significant victories in the north. The TNA and the government
have been in negotiations to deal with, among other matters, devolution of
powers to the provinces, a key issue underpinning the civil war. The talks have
been rife with tension, with the TNA accusing the government of deceitful and
facetious behavior, and the government accusing the TNA of issuing LTTE-type
ultimatums as a result of its electoral victory in the north. The TNA left talks
with the government in August but has since returned.
In September the TNA reacted angrily to government statements at the UN
Human Rights Council (HRC) in Geneva, saying government claims that reconciliation
efforts have been predicated on “building trust and amity” between the
communities is not supported by the experience of the Tamil people.
Internally Displaced Persons
The vast majority of the nearly 300,000 civilians illegally confined in militarycontrolled
detention centers after the war have moved out of the centers back
into communities, although not necessarily into their original homes. About
110,000 persons still live with host families or in camps and several thousand
are not able to return because their home areas have not been demined. The
government has still not granted international demining agencies access to
several areas.
Key International Actors
Pressure on accountability from key international actors mounted following the
April release of a damning panel report commissioned by the UN secretary-general.
Several countries—including Britain, Canada, Australia, and the United
States—called on Sri Lanka to investigate the allegations contained in the
report. The European Parliament adopted a resolution in May urging Sri Lanka
to immediately investigate the allegations and the European Union to “support
further efforts to strengthen the accountability process in Sri Lanka and to support
the UN report.” Even India, which had largely stayed silent on alleged
abuses in Sri Lanka, added to the pressure in May when it called for investigations.
Also in May the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary
executions called on the government to investigate “textbook examples of
extrajudicial executions” in Sri Lanka following a review of evidence related to
government execution of prisoners.
In September UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon submitted the panel report on
the war to the president of the HRC and, acting on one of the report’s recommendations,
announced that the UN would undertake a separate inquiry into
the its own actions in Sri Lanka during the final months of the war.
While several countries called for accountability for laws of war violations during
the September HRC session, the Council failed to act following Ban’s transmission
of the panel report and has not yet taken steps towards establishing an
international accountability mechanism, the main recommendation in the
report.
Several governments indicated that they will support an international accountability
mechanism if the LLRC report fails to properly address accountability
issues. US Assistant Secretary of State Robert Blake said during a trip to Sri
Lanka in September that unless there is a full, credible, and independent
accounting, “there will be pressure for some sort of alternative mechanism.”
The UK has likewise said that it will “support the international community in
revisiting all options” unless the Sri Lankan government demonstrates progress
by the end of 2011.
US legislation restricts military aid to Sri Lanka, subject to strict conditions
regarding progress on accountability and human rights.
At a Commonwealth summit in October, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen
Harper called for a boycott of a planned Commonwealth heads of government
summit in Sri Lanka in 2013, should Sri Lanka fail to improve its human rights
record by that time.