Sri Lanka
On January 2, 2008, the Sri Lankan government formally pulled out of its ceasefire
agreement with the secessionist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The
agreement had effectively been a dead letter since mid-2006, when major military
operations by both sides resumed. Since then, the human rights situation in
the north and east of the country has deteriorated markedly, with numerous
reports of killings, abductions, and enforced disappearances by government
forces, the LTTE, and paramilitary groups.
All parties are responsible for harmful and unnecessary restrictions on humanitarian
access to populations at risk. The LTTE has continued bomb attacks on civilians
in several cities, including the capital Colombo.
The government’s state of emergency continued in 2008, with increasing numbers
of arrests and detentions taking place under emergency regulations and the
Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA). The culture of impunity deepened, with investigations
and inquiries into human rights violations failing to bring significant
results, and a group of prominent international figures pulling out of an inquiry
into grave human rights abuses because of “an absence of political and institutional
will” on the part of the government.
Humanitarian Crisis
Since mid-2006 fighting in the north and east has created a series of humanitarian
crises. On September 8, 2008, the government ordered the United Nations
and other international agencies to withdraw foreign and non-resident local staff
and suspend their aid operations in the LTTE-controlled Vanni region. At this writing,
reports indicated there were over 240,000 displaced persons in Kilinochchi
and Mullativu Districts. The withdrawal raised fears of shortages of food and
essential items in the area and inadequate shelter.
Restrictions imposed by the LTTE make it extremely difficult for civilians to leave
the Vanni for government areas, including the LTTE requirement that civilians have
a “guarantor”—in effect, a hostage—who remains behind. Such restrictions have resulted in entire communities being trapped in areas threatened by fighting and
with minimal humanitarian assistance.
Those who manage to escape the Vanni have faced an uncertain future, as the
government suspects Tamils from the area of being LTTE supporters. Many families
have been moved by the government to “welfare centers,” as in Kallimoddai
and Sirukondal in Mannar District, where their movements are severely restricted.
Concerns remain about security, sustainability, and freedom of choice for displaced
persons returning to or resettling in areas in the east, particularly in the
High Security Zone in Sampur, Trincomalee District.
Threats and Attacks against Civilians
Threats and attacks against civilians continue. In 2008 bomb blasts in urban
areas resulted in over 70 civilian deaths and some 250 casualties; the LTTE was
the prime suspect. According to local media, as many as 47 civilians were killed
in Kilinochchi District after hostilities escalated in May. T. Maheswaran, a Tamil
member of parliament and vocal critic of the government, was killed on January 1,
2008, while attending religious services at a Hindu temple in an area with high
security.
Fear of killings and abductions in the northern Jaffna peninsula is so great that at
this writing over 300 people were in protective custody in the Jaffna prison. Many
serious abuses in Jaffna have been reported during curfew hours and in highsecurity
areas, suggesting the complicity of government security forces.
As many as 22 people were killed and 26 abducted in May 2008 before and after
council elections in Eastern Province. The elections resulted in the appointment
of Pillayan, a former LTTE member and current Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal
(TMVP) leader, as chief minister. The TMVP, originally a breakaway faction of the
LTTE called the Karuna Group, continues to be responsible for abductions and
child recruitment with the complicity of the security forces.
Tamil civilians, including many who relocated to Colombo from Jaffna and other
locations in the north and east, continue to face arbitrary arrests and detentions,
round-ups, orders of eviction, and new forms of registration.
Abductions and Enforced Disappearances
Abductions and enforced disappearances continued in 2008, with approximately
43 reported cases in Vavuniya in August alone. Many cases are not reported due
to fear of reprisals. Besides a few arrests of persons alleged to be involved in
abductions for ransom, Human Rights Watch is unaware of any serious action by
the government to address the hundreds of new “disappearances” of the past
few years, the great majority of which remain unresolved. Most cases of enforced
disappearances implicate government security forces.
Emergency Regulations and the Prevention of Terrorism Act
Emergency regulations provide broad powers to the security forces to investigate,
arrest, and detain people in the name of “national security.” The government
uses the regulations to arrest and detain political opponents, journalists, human
rights defenders, and members of the Tamil minority community.
On March 7, 2008, the Terrorist Investigative Department arrested prominent journalist
J.S. Tissainayagam and detained him without charge for more than 150 days
for alleged links to the LTTE. He was later charged both under the emergency regulations
and the Prevention of Terrorism Act for printing and distributing North
Eastern Monthly magazine in 2006. A new emergency regulation introduced in
August 2008 gives the secretary of defense power to detain persons for 18
months without producing them before the courts.
Impunity
Despite government commitments to address impunity, rights violators continue
to face no serious threat of prosecution. There were no convictions of perpetrators
of serious human rights violations in 2008. The Presidential Commission of
Inquiry, formed under international pressure to investigate 16 incidents of grave
human rights abuses, failed to make any significant progress. The process was so
flawed that the International Independent Group of Eminent Persons, after regularly
raising serious concerns, eventually withdrew from its observer role. Four Sri
Lankan commissioners also resigned.
In a shocking display of impunity, Karuna Amman, former LTTE deputy commander
implicated in numerous serious abuses both with the LTTE and his breakaway
armed group, was reinstated as a leader of the TMVP upon his return to Sri Lanka
in July 2008. He had just been released after serving time for immigration fraud in
the United Kingdom. On October 7 he was inducted as a member of parliament
with the full support of the president and government.
Child Soldiers
In October the United Nations Children’s Fund reported 1,424 outstanding cases
of recruitment of child soldiers by the LTTE, including 108 still under age 18, and
133 by the TMVP, including 62 still under age 18. New child recruitment continues:
reports from Ampara District indicated an increase in TMVP abductions in late
2008 and unconfirmed reports suggest that the LTTE has sharply increased child
recruitment in response to government military operations in Kilinochchi District.
Many cases are not reported due to fear of reprisals.
Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, and Humanitarian
Workers
Threats and attacks against human rights defenders and journalists worsened in
2008. On September 27, grenades were thrown at the house of human rights
lawyer and executive director of Transparency International Sri Lanka, J.C.
Weliamuna. According to the Free Media Movement, since 2005, 14 journalists
have been killed, 7 abducted, and 13 arrested.
Humanitarian space shrunk considerably in 2008, with the government ordering
withdrawal of agencies from the Vanni region. Aggressive public statements from
senior government officials continued against international agencies, including
the UN, with many accused of being LTTE supporters or sympathizers.
Humanitarian aid agencies’ operations were significantly affected with restrictions
on movement and difficulties obtaining visas and work permits for expatriate
staff. No progress was made in the August 2006 execution-style slayings of 17
Action against Hunger (ACF) aid workers despite strong new evidence that state
security forces were responsible. 
Sri Lankan Migrant Workers
More than 710,000 Sri Lankan women work abroad as domestic workers, nearly
90 percent of them in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Lebanon, and the United Arab
Emirates. Once abroad, many domestic workers face abuses, including long
hours, no rest days, forced confinement, low and unpaid wages, physical and
sexual abuse, and conditions that amount to forced labor (see Saudi Arabia and
Lebanon chapters).
Some Sri Lankan foreign missions have created shelters to assist the thousands
of domestic workers complaining of unpaid wages and abuse each year. These
foreign missions have inadequate staffing and resources, the shelters are grossly
overcrowded and unhygienic, and the services they provide often fail to meet
minimum standards. The government and the Sri Lankan association of recruitment
agencies have attempted to negotiate higher salaries for Sri Lankan domestic
workers working abroad, but enforcement in labor-receiving countries is
uneven.
Key International Actors
On May 21, Sri Lanka lost its bid for reelection to the UN Human Rights Council. A
broad coalition of national and international NGOs raised strong objections to Sri
Lanka’s candidacy, pointing to its poor human rights record and failure to meet
past commitments to the HRC. In May during the HRC’s triennial review of Sri
Lanka’s record, the government agreed to implement a national action plan on
human rights.
In 2008 several influential actors, including co-chairs of the peace process in Sri
Lanka—the European Union, Japan, Norway, and the United States—denounced
abuses by government and LTTE forces and called on all sides to respect civilian
life and humanitarian space.
Many eminent international figures who commented on the deteriorating human
rights situation in Sri Lanka were sharply criticized by senior government officials,
some even accused of being LTTE dupes or sympathizers, including UN SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Nobel Laureates Bishop Desmond Tutu, Adolfo Pérez
Esquivel, and Jimmy Carter.