Sri Lanka
The aftermath of the quarter-century-long civil war, which ended in May 2009 with
the government defeat of the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE),
continued to dominate events in 2010. As pressure mounted for an independent
investigation into alleged laws of war violations, the government responded by
threatening journalists and civil society activists, effectively curtailing public
debate and establishing its own commission of inquiry with a severely limited
mandate. When United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon established his
own panel to advise him on accountability issues in Sri Lanka, the government
refused to cooperate.
Sri Lanka held presidential and parliamentary elections in January and April
respectively. President Mahinda Rajapaksa easily won re-election, and the ruling
United People’s Freedom Alliance party remained in power with a significant
majority in parliament. Two weeks after the presidential election, the main opposition
candidate, former army chief Sarath Fonseka, was arrested and in August
found guilty before a court martial of engaging in political activity while still in
uniform, and was stripped of his rank and pension. In a second court martial in
September, he was found guilty of corrupt military supply deals and sentenced to
30 months imprisonment.
In September, at the Rajapaksa administration’s urging, parliament passed the
18th amendment to the constitution, which removed restrictions on central government
control over important independent bodies, such as the police, judiciary,
electoral bodies, and national human rights commission. The amendment consolidated
central government power, in particular executive power.
Accountability
Sri Lanka made no progress toward justice for the extensive laws of war violations
committed by both sides during the long civil war, including the government’s
indiscriminate shelling of civilians and the LTTE’s use of thousands of civilians as
human shields in the final months of the conflict.
Senior government officials have repeatedly stated that no civilians were killed by
Sri Lankan armed forces during the final months of the fighting, despite overwhelming
evidence reported by Human Rights Watch and others that government
forces frequently fired artillery into civilian areas, including the governmentdeclared
“no fire zone” and hospitals. When in late 2009, former commander
Fonseka, then a presidential candidate, stated he was willing to testify about the
conduct of the war, the defense secretary threatened to have him executed for
treason.
Rajapaksa established the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC)
in May 2010. The LLRC’s mandate, which focuses on the breakdown of the 2002
ceasefire between the government and the LTTE, does not explicitly require it to
investigate alleged war crimes during the conflict, nor has the LLRC shown any
apparent interest in investigating such allegations in its hearings to date.
Internally Displaced Persons
After illegally confining more than 280,000 civilians displaced by the war in military-
controlled detention camps–euphemistically called “welfare centers”–the
government released most of the detainees in 2010. Many of those who returned
to their homes in the north and the east face serious livelihood and security
issues. About 50,000 people remained in the camps, primarily families that could
not return to their former homes.
Arbitrary Detention, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture
The government continues to detain without trial approximately 7,000 alleged
LTTE combatants, in many cases citing vague and overbroad emergency laws. The
detainees are denied access by the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
little is known of camp conditions or their treatment. They typically have access to
family members but not to legal counsel. While the government asserts that it has
withdrawn some of its emergency regulations, the Prevention of Terrorism Act
enables security forces to circumvent basic due process.
There were reports in 2010 of new enforced disappearances and abductions in
the north and the east, some linked to political parties and others to criminal gangs. The government continues to restrict access to parts of the north, making
it difficult to confirm these allegations. Witnesses testified before the LLRC that
relatives last known to be in government custody at the end of the war were
forcibly disappeared and were feared to be dead.
The emergency regulations, many of which are still in place, and the Prevention of
Terrorism Act give police broad powers over suspects in custody. Sri Lanka has a
long history of custodial abuse by the police forces, at times resulting in death. In
a particularly shocking case in January, a video camera caught police officers brutally
beating to death an escaped prisoner.
Attacks on Civil Society
Free expression remained under assault in 2010. Independent and opposition
media came under increased pressure, particularly in the run-up to elections. Sri
Lankan authorities detained and interrogated journalists, blocked access to news
websites, and assaulted journalists covering opposition demonstrations.
News outlets associated with opposition parties came under the most vigorous
and sustained attacks. The government particularly targeted Lanka-e-News, a
news website published in English, Tamil, and Sinhalese, often aligned with the
opposition party People’s Liberation Front (JVP). A contributor to Lanka-e-News,
Prageeth Ekneligoda, left his office on January 24 and has been missing ever
since.
Lanka-e-News was one of six news websites blocked by the state-controlled Sri
Lanka Telecom internet provider for several days starting on January 26, the day
of the presidential election. Even after the elections commissioner ordered Sri
Lanka Telecom to unblock the website, the editor of Lanka-e-News, Sandaruwan
Senadheera, was subjected to threats and intimidation. Following several abduction
attempts, Senadheera went into hiding.
The government also targeted another JVP-owned bi-weekly newspaper, Irida
Lanka. On January 29, police questioned senior news editor Chandana
Sirimalwatte and two editorial assistants about a recently published article. While
police released the assistants after several hours, Sirimalwatte was held without charge for 18 days. The police also sealed the newspaper’s offices until a court
ordered them opened again.
Some 20 journalists, media workers, and civil society actors went into hiding in
the days following the January election out of concern for their safety. At least four
journalists left the country, adding to the several dozen who have fled in recent
years.
Arrests and Harassment of Opposition Members and
Supporters
The sudden emergence of Sarath Fonseka as a plausible political challenger to
Rajapaksa in November 2009 galvanized the opposition, bringing together such
disparate parties as the left-wing Sinhalese-nationalist JVP and the right-leaning
United National Front (UNP). Even the Tamil National Alliance (TNA), previously
sympathetic to LTTE goals, pledged its support to Fonseka. Although Rajapaksa
won the election by a comfortable margin, his administration targeted Fonseka
and his supporters in what seems to have been an effort to remove not only
Fonseka, but any strong opposition voice, from the public arena.
A few weeks after the January elections the government raided opposition offices
and arrested dozens of staff members, including Fonseka. Some were arrested
when security forces surrounded the hotel where Fonseka’s staff were staying on
election night; another 13 staff members were arrested and accused of conspiring
to stage a military coup.
Key International Actors
Mounting pressure from the United States, some European governments, and
intergovernmental bodies contributed to the Sri Lankan government’s decision to
establish the LLRC in May. Other influential international actors, including India
and Japan, adopted a “wait and see” approach, failing to insist on more serious
justice efforts. A US State Department report issued in August acknowledged that
the government had not taken effective steps toward accountability and noted
the LLRC’s shortcomings. In October Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International,
and the International Crisis Group declined an invitation to testify before the LLRC, citing its limited mandate and lack of impartiality. Also in October, United
Kingdom Prime Minister David Cameron stated in parliament that there was a
need for an independent investigation into the conduct of the war, seemingly
retreating from parliament’s prior commendation of the LLRC.
In June UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon established a three-member panel to
advise him on accountability issues in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan government publicly
castigated the newly created panel and, in early July, Housing Minister Wimal
Weerawansa led a protest outside a UN office in Colombo, preventing staff from
entering the building. It was only a few days later, after Ban recalled the UN resident
coordinator to New York, that President Rajapaksa intervened and the
protests stopped.
In June Japan announced that it would donate 100 million yen (US$1.23 million)
through the UN High Commissioner for Refugees for humanitarian assistance to
internally displaced persons in Sri Lanka. In July the European Union decided to
withdraw Sri Lanka’s preferential trade relations, known as the Generalised
System of Preferences Plus, effective from mid-August, after it identified “significant
shortcomings” regarding Sri Lanka’s implementation of three UN human
rights conventions. The government responded that the decision amounted to foreign
interference and that Sri Lanka could manage without the trade benefits.
In September the International Monetary Fund announced that it had approved a
US$2.6 billion loan to Sri Lanka following a two-week mission to the country.