Sri Lanka
In the continuing conflict between the Sri Lankan government and the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), both sides show little regard for the safety and wellbeing
of civiliansand violate international humanitarian lawby indiscriminately
firing on civilian areas and unnecessarily preventing the delivery of humanitarian
aid. Since the breakdown of the ceasefire and the resumption of major military
operations in mid-2006, hundreds of civilians have been killed and over 208,000
persons remain displaced as of October 31.
Government security forces are implicated in extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances,
forcibly returning internally displaced persons (IDPs) to unsafe
areas, restricting media freedoms, apparent complicity with the abusive Karuna
group, and widespread impunity for serious human rights violations. Hundreds of
people have been detained under newly strengthened Emergency Regulations
that give the government broad powers of arrest and detention without charge.
The regulations have been used to conduct mass arbitrary arrests of ethnic Tamils
in the capital Colombo, as well as to detain political opponents, journalists, and
civil society activists.
In areas under its control, the LTTE continues to forcibly conscript children and
adults, control the media, and suppress freedoms of expression, association and
assembly. In contested areas, the LTTE continues to conduct targeted killings of
perceived political opponents. On November 28, two bombings attributed to the
LTTE killed 18 civilians in Colombo.
The Karuna group, which has been aligned with government forces since breaking
away from the LTTE in 2004, openly engaged in child recruitment, extortion,
abductions for ransom, and political killings. Its expelled leader Colonel Karuna
was arrested by UK immigration authorities in London in October.
Internal Displacement
Nearly 315,000 people, mostly Tamil and Muslim, have fled their homes in the
north and east because of renewed hostilities. Currently over 200,000 remain displaced
in the east; many have been displaced multiple times. Returning IDPs face regular threats and occasional violence, including abductions, by both the LTTE
and pro-government armed groups. In several instances during 2007, government
authorities forced IDPs to return to insecure areas. Others are unlikely ever to be
able to return to their homes following the governments announcement in May of
the creation of High Security Zones that include special economic areas on
land where thousands of families once lived.
Abductions and Enforced Disappearances
More than 1,100 new disappearances or abductions were reported between
January 2006 and June 2007, the vast majority Tamils. While the LTTE has long
been responsible for abductions, most recent reported disappearances implicate
government forces or armed groups acting with government complicity, who
target young Tamil men deemed to be part of the LTTEs civilian support network.
On the northern Jaffna peninsula alone, in areas under strict military control,
more than 800 persons were reported missing from December 2005 to April 2007.
The national Human Rights Commission (HRC) does not publicize its data on disappearances,
yet credible sources maintain that about 1,000 cases were reported
to the HRC in 2006 and over 300 cases in the first four months of 2007. A
prominent Sri Lankan NGO, the Law and Society Trust, says that, on average, five
persons are either killed or disappeared each day in Sri Lanka. The group
recorded 540 cases of disappearances between January 1 and August 31, 2007.
In the lawlessness that has grown since the return to conflict, Tamil armed groups
and criminal elements have committed numerous abductions for ransom. The victims
were mostly businessmen from the Tamil community in Colombo.
Emergency Regulations
In December 2006 the government expanded the Emergency Regulations that
were reintroduced in August 2005, labeling a range of peaceful activities as terrorist
offenses. Using sweeping language, the regulations criminalize any action
threatening public order that aims to bring about political or governmental
change or compels the government to do or abstain from doing any act. The
government has used the regulations to detain political opponents, journalists, and civil society activists, and at this writing has provided no information about
the number of people held and their whereabouts.
On November 22, 2006, agents of the Terrorist Investigation Division arrested
Munusamy Parameswary, a reporter for the weekly newspaper Mawbima, under
the Emergency Regulations, accusing her of helping the LTTE and of being a
suspected suicide bomber. On March 22, 2007, the Supreme Court found no reasonable
grounds for her detention and ordered her release.
Before Parameswarys release, on February 27, the Terrorist Investigation Division
arrested Dushantha Basnayake, spokesman and financial director of Standard
Newspapers Ltd., the company that publishes Mawbima and the English-language
weekly Sunday Standard. They detained Basnayake for over two months
also under the Emergency Regulations, eventually releasing him on bail. On
March 13 the government froze the assets of Standard Newspapers, citing suspected
links to the LTTE, and neither Mawbima nor the Sunday Standard have
been published since March 29.
Impunity
The Sri Lankan government fails to hold members of the security forces and nonstate
armed groups accountable for abuses. Key parts of the criminal justice system,
such as the police and the Attorney Generals Office, have not effectively
investigated human rights violations or brought perpetrators to justice. Victims of
abuses by security forces and non-state armed groups are apprehensive about
complaining to the authorities for fear of retaliation, especially in the absence of
functioning victim and witness protection mechanisms. A draft witness protection
bill is still pending.
Sri Lankas Human Rights Commission is of limited capacity and political weight,
and unable to investigate specific incidents and make recommendations for
redress, primarily for lack of cooperation from the government. Independence of
the Human Rights Commission and other constitutional bodies has been undermined
since 2006, when Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa directly
appointed commission members, contrary to the constitution.
Given their limited resources and mandate, and lack of support from government
agencies and the security forces, the Presidential Commission of Inquiry and the
International Independent Group of Eminent Persons (IIGEP) have been ineffectual
in investigating the 15 incidents of grave human rights abuses selected for
inquiry. In its first statement in August 2007, the IIGEP noted that the Commission
of Inquiry and the IIGEP are not a substitute for robust, effective national and
international human rights monitoring to address the countrys broader human
rights problems. In early November the president extended the term of the
Commission of Inquiry by an additional year, but determined that the body cannot
examine practices of the Attorney Generals Office.
The Nordic-led Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission (SLMM), created to monitor violations
of the 2002 ceasefire, has had a significantly reduced role since the effective
end of the ceasefire in mid-2006 and due to restrictions on its access.
Child Soldiers
The United Nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF) documented 210 cases of recruitment
and re-recruitment of children by the Karuna group from December 2006 to
September 2007, and an almost identical number of cases of recruitment or rerecruitment
by the LTTE in the same period. Fear often prevented parents from
reporting cases, however.
Evictions of Tamils from Colombo
On June 7, 2007, 376 Tamils resident in Colombo were forcibly evicted and
expelled from the city by security forces. While the government cited security reasons,
those evicted included infants, the elderly, the sick; some evictees had
been resident in Colombo for over a decade. Following an interim order halting
the process arising from a fundamental rights petition filed by the Centre for
Policy Alternatives, an NGO, the government reportedly brought back 140 of those
expelled. The prime minister apologized on behalf of the government, although
the defense secretary defended the decision. President Rajapaksa ordered a commission
to investigate the evictions but it is unclear how the commission will be
constituted or what action, if any, it will take.
Media Freedom
The environment for media freedom continues to worsen. Tamil journalists in particular
work under severe threat from both the government and LTTE, but the government
also pressures Sinhala-language outlets that present critical news and
views.
The Karuna group impedes and at times has blocked circulation of some Tamillanguage
newspapers in the north and east, including by issuing death threats to
newspaper distributors in Trincomalee. There was no apparent effort by the government
to address these actions or arrest those responsible.
Sri Lankan Migrant Workers
More than 660,000 Sri Lankan women work abroad as domestic workers, nearly
90 percent in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Lebanon, and the United Arab Emirates. Poor
monitoring of labor recruiters has allowed unscrupulous labor agents and their
unlicensed sub-agents to demand illegal, exorbitant fees from prospective
migrant domestic workers, leaving them highly indebted. Labor agents often
deceive women about their conditions of employment, including the country
where they will work and their salary. In mid-2007 the government instituted
measures to provide migrant workers greater information about their employment
contracts; the impact of these efforts is not yet clear. Once abroad domestic workers
face a wide range of abuses, including long hours, no rest days, forced confinement,
extremely low wages, physical and sexual abuse, and conditions that
amount to forced labor (see Saudi Arabia and UAE chapters). Sri Lankan consular
officials often provide little or no assistance to domestic workers who approach
them with cases of unpaid wages and abuse.
Human Rights Defenders and Humanitarian Workers
Human rights defenders, community leaders, and humanitarian workers in Sri
Lanka have particularly come under attack. The government tries to silence those
questioning or criticizing its approach to the armed conflict or its human rights
record. It has dismissed peaceful critics as traitors, terrorist sympathizers,
and supporters of the LTTE. The Law and Society Trust reported that from January 2006 to August 2007, 40 humanitarian workers and religious leaders had
been killed and 20 disappeared. During an August 2007 visit, UN Under-
Secretary for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief John Holmes described
Sri Lanka as one of the most dangerous places for aid workers in the world. The
chief government whip and cabinet minister Jeyaraj Fernandupulle dismissed
Holmes as a terrorist.
In areas under its control the LTTE prevents development of any independent and
effective human rights institutions. Domestic human rights organizations critical
of the LTTE have justifiable concerns for their safety.
Key International Actors
Expressions of concern about the situation in Sri Lanka grew in 2007 but international
action on human rights was slow and lacked cohesion.
In early May the UK suspended around US$3 million of debt relief aid to the Sri
Lankan government, citing concerns over human rights and defense spending. In
June the European Parliament Committee on Development conducted a hearing
on the humanitarian and human rights situation in Sri Lanka since the December
2004 tsunami. There was little support within the Parliament to pass a resolution
on Sri Lanka, however.
The US increasingly criticized the Sri Lankan government and the LTTE for failing
to stem human rights abuses. Notably, at the end of a three-day visit in May, US
Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs Richard Boucher
expressed strong concern about the spate of abductions, killings, and attacks on
the media in Sri Lanka. In October the US for the first time called on the Sri
Lankan government to cooperate with the United Nations in establishing an international
human rights monitoring mission to investigate and report on human
rights abuses by all sides to the conflict. The US governments Millennium
Challenge Corporation suspended more than US$110 million in aid due to concerns
about the countrys human rights situation.
European Union members on the UN Human Rights Council sought unsuccessfully
to adopt a resolution on human rights in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan government
sought to thwart such efforts by inviting United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour and Special Rapporteur on Torture Manfred Nowak.
Both UN officials visited Sri Lanka in October 2007. At the end of the high commissioners
five-day visit, Human Rights Minister Mahinda Samarasinghe told
Arbour that Sri Lanka would not agree to her call for UN monitoring of human
rights in the country. Authorities tried to dismiss allegations of human rights violations
as propaganda by separatist Tamil Tiger rebels, but Arbour stated she
believed there were credible allegations that deserved to be investigated. She
also expressed concern about the culture of impunity and a disturbing lack of
investigations that undermines confidence in institutions set up to protect human
rights.