Sri Lanka
The Sri Lankan government of President Mahinda Rajapaksa made little
progress in 2013 in addressing accountability for serious human rights abuses
committed during the country’s nearly three-decades-long civil war, which
ended in 2009. In March, the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC)
adopted a second resolution in as many years that called on Sri Lanka to implement
the recommendations made by its own Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission (LLRC) and provide accountability for alleged war crimes committed
by both sides in the civil war. The government claimed it was implementing
the LLRC recommendations, but its claims were difficult to verify and accountability
efforts lacked credibility.
The year saw an escalation in attacks by militant Buddhist groups against
Hindus and Muslims.
The independence of the judiciary came under question after the Rajapaksa
government orchestrated the impeachment of Chief Justice Shirani
Bandaranayake in December 2012 after she had ruled against the government
in a major case.
Elections for three provincial councils were conducted in September.
Independent observers reported dozens of incidents of intimidation, violence,
and improper military interference. The Tamil National Alliance (TNA) won a
large majority in the Northern Provincial Council, an ethnic Tamil-majority area
that was the site of much of the fighting during the civil war.
By September, the government was detaining 230 of the estimated 12,000
members and supporters of the defeated Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
held at the end of the civil war for “rehabilitation.”
Accountability
Sri Lanka’s failure over several years to address war crimes allegations prompted
the HRC in March to issue a resolution calling on Sri Lanka to independently
and credibly investigate violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. The resolution also called on UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights Navi Pillay to give an oral update on the human rights situation in Sri Lanka during the HRC’s September session, and to present a written report at
the March 2014 session.
Following the HRC resolution, the government issued several updates regarding
its implementation of LLRC recommendations, including investigations into a
few war crimes allegations. Many of its claims were difficult to verify due to lack
of government transparency, and, even if accurate, in important respects fell far
short of the steps called for in the resolution.
Special army courts of inquiry established in 2012 wholly exonerated the army
of any laws of war violations despite significant evidence to the contrary. While
the government arrested 12 members of the police Special Task Force as part of
its investigation into the murder of five Tamil youths in Trincomalee in January
2006, it failed to arrest senior police officials implicated. In response to LLRC
concerns about enforced disappearances, the government established the latest
in a long line of special commission with a limited mandate and no clarity
as to whether the government would publicize its findings.
High Commissioner Pillay travelled to Sri Lanka in August. Her September oral
report to the HRC was a scathing critique of the government’s failures on postwar
accountability. Pillay said she found no evidence of government efforts “to
independently or credibly investigate the allegations” of war crimes and reported
that the government had failed to implement many of the LLRC recommendations.
Pillay said that the separation of the police from the Ministry of Defence,
a key LLRC recommendation, remained incomplete as the police were placed
under the command of a former army officer.
Torture and Rape
Torture and other ill-treatment of persons in custody by the security forces has
been a widespread problem both during and since the armed conflict. Human
Rights Watch published new evidence in February that rape and sexual violence
has been a key element of broader torture of suspected LTTE members and supporters
even since the war’s end. The torture is used to obtain “confessions” of
LTTE involvement, and to instill terror in the broader Tamil population to discourage
involvement with the LTTE.
The government rejected these findings and claimed they were fabrications by
individuals seeking to embellish their overseas asylum claims. Human Rights
Watch is unaware of any government investigations into the reported sexual
abuse.
Several European countries have since suspended deportations of Tamils with
connections to the LTTE, finding them to be at risk of torture on return. UNHCR
revised its guidelines on assessing asylum claims in December 2012, and recommended
that persons with certain links to the LTTE be regarded as being at
risk on return.
Arbitrary Detention and Enforced Disappearances
Sri Lanka’s Prevention of Terrorism Act gives police broad powers over suspects
in custody and is the law most commonly invoked by officials to justify prolonged
detention without trial of security suspects. It is still in regular use. The
government asserts it has made available comprehensive lists of the names of
those detained under the law as well as their places of detention, but family
members in 2013 reported difficulty accessing the information. Pillay said during
her trip in August that she had “never seen this level of uncontrollable
grief” when visiting with families of the forcibly disappeared in northern Sri
Lanka.
Civil Society Organizations and Media Freedom
Civil society organizations and media continue to face arbitrary restrictions and
intimidation. In June, the government proposed a dangerously ambiguous
media code that would have prohibited 13 types of substantive speech, including
content that “offends against expectations of the public, morality of the
country, or tends to lower the standards of public taste and morality.” Also prohibited
would have been any content that “contains material against the
integrity of the Executive, Judiciary, and Legislative”—which could have been
interpreted as barring criticism of the government. The proposed code was
withdrawn in the face of a storm of negative media coverage.
The government continues to block public access to certain news websites critical
of the government. Several cases of journalists killed or “disappeared” in
recent years remained unsolved.
Activists and organizations, particularly those working in the north and east,
report ongoing harassment and intimidation. Pillay reported that people who
she met with in the north and east were visited by security forces within hours
of her visit. Instead of investigating these reports, the government denied
Pillay’s allegations and demanded the names of her sources. Repression by the
government is not limited to the north and east: in August, the army opened fire
on protesters in Weliweriya demanding clean drinking water, killing three.
In July, a senior Sri Lankan diplomat launched a public attack on Callum
Macrae, producer of “No Fire Zone,” a documentary film about alleged war
crimes at the end of the civil war, tweeting suggestions that Macrae was a terrorist
receiving “blood money” from the LTTE. The government did not censure
the diplomat for his remarks, and a Channel 4 crew including Macrae was subjected
to continual harassment during the Commonwealth summit in
November.
A disturbing trend was the rise in violence against religious minorities, led
largely by the militant Buddhist group Bodhu Bala Sena (BBS). The government
did little to investigate or prevent these attacks. During an ongoing campaign
by the BBS targeting Sri Lanka’s Muslim population, the secretary to the
Ministry of Defence, the president’s brother, was the group’s guest at a public
event. In her September oral report to the HRC, High Commissioner Pillay
expressed alarm at the rise in hate speech against religious minorities, and
called for more forceful government intervention to prevent violence.
Military Abuses in the North and East
The government contends to have considerably decreased its military presence
in the north and east, but credible accounts indicate that military personnel
still frequently intervene in civilian life. The Defence Ministry and army websites
both regularly post articles about the role of the military in civilian affairs that
appear intended to exert control over the local population and development.
Independent observers of provincial council elections in September expressed
concern about military campaign activities in favor of the ruling party there, and the resulting heightened sense of insecurity and tension among the Tamil population
ahead of the elections.
Women and girls in the north and east remained especially vulnerable to sexual
harassment and violence that the army neither prevented and may have contributed
to. Women’s rights groups working in Tamil areas reported particular
difficulty documenting abuses because of an oppressive military presence.
Key International Actors
At the March HRC session, the government unsuccessfully tried to block the
council from adopting a resolution focusing on accountability for serious
wartime abuses. The resolution, backed by the United States and India among
others, sets the stage for calling for an independent investigation at the 2014
HRC session if Sri Lanka does not take meaningful steps to implement the resolution.
Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, as well as the prime minister of
Mauritius, did not attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
(CHOGM) in November in Colombo because of human rights concerns. The
prime minister of India also did not attend the summit, citing domestic concerns.
The human rights situation in Sri Lanka and lack of accountability for
wartime atrocities became the focus of media coverage. United Kingdom Prime
Minister David Cameron attended the summit, and spent much time touring
war-ravaged parts of the north and talking to local activists. He publicly said
the UK would back an international investigation into war crimes if the Sri
Lankan government did not undertake an independent investigation, a position
supported by the US and Canada.
China kept up its high-profile engagement and investment in Sri Lanka and
vocally opposed the HRC resolution. After pressing for Sri Lanka to hold meaningful
provincial council elections, India continued to call for the full implementation
of the 13th amendment to the constitution, which calls for devolution of
powers to the provinces.