Sri Lanka
The Sri Lankan government in 2012 continued its assault on democratic space
and failed to take any meaningful steps towards providing accountability for war
crimes committed by either side during the internal armed conflict that ended in
2009.
The government targeted civil society through threats, surveillance, and clampdowns
on activities and free speech. Statements by government officials and
government-controlled media named and threatened human rights defenders
who called for accountability for wartime abuses or criticized other government
policies. Local activists expressed deep concern about the security of their staff
and the people they assist.
Overly broad detention powers remained in place under various laws and regulations.
Several thousand people continued to be detained without charge or
trial. State security forces committed arbitrary arrests and torture against ethnic
minority Tamils, including repatriated Sri Lankan nationals allegedly linked to
the defeated Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The Tamil population in the
north benefitted from humanitarian groups having greater access to the area,
but the government did not take adequate steps to normalize their living conditions.
President Mahinda Rajapaksa and his brothers continued to accumulate power
at the expense of democratic institutions. Calls to restore the independence of
the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and other government commissions
that Rajapaksa marginalized via the Eighteenth Amendment to the constitution,
which passed in 2010, went unheeded.
Accountability
Sri Lanka made no progress in 2012 toward ensuring justice for the victims of
numerous violations of human rights and the laws of war committed by both
sides during the 26-year-long conflict between the government and the LTTE.
These violations include the government’s indiscriminate shelling of civilians and the LTTE’s use of civilians as “human shields” in the final months of the
conflict, which ended in May 2009.
The government continued to ignore the 2011 report of the panel of experts
appointed by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, which recommended
establishing an independent international mechanism to monitor the
government’s implementation of the panel recommendations, conduct an independent
investigation, and collect and safeguard evidence.
In March 2012, the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted a resolution finding
that the government’s Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC) did
not adequately address serious allegations of violations of international law,
and called on Sri Lanka to take all necessary steps to ensure justice and
accountability. It requested that the government expeditiously present a comprehensive
plan detailing the steps it had taken to implement the LLRC’s recommendations
and to address accountability.
The Sri Lankan government responded by publicly threatening human rights
defenders who had advocated for the resolution. In July, the government
announced that it had adopted an action plan to implement LLRC recommendations.
The plan vaguely calls for the government to look into civilian deaths and
prosecute any wrongdoers. It sets out a 12-month timeframe to conclude disciplinary
inquiries and 24 months for prosecutions. 􀀀􀀀But the government proposal
merely leaves responsibility for investigations with the military and police,
the entities responsible for the abuses, using processes lacking in transparency.
There has been no information regarding actions of the special army courts of
inquiry, supposedly established in 2012 to look into allegations of war crimes.
Despite strong evidence that government forces were involved in the executionstyle
slayings of 17 aid workers and 5 students in separate incidents in 2006, no
one was arrested for the crimes. Other recommendations, such as the need to
restore the independence of the police and remove them from the purview of
the Ministry of Defence, were tasked to parliamentary select committees that
had yet to be established at this writing.
During its Universal Periodic Review (UPR) before the HRC in November 2012,
the Sri Lankan government rejected 100 recommendations from member states,
including some that have a direct impact on accountability.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Enforced Disappearances
The police and security forces continue to enjoy overly broad detention powers.
The president issued monthly decrees granting the armed forces search and
detention powers, effectively granting police powers to the army.
Despite the end of the formal state of emergency in 2011, the government continued
to hold without trial several thousand people initially detained under the
emergency regulations. In spite of public commitments, the government also
failed to publish comprehensive lists of the names of the detained, as well as
places of detentions.
The government released most of the more than 11,000 suspected LTTE members
detained at the end of the war and announced plans to prosecute 180 of
those still detained.
Local rights groups reported arbitrary arrests, new enforced disappearances,
abductions, and killings in the north and the east in 2012. The government lifted
its restrictions on travel to the north, although it maintained a high security
presence. Tamils with alleged links to the LTTE were increasingly at risk of arbitrary
arrests and torture. In April, nearly 220 Tamil men and women in the
Trincomalee area were arrested and held for several days without charge in military
detention camps.
Tamils who returned to Sri Lanka, including deported asylum seekers, reported
being detained and accused of having links to the LTTE or taking part in antigovernment
activities abroad. A number reported being tortured by the Central
Intelligence Department and other security forces. On the basis of these reports,
courts in the United Kingdom granted injunctions to stop the deportation of
more than 30 Tamil asylum seekers.
The Prevention of Terrorism Act remained in place, giving police broad powers
over suspects in custody.
Attacks on Civil Society
Free expression remained under assault in 2012. Government officials and
state-owned media publicly threatened civil society and human rights activists
who spoke in favor of March’s HRC resolution. Their names and faces were publicized
and they were branded as traitors. The government took no action
against a cabinet minister, Mervyn de Silva, who threatened activists.
Media reported increased surveillance and clampdowns on free speech. In June
2012, the Criminal Investigation Department raided the offices of the Sri Lanka
Mirror, a news website, and the Sri Lanka X News website of the opposition
United National Party. The authorities confiscated computers and documents
and arrested nine people on the grounds that the websites were “propagating
false and unethical news on Sri Lanka.” They were charged under article 120 of
the penal code, which imposes up to two years in prison for those who “excite
or attempt to excite feelings of disaffection to the president or to the government.”
The nine were released on bail the day after their arrest.
The government shut down at least five news websites critical of the government
in 2012 and put in place onerous registration requirements and fees for all
web-based media services. Many news websites moved their host proxies
abroad to avoid the censorship. Frederica Jansz, then-editor of the anti-government
Sunday Leader newspaper, reported that Gotabhaya Rajapaksa threatened
her in July, when she criticized his decision to reroute a government plane in
order to pick up a puppy from Switzerland. The paper retracted the story in
November. There were reports of other independent or outspoken members of
the media being pushed out of their positions due to political pressure.
Unknown assailants gunned down the previous Sunday Leader editor, Lasantha
Wickrematunge, in broad daylight near a police station in 2009. No investigation
has been conducted into his death.
There were no further developments in the case of Prageeth Ekneligoda, a contributor
to Lanka E-news, who disappeared on January 24, 2010. Attorney
General Mohan Peiris, summoned to testify in Colombo, retracted a previous
statement where he had claimed that Ekneligoda had not disappeared but had
willingly moved abroad.
In September, elections for local provincial councils in the east were marred by
allegations of violence and vote-rigging.
Internally Displaced Persons and Militarization
The last of the nearly 300,000 civilians illegally confined in military-controlled
detention centers after the war—including Menik Farm near Vavuniya, which was
closed in September 2012—moved back into communities, although not necessarily
to their home areas. Tens of thousands of persons still live with host families
or in temporary accommodation, and several thousand are not able to
return home because their home areas have not been de-mined.
Although the government claimed to have considerably decreased its military
presence in the north and east, credible accounts indicate that military personnel
still frequently intervene in civilian life. A Defence Ministry video on the
north and east showed the military involved in numerous civilian activities,
including organizing school cricket competitions and celebrations in temples.
Soldiers commit abuses against soldiers with impunity. Fishermen and farmers
complained about the armed forces continuing to encroach into their coastal
areas and onto their land, impacting their livelihoods.
Key International Actors
Sri Lanka’s government faced mounting pressure from key international actors
after it failed to take meaningful action on accountability issues. At the March
HRC session, the government tried to block the council from adopting a resolution
focusing on accountability. The resolution, which passed with 24 votes in
favor, 15 against, and 8 abstentions, effectively overturned a May 2009 council
resolution that ignored serious human rights concerns during the Sri Lankan
war. Member countries voting for the resolution included Nigeria, Uruguay, and
India, which faces pressure from Tamil Nadu state and civil society activists
demanding accountability. The resolution calls on the UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to report back in March 2013.
India continued to press the Sri Lankan government to address allegations of
human rights violations, implement the LLRC recommendations, and initiate a
reconciliation process with the Tamil minority.
China has emerged in recent years as an important ally of Sri Lanka’s government.
In addition to investing heavily in developing Sri Lankan infrastructure,
China had several high-level diplomatic and military missions to the country
during the year and vocally opposed the HRC resolution on Sri Lanka.