Sri Lanka
The endgame and aftermath of the armed conflict between the Sri Lankan government
and the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) dominated events
in Sri Lanka throughout 2009. During the last months of the war, both sides committed
serious violations of international humanitarian law, in what a senior
United Nations official described as a “bloodbath,” while the overall human
rights situation in the country continued to deteriorate as the government adopted
increasingly repressive policies.
During the final months of the conflict that ended in May, the LTTE continued to
forcibly recruit civilians, including children, into its forces, used civilians as
human shields, and physically prevented and at times shot at Tamil civilians
under their control trying to flee the fighting. Government forces indiscriminately
shelled densely populated areas, including hospitals. Both parties prevented
vital humanitarian assistance from reaching the civilian population.
Since March 2008 the government has confined displaced Tamils fleeing the
fighting. The population of the detention camps skyrocketed to over a quarter million
people after the LTTE’s defeat in May. Security forces also detained, in many
cases in violation of domestic and international law, more than 10,000 people
suspected of LTTE involvement or sympathies. Threats, physical attacks, and arbitrary
arrests against journalists, human rights defenders, and humanitarian workers
continued unabated, causing significant numbers to leave the country. As in
the past, rights violators enjoyed near-complete impunity.
Violations of Laws of War
On May 19, 2009, the Sri Lankan government declared victory over the LTTE, marking
an end to a 26-year-long armed conflict that had caused between 80,000 and
100,000 deaths. During the last months of the war both the Sri Lankan armed
forces and the LTTE repeatedly violated the laws of war, causing unnecessary civilian
suffering and casualties.
Forced to retreat by government offensive operations, the LTTE drove civilians into
a narrow strip of land on Sri Lanka’s northeastern coast, effectively using several hundred thousand people as human shields. The LTTE shot at and injured or
killed many of those trying to flee from the war zone to government-held territory.
LTTE forces also deployed near densely populated areas, placing civilians in
increased danger of attack. As the fighting intensified, the LTTE stepped up its
practice of forcibly recruiting civilians, including children, into its ranks and, to
hazardous forced labor on the battlefield.
Government forces repeatedly and indiscriminately shelled densely populated
areas, sometimes using heavy artillery and other area weapons incapable of distinguishing
between civilians and combatants. As the LTTE-controlled area
shrank, the government unilaterally declared “no-fire zones” or “safe zones” on
three different occasions, calling upon civilians to seek shelter there; nevertheless,
government forces continued attacking these areas. In disregard of the laws
of war, government forces also fired artillery at or near hospitals on at least 30
occasions.
High-level government officials tried to justify attacks on civilians by arguing that
people remaining in the war zone were LTTE sympathizers and therefore legitimate
targets, indicating possible intent to commit war crimes.
Civilians in the war zone also suffered from lack of food, water, shelter, and medicines.
The government’s decision in September 2008 to order humanitarian agencies
out of the LTTE-controlled area greatly exacerbated their plight. Ongoing fighting,
lack of oversight, and the manipulation of aid delivery by government and
LTTE forces contributed to the deepening humanitarian crisis.
Exact information on the extent of humanitarian law violations by both sides as
well as casualty figures remains limited, largely because the government barred
all independent observers, including the media and human rights organizations,
from operating near the war zone. The UN estimated that at least 7,000 people
were killed and 13,000 injured during the last five months of the war.
Detention Camps for Internally Displaced Persons
Since March 2008 the government has confined virtually all civilians displaced by
the war in military-controlled detention camps, euphemistically called “welfare
centers.” In violation of international law, the government denied more than 280,000 displaced their rights to liberty and freedom of movement. As of
November 18, 2009, six months after the end of hostilities, the government continued
to hold more than 129,000 people (more than half of them women and
girls) in the camps. Over 80,000 of these were children.
The government’s refusal to release displaced persons from the camps contributed
to severe overcrowding, with many of the camps holding twice the number
recommended by the UN. As a result, access to basic requirements such as
food, water, shelter, toilets, and bathing, has been inadequate. These conditions
imposed particular hardships on the elderly, children, and pregnant women.
The authorities failed to provide camp residents with sufficient information about
the reason for their continued detention, the whereabouts of relatives, or the criteria
and procedure for their return home. Families in the detention camps had no
access to mechanisms for finding missing relatives who might be in other camps
or in unofficial detention centers. The military camp administration prevented
humanitarian organizations, including the UN and the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), from undertaking effective monitoring and protection in the
camps.
Arbitrary Detention and Enforced Disappearances
The government detained more than 10,000 displaced persons at checkpoints
and from the camps on suspicion of LTTE involvement, in many cases citing vague
and overbroad emergency laws still in force after the end of the war. Many arrests
were carried out in violation of domestic and international law. The authorities
failed to inform families of their relatives’ fate and whereabouts, raising fears that
some detainees were forcibly disappeared.
The authorities also specifically targeted key witnesses to the final stages of the
war. They arrested and held for several months several government doctors who
had been working in areas under LTTE control and had reported on government
shelling and resulting civilian casualties. While in detention the doctors retracted
wartime statements, raising suspicion of undue pressure and ill-treatment.
Enforced disappearances and abductions, a longstanding and widespread problem
in Sri Lanka, continued, especially in the north and east. From January to June
2009, 16 enforced disappearances were reported in Trincomalee district alone.
Attacks on Civil Society Actors
Threats and attacks against outspoken and critical civil society actors continued
in 2009, including after the end of the war, further shrinking the already limited
space for public debate.
On numerous occasions unidentified perpetrators attacked journalists and media
outlets critical of the government. In one of the most brazen attacks, unidentified
armed men in January assassinated Sunday Leader newspaper editor Lasantha
Wickremetunga, a senior journalist acclaimed for his investigative reporting. On
June 1, unidentified men abducted and severely beat Poddala Jayantha, general
secretary of the Sri Lanka Working Journalists Association, who was later
released.
The government continued to use anti-terror laws and emergency regulations
against peaceful critics. On August 31 the Colombo High Court, in a deeply flawed
trial, sentenced J.S. Tissainayagam, a journalist who had written critically of the
government’s military campaign, to 20 years’ hard labor under the Prevention of
Terrorism Act. He and his publishers had been arrested and detained in March
2008, but he was not formally charged for nearly six months. The hostile, sometimes
deadly, media environment drove at least 11 Sri Lankan journalists into
exile in the 12 months to June 2009, according to the Committee to Project
Journalists.
Human rights activists were also targeted. On May 7, armed men in uniform
abducted Stephen Suntharaj, a staff member of the Centre for Human Rights and
Development who had just been released by a Supreme Court order after having
spent two months in police detention. Suntharaj is still missing. On August 20,
Paikiasothy Saravanamuttu, the executive director of the Centre for Policy
Alternatives, a leading Sri Lankan NGO, received a death threat in an anonymous
letter blaming him for Sri Lanka’s possible loss of European Union trade privileges. Two weeks later police detained him briefly at the airport as he was reentering
the country.
Government officials continued to publicly accuse international agencies, including
the UN and the ICRC, of being LTTE supporters or sympathizers. In September
the government expelled a UNICEF spokesperson who had drawn attention to the
plight of children during and in the aftermath of the war. In July the government
asked the ICRC to close its offices in eastern Sri Lanka, and barred it from accessing
most displaced persons in the north.
Justice and Accountability
Despite government promises, including in a May 23, 2009 joint statement by
President Mahinda Rajapaksa and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, no serious
steps have been taken to investigate allegations of human rights and laws-of-war
violations during the war’s final months. On the contrary, high-ranking government
officials, including the president, repeatedly dismissed such allegations,
claiming that there had been no violations by the armed forces. A committee of
experts established by Rajapaksa in October to look at United States government
allegations of war crimes in Sri Lanka does not have the mandate, resources, or
independence to conduct an adequate investigation.
The government’s refusal to address accountability for serious abuses continues
a longstanding pattern of impunity for rights violations by state security forces.
Past efforts to address shortcomings through the establishment of ad hoc mechanisms
in Sri Lanka have produced few results. In June a presidential commission
of inquiry into human rights abuses disbanded after having investigated only 7 of
the 16 mandated cases. In the most prominent case, the commission, without
sufficient basis, exonerated the armed forces in the execution-style slaying of 17
aid workers in 2006. An International Independent Group of Eminent Persons
withdrew from its observer role to the commission in 2008 because of flaws in
the commission’s working methods. To date the president has yet to release the
commission’s report on any of the cases.
Reflecting the continuing impunity for even the most egregious human rights violators,
the government in April 2009 appointed as minister of national integration  V. Muralitharan, who as LTTE-leader Colonel Karuna was implicated in the execution
of hundreds of police officers in the early 1990s and the recruitment of thousands
of children into LTTE ranks and, later, his splinter group.
Key International Actors
While many governments and diplomats worked hard to persuade the Sri Lankan
government to respect rights and to avoid civilian casualties in the conflict, it
largely ignored such entreaties. The United States and some European Union governments
publicly condemned violations by both sides and called for a humanitarian
corridor for civilians trapped in the war zone. Collectively, however, international
actors signally failed to address the humanitarian crisis. The UN Security
Council did not even discuss the unfolding crisis as part of its official agenda.
During a special session on Sri Lanka at the UN Human Rights Council in May,
governments including Brazil, Cuba, India, and Pakistan led efforts to prevent the
passage of a strong resolution, ensuring the adoption of a deeply flawed resolution
that largely commended the Sri Lankan government for its current policies.
While some UN actors, such as the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, were outspoken
during the crisis, others, such as the senior UN official in Sri Lanka and Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, failed to adequately denounce laws-of-war violations
against civilians trapped in the conflict zone and rights violations against displaced
persons. In contrast to other conflicts, for instance, the UN refused to publish
its estimates of the number of civilian casualties. And Ban failed to hold the
Rajapaksa government to commitments made in their May 23 joint communiqué.
In September the European Commission completed an investigation into Sri
Lanka’s compliance with 27 international conventions on human rights, labor
rights, and environmental standards to determine whether Sri Lanka qualified for
an extension of a preferential trading scheme called GSP+. Sri Lanka’s refusal to
cooperate with the investigation and grave concerns about its human rights
record put into question whether the privilege would be extended in December
2009. The US State Department War Crimes Unit issued a report on the final
months of the war in October that detailed laws of war violations by both sides.
The International Monetary Fund granted Sri Lanka a US$2.6 billion loan in July.
The vote was delayed for weeks because of concerns about the human rights situation
in the country. At the vote, five countries—the United States, United
Kingdom, France, Germany, and Argentina—made the highly unusual move of
abstaining from the vote in a show of disapproval of Sri Lanka’s human rights violations.