Mexico
Several of Mexico’s most pressing human rights problems stem from
shortcomings in its criminal justice system. They include torture and
other ill-treatment by law enforcement officials, and a failure to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for human rights violations.
President Vicente Fox has repeatedly promised to address these problems
and has taken important steps toward doing so—establishing a special
prosecutor’s office to investigate past abuses and proposing justice
reforms designed to prevent future ones. Neither initiative has received
adequate government support, however, and it is unclear whether
President Fox will be able to advance these programs in the two years
that remain in his presidency.
Torture, Ill-treatment, and Police Brutality
Torture is a persistent problem within the Mexican criminal justice system.
A factor perpetuating the practice is that some judges accept the
use of evidence obtained through violations of detainees’ human rights.
Prison inmates are subject to abuses, including extortion by guards and
the imposition of solitary confinement for indefinite periods of time.
Children in some juvenile detention facilities are forced to live in
squalid conditions and are reportedly subject to beatings and sexual
abuse. Foreign migrants are especially vulnerable to abusive practices by
government agents.
Abusive police practices were evident in several high profile cases in
2004. In May, police in Guadalajara, Jalisco, clashed with protesters
during the final day of the EU-Latin America summit and, several
hours later, swept through the area around the protest, rounding up
people as they sat in public parks, rode buses, walked down the street,
and as they were being treated in the Red Cross clinic. Police beat some
of the detainees during and after their arrests, and held over fifty people incommunicado for two days. During this time, detainees were denied
access to legal counsel and subjected to physical mistreatment and
abuse. Several former detainees reported being coerced into signing
false confessions as a result of torture and other abuses.
In March 2004, President Fox proposed reforms designed to fix features
of Mexican criminal procedure that perpetuate and even encourage the
use of torture by law enforcement officials. The new legislation would
disqualify all evidence obtained illegally and allow confessions to be
entered as evidence at trial only when they were made in the presence
of a judge and defense counsel. The impact of these provisions was
undercut, however, by language that could exempt suspects in organized
crime cases from these and other due process guarantees. At this writing,
the Mexican Congress had yet to vote on the bill.
Impunity
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims
of violent crime and human rights abuses. The causes of this failure are
varied and include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and a
lack of political will. One prominent example is the unsolved murders of
hundreds of young women and girls over the last decade in Ciudad
Juárez, a city on the U.S. border in Chihuahua state.
The state’s efforts to prosecute those responsible for the killings have
been fraught with problems. In October 2004, a Chihuahua judge sentenced
bus driver Victor Garcia Uribe to successive fifty-year prison
terms for the murders of eight young women. Garcia was convicted on
the basis of a confession that he said he made under torture and that he
later recanted. There was no physical evidence linking García to any of
the murders. In 2002, police gunned down García’s lawyer, Mario
Escobedo Salazar, under highly suspicious circumstances. Escobedo and
another lawyer had reported receiving telephone threats for three
months from unidentified male callers who warned them that they would be killed if they continued representing García and another suspect.
That other suspect died while in police custody. Three other individuals
facing charges for some of the Júarez killings have also recanted
confessions that they claim were coerced through torture.
A major shortcoming of the Mexican justice system is that it leaves the
task of investigating and prosecuting army abuses to military authorities.
The military justice system is ill-equipped for such tasks. It lacks
the independence necessary to carry out reliable investigations and its
operations suffer from a general absence of transparency. The ability of
military prosecutors to investigate army abuses is further undermined
by fear of the army, which is widespread in many rural communities and
which inhibits civilian victims and witnesses from providing information
to military authorities.
The Special Prosecutor’s Office
In 2001, President Fox established a special prosecutor’s office to investigate
and prosecute past acts of political violence, including massacres
of student protesters in 1968 and 1971, and the forced disappearance of
hundreds of government opponents during the country’s “dirty war” in
the 1970s. For two years the office’s progress was limited by insufficient
cooperation from the military and inadequate access to government
documents. But in November 2003, the special prosecutor won a landmark
decision from the Mexican Supreme Court holding that statutes
of limitations do not apply to old “disappearance” cases as long as the
victims’ bodies have not been found. He then obtained arrest warrants
for several high level officials, and secured the arrests of Miguel Nazar
Haro in February 2004 and Juventino Romero Cisneros in October
2004. Both are accused of participating in the forced disappearance of
Jesús Piedra Ibarra in the 1970s.
But these advances have been counterbalanced by significant failures.
All the other suspects have managed to escape arrest. There have been no exhumations, nor any indication that the special prosecutor has made
progress uncovering the fate of hundreds of “disappeared” people or in
providing Mexico with a comprehensive account of the crimes that took
place. The special prosecutor’s most ambitious move—the indictment of
former president Luis Echeverría—was thrown out by a trial judge. The
case is now before the Supreme Court.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity is obstructed by collective bargaining
agreements negotiated between management and pro-management
unions. These agreements often fail to provide worker benefits beyond
the minimums mandated by Mexican legislation, and workers sometimes
only learn of the agreements when they grow discontented and
attempt to organize independent unions. Workers who seek to form
independent unions risk losing their jobs and are generally left unprotected
by the government from retaliatory dismissals.
Freedom of Expression
Mexican laws on defamation are excessively restrictive and tend to
undermine freedom of expression. Besides monetary penalties, journalists
face criminal prosecution for alleged defamation of public officials.
Journalists have occasionally faced violence at the hands of government
agents.
Right to Education
Mexico has failed to ensure that tens of thousands of rural children
receive primary education during the months that their families migrate
across state lines to work in agricultural camps. While there is a federal
program to provide primary schooling in the agricultural camps, a lalarge
number of parents choose to have their children work in the fields rather than attend school. The failure to enforce child labor laws facilitates
this choice.
Key International Actors
As part of a Technical Cooperation Agreement signed by President Fox,
the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights maintains an in-country
office that, in December 2003, produced a comprehensive report
documenting ongoing human rights problems and providing detailed
recommendations for addressing them. The Fox administration has
committed itself to developing a national human rights program based
on the report’s recommendations, but at this writing had yet to do so.
The administration’s justice reform proposal incorporates some elements
of those recommendations while ignoring others, such as the recommendation
to end military jurisdiction over cases involving human
rights violations.
The United States and Canada are, along with Mexico, signatories to
the North American Free Trade Agreement and its labor side accord,
which commits them to enforce their laws protecting workers’ rights
and grants them authority to hold one other accountable for failing to
meet these obligations. Under the accord, when a government of one
country receives a complaint of violations committed in one of the
other two, it can investigate the charges. However, because the complaint
process is convoluted and enforcement mechanisms are weak, the
accord has had little impact on labor rights violations in Mexico.
Mexico has played a leading role at the international level in pressing
for human rights promotion to be considered an integral part of counter-
terror efforts. It sponsored resolutions to that end at both the U.N.
General Assembly and Commission on Human Rights and successfully
pressed the Commission to name an independent expert on the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.