Mexico
Mexicos criminal justice system continues to be plagued by human rights problems.
Persons under arrest or imprisoned face torture and ill-treatment. Law
enforcement officials often neglect to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for human rights violations, including those committed during Mexicos dirty
war and abuses perpetrated nowadays during law enforcement operations.
Mexico lacks adequate legal protections for women and girls against violence and
sexual abuse.
Criminal Justice System
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crime and human rights violations. The causes of this failure are varied and
include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and abusive policing practices.
Torture remains a widespread problem within the Mexican criminal justice system.
One perpetuating factor is the acceptance by some judges of evidence
obtained through torture and other mistreatment. Another is the failure to investigate
and prosecute most cases of torture.
Over 40 percent of prisoners in Mexico have never been convicted of a crime.
Rather, they are held in pretrial detention, often waiting years for trial. The excessive
use of pretrial detention contributes to prison overcrowding. Prison inmates
are also subject to abuses including extortion by guards and the imposition of
solitary confinement for indefinite periods. Foreign migrants are especially vulnerable
to such abuses.
In March 2007 President Felipe Calderon presented a constitutional reform proposal
aimed at strengthening the ability of prosecutors to combat organized
crime. The proposal creates serious exceptions to basic due process guarantees,
including allowing prosecutors to adopt precautionary measuressuch as administrative
detention, home searches, and phone tappingwithout previous judicial
authorization. At this writing the proposal is being debated in Congress.
A major shortcoming of the Mexican justice system is that it routinely leaves the
task of investigating and prosecuting army abuses to military authorities. The military
justice system is ill-equipped for such tasks: it lacks the independence necessary
to carry out reliable investigations and its operations suffer from a general
absence of transparency. The ability of military prosecutors to investigate army
abuses is further undermined by a fear of the army, which is widespread in many
rural communities and which inhibits civilian victims and witnesses from providing
information to military authorities.
Abuses by Security Forces
Mexican police forces routinely employ excessive force when carrying out crowdcontrol
operations. In July 2007 a protest march ended in a violent confrontation
with police in Oaxacas state capital. The police fired teargas canisters, and
marchers and police attacked each other with stones. Human Rights Watch
received credible reports that police carried out arbitrary arrests, including pulling
people from passing cars and buses, and beat those in custody. These events followed
sporadic violent clashes that began in June 2006 in connection with a
teachers strike; during those clashes state and federal police forces used force
excessively.
Over the past year Mexican soldiers have committed egregious abuses while
engaged in law enforcement activities. According to the national human rights
ombudsman, in May 2007, for example, soldiers arbitrarily detained 65 people in
Michoacn state, holding some incommunicado at a military base, beating many
of the detainees, and raping four minors. That same month soldiers in Michoacn
arbitrarily detained eight people, keeping them incommunicado at a military base
where they beat and covered the heads of four of them with plastic bags. In June
soldiers opened fire on a truck in Sinaloa, killing five people, including three children,
and injuring three others.
Impunity for Dirty War Crimes
In March 2007 President Calderon officially closed the Special Prosecutors Office
that former President Vicente Fox had established to address abuses committed
during the countrys dirty war in the 1960s, 70s and 80s. During its five-year existence the office made very limited progress in investigating and prosecuting
these crimes. Its initial advancessuch as the 2003 Supreme Court ruling authorizing
prosecution of decades-old disappearance caseswere offset by significant
failures. It did not obtain a single criminal conviction. Of the more than 600
disappearance cases, it filed charges in 16 cases and obtained indictments in
nine; the office determined the whereabouts of only six disappeared individuals.
At this writing only the genocide charge against former President Luis
Echeverria for his responsibility in the 1968 massacre of student protestors
remains pending before the courts.
Reproductive Rights, Domestic Violence, and Sexual Abuse
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual abuse. Some laws on violence against women run directly
counter to international standards, including provisions of Mexican law that
define sanctions for some sexual offenses with reference to the chastity of the
victim, and penalize domestic violence only when the victim has been battered
repeatedly. Legal protections that do exist are often not enforced vigorously. Girls
and women who report rape or violence to the authorities are generally met with
suspicion, apathy, and disrespect. As a result, victims are often reluctant to
report crimes and such underreporting in turn undercuts pressure for necessary
legal reforms. The net effect is that sexual and domestic violence against women
and girls continues to be rampant and shrouded in impunity.
In April 2007 the Mexico City legislature legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of
pregnancy. Abortion continues to be criminalized in the rest of Mexico, though
every federal state in the country allows abortion in certain specific circumstances,
including after rape. Yet pregnant rape victims who seek to terminate
their imposed pregnancy are often thwarted from doing so by the dismissive and
even hostile treatment they receive from authorities, in disregard for their rights
to non-discrimination, due process, and equality under the law.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists, particularly those who have investigated drug trafficking or have been
critical of state governments, have faced harassment and attacks. In April 2007 a journalist was shot dead in Acapulco, another in Sonora received death threats
and was beaten unconscious, and a third in Chihuahua was kidnapped and
found dead a week later. In October three media workers from a newspaper in
Oaxaca were shot and killed. Five Mexican journalists have gone missing since
2005, including four who had reported on drug trafficking or organized crime.
In March 2007 the Mexican Congress passed a law that decriminalizes defamation,
libel, and slander at the federal level. However, at the state level defamation
laws continue to be excessively restrictive and tend to undermine freedom of
expression. Besides monetary penalties, journalists are subject to criminal prosecution
for alleged defamation of public officials.
Access to Information
A 2002 federal law on transparency and access to information increased avenues
for public scrutiny of the federal government. However, there is still considerable
risk that secrecy will reassert itself in the future: the federal agency in charge of
applying the law to the executive has not been granted autonomy from the executive
branch, remains vulnerable to political interference, and has encountered
resistance from several key government agencies. Progress made in promoting
transparency within the executive branch has not been matched in other branches
of government nor in the autonomous state institutions.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity continues to be obstructed by collective bargaining
agreements negotiated between management and pro-management
unions. These agreements often fail to provide worker benefits beyond the minimums
mandated by Mexican legislation. Workers who seek to form independent
unions risk losing their jobs, as inadequate laws and poor enforcement generally
fail to protect them from retaliatory dismissals.
Right to Education
A chronic concern in Mexico is the governments failure to ensure that tens of
thousands of rural children receive primary education during the months that their families migrate across state lines to work in agricultural camps. A large
number of parents decide to take their children to work with them in the fields
rather than have them attend school during these months. This decision is largely
due to economic conditions, and to the governments failure to enforce child
labor laws. Although there is a federal program to provide primary schooling in
the agricultural camps, the classes are generally offered in the evening, when
children are too exhausted from their work to study.
Key International Actors
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights maintains an in-country
office that, in December 2003, produced a comprehensive report documenting
ongoing human rights problems and providing detailed recommendations for
addressing them. The office is now working on an assessment of human rights
problems in Mexico City and the state of Guerrero.
In August 2007 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights held that
Mexico was responsible for the detention, torture, and subsequent disappearance
of Rosendo Radilla, carried out by members of the Mexican army in
Guerrero in 1974. It stated Mexico had failed to inform Radillas family of his
whereabouts, and to adequately investigate the case and prosecute those
responsible.