Mexico
Among Mexico’s most serious human rights problems are those affecting its
criminal justice system. Persons under arrest or imprisonment face torture
and other ill-treatment, and law enforcement officials often neglect to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for human rights violations.
President Vicente Fox has repeatedly promised to address these problems
and has taken important steps toward doing so—establishing a special prosecutor’s
office to investigate past abuses and proposing justice reforms
designed to prevent future ones. Unfortunately, neither initiative has lived up
to its potential.
Torture, Ill-treatment, Police Brutality, and Pretrial Detention
Torture remains a widespread problem within the Mexican criminal justice
system. A factor perpetuating the practice is the acceptance by some judges
of evidence obtained through violations of detainees’ human rights. Prison
inmates are subject to abuses, including extortion by guards and the imposition
of solitary confinement for indefinite periods of time. Children in some
juvenile detention facilities are forced to live in squalid conditions and are
reportedly subject to beatings and sexual abuse. Foreign migrants are especially
vulnerable to abusive practices, including extortion, by government
agents.
Over 40 percent of prisoners in Mexico have never been convicted of a
crime. Rather, they are held in pretrial detention, often waiting years for
trial.
In 2004, President Fox proposed reforms designed to fix features of Mexican
criminal procedure that perpetuate and even encourage the use of torture by
law enforcement officials. The new legislation would bar all evidence
obtained illegally and allow confessions to be entered as evidence at trial only
when they were made in the presence of a judge and defense counsel.
The reform package also contained measures to address the problem of preventive
detention. Specifically, it would amend the Constitution to establish
that criminal suspects are presumed innocent until proven guilty. The reform
would allow judges to decide in each case, based on objective criteria,
whether preventive detention is necessary.
Although the Senate approved several positive pieces of the reform package
in July 2005, Congress has yet to vote on measures addressing the critical
problems of torture and preventive detention.
Impunity
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crime and human rights abuses. The causes of this failure are varied and
include corruption, inadequate training and resources, and a lack of political
will. One prominent example is the unsolved murders of hundreds of young
women and girls over the last decade in Ciudad Juárez, a city on the U.S.
border in Chihuahua state. Several individuals facing charges for some of the
Júarez killings have recanted confessions that they claim were coerced
through torture.
A major shortcoming of the Mexican justice system is that it leaves the task
of investigating and prosecuting army abuses to military authorities. As
Human Rights Watch documented in a 2001 report, the military justice system
is ill-equipped for such tasks. It lacks the independence necessary to
carry out reliable investigations and its operations suffer from a general
absence of transparency. The ability of military prosecutors to investigate
army abuses is further undermined by fear of the army, which is widespread
in many rural communities and which inhibits civilian victims and witnesses
from providing information to military authorities. The Mexican Supreme
Court had an opportunity to address the problem of military jurisdiction in a
2005 case, but in September it upheld the military’s authority over cases
involving army members even when the alleged crimes were committed
while off-duty.
The Special Prosecutor’s Office
The special prosecutor’s office that President Fox established in 2001 to
address past abuses has produced limited results. In November 2003, the special
prosecutor won a landmark decision from the Mexican Supreme Court
holding that statutes of limitations do not apply to old “disappearance” cases
as long as the victims’ bodies have not been found. He then obtained arrest
warrants for several high-level officials, and secured custody of three of them.
But these advances have been counterbalanced by significant failures. The
majority of the suspects pursued by the special prosecutor have managed to
escape arrest. The special prosecutor has also made only limited progress in
uncovering the fate of hundreds of people who were “disappeared” in the
1970s.
The special prosecutor’s most ambitious move—the indictment of former
president Luis Echeverría for genocide—was thrown out by a trial judge on
grounds that the statute of limitations had expired. The special prosecutor
won an appeal before the Supreme Court, which ruled in June 2005 that the
statute of limitations had not expired in Echeverría’s case because he had
been shielded by immunity during his presidency. But the case was thrown
out again by a lower court in July 2005, on the grounds that the 1971 massacre
did not constitute genocide.
The special prosecutor subsequently sought to indict Echeverría again on
genocide charges for a 1968 massacre of student protesters, but in September
2005 a lower court once again rejected his argument.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity continues to be obstructed by collective
bargaining agreements negotiated between management and pro-management
unions. These agreements often fail to provide worker benefits beyond
the minimums mandated by Mexican legislation, and workers sometimes only
learn of the agreements when they grow discontented and attempt to organize
independent unions. Workers who seek to form independent unions risk losing their jobs, as the government generally fails to protect them from
retaliatory dismissals.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists have occasionally faced harassment and attacks, particularly those
who have investigated drug trafficking or have been critical of state governments.
In April 2005, a journalist in Tamaulipas and one in Veracruz were
killed. During that same month, another journalist in Sonora disappeared,
and at this writing is still missing. In June 2005, thirty-one journalists of the
Oaxaca-based Noticias newspaper were forced to stay inside the newspaper
facilities for more than a month because members of a pro-government trade
union had initiated a strike outside the building. Newspaper staff maintain
that the strikers did not actually work at the newspaper and aimed merely to
stop the paper’s publication.
Mexican defamation laws continue to be excessively restrictive and tend to
undermine freedom of expression. Besides monetary penalties, journalists can
be subject to criminal prosecution for alleged defamation of public officials.
Right to Education
A chronic concern in Mexico is the government’s failure to ensure that tens
of thousands of rural children receive primary education during the months
that their families migrate across state lines to work in agricultural camps. A
large number of parents choose to have their children work in the fields
rather than attend school during these months. The government’s failure to
enforce child labor laws facilitates this choice. Although there is a federal
program to provide primary schooling in the agricultural camps, the classes
are generally offered in the evening when children are too exhausted from
their work to study.
Electoral Rights
According to electoral laws in Mexico, presidential candidates must be nominated
by political parties. Jorge Castañeda, a former foreign relations minister, challenged these laws, arguing that he should be allowed to run as an
independent candidate. In August 2005, the Supreme Court refused to hear
his appeal on the grounds that only political parties have standing to challenge
the electoral laws.
Key International Actors
As part of a Technical Cooperation Agreement signed by President Fox, the
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights maintains an in-country office
that, in December 2003, produced a comprehensive report documenting
ongoing human rights problems and providing detailed recommendations for
addressing them. The Fox administration’s justice reform proposal incorporates
some of those recommendations while ignoring others, such as the recommendation
to end military jurisdiction over cases involving human rights
violations. In December 2004, the administration presented a national human
rights program that outlined a wide range of policy objectives based on the
report’s recommendations. In 2005, the administration established a committee,
with representatives from the government and civil society, to monitor
the implementation of the program.
Along with the United States and Canada, Mexico is a party to the North
American Free Trade Agreement and its labor side accord. The side accord
commits the three countries to enforcing their laws protecting workers’
rights and grants them authority to hold one other accountable for failing to
meet these obligations. Under the accord, when a government of one country
receives a complaint of violations committed in one of the other two, it
can investigate the charges. However, because the complaint process is convoluted
and enforcement mechanisms are weak, the accord has had little
impact on labor rights violations in Mexico.
Mexico has maintained its leading role at the international level in pressing
for human rights promotion to be considered an integral part of counter-terrorism
efforts. It sponsored resolutions to that end at both the U.N. General
Assembly and the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, and successfully
pressed the Commission to name an independent expert on the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while combating terrorism.
In an important move, Mexico, after a long process, ratified the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court in October 2005, becoming the
100th state party of the court.