Mexico
Upon taking office in December 2012, President Enrique Peña Nieto acknowledged
that the “war on drugs” launched by predecessor Felipe Calderón had
led to serious abuses by the security forces. In early 2013, the administration
said that more than 26,000 people had been reported disappeared or missing
since 2007—a problem it called a “humanitarian crisis”—and promulgated
broad legislation aimed at ensuring victims’ rights.
Yet the government has made little progress in prosecuting widespread killings,
enforced disappearances, and torture committed by soldiers and police in the
course of efforts to combat organized crime, including during Peña Nieto’s
tenure. Members of the military accused of human rights violations continue to
be prosecuted within the biased military justice system, ensuring impunity.
Some criminal suspects can be held for 80 days without charge under the arraigo
provision.
Disappearances
Mexico’s security forces have participated in widespread enforced disappearances
since former President Calderón (2006-2012) launched a “war on drugs.”
Members of all security force branches continue to carry out disappearances
during the Peña Nieto administration, in some cases collaborating directly with
criminal groups. In June 2013, Mexico’s National Human Rights Commission
(CNDH) said it was investigating 2,443 disappearances in which it had found
evidence of the involvement of state agents.
Prosecutors and police routinely fail to carry out basic investigative steps to
search for missing people or to identify those responsible for disappearances,
often blaming victims and telling their families to investigate. Families of the
disappeared may lose access to basic social services that are tied to the victim’s
employment, such as child care.
In February 2013, the Peña Nieto administration acknowledged that more than
26,000 people had been reported disappeared or missing since December
2006. In May, the government created a unit in the Federal Prosecutor’s Office
to investigate enforced and other disappearances, but at time of writing it had not demonstrated meaningful progress in criminal investigations or searches
for the victims. Mexico still lacks a national database for disappeared people,
and a national database of thousands of unidentified human remains, many of
which were found in mass graves.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Mexico has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related violence and
organized crime, leading to widespread human rights violations. From
December 2006 to mid-September 2013, the CNDH received 8,150 complaints
of abuse by the army, and issued reports on 116 cases in which it found that
army personnel had committed serious human rights violations.
The soldiers who commit these abuses are virtually never brought to justice,
largely because such cases continue to be investigated and prosecuted in the
military justice system, which lacks independence and transparency. The
Military Prosecutor’s Office opened over 5,600 investigations into alleged abuses
by soldiers against civilians from January 2007 to mid-2013. However, as of
October 2012, military judges had sentenced only 38 members of the military
for human rights violations.
At time of writing, the Senate’s Justice Commission was considering a proposed
reform to the military justice code that would aim to ensure that abuses committed
by members of the military against civilians were handled in the civil
justice system.
Torture
Torture is widely practiced in Mexico to obtain forced confessions and extract
information. It is most frequently applied in the period between when victims
are arbitrarily detained and when they are handed to prosecutors, when they
are often held incommunicado at military bases or other illegal detention sites.
Common tactics include beatings, waterboarding, electric shocks, and sexual
torture. Many judges continue to accept confessions obtained through torture,
despite the constitutional prohibition of such evidence.
Justice officials rarely apply the Istanbul Protocol, a set of principles to assess a
potential victim of torture or ill-treatment. The Federal Prosecutor’s Office not demonstrated meaningful progress in criminal investigations or searches
for the victims. Mexico still lacks a national database for disappeared people,
and a national database of thousands of unidentified human remains, many of
which were found in mass graves.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Mexico has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related violence and
organized crime, leading to widespread human rights violations. From
December 2006 to mid-September 2013, the CNDH received 8,150 complaints
of abuse by the army, and issued reports on 116 cases in which it found that
army personnel had committed serious human rights violations.
The soldiers who commit these abuses are virtually never brought to justice,
largely because such cases continue to be investigated and prosecuted in the
military justice system, which lacks independence and transparency. The
Military Prosecutor’s Office opened over 5,600 investigations into alleged abuses
by soldiers against civilians from January 2007 to mid-2013. However, as of
October 2012, military judges had sentenced only 38 members of the military
for human rights violations.
At time of writing, the Senate’s Justice Commission was considering a proposed
reform to the military justice code that would aim to ensure that abuses committed
by members of the military against civilians were handled in the civil
justice system.
Torture
Torture is widely practiced in Mexico to obtain forced confessions and extract
information. It is most frequently applied in the period between when victims
are arbitrarily detained and when they are handed to prosecutors, when they
are often held incommunicado at military bases or other illegal detention sites.
Common tactics include beatings, waterboarding, electric shocks, and sexual
torture. Many judges continue to accept confessions obtained through torture,
despite the constitutional prohibition of such evidence.
Justice officials rarely apply the Istanbul Protocol, a set of principles to assess a
potential victim of torture or ill-treatment. The Federal Prosecutor’s Office Prison Conditions
Prisons are overpopulated, unhygienic, and fail to provide basic security for
most inmates. Prisoners who accuse guards or inmates of attacks or other
abuses have no effective system to seek redress.
Approximately 65 percent of prisons are controlled by organized crime, and corruption
and violence are rampant, according to the CNDH. Some 108 inmates
had died in 2013, as of November.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists, particularly those who report on crime or criticize officials, face
harassment and attacks. At least 85 journalists were killed between 2000 and
August 2013, and 20 more were disappeared between 2005 and April 2013,
according to the CNDH. Authorities routinely fail to adequately investigate
crimes against journalists, often preemptively ruling out their profession as a
motive.
Journalists are often driven to self-censorship by attacks carried out both by
government officials and by criminal groups, while under-regulation of state
advertising can also limit media freedom by giving the government disproportionate
financial influence over media outlets.
Mexico created a special prosecutor’s office for Crimes against Freedom of
Expression in 2006, but to date it has obtained only one criminal sentence from
the 378 investigations it has opened. Legislation enacted in May 2013 gave the
Federal Prosecutor’s Office power to take over any investigation into attacks on
media.
Gender-Based Violence
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual violence. Some provisions, including those that make the
severity of punishments for some sexual offenses contingent on the “chastity”
of the victim, contradict international standards. Women and girls who have
suffered these types of human rights violations generally do not report them to
authorities, while those who do generally face suspicion, apathy, and disrespect. In January 2013, Mexico amended its law on violence against women to
expedite emergency protection measures for victims of gender-based violence.
Reproductive Rights
In August 2008, the Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of a Mexico
City law that legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Since that
time, 16 of Mexico’s 32 federal entities have legislated to recognize the right to
life from the moment of conception, limiting women’s ability to exercise their
right to health. In 2010, the Supreme Court ruled that all states must provide
emergency contraception and access to abortion for rape victims. However, in
practice many women and girls face serious barriers to accessing abortions
after sexual violence, including inaccurate information and intimidation by officials.
Marriage Equality
In August 2010, the Supreme Court recognized the right of same-sex couples in
Mexico City to adopt children and to marry, and ruled that all 31 Mexican states
must recognize same-sex marriages that take place in Mexico City. Yet the ruling
does not require that states recognize the right themselves, and many still
deny same-sex couples the right to marry. In December 2012, the Mexican
Supreme Court struck down a law in Oaxaca that defined marriage as being
between a man and a woman.
Access to Palliative Care
Tens of thousands of patients face major and often insurmountable obstacles
in accessing end-of-life care, even though Mexican law grants them a right to
such care. Health insurance schemes do not yet adequately address the health
needs of incurable patients; drug control regulations unnecessarily restrict
access to morphine, an essential medication for severe pain; and training in
palliative care for healthcare workers remains insufficient.
Migrants
Hundreds of thousands of undocumented migrants pass through Mexico each
year and many are subjected to grave abuses en route—such as disappearances
and sexual violence—at the hands of organized crime, migration authorities,
and security forces. Authorities have not taken adequate steps to protect
migrants, or to investigate and prosecute those who abuse them. Despite the
approval in 2011 of a new migration law ostensibly aimed at protecting
migrants’ rights, police continue to detain and harass undocumented migrants.
The staff of migrant shelters face threats and harassment from criminal groups
and officials, yet the government has failed to implement protective measures
granted to these centers by national and international human rights bodies. At
least three migrant centers were forced to close or saw staff forced to flee in
2013.
In September, the Federal Prosecutor’s Office authorized the creation of a team,
including international forensic experts, to identify more than 200 human
remains thought to belong to migrants.
Labor Rights
The dominance of pro-management unions continues to obstruct legitimate
labor-organizing activity. Independent unions are often blocked from entering
negotiations with management, while workers who seek to form independent
unions risk losing their jobs. A 2012 labor law failed to address the lack of
transparency and democracy in the powerful pro-management unions, and
failed to protect workers’ right to form independent unions and carry out collective
bargaining.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders and activists continue to suffer harassment and
attacks, often in the context of opposition to infrastructure or resource extraction
“mega-projects.” In many cases, there is evidence—including witness testimony
or traced cell phones—that state agents are involved in aggressions
against human rights defenders. Of 89 aggressions against human rights
defenders registered by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights between November 2010 and December 2012, none resulted in a conviction.
In June 2012, Mexico enacted a law to protect human rights defenders and journalists.
At time of writing, the protection mechanism created by the law had not
been effectively implemented, with protective measures slow to arrive, insufficient,
or incomplete in some cases. The mechanism suffers from too few and
inadequately trained staff, delays in accessing funds, coordination failures with
state-level institutions, poor dissemination to those at risk, and a lack of public
support from high level government officials.
Key International Actors
The United States has allocated over US$2 billion in aid to Mexico through the
Merida Initiative, an aid package agreed upon in 2007 without a year cap, to
help Mexico combat organized crime. Fifteen percent of select portions of the
assistance can be disbursed only after the US secretary of state reports that the
Mexican government is meeting human rights requirements.
However, the impact of these requirements has been undermined by the fact
the US State Department has repeatedly reported to the US Congress that they
are being met, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, often citing
vague and incomplete progress towards meeting the requirements, leading
Congress to release the funds.
The UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
conducted a fact-finding mission to Mexico in April-May 2013, and stated that
extrajudicial executions by security forces were widespread and often occurred
without accountability.
In October 2013, Mexico underwent its second Universal Periodic Review in the
United Nations Human Rights Council, where key recommendations included
placing human rights violations by the military under civilian jurisdiction, and
strengthening the protection mechanism for human rights defenders and
journalists.