Mexico
Among Mexico’s most serious human rights problems are those affecting its criminal
justice system. Persons under arrest or imprisonment face torture and illtreatment,
and law enforcement officials often neglect to investigate and prosecute
those responsible for human rights violations.
The presidency of Vicente Fox ended in 2006 with the ambitious human rights
agenda that he had brought to office left largely unfulfilled. While the Fox administration
succeeded in promoting greater transparency in government, including
greater receptivity to international scrutiny of Mexico’s human rights practices,
the administration made little progress in curbing longstanding abusive
practices. When Fox stepped down, the Special Prosecutor’s Office that he created
in 2001 to address past atrocities had yet to win a single conviction and his
comprehensive 2004 proposal to reform the justice system had not been passed
by Mexico’s Congress.
Police Brutality, Torture, and Pretrial Detention
Mexican police forces routinely employ excessive force when carrying out crowdcontrol
operations. In April 2006, for example, during a police intervention to disperse
a miner’s strike in Lazaro Cardenas, police forces killed two workers and
injured dozens. In May, while dispersing demonstrators in San Salvador de
Atenco, police officers killed two people, including one teenager, and arbitrarily
detained, beat, and kicked demonstrators. Police also sexually harassed women
while they were being transported to a penitentiary.
Torture remains a widespread problem within the Mexican criminal justice system.
One perpetuating factor of the practice is the acceptance by some judges of
evidence obtained through torture and other mistreatment. Another is the failure
to investigate and prosecute most cases of torture.
Over 40 percent of prisoners in Mexico have never been convicted of a crime.
Rather, they are held in pretrial detention, often waiting years for trial. The excessive
use of pretrial detention contributes to overcrowding in prisons. Prison
inmates are also subject to abuses, including extortion by guards and the imposition of solitary confinement for indefinite periods of time. Foreign migrants are
especially vulnerable to such abuses.
The justice reform proposal presented by President Fox in 2004 included measures
aimed at addressing these chronic abuses. Only a few reforms were adopted
and at this writing Congress has yet to vote on most measures addressing the critical
problems of torture and pretrial detention.
In a positive development, Congress passed a constitutional reform in December
2005 that forces all jurisdictions to make their juvenile justice systems compatible
with human rights norms.
Impunity
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crime and human rights abuses. The causes of this failure are varied and include
corruption, inadequate training and resources, and a lack of political will.
The failure for over a decade to resolve the murders of hundreds of young women
and girls in Ciudad Juarez, in Chihuahua state, offers a paradigmatic example of
impunity in Mexico. Several individuals facing charges for some of the Juarez
killings recanted confessions that they claim were coerced through torture. In one
of these cases, David Meza, who in 2003 had confessed under torture that he
had murdered his cousin, recanted and was acquitted in June 2006. His cousin’s
murder has not yet been solved. A shift in policy by the state prosecutor’s office
in 2004 has led to better investigations of these cases, however.
A major shortcoming of the Mexican justice system is that it leaves the task of
investigating and prosecuting army abuses to military authorities. The military
justice system is ill-equipped for such tasks. It lacks the independence necessary
to carry out reliable investigations and its operations suffer from a general
absence of transparency. The ability of military prosecutors to investigate army
abuses is further undermined by a fear of the army, which is widespread in many
rural communities and which inhibits civilian victims and witnesses from providing
information to military authorities.
The Special Prosecutor’s Office
The Special Prosecutor’s Office that President Fox established in 2001 to address
past abuses has produced limited results. Its initial advances—such as the
November 2003 landmark decision from the Mexican Supreme Court holding that
statutes of limitations do not apply to old “disappearance” cases as long as the
victims’ bodies have not been found—have been counterbalanced by significant
failures.
The special prosecutor has made only limited progress in uncovering the fate of
hundreds of people who were “disappeared” in the 1970s. His most ambitious
move—the indictment of former president Luis Echeverria for genocide—was
thrown out by the courts. The few cases in which the special prosecutor managed
to indict those responsible for forced disappearances were dismissed by courts
after Congress modified the federal criminal code in June 2006. There have thus
far been no convictions related to the crimes committed during Mexico’s “dirty
war.”
The Special Prosecutor’s Office produced a draft report on past abuses which
shows there is extensive documentation in government archives implicating former
officials and military officers in the “dirty war” crimes. However, far more
information could have been collected if a more thorough investigation had been
carried out. The draft was leaked to the press in February 2006, but the report still
has not been officially published at this writing.
Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual abuse. Some laws on violence against women run directly
counter to international standards, including provisions of Mexican law that
define sanctions for some sexual offenses with reference to the “chastity” of the
victim and provisions penalizing domestic violence only when the victim has
been battered repeatedly. Legal protections that do exist are often not enforced
vigorously. As a result, victims are often reluctant to report crimes and such
underreporting in turn undercuts pressure for necessary legal reforms. The net effect is that sexual and domestic violence against women and girls continues to
be rampant and shrouded in impunity.
Girls and women who report rape or violence to the authorities are generally met
with suspicion, apathy, and disrespect. For pregnant rape victims who want to
terminate their imposed pregnancy—as they are legally entitled to do in Mexico—
this reaction is even more pronounced. They are ignored or actively silenced in
disregard of their human dignity and their rights to nondiscrimination, due
process, and equality under the law.
In 2006, both the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women reiterated previous calls on Mexico to prevent and punish violence
against women, and to provide adequate access to safe abortion services
for rape victims.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists—particularly those who have investigated drug trafficking or have
been critical of state governments—have occasionally faced harassment and
attacks. In February 2006, unidentified individuals attacked the newspaper El
Mañana in Nuevo Laredo, damaging the installations and wounding a journalist.
A photographer was gunned down in Michoacan in March 2006, and a journalist
was killed in Chihuahua in August 2006. In February 2006, the federal government
created a special prosecutor’s office to investigate crimes committed
against journalists.
Mexican defamation laws continue to be excessively restrictive and tend to
undermine freedom of expression. Besides monetary penalties, journalists are
subject to criminal prosecution for alleged defamation of public officials. In
December 2005, Lydia Cacho was arrested because she had supposedly failed to
answer a court summons in a defamation case against her. Cacho is being criminally
prosecuted for the publication of a book that describes a child prostitution
ring that, according to her, operated with the complicity of local police and politicians.
In March 2006, Isabel Arvide was convicted for defamation in relation to an
article published in 2001 on the involvement of state government officials in a drug cartel in Chihuahua. She received a one-year prison sentence (which the
judge suspended) and was ordered to pay a fine of approximately US$18,000.
Access to Information
A 2002 federal law on transparency and access to information increased avenues
for public scrutiny of the federal government. However, there is still considerable
risk that secrecy will reassert itself in the future: the federal agency in charge of
applying the law to the executive has not been granted autonomy from the executive
branch, remains vulnerable to political interference, and has encountered
resistance from several key government agencies. The progress made in promoting
transparency within the executive branch has not been matched in other
branches of government nor in the autonomous state institutions.
Labor Rights
Legitimate labor-organizing activity continues to be obstructed by collective bargaining
agreements negotiated between management and pro-management
unions. These agreements often fail to provide worker benefits beyond the minimums
mandated by Mexican legislation. Workers who seek to form independent
unions risk losing their jobs, as inadequate laws and poor enforcement generally
fail to protect them from retaliatory dismissals.
Right to Education
A chronic concern in Mexico is the government’s failure to ensure that tens of
thousands of rural children receive primary education during the months that
their families migrate across state lines to work in agricultural camps. A large
number of parents decide to take their children to work with them in the fields
rather than attend school during these months. This decision is largely due to
economic conditions, as well as to the government’s failure to enforce child labor
laws. Although there is a federal program to provide primary schooling in the agricultural
camps, the classes are generally offered in the evening, when children
are too exhausted from their work to study.
Key International Actors
As part of a Technical Cooperation Agreement signed by President Fox, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights maintains an in-country office that,
in December 2003, produced a comprehensive report which documented ongoing
human rights problems and provided detailed recommendations for addressing
them. Based on this report, the administration initiated a national human rights
program. In December 2005, the administration established a committee with
representatives from the government and civil society to monitor implementation
of the program.
Along with the United States and Canada, Mexico is party to the North American
Free Trade Agreement and its labor side accord. This accord commits the three
countries to enforcing their laws protecting workers’ rights, and creates a complaints
mechanism whereby, in principle, each has the authority to hold the others
accountable for any failures to do so. However, because the complaint
process is convoluted and enforcement mechanisms are weak, the accord has
had little impact on labor rights violations in Mexico.
Mexico has maintained its leading role in promoting human rights at the international
level. In June 2006 Mexico became the first country to preside over the
newly formed United Nations Human Rights Council.