Mexico
Mexican security forces have committed widespread human rights violations in
efforts to combat powerful organized crime groups, including killings, disappearances,
and torture. Almost none of these abuses are adequately investigated,
exacerbating a climate of violence and impunity in many parts of the country.
In an historic decision in August 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that the use of
military jurisdiction to prosecute a human rights violation was unconstitutional.
Nonetheless, most abuses by military personnel continue to be prosecuted in
military courts, which lack independence and impartiality.
Criminal groups and members of security forces continue to threaten or attack
human rights defenders and journalists. The government has failed to provide
these vulnerable groups with adequate protection or investigate the crimes
committed against them. In April, Mexico passed legislation to create a protection
mechanism for human rights defenders and journalists, but protocols to
evaluate risk and assign protection are still being designed.
Military Abuses and Impunity
Mexico has relied heavily on the military to fight drug-related violence and
organized crime. While engaging in law enforcement activities, the armed forces
have committed grave human rights violations. From January 2007 to mid-
November 2012, Mexico’s National Human Rights Commission issued detailed
reports of 109 cases in which it found that members of the army had committed
serious human rights violations, and received complaints of 7,350 military abuses.
One of the main reasons military abuses persist is because the soldiers who
commit them are virtually never brought to justice. This occurs largely because
such cases continue to be investigated and prosecuted in the military justice
system. The military prosecutor’s Office opened nearly 5,000 investigations into
human rights violations by soldiers against civilians from January 2007 to April 2012, during which time military judges sentenced only 38 military personnel
for human rights violations.
In August 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that the killing of an unarmed man by
soldiers at a military checkpoint should be prosecuted in civilian jurisdiction,
and that the article of the Military Code of Justice used to claim jurisdiction over
human rights cases was unconstitutional. Nevertheless, efforts to reform the
Military Code of Justice in Mexico’s Congress have met with stiff resistance. The
military has stated that it will continue to claim jurisdiction over cases of
alleged abuses until its justice code is reformed.
Torture
Torture remains a widespread practice in Mexico to obtain forced confessions
and extract information about organized crime. Torture is most frequently
applied in the period between when victims are arbitrarily detained and when
they are handed to prosecutors, a time when they are often held incommunicado
on military bases or other illegal detention sites. Common tactics include
beatings, asphyxiation, waterboarding, electric shocks, sexual torture, and
death threats.
One perpetuating factor is that some judges continue to accept confessions
obtained through torture and ill-treatment, despite the fact the constitution prohibits
the admission of such statements. Another is the failure to investigate
and prosecute most torture cases. Only two federal officials have been sentenced
for torture since 1994. In contrast, the National Human Rights
Commission received more than 100 complaints of torture and over 4,700 complaints
of ill-treatment from 2007 to 2011.
Mexico has committed to applying the Istanbul Protocol, an internationally recognized
set of guiding principles to assess the condition of a potential victim of
torture or ill-treatment. Yet justice officials rarely follow it, and medical examiners
often omit evidence of abuse from their reports.
Criminal Justice System
The criminal justice system routinely fails to provide justice to victims of violent
crimes and human rights violations. The various causes of this failure include
corruption, inadequate training and resources, and the complicity of prosecutors
and public defenders.
In June 2008, Mexico passed a constitutional reform that creates the basis for
an adversarial criminal justice system with oral trials, and contains measures
that are critical for promoting greater respect for fundamental rights. But implementation
of the reform, which authorities have until 2016 to complete, has
been sluggish, and most changes have yet to be translated into practice. Many
states continue to operate under Mexico’s traditional system and tolerate its
most insidious practices. Meanwhile, the few states where the new system has
been introduced have passed significant counter-reforms or inserted exceptions
that undercut the key modifications of the oral system.
In addition to its positive aspects, the reform also introduced the provision of
arraigo, which allows prosecutors, with judicial authorization, to detain individuals
suspected of participating in organized crime for up to 80 days before they
are charged with a crime. Detention without charge for up to 80 days violates
Mexico’s obligations regarding liberty and security and due process under international
law. Many detainees are held well beyond the 80-day limit, and in
some cases are subjected to torture in arraigo detention centers.
Prison Conditions
Prisons are overpopulated, unhygienic, and fail to provide basic security for
most inmates. Prisoners who accuse guards or inmates of attacks or other abuses
have no effective system to seek redress.
Approximately 60 percent of prisons are under the control of organized crime,
and corruption and violence are rampant, according to the National Human
Rights Commission. Criminal groups use their control to extort the families of
prisoners, threatening to torture inmates if they do not pay. In February 2012,
guards in Apodaca prison in Nuevo León state allowed prisoners from one criminal group to execute 44 prisoners who belonged to a rival group, and then
allowed many of those responsible to escape.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists, particularly those who have reported on drug trafficking or have
been critical of security forces and authorities, have faced serious harassment
and attacks. From 2000 to July 2012, 82 journalists were killed and 16 more disappeared.
Participants in social media networks and the offices of news outlets
have increasingly been the targets of violence. While many attacks on the press
in 2012 were attributed to organized crime, evidence points to the involvement
of state officials in some instances.
Authorities have routinely failed to adequately investigate and prosecute crimes
against members of the press or to protect journalists who face serious risk, fostering
a climate of impunity and self-censorship. Mexico created a special prosecutor’s
office for crimes against freedom of expression in 2006, and endowed
it with greater authority in 2010, but it has failed to effectively prosecute cases.
More than 630 attacks on the press were reported from 2006 through mid-2012,
yet the special prosecutor has obtained only one criminal sentence.
In June 2012, Mexico passed a constitutional amendment that makes attacks on
the press a federal crime, giving federal prosecutors the power to take over such
investigations from local prosecutors, who are more susceptible to corruption
and threats. Implementing legislation of the reform is pending.
Gender-Based Violence
Mexican laws do not adequately protect women and girls against domestic violence
and sexual violence. Some provisions, including those that make the
severity of punishments for some sexual offenses contingent on the “chastity”
of the victim, contradict international standards. Women who have suffered
these types of human rights violations generally do not report them to authorities,
while those who do report them are generally met with suspicion, apathy,
and disrespect.
Reproductive Rights
In August 2008, the Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of a Mexico
City law that legalized abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Since that
time 16 of Mexico’s 32 states have adopted reforms that recognize the right to
life from the moment of conception, limiting women’s ability to exercise their
right to health. In 2010, the Supreme Court ruled that all states must provide
emergency contraception and access to abortion for rape victims. However, in
practice many women and girls face serious barriers to accessing abortions
after sexual violence, including inaccurate information, undue delays, and
intimidation by officials.
Same-Sex Marriage
In August 2010, the Supreme Court recognized the right of same-sex couples in
Mexico City to adopt children and to marry, and ruled that all Mexican states
must recognize same-sex marriages that take place in Mexico City. Yet the ruling
does not require that states recognize the right themselves, and many still deny
same-sex couples the right to marry.
Access to Palliative Care
Although since 2009 Mexican law provides for a right to home-based palliative
care for patients with terminal illnesses—one of very few countries to do so—
implementing regulations have not been passed. Consequently, tens of thousands
of patients continue to face major and often insurmountable obstacles in
accessing end-of-life care, leading to unnecessary suffering.
Migrants
Hundreds of thousands of undocumented migrants pass through Mexico each
year and many are subjected to grave abuses en route—such as disappearances
and physical and sexual assault—at the hands of organized crime, migration
authorities, and security forces. Approximately 22,000 migrants are kidnapped
annually, according to the National Human Rights Commission, often with the
aim of extorting payments from their relatives. Authorities have not taken adequate steps to protect migrants, or to investigate and prosecute those who
abuse them. Migration officials rarely inform migrants of their rights, such as
the right to seek asylum. Authorities and criminal groups have threatened and
harassed the staff of migrant shelters for assisting migrants.
Labor Rights
Agreements negotiated between management and pro-management unions
continue to obstruct legitimate labor-organizing activity. These agreements
often restrict workers’ ability to obtain effective representation, undermining
their ability bargain collectively and earn benefits beyond the minimums mandated
by Mexican law. Workers who seek to form independent unions risk losing
their jobs, as loopholes in labor laws and poor enforcement generally fail to protect
them from retaliatory dismissals. In November 2012, Congress passed a farreaching
reform of labor law that imposes onerous preconditions for striking
and makes it easier for employers to replace regular employees with workers on
short-term contracts supplied by third-party brokers, further undermining fundamental
labor rights and protections for workers.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders continue to suffer harassment and attacks, sometimes
directly at the hands of state officials. Meanwhile authorities consistently fail to
provide adequate protection or to investigate crimes against defenders such as
Margarita Martinez, who fled Chiapas state in June 2012 after repeated death
threats and attacks tied to her work denouncing police abuses.
In April 2012, Mexico’s Congress passed a law to protect human rights defenders
and journalists, which mandates formal protocols to evaluate the risk faced
by individuals from these groups and protection when necessary. At this writing,
the implementation of these processes—with civil society participation—
remained ongoing.
Key International Actors
The United States has allocated over US$2 billion in aid to Mexico through the
Merida Initiative, a multi-year aid package agreed upon in 2007 to help Mexico
combat organized crime. Fifteen percent of select portions of the assistance can
be disbursed only after the US secretary of state reports to the US Congress that
the Mexican government is meeting four human rights requirements, which
include ensuring that military abuses are investigated in the civilian justice system,
and prohibiting the use of testimony obtained through.
However, the impact of these requirements has been undermined by the fact
that the US State Department has repeatedly reported to the US Congress that
they are being met, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, leading
Congress to release the funds. For example, the State Department’s 2012
human rights report on Mexico found that “widespread impunity for human
rights abuses by officials remained a problem in both civilian and military jurisdictions,”
which violates one of the requirements.
In November 2011, a Mexican lawyer submitted a petition asking the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (OTP) to open an investigation
into the alleged responsibility of President Felipe Calderón and other officials
for war crimes and crimes against humanity, which was signed by more than
23,000 Mexicans. A press release that the presidency released in response
called the accusations in the petition slander, and said it was exploring legal
options against those who had made them. The prosecutor’s office was still
reviewing this petition at this writing.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACtHR) has issued decisions in four
cases since 2009 mandating that the military justice system should not be used
to investigate and prosecute human rights abuses committed by the military.
These rulings precipitated a Supreme Court decision in July 2011, which recognized
that the jurisprudence of the Inter-American Court was binding and stated
that Mexican judges should take its rulings into account in their judgments.
The United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
(WGEID) conducted a fact-finding mission to Mexico in 2011, concluding that,
“sufficient efforts are not being made to determine the fate or whereabouts of persons who have disappeared, to punish those responsible and to guarantee
the right to the truth and reparation.”
Mexico appeared before the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) in October
2012. During the hearing, committee experts expressed concern regarding the
ongoing use of torture to obtain confessions and the unlawful practice of arraigo
detention, among other abusive patterns.