Mind the Gap: Diplomatic Assurances and
the Erosion of the Global Ban on Torture
By Julia Hall
Introduction
The United States has rightly attracted massive international criticism for its
appalling and illegal conduct in the “war on terrorism.” The abuses—Abu Ghraib,
extraordinary renditions, secret prisons, enhanced interrogation techniques,
Guantanamo Bay—are so dramatic and counterproductive, that they overshadow
the fact that the Bush administration could not have “achieved” all this singlehandedly.
Allies and partners complicit in the US project to undermine the rule of
law have provided airspace for illegal transfers, bases to house secret prisons,
and intelligence support for operations that have led to torture and disappearances.
None of these governments has a record to be proud of, either.
But the role of the British government raises particular concerns. In addition to
the more evident transgressions—complicity in renditions, failure to criticize
Guantanamo early and assertively, and an array of rights-abusive domestic antiterrorism
measures—it has offered a counterterrorism tool that is less obvious,
allegedly more “human rights friendly,” and thus uniquely insidious: diplomatic
assurances against torture. The US government borrowed this handy device to
justify renditions, and now many countries the world over are eager to try them
out. The fact that promises of humane treatment from state torturers are inherently
untrustworthy and have not worked in a number of cases does not seem to
bother London. The goal is to deport terrorism suspects, no matter what—and if
brokering unreliable, unenforceable agreements with states that torture is what it
takes, then so be it.
Like the Americans, the British government obtains promises of fair treatment
from countries where torture is a serious and enduring problem in an effort to get
rid of foreign terrorism suspects. Like Washington, London tries to sell this policy
as a genuine effort to square the needs of fighting international terrorism with its
human rights obligations. But the British government’s boast that it is committed to stopping torture cannot mask the fact that its promotion of empty promises of
humane treatment will do irreparable damage to the absolute ban on torture.
The British government has sought assurances over the years from a veritable Alist
of abusive regimes: Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Libya, and Russia, to name a few.
These countries have long histories and continuing records of torture, a fact that
Whitehall readily acknowledges. What London fails to admit, however, is that
despite compelling independent documentation of abuses, these governments
routinely deny that torture takes place and usually fail to investigate allegations
of abuse. And it fails to explain adequately why these governments—which continue
to torture with impunity, despite international condemnation—would keep
their promises not to torture a single individual.
The problems with these promises begin with the nature of torture itself. Torture
is criminal activity of the most brutal sort, practiced in secret using techniques
that often defy detection (for example, mock drowning, sexual assault, and the
internal use of electricity). In many countries, medical personnel monitor the
abuse to ensure that the torture is not easily detected. And detainees subjected
to torture are often afraid to complain to anyone about the abuse for fear of
reprisals against them or their family members. Occasional monitoring of a suspect’s
well-being after return in such circumstances is unlikely to protect him or
her from abuse. Moreover, there is no formal enforcement mechanism to ensure a
victim has recourse if he or she is abused.
It should therefore come as no surprise that UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights Louise Arbour has opined that diplomatic assurances do not work, cannot
stop torture, and should not be used. Her concerns are echoed by many human
rights experts in the US, Europe, and elsewhere. With good reason: reliance on
diplomatic assurances is growing in the US, Canada, and throughout Europe, and
is spreading to other parts of the world.
It is bad enough that the British government has mounted a concerted campaign
to gain the acceptance of assurances at the Council of Europe, the European
Court of Human Rights, and in the European Union, proselytizing at every opportunity
on the benefits of this counterterrorism tool. But abusive governments are
also taking a leaf out of the UK and US book to rid themselves of unwanted terror suspects. The Russian government now readily accepts diplomatic assurances
from Uzbekistan—a notorious practitioner of torture. Renditions are outlawed in
the Philippines unless promises of humane treatment are secured first. Ironically,
a draft anti-torture plan recently devised by the Georgian government includes
acceptance of assurances to justify the deportation of terrorism suspects. The torture
ban is being slowly but surely eroded—and the British government has
helped lead the way.
Good vs. Bad Assurances
Seeking “diplomatic assurances” to protect human rights began as an earnest
effort by European governments to protect the most fundamental right: the right
to life. Governments in countries where the death penalty is outlawed have long
asked for guarantees against capital punishment from states like the US, where
such punishment is legal, before extraditing suspects. International law does not
prohibit the death penalty, but capital punishment is outlawed in nearly all of
Europe, and the United Nations and every major intergovernmental organization
and nongovernmental human rights group condemn the practice. Nearly every
bilateral and multilateral extradition agreement or treaty contains a provision
requiring that an abolitionist state secure assurances against the death penalty
from a state where that sanction remains legal.
Assurances against torture, however, came into being in the 1990s from what
Swedish legal expert Gregor Noll calls “the silence of international law.”
International human rights law absolutely prohibits sending a person to a place
where he or she is at risk of torture (the nonrefoulement obligation). No exceptions
are allowed, even if a person poses a threat to national security. But the law
says nothing about no-torture promises between states as a means of meeting
that obligation.
The UK and other governments have capitalized on this gap in the law, applying
the assurances regime to torture. But they fail to acknowledge the profound difference
between the dynamic governing death penalty convictions and the
dynamics of torture.
As repellant as it may be to many people, the death penalty is a legal sanction, a
sentence handed down after a criminal trial, and often followed by a number of
appeals if fairness has been compromised. Executions are generally scheduled
well in advance. If a state fails to honor a promise not to seek the death penalty,
it should be easy to monitor and protest a potential breach before an execution
happens. According to the Washington-based Death Penalty Information Center,
the US, for example, has never violated a formal death penalty assurance, lending
credence to the claim that such promises can be trusted.
The Reality of Assurances against Torture
By stark contrast, torture is always illegal. It is a brutal criminal act, usually carried
out secretly and robustly denied by the perpetrators. Torture is not scheduled
in advance and made public like the execution of a death sentence. Any government
that receives a diplomatic assurance against torture will be able to identify
a breach of the promise only after the abuse has occurred.
As the cases involving the US, Canada, and Sweden below amply demonstrate,
people sent back based on these empty promises have been tortured and illtreated:
In December 2001, Egyptian asylum seekers Ahmed Agiza and Mohammed al-Zari
were apprehended together and “roughed-up” by Swedish police, denied permission
to contact their lawyers, driven to Bromma airport outside Stockholm, and
handed over to hooded CIA agents. These operatives cut off the men’s clothing,
and blindfolded, hooded, and drugged them (by inserting suppositories), before
transporting Agiza and al-Zari aboard a US government-leased Gulfstream jet to
Cairo. The men were subsequently tortured, including with electric shocks, in
Egyptian custody. Sweden defended its decision to permit the expulsions, claiming
it had received diplomatic assurances from Egypt promising that the men
would not be tortured. The UN Committee Against Torture and UN Human Rights
Committee have both since ruled that Sweden violated the ban on torture as
Stockholm should have known that assurances from Egypt could not be relied
upon to protect the men.
Maher Arar, a dual Syrian-Canadian national, was deported from the US in 2002
and transported to Syria where he was held for nearly a year. The US government
claimed that it had secured assurances of humane treatment from the Syrian
authorities before sending Arar back, but failed to explain why he was not sent to
Canada where he lived. After his release in late October 2002, Arar told a gruesome
tale of abuse and torment that included severe beatings, incarceration in a
tomb-like cell infested with rats, and psychological abuse. A specially convened
Canadian inquiry ruled definitively in 2006 that Arar was not a terrorist; that he
suffered a nightmare of abuse amounting to torture in Syrian custody; and that
his case is a clear example of the problems inherent in relying on diplomatic
assurances. Arar is now suing the US government for deporting him to torture.
The US government transferred seven Guantanamo Bay detainees to Russia in
March 2004 in reliance on promises from Moscow to prosecute the detainees
only on terrorism charges and to treat them humanely. Russia did neither. Some
of the men were subsequently harassed and convicted on trumped up charges.
Former detainee Rasul Kudaev, a resident of Kabardino-Balkaria in southern
Russia, was detained after an armed uprising in the provincial capital in October
2005. According to photographs, medical records, court documents, and the testimony
of lawyers and family members, Kudaev was repeatedly beaten in custody
in an effort to compel him to confess to involvement in the uprising. The men’s
treatment illustrates how the “stamp of Guantanamo” can lead to ill-treatment,
despite promises to the contrary.
Two former Guantanamo Bay detainees were sent home to Tunisia in June 2007
based on Tunisia’s pledge to the US government that they would be treated
humanely on return. Both men were incarcerated in Tunisian prison upon return
and have told those who visit them that their treatment has been so poor they
would rather be back in Guantanamo.
Promoting Assurances at Home
The UK first developed assurances in the early 1990s as a means of removing a
Sikh activist labeled a threat to national security. The British government began
efforts to deport Karamjit Singh Chahal to India in 1990. After much procedural
wrangling, the UK issued a final deportation order in 1995, purporting to satisfy qualms about his safety upon return by producing two sets of diplomatic assurances
against torture and ill-treatment from the Indian government. The British
government argued that Chahal’s high profile in the UK and India would guarantee
him fair treatment (a claim that it and other governments continue to make).
The European Court of Human Rights, however, did not buy the British government’s
“all eyes are watching” defense and in a landmark 1996 decision ruled
that the UK’s public branding of Chahal as a “terrorist,” coupled with the Indian
government’s lack of control over brutal security forces in Punjab, made him particularly
vulnerable to torture and ill-treatment. This case set the standard in
Europe for transfers of terrorism suspects: no balancing test between national
security and the risk of torture is permitted; torture and ill-treatment are prohibited
at all times, under all circumstances, even if a person has committed horrible
crimes; and diplomatic assurances will not suffice from a country where human
rights abuses are a “recalcitrant and enduring” problem.
Although the British tried to get assurances in a number of cases after the Chahal
ruling, opposition within the government itself and court challenges appeared to
sound the death knell for the practice. For example, throughout 1999, the Home
Office and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office engaged in an unusual internal
struggle against an effort led by then-Prime Minister Tony Blair to deport four
Egyptian terrorism suspects, arguing that Cairo’s assurances against torture could
not be trusted. The Egyptian government eventually refused to give assurances
and the deportations were halted.
In the aftermath of September 11, 2001, the British government took the opportunity
to introduce new counterterrorism measures, including the shocking power to
indefinitely detain foreign terrorism suspects whom the government refused to
prosecute but who could not be sent home because they risked being tortured
there. There was no talk at that time about diplomatic assurances against torture,
which led many to believe that they might be off the table.
But the credibility of no-torture promises came under renewed scrutiny in 2003
when the Bow Street Magistrates’ Court in London considered Russia’s extradition
request for the surrender of Akhmed Zakaev, an envoy for the Chechen government-
in-exile, for alleged crimes committed in Chechnya. A Russian government minister traveled to London to assure the court that Zakaev would come to no
harm in prison in Russia. But Zakaev’s lawyers produced a credible witness who
said he was tortured into giving Zakaev’s name to the Russian authorities. The
court rejected the Russian promises of fair treatment, relying on the fact that torture
was widespread in Russia; that Chechens were particularly susceptible to torture;
and that the Russian government didn’t have effective control over the vast
prison system.
By the time the House of Lords ruled in 2004 that the British government could
not detain foreign terrorism suspects indefinitely without charge or trial, the government
had already revived plans to use assurances as a solution. The UK went
on to broker a series of “memorandums of understanding” (MoU) with Lebanon,
Libya, and Jordan for the “deportation with assurances” (DWA) of terrorism suspects
who are nationals of these countries. The agreements, which purport to systematize
assurances, contain a new element: employing an “independent” local
human rights group, funded and trained by the British government, to monitor an
individual suspect’s well-being post return. The British government argues that
monitoring greatly reduces the chances that a returned suspect will be abused.
In fact, monitoring is no panacea. Its key deficiency is the lack of confidentiality. If
monitors have universal access to all detainees in a facility, and are able to speak
with all detainees, each in private, a single detainee can report torture or other
abuse without fear that he will be identified by the authorities. The International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) makes universal access a condition of its monitoring
for precisely that reason. Such confidentiality cannot be provided when
only one detainee or small group is being monitored. The prison or detention
facility authorities would know directly where the allegations of ill-treatment came
from. Detainees would be too afraid of reprisals to report abuse. In a statement
given after he was released from Syrian custody, Maher Arar had this to say about
visits from Canadian consular officials:
I could not say anything about the torture. I thought if I did, I
would not get any more visits, or I might be beaten again … The
consular visits were my lifeline, but I also found them very frustrating.
There were seven consular visits, and one visit from
members of Parliament. After the visits I would bang my head and my fist on the wall in frustration. I needed the visits, but I
could not say anything there.
The British government has tried to argue that local human rights organizations
can effectively monitor any abuse. To that end, it has provided thousands of
pounds to support the Adaleh Center for Human Rights Studies, a small nongovernmental
organization in Jordan. But monitoring organizations, both local
and international, often have trouble with open access to facilities. Local monitoring
groups are particularly vulnerable to intimidation by their governments, which
often control them via registration laws, if not by threats, outright harassment,
and worse.
Monitoring by the ICRC at the infamous Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq was often frustrated
by the actions of prison staff. In the past few years, the ICRC has suspended
visits more than once to Jordanian detention facilities owing to problems of
access to certain detainees. Human Rights Watch has spoken to numerous former
detainees who claim they were hidden from the ICRC while in the custody of the
Jordanian intelligence services. Official government monitors are even less capable
of detecting torture, let alone preventing it: Ahmed Agiza and Mohammed al-
Zari were both tortured in Egyptian custody, despite numerous visits from
Swedish diplomats.
The British government’s MoU policy is now being challenged in the courts. In
February 2007 the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC), which hears
appeals against deportation in national security cases, ruled that Omar Othman
(better known as Abu Qatada), a recognized refugee and radical Muslim cleric
accused of ties to al Qaeda, could be returned safely to Jordan under the terms of
the UK-Jordan MoU. The court admitted that torture in Jordan is a serious problem,
especially for terrorism suspects, and there is little accountability for those
who perpetrate such abuse. But having raised those concerns, it ignored them,
and simply relied on the British government’s argument that the strength of ties
between the two countries meant that Jordan would keep its word.
The policy suffered a setback in April, however, when the same court ruled that
two Libyan terrorism suspects risked torture and a “complete” denial of due
process if deported. Applying the same logic as in the Qatada case, it determined that ties between Libya and the UK were not sufficiently strong and enduring to
overcome the Libyan government’s routine use of incommunicado detention and
torture against prisoners.
A second SIAC ruling on the Jordan MoU, in November 2007, again failed to
engage with the substantive risk of torture, despite fresh documentation of
Jordanian torture practices. In August 2007, Human Rights Watch interviewed
numerous prisoners in several prisons in Jordan who complained of persistent
abuse by prison guards, including hanging by iron cuffs in a large cage-like cell
and beatings with cables. When we returned for a second time to speak to prisoners
at one prison, they reported mass beatings by guards. There were evident
signs of new injuries: bruises on backs, calves, and arms, and head wounds. The
prison guards wore face masks and some wielded truncheons. A diplomat representing
the British government before the SIAC in the case admitted in open court
that these events were “frankly horrific.”
Despite accepting these accounts as truthful and accurate, the court maintained
that ties between London and Amman guaranteed that no such misfortune would
befall any of the suspects returned under the agreement. The court skirted
around the fact that the Human Rights Watch monitors—skilled independent
researchers—were invited to inspect detention facilities and interview prisoners
by the Jordanian authorities, but the abuse occurred anyway. How would a small
local NGO with little experience, questionable independence, and virtually no
power to hold the government accountable for torture abuses be able to ensure
the safety of a person returned under the terms of the memorandum? That question
went unanswered.
Setting a Bad Example
The British government promotes itself as a leader in the global effort to eradicate
torture. It is true that the government has funded international anti-torture projects,
and paid for publications like “The Torture Reporting Handbook”—a practical
guide to identifying, documenting and reporting incidents of torture for doctors,
lawyers, and human rights activists. The UK was one of the first states to ratify
the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture, which creates parallel
international and domestic monitoring systems aimed at reducing torture and illtreatment in detention, and has been active in pressing other governments to do
the same.
All this deserves praise. But the government’s relentless campaign to see “deportations
with assurances” accepted throughout Europe reflects a more ambivalent
attitude toward torture. In 2005-2006 it helped mount an effort to develop guidelines
for the “appropriate” use of assurances at the Council of Europe, a regional
intergovernmental human rights body comprising 47 member states. That effort
was decisively rejected when a number of experts, including representatives from
Belgium, France, Italy, and Switzerland expressed serious concern that promises
from torturers could not be trusted and that any shift to reliance upon assurances
would effectively gut the ban on transfers to torture.
It was not surprising that the UK then extended its direct advocacy effort on diplomatic
assurances to the European Union. Although the vast majority of counterterrorism
policy is set at the national level, the EU has taken up select issues for
consideration and consensus, including the definition of terrorism and a regional
arrest warrant. The UK is leading an effort, through the G6 group of interior ministers
(France, Italy, Spain, UK, Poland, and Germany), for broader EU endorsement
of the deportation with assurances policy. A UK government memorandum circulated
in advance of a November 2007 meeting of EU interior ministers claimed
that the expulsion of terrorism suspects is an effective tool to protect people from
foreigners who threaten national security, adding that “the mechanism of seeking
assurances, on a government-to-government basis” could be a “way forward.”
It is also likely that the UK played a role in Italy’s interest in using assurances in
an effort to deport a Tunisian national security suspect. In June 2007 the Italian
government argued before the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human
Rights that Nassim Saadi should be sent back to his home country with promises
from the Tunisian authorities that he would not be tortured on return. The British
government intervened in the Saadi case and made oral representations to the
court in favor of a national security balancing test for returns to risk of ill-treatment.
A decision is pending.
The Real Way Forward
The United Kingdom’s post-Blair approach to combating terrorism appeared at
first to offer some welcome relief. Prime Minister Gordon Brown wants to engage
in the parallel battle of “winning hearts and minds” in Muslim communities.
During the September 2007 Labour Party conference, Tony McNulty, the minister
responsible for counterterrorism policy, said that Blair had got it wrong: the “rules
of the game” have not changed and the response to terrorism should be “rooted
in our civil liberties and human rights, with whatever slight tweaks at the top.”
Apparently, sending people to places where they risk being tortured is simply a
“slight tweak.” In November 2007 Brown virtually boasted that new “memorandums
of understanding” were being negotiated with a number of other countries.
If these agreements are necessary, then the UK is acknowledging that these governments
engage in torture, but London is willing to make a deal.
Accepting torture undermines the moral legitimacy of the British government
around the world. And instead of winning hearts and minds, it damages the government’s
standing at home, especially with British Muslims, whose cooperation
with the police and security services is so vital if the terrorist threat is to be
addressed.
No person has been deported yet under an official British “memorandum of
understanding.” The UK government can act now to stop all deportations with
assurances to countries where torture is practiced. That would send a simple but
powerful message around the world: the British government does not bargain
with torturers, and neither should you.
Julia Hall is senior counterterrorism counsel at Human Rights Watch.