Macedonia
By the end of 2004, almost all provisions of the August 2001
Framework Peace Agreement (known as the Ohrid Agreement), which
ended the 2001 armed conflict between ethnic Albanian insurgents and
Macedonian government forces, had been implemented. Certain provisions
of the agreement, however, remained controversial and served to
exacerbate tensions among Macedonia’s ethnic minorities. In general,
discrimination against national minorities, including in particular ethnic
Albanians and Roma, and police violence continue to be problems in
the country.
Implementation of the Ohrid Agreement and Its Implications for
Minority Rights
Although ethnic tensions between the Macedonian majority and
Albanian minority reached a climax during the 2001 armed conflict,
relations remained tense throughout 2004, especially as the redistricting
plans called for by the Ohrid Agreement were under consideration. In
addition, other unresolved concerns—such as the ongoing situation of
displaced persons from the conflict and the absence of a successful disarmament
program—continue to plague inter-ethnic relations.
On August 11, 2004, the parliament passed a Territorial Organization
Act, the last of a package of legislative initiatives required by the Ohrid
Agreement. By increasing the powers of administrative districts and
decreasing their number from 123 to seventy-six in 2008, the act decentralizes
the country by giving more powers to local government and
increases the representation of ethnic Albanians in local government.
According to the last census held in 2002, ethnic Albanians make up 25
percent of the population in Macedonia. New administrative districts
will be created by joining Albanian rural areas with majority
Macedonian districts, thereby increasing the number of districts in
which the ethnic Albanian population will comprise more than 20 percent of the population (in Kiãevo and Struga to more than 50 percent).
As a result, Albanian language will become a second official language in
these districts (as stipulated in the Ohrid Agreement), and members of
the Albanian minority will be able to elect a larger number of local government
representatives.
The introduction of the Territorial Organization Act by the government
in August 2004 exacerbated the already existing tensions between
the majority Macedonian and minority Albanian populations. Some ethnic
Macedonian groups feared that the plan would lead to a division of
the country along ethnic lines and ultimately make it easier for ethnic
Albanians to secede and unify with neighboring Kosovo. Many
Macedonians organized demonstrations against the Act, some of which
became violent. For example, the media reported that forty protestors
and police officers were injured during anti-redistricting riots in the
town of Struga on July 22, 2004. Ultimately, charges were filed against
more than fifty people in connection with the disturbances.
Contributing further to inter-ethnic tensions, a referendum was called
by the World Macedonian Congress to overturn the redistricting plan.
However, the referendum, which took place on November 7, 2004,
failed due to low voter turn out.
Three years after the end of the armed conflict, the government has still
not succeeded in fully disarming the ethnic Albanian population, contributing
to a worsening of the security situation in areas populated predominantly
by Albanians.
There are still 1,900 persons who remain internally displaced as a result
of the 2001 conflict. The Macedonian Helsinki Committee reported
that security is no longer the primary obstacle to return. Instead, the
main obstacle appears to be the poor economic situation of the internally
displaced, who need financial assistance in order to replace basic
household items and farming supplies that were destroyed during the
conflict. 
Despite the ethnic tensions discussed above, implementation of the
Ohrid Agreement has contributed to some positive developments
regarding minorities. According to the Macedonian Helsinki
Committee for Human Rights, during the three years since the Ohrid
Agreement was signed, there has been an 80 percent increase in the
employment of minorities. As a result, for example, Albanians have
obtained a level of representation in the state administration that is
closer to their share of the overall population. In addition, after years of
controversy regarding the Albanian-language Tetovo University, it
received legal recognition in February 2004. Furthermore, pursuant to
the Ohrid Agreement, a constitutional amendment was adopted that
requires a “double majority” for laws related to ethnic minorities: the
majority of all parliamentary deputies and the majority of all deputies
representing ethnic minorities must support such a law in order for it to
be adopted.
Police Abuse
Police abuse and violations of defendants’ procedural rights continued
to be a serious problem during 2004. From January to September 2004,
the Macedonian Helsinki Committee reported at least nineteen cases of
people who were interrogated by the police without being informed of
their rights or the reason for the interrogation. What is more, in the
course of their detention and/or interrogation, individuals often reported
being ill-treated. Local nongovernmental organizations also reported
widespread impunity for police abuses, with the judiciary often responding
ineffectively and slowly to complaints of ill-treatment.
The Macedonia government has committed its police and military
forces to support the global campaign against terrorism. However, in
one bizarre and troubling case, the former Macedonian interior minister,
Ljube Boskovski, is currently under investigation along with several
others for smuggling an Indian and six Pakistani refugees into the country
and then killing them in 2002. Boskovski and the other suspects are also accused of having altered the scene of the crime in an attempt to
make it appear as if the seven men were armed Islamic militants who
had planned an attack on Western embassies, the aim of which was to
show Macedonia’s contribution to the global war on terrorism.
Boskovski was arrested in August 2004 and is currently under investigation
in Croatia.
Roma Rights
Roma continue to be the most disadvantaged and marginalized minority
in Macedonia and are often victims of police abuse and other discrimination.
To date, the Macedonian government has failed to adopt affirmative
policies that would improve the situation of Roma and generally
tends to neglect the concerns of the Roma population.
Although police brutality is not limited to ethnic minorities in
Macedonia, reports by human rights groups suggest that Roma are particularly
vulnerable to police abuse. For the most part, Roma have been
unsuccessful in obtaining redress for police brutality.
Key International Actors
The worst cases of human rights violations committed during the 2001
armed conflict between the Albanian National Liberation Army and
Macedonian security forces are being investigated by the Skopje-based
bureau of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. However, to date no indictments on Macedonia have been
issued.
The E.U. and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are
among the most active and influential international actors with regard
to Macedonia’s human rights policies. Macedonia applied for E.U.
membership on March 22, 2004. Throughout the year, the E.U. and
NATO exerted pressure on Macedonia to pass the Territorial Organization Act discussed above in order to complete the implementation
of the Ohrid Agreement, which the E.U. has set as a condition for
beginning accession negotiations.
NATO monitored the security situation in Macedonia throughout 2004
and concluded that there had been significant progress towards stability
in the country. Specifically, NATO pointed not only to Macedonia’s
success in showing that ethnic communities can live peacefully together,
but also to improvement in equitable representation of ethnic minorities.
NATO has stressed that respect for international human rights
standards as required by the Ohrid Agreement, as well as reforms of
Macedonia’s defense structures, are preconditions for it to gain membership
in the NATO alliance.
The activities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in Macedonia focus primarily on police training and
election monitoring. The OSCE monitored the presidential elections
on April 28, 2004, and concluded that they were largely in compliance
with international standards. However, although the OSCE did raise
concern about several electoral irregularities, the Macedonian authorities
failed to condemn these irregularities publicly or take steps to
investigate or remedy them. The OSCE also carried out several studies
on Macedonian local government and encouraged the decentralization
of the state.
In the months leading up to the referendum to overturn the Territorial
Organization Act, the U.S. said that a “yes” vote would be contrary to
the “word and spirit” of the Ohrid Agreement. The U.S. urged
Macedonia to complete the implementation of the agreement to
increase its chances for membership in the Euro-Atlantic structures.
Eager to maintain good relations with the United States, Macedonia
signed a Bilateral Immunity Agreement with the U.S. government,
which protects U.S. troops and the troops of its allies from extradition to the International Criminal Court (ICC). With this move, Macedonia
joined the U.S. and a number of other countries in their efforts to
undermine the authority of the ICC and its mandate to prosecute war
crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.