Burma
Burmas deplorable human rights record received widespread international attention
in 2007 as anti-government protests in August and September were met with
a brutal crackdown by security forces of the authoritarian military government, the
State Peace and Development Council (SPDC). Denial of basic freedoms in Burma
continues, and restrictions on the internet, telecommunications, and freedom of
expression and assembly sharply increased in 2007. Abuses against civilians in
ethnic areas are widespread, involving forced labor, summary executions, sexual
violence, and expropriation of land and property.
Violent Crackdown on Protests
Poor economic conditions sparked a series of demonstrations and arrests from
February onward. Protests were directly related to declining living standards, limited
access to health services and education, and poor electricity supplies.
Despite booming revenues from natural gas exports, the government raised fuel
prices sharply and without warning on August 15, which had an immediate and
adverse effect on the civilian population.
Small-scale protest marches were conducted in Rangoon by members of the 88
Generation Students and members and supporters of the National League for
Democracy (NLD), calling for improved living standards and dialogue with the
government on political reforms. Demonstrations were broken up by police and
members of the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA), a pro-government
social welfare organization with a nominal national membership of 23
million, and Swan Ar Shin, a civilian paramilitary group. Over 150 political dissidents
were arrested and dozens went into hiding in August.
Demonstrations by Buddhist monks and civilians spread to other towns such as
Mandalay, Sittwe, and Pakkoku in September. Following the beating of monks in
Pakkoku, public demonstrations increased. In late September marches by monks
in Rangoon became larger, and political activists, artists, and other civilians gradually
joined in the daily processions. On September 22 over 1,000 monks and
supporters were permitted to march to the home of Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
On September 26, demonstrations in Rangoon were violently dispersed by riot
police, supported by regular army soldiers, who used teargas, rubber bullets, and
automatic weapons against unarmed civilians. Following brutal nighttime raids on
monasteries and homes, demonstrations continued the next day in Rangoon,
Mandalay, Mytikina, Pegu, Sittwe, and Pakkoku, and were met with more violence
by security forces. Small demonstrations continued for the next several days, as
the police and army arrested and detained an estimated 3,000 monks in
Rangoon. An estimated 100 civilians were killed in the demonstrations in
Rangoon; there are unverified reports of protester deaths in other locations
throughout Burma. Official SPDC figures claim that 15 people were killed and over
3,000 arrested. The SPDC claims to have released over 2,000 detainees; there are
fears several hundred remain incarcerated.
The SPDC made no concessions to international condemnation, staging mass rallies
of the USDA and Myanmar Womens Affairs Federation throughout the country,
condemning foreign interference in Burma, and blaming unrest on foreign
media reports and exile radio broadcasts inciting protests.
Lack of Progress on Democracy
Burmas long-running National Convention concluded on September 3, after years
of haphazard sessions since 1993. Participation by political parties, ethnic
groups, and other non-military delegates was sharply circumscribed and alternative
proposals routinely ignored. Criticism of the Convention was expressly forbidden
by law. A list of Detailed Basic Principles has been finalized and this will
form the basis of an eventual national constitution. Many of these provisions are
designed to entrench military control over an envisaged civilian parliament,
restrict citizens freedoms and rights, and provide the future president with
sweeping emergency powers in the event of a threat against national sovereignty.
Human Rights Defenders
The SPDC continues to imprison an estimated 1,100 political prisoners including
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, whose house arrest was extended in May for another year.
In addition, political dissidents arrested in August and September, including Min Ko Naing and leaders of the 88 Generation Students remain in detention at
unknown locations.
Other attacks against human rights defenders included the beating in April of two
members of the Human Rights Defenders and Promoters group by USDA forces,
north of Rangoon. Authorities detained Phyu Phyu Tin, a leading HIV/AIDS educator,
between May 21 and July 2, for protesting against the lack of access to antiretroviral
drugs in government hospitals.
The SPDC appointed the deputy labor minister, Maj. Gen. Aung Kyi, as official liaison
to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. The two sides have already conducted preliminary
meetings on establishing regular dialogue.
Continued Violence against Ethnic Groups
In ethnic areas of the borderlands human rights violations are widespread, involving
forced labor, summary executions, sexual violence against women and girls,
land confiscations, and the use of landmines to disrupt civilian food production.
The ongoing military offensive in northern Karen state has displaced an estimated
40,000 civilians since early 2006, with an estimated 150 civilians killed by
Burmese army attacks and landmines. Forty-three new Burmese army bases have
been built in the area, using convict and forced civilian labor; local civilians were
also forced to supply construction materials. An estimated 500 convict porters
were killed as a result of Burmese army abuses, including through the practice of
atrocity de-miningforcing civilians to act in effect as human minesweepers.
The use of landmines by the Burmese army and non-state armed groups is widespread.
Abuses by Burmese military units are commonplace against civilians also in
Karenni, Chin, and Shan states. The army continues to use sexual violence with
impunity in ethnic areas. For example, in February four teenage girls were raped
by four Burmese army officers in Putao, Kachin state.
Since January 2006 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has not
been permitted to conduct prison visits. During 2007 they gradually closed several
field offices in the countryside due to restrictions on their activities. In a rare
public statement issued in June, the ICRC voiced concerns that repeated abuses committed against men, women and children living along the Thai-Myanmar
[Burma] border violate many provisions of international humanitarian law.
Child Soldiers
Recruitment of children into the government armed forces continues as a result of
high desertion rates and chronic understaffing. Recruiters and civilian brokers
used coercion, threats, and physical force to recruit children as young as 10.
Former soldiers indicated that in many training camps children constituted 30
percent or more of new recruits.
Several non-state armed groups also continue to recruit children as soldiers,
although in numbers far lower than the Burmese army.
Humanitarian Concerns, Internal Displacement, and Refugees
Burmas humanitarian crisis worsened in 2007 as government restrictions on
United Nations and international development agencies activities continued,
including close monitoring and restrictions of movement. A United Nations
Development Programme household living conditions survey issued in June
showed that one-third of civilians in Burma live below the poverty line.
Despite official figures released by the SPDC and UNAIDS that argued that the
countrys HIV/AIDS epidemic had decreased, there are concerns that the extent of
the crisis might be underestimated because of limitations on travel and access to
healthcare facilities by foreign nongovernmental organizations. The Three
Diseases Fund began operations in 2007 with two rounds of grant disbursals to
address the epidemics of HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis in Burma. A major report
on health and human rights released by US research institutes in June argued
that epidemics of malaria, tuberculosis, HIV, and other diseases, many of them
developing drug resistant strains, in Burmas border areas were exacerbated by
government healthcare expenditures that are a fraction of state military expenditure.
There was little change in the plight of the estimated half a million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in eastern Burma during 2007. Estimating the number of displaced people in other areas, including urban displacement, is difficult.
International humanitarian organizations are denied access by the SPDC to IDP
settlements in Shan and Karen states beside the border with Thailand.
Thousands of civilians fleeing fighting in Karen state are prevented from moving
to camps in Thailand by the Thai authorities. Refugees from Shan state are routinely
denied sanctuary in Thailand, and there were incidents of refugees being
forced back to Burma in 2007. An estimated 2,500 Rohingya Muslims from western
Burma and Bangladesh arrived in southern Thailand from November 2006 to
May 2007 and were arrested by Thai security forces. In several incidents,
Rohingya men were subject to refoulement to Burma by Thai authorities.
Some 150,000 refugees remain in 14 refugee camps along the border with
Thailand. Since 2004 an estimated 40,000 refugees have been resettled to third
countries such as the United States, Canada, Norway, Australia, and Sweden. Thai
authorities have all but stopped their Provincial Admissions Board mechanism for
ascertaining asylum seeker claims, and regularly threaten to send back unregistered
camp residents to IDP settlements inside Burma.
Restrictions on migrant workers from Burma in Thailand increased, with a curfew
invoked in several provinces on migrant workers and a ban on their use of mobile
phones and motorbikes. Burmese migrant workers and refugees continue to be
subject to harassment, arbitrary arrest, and abuses in detention in India,
Malaysia, and Singapore.
Key International Actors
Responding to the August-September events, the UN secretary-generals special
envoy to Burma, Ibrahim Gambari, visited Burma twice, meeting with the senior
SPDC leadership and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. He reported back to the Security
Council on October 5 that there were continuing and disturbing reports of abuses
being committed by security and non-uniformed elements. Despite international
calls for Gambari to have access to detainees, this was not permitted by
the SPDC, who tightly controlled his schedule during the visits.
A special session of the UN Human Rights Council was convened on October 2,
issuing a statement that strongly deplores the continued violent repression of peaceful demonstrations in Myanmar, including through beatings, killings, arbitrary
detentions and enforced disappearances. After four years of being denied
access by the SPDC, the UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Burma, Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, was permitted to visit and went in November.
International condemnation of the violent September crackdown included foreign
ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) issuing a statement
expressing their revulsion at the use of force. The United States imposed
targeted financial sanctions on the 14 top leaders of the SPDC. The EU reinforced
their Common Position on sanctions to Burma, and Japan suspended some aid
projects. The reaction from China, India, and Russia was muted, as officials called
on the SPDC and demonstrators to exercise restraint, but refused to issue strong
statements denouncing the use of violence by the SPDC.
Throughout 2007 ASEAN increased its criticism of the SPDC, expressing exasperation
over the slow pace of reform and unwillingness to consult with regional partners,
although it permitted Burma to sign the ASEAN Charter in November.
The EU continued to invite Burmese officials to multilateral meetings such as the
Asia-Europe Meeting in May, despite EU Common Position provisions banning
attendance without progress on human rights.
China, India, Russia, and Ukraine continued to sell large numbers of weapons to
the SPDC, and in May Russia announced the sale of a nuclear test reactor to
Burma.
Foreign investment in Burmas natural energy sector increased, with natural gas
exploration contracts signed with companies from China, India, South Korea,
Thailand, and Malaysia. Natural gas sales from the Yetagun and Yadana fields
accrued an estimated US$2.16 billion to the SPDC in 2007.
In February the International Labour Organization (ILO) reached an agreement
with the SPDC on a mechanism for reporting cases of forced labor for a year from
March 2007. The ILO stated in July that despite the mechanism there was still
widespread use of forced labor in Burma.
UN Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict Radhika
Coomaraswamy, visited Burma in June and secured agreement from the SPDC to
set up a mechanism on reporting the use of child soldiers.