BLID8
Burma’s human rights situation remained dire in 2011 despite some significant
moves by the government which formed in late March following November 2010
elections. Freedoms of expression, association, and assembly remain severely
curtailed. Although some media restrictions were relaxed, including increased
access to the internet and broader scope for journalists to cover formerly prohibited
subjects, official censorship constrains reporting on many important
national issues. In May and October the government released an estimated 316
political prisoners in amnesties, though many more remain behind bars.
Ethnic conflict escalated in 2011 as longstanding ceasefires with ethnic armed
groups broke down in northern Burma. The Burmese military continues to be
responsible for abuses against civilians in conflict areas, including forced
labor, extrajudicial killings, sexual violence, the use of “human shields,” and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. Despite support from 16 countries for a proposed
United Nations commission of inquiry into serious violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties to Burma’s internal armed conflicts, no
country took leadership at the UN to make it a reality. Foreign government officials
expressed their optimism about government reforms despite abundant
evidence of continuing systematic repression.
Signs of Change, But Unclear If They Will Result in
Lasting Change?
Burma’s national parliament and 14 regional and state assemblies convened in
late January 2011. The formal transfer of power from military rule to the new government
took place on March 30. Former generals hold most senior ministerial
portfolios, and serving generals are constitutionally guaranteed the posts of
ministers of defense, home affairs, and border affairs security. Thein Sein, a former
general and prime minister, was elected president. The speaker of the
lower house is also a former general, and many former military officers hold
important positions in the ruling military-backed Union Solidarity and
Development Party.
President Thein Sein’s inaugural speech in March was notably moderate and
constructive in tone and he promised more reforms than had any leader during
the preceding 23 years of military rule. The government’s stated priorities
include economic reform, improved education, ending corruption, and environment
protection. In August senior government officials called on exiled political
dissidents to return home without reprisal.
In the national parliament, members of parliament are permitted to raise issues
with two weeks prior notice and upon official approval. Some previously sensitive
issues have been discussed in the new parliament such as calls for a political
prisoner amnesty, citizenship for the long repressed Rohingya Muslim
minority, and education reform including the currently banned teaching of ethnic
languages. In addition, the government worked on a bill that, if not watered
down before being enacted, would liberalize citizens’ ability to form unions and
associations.
Reform bills have been tabled in the new parliament on forming trade unions,
permitting peaceful assembly, and amending of the political party registration
rules in ways that could open the way for participation by the long repressed
opposition party, the National League for Democracy. These changes are
encouraging on paper, but it remains to be seen how they will be implemented
and the level of social participation.
Media freedoms have been relaxed in some cases, with propaganda slogans
removed from magazines and newspapers; mention of Aung San Suu Kyi and
display of her photo is now permitted after a long ban. Neverthless, the censorship
board continues to ban stories deemed politically sensitive, an estimated
20 media workers are in prison, including a 21-year-old videographer who
received a 16-year sentence in September 2011 for taking video footage after a
bomb blast in central Rangoon.
On September 5 the government formed a new National Human Rights
Commission, composed of 15 former ambassadors, academics, and civil servants.
Since March Aung San Suu Kyi has been permitted much greater freedom to
travel and meet her supporters in the National League for Democracy, even though the party is technically illegal under the electoral laws. Suu Kyi travelled
to Naypyidaw in August to meet President Thein Sein; it was the first time she
has visited the capital city, which formally opened in 2005.
In November the NLD announced the party would formally re-register as a political
party, and expressed their intention to contest scheduled bi-elections in
2012, with Suu Kyi stating she would consider running as a candidate.
Ethnic Conflict and Displacement
Fighting between government forces and ethnic armed groups spread in Burma
during 2011, as many longstanding ceasefire agreements unraveled. In Karen
State, eastern Burma, a breakaway faction of the Democratic Karen Buddhist
Army (DKBA) took up arms following the November 2010 elections. Intensified
fighting along the border forced an estimated 20,000 refugees into Thailand.
Most DKBA soldiers refused to complete their transformation into Burmesearmy-
controlled Border Guard Force units and ended their 16-year ceasefire.
In March the Burmese army attacked the Shan State Army-North, breaking a
ceasefire reached in 1989, as the Shan army resisted pressure to demobilize
and form a government-controlled people’s militia. Fighting in northern Shan
State displaced an estimated 30,000 civilians.
In June fighting broke out between Burma’s second largest opposition armed
group, the Kachin Independence Army (KIA), and the Burmese army in northern
Burma near the Chinese border, ending a ceasefire signed in 1994. Local
women’s rights groups reported high levels of sexual violence with more than
35 women and girls raped in the first two months of the fighting alone. Over
30,000 civilians were internally displaced, fleeing Burmese army abuses such
as forced labor, extrajudicial killings, and indiscriminate fire, with several thousand
seeking refuge in China.
The Burmese military continues to violate international humanitarian law
through the use of anti-personnel landmines, extrajudicial killings, forced
labor, torture, beatings, and pillaging of property. Sexual violence against
women and girls remains a serious problem and perpetrators are rarely brought
to justice. The army continues to actively recruit and use child soldiers, even as the government cooperates with the International Labour Organization on
demobilizing child soldiers.
In January Burmese army units in Karen State forced convicts to work as porters
in ongoing operations in combat zones. This longstanding practice saw hundreds
of prisoners drawn from prisons and labor camps transported to frontline
units, and forced to carry military supplies and material to the frontline, often
being used as “human shields” to deter attacks or clear anti-personnel landmines.
Porters are often tortured, beaten, and subjected to ill-treatment during
their forced service.
Ethnic armed groups have also been implicated in serious abuses, such as
recruiting child soldiers, extrajudicial executions, and using antipersonnel landmines
around civilian areas.
Approximately 500,000 people are internally displaced due to conflict in eastern
Burma, with an additional 140,000 refugees in camps in Thailand. Thai
authorities in 2011 increased calls for repatriation of the refugees, a proposal
that Burmese officials welcomed, and European Union authorities gave greater
priority in refugee aid allocations to preparations for repatriation despite serious
security concerns about returning populations to active conflict zones.
Bangladeshi authorities increased threats to close Rohingya refugee camps and
drive the Rohingya minority back into Burma. Some 28,000 Rohingya refugees
live in official camps in Bangladesh and another 200,000 live in makeshift settlements
or mixed in with the local population in border areas.
Millions of Burmese migrant workers, refugees, and asylum seekers live in
Thailand, India, Bangladesh, Malaysia, and Singapore.
Key International Actors
In 2011, 16 countries publicly supported calls for a UN-led commission of
inquiry into violations of international human rights and humanitarian law in
Burma, but none was prepared to lead efforts to make this a reality. Most countries
adopted a “wait and see” approach to Burma, noting government pledges
of reform and citing Aung San Suu Kyi’s expression of cautious optimism that
there might be an “opportunity for change.”
In May Vijay Nambiar, the UN secretary-general’s special envoy on Burma, visited
Burma and expressed optimism over stated reform goals, but also noted
that political prisoner releases fell short of international expectations. In his
August report on the human rights situation, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
encouraged the government to turn its reform agenda into reality, but cautioned
that failure to release political prisoners, seek peace with ethnic groups, and
lift all restrictions on Aung San Suu Kyi would erode international confidence in
the process.
Tomas Ojea Quintana, the UN special rapporteur on Burma, visited Burma in
August and later stated that despite positive signs of change there remain
“serious and ongoing human rights concerns,” including “continuing allegations
of torture and ill-treatment during interrogation.” In his September report
to the General Assembly, Quintana said “many serious human rights issues
encompassing the broad range of civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights remain and they need to be addressed.”
The United States, EU, Australia, Canada, and Switzerland continue to impose
restrictive trade and financial sanctions on Burma, arguing that recent government
actions are insufficient to consider lifting the sanctions. In September and
November Derek Mitchell, the newly appointed US special representative and
policy coordinator on Burma, made official visits to the country. Mitchell
expressed cautious optimism that reforms could evolve into far-reaching
change, but urged the government to “take concrete actions in a timely fashion
to demonstrate its sincerity and genuine commitment to reform and national
reconciliation.” US Senator John McCain visited refugee communities along the
Thailand-Burma border and met government and opposition leaders inside
Burma in May and June.
In December US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton visited Burma, the first visit by
such a senior US official in 50 years—the result, President Barack Obama said,
of encouraging “flickers of change” in Burma.
During the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Summit in
November, it was announced that Burma would become chair of the regional
grouping in 2014 and host all of ASEAN’s meetings that year.
Burma’s neighbors—China, India, and Thailand—continue to invest in and trade
extensively with Burma, especially in the extractive and hydro-electric energy
industries. Burma continued to earn billions of US dollars in natural gas revenues,
little of which is directed into social services such as health care and
education.
China began construction on two energy pipelines from western Burma to
Yunnan, including a planned rail link. The building of a series of massive hydroelectric
dams on the Irrawaddy River in upper Burma sparked heated domestic
debate over its effects on the environment and the ethnic minority population,
some of whom have already been forcibly displaced by the project. In late
September President Thein Sein suspended work on the Myitsone dam, the
largest in a series of several planned dams. The move was received positively
inside Burma, but criticized by the Chinese government.
There are negative impacts of certain other Chinese investments, including agribusiness
ventures in northern Burma, which have involved land seizures by
Burmese authorities. India’s construction of a major infrastructure project for
the Kaladan River in western Burma continued in 2011, as did Indian investments
in mining projects. Sales of natural gas to Thailand still account for the
largest share of the Burmese government’s foreign exchange earnings, which
will increase markedly when the Chinese gas pipeline project is completed in
2013.
Russia, China, and North Korea continue to sell arms to Burma, despite frequently
voiced US concerns that North Korean sales could breach UN Security
Council resolutions on non-proliferation.