Burma
Burma’s already dismal human rights record worsened following the devastation
of cyclone Nargis in early May 2008. The ruling State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC) blocked international assistance while pushing through a constitutional
referendum in which basic freedoms were denied.
The ruling junta systematically denies citizens basic freedoms, including freedom
of expression, association, and assembly. It regularly imprisons political activists
and human rights defenders; in 2008 the number of political prisoners nearly
doubled to more than 2,150. The Burmese military continues to violate the rights
of civilians in ethnic conflict areas and extrajudicial killings, forced labor, land
confiscation without due process and other violations continued in 2008.
Cyclone Nargis
Cyclone Nargis struck the Irrawaddy Delta and Burma’s largest city Rangoon on
the night of May 2-3, 2008. The storm rendered 2.4 million people across 37
townships homeless or in need of food or medical assistance with an estimated
84,000 dead and 53,000 missing.
The SPDC tightly controlled emergency international assistance and in some
cases blocked aid in the crucial early stages following the cyclone. The government
denied visas to disaster relief experts and aid workers and prevented them
from travel inside Burma. More than 2 million people waited for weeks for relief
operations to reach them.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Burma in late May, and the
UN, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and the SPDC created a
Tripartite Core Group (TCG) as a multilateral mechanism to coordinate delivery
and distribution of emergency relief aid. The SPDC subsequently relaxed restrictions
on some agencies and enabled helicopters and boats to operate more
freely. But two months after the cyclone an estimated 700,000 people had
received no aid whatsoever because of SPDC obstruction. While some UN agencies and international NGOs have reported continuing travel
restrictions and obstructions, others say they have been permitted free travel and
unfettered operational space. Pro-government organizations such as the Myanmar
Red Cross and the Union Solidarity and Development Association operate extensively
in the Irrawaddy Delta, but some private civil society efforts have been
either discouraged or co-opted by the authorities.
In cyclone-affected areas, there have been reports of land confiscations, forced
labor, and forced evictions of displaced people by Burmese authorities.
Constitutional Referendum
The SPDC announced in February 2008 that its long awaited constitutional referendum
would take place on May 10. The constitution itself was publicly released
only in April, and then under limited distribution. A new law made any “disruption”
of the referendum process potentially punishable by three years’ imprisonment.
The new constitution entrenches military rule and limits the role of independent
political parties. It empowers the commander-in-chief to appoint military officers
to a quarter of all seats in both houses of parliament, and gives the military even
broader representation in the selection of the president and two vice-presidents.
Despite the devastation of the cyclone, the referendum took place throughout
Burma on May 10, with a delayed vote on May 24, for 47 townships affected by
the storm. The referendum was carried out in an environment of severe restrictions
on access to information, repressive media laws, an almost total ban on
freedom of expression, assembly, and association, and the continuing widespread
detention of political activists. There were no independent international
observers and Burmese and foreign media could only clandestinely cover it. The
referendum was marred by voter registration irregularities, coercion and intimidation
in communities and at polling stations, and widespread government corruption
including ballot stuffing.
In late May the SPDC announced a national voter turnout of 98.12 percent, of
which 92.48 voted in favor of the constitution. Widespread international condemnation
denounced the referendum as a sham. The referendum completed the fourth step of the SPDC’s Seven Step Road Map to Democracy, with the SPDC
announcing multi-party elections for 2010.
Human Rights Defenders
Intimidation of political activists and human rights defenders increased in 2008.
The number of political prisoners rose from 1,100 in mid 2007 to over 2,150 in
late 2008. On September 23, the SPDC announced the release of 9,002 prisoners,
of which only seven were political activists, including 78 year old U Win Tin who
had been incarcerated since 1989. Days later, the SPDC arrested five members of
the National League for Democracy (NLD). On May 27, NLD leader Aung San Suu
Kyi had her house arrest order extended for another year, her sixth straight year of
confinement. Reports indicate her health is deteriorating, and the SPDC denies
her visitors or contact with the outside world.
In October and November, more than 70 political activists, monks, nuns, labor
activists, and journalists were tried in secret proceedings in prison or closed sessions
in court. Many received harsh sentences for offenses related to the 2007
demonstrations; 14 of them were sentenced to 65 years each. Members of the 88
Generation Students faced 22 charges, including contact with exiled political
groups and unlawfully publishing documents, and faced sentences of 150 years.
Four lawyers representing activists were als0 jailed for contempt of court after
they attempted to withdraw from legal representation to protest the unfair proceedings.
Journalists continued to be harassed and arrested in 2008, including Thet Zin and
Sein Wun Aung in February for their investigation into the SPDC’s brutal crackdown
against peaceful protestors. Prominent blogger Nay Phone Latt received a
20-year prison sentence in November.
Authorities arrested several prominent former political prisoners for their role in
cyclone relief activities including, on June 4, 2008, prominent comedian and dissident
Zargana, who distributed aid through his activist networks to Nargis victims.
Zargana had criticized the SPDC’s relief efforts in interviews with the foreign
media.
Child Soldiers
Burma continues widespread and systematic forced recruitment of child soldiers.
Non-state armed groups also recruit and deploy children in conflict areas.
The UN Security Council working group on children and armed conflict reviewed
Burma’s record for the first time in 2008. Despite the SPDC’s ongoing failure to
curtail use of child soldiers, it did not recommend concrete measures to spur the
SPDC to act. The Security Council’s failure—in large part due to efforts by China to
block a more principled response—was particularly glaring given its previous
pledges to seriously consider arms embargoes and other targeted measures
against parties that repeatedly recruit and use child soldiers.
Continuing Violence against Ethnic Groups
The Burmese military continues to attack civilians in ethnic conflict areas, particularly
in Karen State and Shan State. Abuses such as forced labor, sexual violence
against women and girls, extrajudicial killings, torture and beatings, and confiscation
of land and property are widespread. In 2008 army counterinsurgency tactics
and security operations for infrastructure developments displaced more than
40,000 civilians in these two areas.
There are an estimated 450,000 to half a million internally displaced people in
eastern Burma. The Burmese army and non-state armed groups extensively use
landmines, including near civilian settlements and food production sites— a clear
violation of international humanitarian law.
In Arakan State in western Burma, the Rohingya Muslim minority faces widespread
rights violations including religious persecution, forced relocation, land
seizures, and denial of citizenship and identity papers. Ethnic Chin people in
Chin State and Sagaing Division continue to face forced labor, beatings, sexual
violence, and land confiscation by the Burmese military; a famine in the region
affected over 100,000 civilians, with reports that relief efforts were hampered by
the Burmese army.
Refugees and Migrant Workers
Thousands of Burmese refugees and migrant workers continue to travel to
Bangladesh, India, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore where they face abuses
and harassment. Some 140,000 refugees remain in nine camps along the Thai-
Burma border. Over 50,000 refugees have been resettled in third countries such
as the United States, Canada, Australia, and Norway since 2004.
In July 2008, Thai military officials forcibly returned 52 ethnic Karen people,
including children, back to Burma, clearly violating the principle of non-refoulement,
and threatened further returns from other camps. In December 2007, Thai
security forces shot dead a man in Karenni Site 1 camp, and have since obstructed
the official Thai investigation into the killing. Sexual violence by Thai camp
guards against female refugees remains prevalent.
Key International Actors
The UN secretary-general’s special advisor on Burma, Ibrahim Gambari, visited
Burma twice in 2008 but made no progress in engaging the SPDC on political
reform. In his March visit, Burmese officials lectured Gambari and criticized his
attempts at impartial mediation. The UN Security Council expressed its frustration
with the slow pace of dialogue with Burma and called on Gambari to show “tangible
progress.” In August, Aung San Suu Kyi and senior generals refused to meet
with Gambari.
The UN special rapporteur on human rights in Burma, Tomas Ojeá Quintana conducted
a five-day official visit to Burma in August 2008. Quintana’s visit was
tightly managed by the SPDC; including a tour of the cyclone-affected Irrawaddy
delta, and meetings with government-screened political prisoners, Burmese officials,
pro-SPDC political parties, and civil society organizations. Quintana
expressed cautious optimism about engaging the SPDC on improving the human
rights situation.
ASEAN was a key diplomatic focal point after Cyclone Nargis, with ASEAN
Secretary General Surin Pitsuwan making frequent visits to Burma to organize
relief efforts. ASEAN’s early criticism of Burma following the 2007 crackdown was
muted as it focused on aid efforts. Indonesia lifted its ban on granting credentials to Burmese ambassadors, and Singapore continued to voice support for Burma in
international forums.
After Cyclone Nargis, the international community reacted with shock and anger
at the SPDC’s reluctance to allow international aid and aid workers into affected
areas, with the French government raising the “Responsibility to Protect” principle
and arguing for international intervention to assist victims. A European
Parliament resolution “strongly condemned” the disruption of cyclone aid,
referred to the referendum as “implausible,” and directly warned that further
blockades by the SPDC should result in a charge of crimes against humanity and
Burma’s referral to the International Criminal Court.
China, Russia, India, and Thailand continue to provide diplomatic support for the
SPDC and are major trade and investment partners. Foreign investment in
Burma’s oil and natural gas sector increased in 2008, particularly in connection
with a major offshore gas project led by a Korean consortium and a planned overland
pipeline to the Burma-China border. Sales of natural gas account for the
largest share of the SPDC’s revenue.
Countries including Australia, Canada, the European Union, Switzerland, and the
US continue to impose targeted sanctions on Burma. In July 2008 the US updated
its sanctions on Burmese leaders and close business allies by adding Burmese
military conglomerates and related companies. It also tightened its gem embargo,
making imports of Burmese rubies and jade illegal even if processed in other
countries. In August, President George Bush met with exiled Burmese dissidents
in Thailand.