Burma
Burma’s uneven reform process continued in 2013 with notable improvements
in some sectors, but serious problems continuing throughout the country. Basic
freedoms of assembly and association improved but laws were enforced inconsistently
and in several instances peaceful demonstrators still faced arrest.
Media freedoms continued to flourish in 2013, but at time of writing the government
was seeking new laws that could roll back important recent gains.
Burma released more than 200 political prisoners in amnesties in 2013, including
56 in October and 69 in November. Despite this progress, it still had an estimated
60 political detainees at time of writing. New arrests of peaceful political
activists continue to be reported.
The national parliament has proven to be a more robust venue for debate and
legislative reform than many observers predicted, with surprisingly open discussion
of issues such as land grabbing by the military, constitutional reform
that would reduce military representation, and rule of law initiatives.
Violence against Muslims
Communal violence against Muslim communities in central Burma spread during
2013, with a series of apparently coordinated attacks against Muslim communities
and property. In late March, Burmese Buddhist mobs attacked Muslim
communities in the central Burmese town of Meiktila. At least 44 people were
killed and 1,400 mostly Muslim-owned businesses and houses were destroyed.
Burmese police forces failed to intervene during much of the violence and in
most cases did not act to protect Muslim lives or property; in some instances
they actively participated in the anti-Muslim violence. More than 12,000 people
were displaced by the violence, and many remained in government-protected
displacement camps in the town at time of writing.
Similar outbreaks of violence were reported during the year in Pegu and Okkan
north of Rangoon, and in Lashio in Shan State. In October, attacks against
Kaman Muslims in southern Arakan State around the town of Thandwe killed at
least six people and destroyed nearly 100 houses. The attacks coincided with a visit to the region by President Thein Sein. Authorities arrested senior
Arakanese political party members accused of instigating the violence.
Legal proceedings against perpetrators of violence were initially asymmetrical,
with more Muslims tried and sentenced in more cases than Burman Buddhist
instigators. However, in June, 25 Buddhists involved in violence in Meiktila
were sentenced for murder and arson, in July, 6 suspects were arrested in connection
with the killing of Muslim pilgrims in 2012 that sparked violence in
Arakan State, and in September two men were sentenced to five years in prison
for arson and violence in Okkan. At time of writing, no members of the security
forces were known to have been disciplined or prosecuted for involvement in
violence.
In some cases, anti-Muslim violence and hate speech is being spread by
nationalist Buddhist monks such as U Wirathu, active proponent of the socalled
969 movement that has urged Buddhists to boycott Muslim businesses
and refrain from marrying Muslims and converting to Islam. U Wirathu has even
drafted legislation that would ban such marriages and conversions. Key political
leaders such as Aung San Suu Kyi did not publicly denounce this movement
in 2013, although in an important speech in April, President Thein Sein warned
that the rise in communal violence had the potential to derail the fragile reform
process.
During a country visit in August, the UN special rapporteur on human rights in
Burma, Tomas Ojea Quintana, was attacked in his car by Burman Buddhist
mobs in Meiktila; security forces in the vicinity failed to intervene.
Compounding their failure to adequately ensure Quintana’s safety, senior government
officials accused him of exaggerating the incident. Many in the
Burmese-language media also lambasted Quintana, a disturbing reflection of
rising Burman nationalism and backlash against international pressure to end
human rights abuses.
The condition of the displaced Rohingya Muslim minority in northern Arakan
State remained precarious in 2013, even with a considerable international
humanitarian response. At time of writing, an estimated 180,000 people, mostly
Muslims, remained in over 40 IDP camps throughout Arakan State, many living
in deplorable conditions. While more international assistance reached them
in 2013 than in 2012, serious concerns remain over restrictions on movement, lack of livelihoods, inadequate basic services, and continued threats from hostile
Arakanese. In Buthidaung and Maungdaw townships, local ordinances
reportedly prohibited Rohingya women from having more than two children;
when the policy became publicly known and met with international outrage,
national officials backtracked and claimed no such policy was in effect.
A government commission of inquiry report on the anti-Rohingya violence of
June and October 2012 in Arakan State failed to investigate cases or assign
responsibility for the violence, and made no recommendation for prosecution of
security forces involved in the violence. Human Rights Watch had found that
the attacks on Rohingya had amounted to a campaign of “ethnic cleansing”
and crimes against humanity. On several occasions in 2013, Rohingya IDPs
were abused for staging protests; in one incident in June, police shot and killed
three women protesters at an IDP camp.
The government continues to refuse to amend Burma’s draconian 1982
Citizenship Law that effectively denies citizenship to Rohingya, despite many
families having lived in Burma for generations. In July, the president ordered
the disbanding of the notoriously abusive and corrupt Na Sa Ka paramilitary
border security force, although doubts remain as to whether all personnel have
been withdrawn from Arakan State or reassigned to other agencies.
Laws on Basic Freedoms
Burma’s legislative reform process remains opaque and consultation with key
community groups uneven. Many longstanding repressive laws have not been
repealed or amended and some are still used to target activists. Several important
laws related to land rights and farmers rights were enacted in 2013, but
concerns remain that they will be insufficient to protect against mass land
grabs by the Burmese military and companies.
The Law on Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Processions was applied haphazardly
in 2013, with the authorities permitting some demonstrations and denying
permission for others. An increasing number of public protests over land issues
were reported during the year, some of which turned violent with clashes
between communities and police. Long-time activist Naw Ohn Lah was sentenced
in August to two years in prison for leading a demonstration against the
Letpadaung mine project in Monywa; 11 Arakanese protesters were sentenced in September to three months in prison for demonstrating against a Chinese
pipeline project, although all were eventually pardoned in the November
amnesty. The government permitted a major gathering on August 8 to commemorate
the 25th anniversary of the 1988 democratic uprising.
A draft Association Law proposed in July contained numerous provisions that
would have severely restricted the establishment and activities of Burmese and
international NGOs. Following coordinated pressure from Burmese civil society,
including consultations with the parliament and government and public letters
by over 500 Burmese groups, a much improved draft was released in August,
albeit still with the potential to restrict the right to freedom of association.
The media in Burma continued to flourish in 2013, even as the government
pressed forward with proposed new laws such as the draft Printers and
Publishers Act that, if passed, would significantly curtail media freedom. The
nascent Burmese Press Council drafted its own version of the law, but the government
rejected it. In June, the government banned the sale of an issue of
Time magazine with a cover story on the nationalist monk U Wirathu.
A draft telecommunications law proposed in 2013 contained numerous provisions
that could imperil basic rights. Passage was pending at time of writing.
The governmental National Human Rights Commission continues to receive
numerous reports of alleged human rights violations but it has not adequately
investigated the reports. At time of writing, it had received approximately 4,000
cases since it was established in 2011. Chairman Win Mra said in early 2013
that the commission would not investigate any alleged Burmese army abuses in
Kachin State. A draft law to provide a stronger legislative basis for the commission’s
independence is pending.
Ethnic Conflict and Displacement
Although the government has concluded ceasefire agreements with about 15
non-state armed groups in Burma, serious human rights violations continued in
ethnic areas in 2013.
The government reached a shaky preliminary ceasefire agreement with the
Kachin Independence Army in March after nearly two years of fighting and displacement
of over 80,000 Kachin civilians. However, reports of Burmese army abuses against civilians persist. Humanitarian access to IDPs has been uneven
and insufficient, with some local Burmese army commanders denying access
that national-level authorities previously granted. No major returns of displaced
civilians had been reported at time of writing.
Conflict spread to parts of northern Shan State involving Kachin, Shan, and
Palaung rebels, with reports of civilian displacement and attacks against civilians
by both government and opposition forces.
At time of writing, an estimated 400,000 internally displaced persons remained
in eastern Burma, and another 130,000 refugees live in nine camps along the
Thailand-Burma border. Thailand, Burma, and the UN refugee agency have
agreed that conditions for the refugees’ return in safety and dignity are not yet
present.
Key International Actors
Most sanctions on Burma were lifted in 2013, including all relevant provisions
of the EU Common Position except its arms embargo. The United States suspended
many of its sanctions, but maintained bans on the importation of jade
and rubies as well as targeted financial sanctions on certain individuals implicated
in past human rights abuses. New human rights reporting requirements
for US investments in Burma took effect in May.
Burma continued its re-engagement with the international community by
expanding programs with the World Bank and Asian Development Bank, and
negotiating marked increases in humanitarian and development assistance
from the US, EU, UK, Australia, and Japan. Foreign investment increased, mainly
in the extractive and resource sectors.
President Thein Sein made visits to the United States, Europe, and Australia in
2013, pledging to continue the reform process. However, despite his public
pledges in November 2012 that the government would permit the establishment
of an office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burma, the initiative
was repeatedly blocked by the Burmese government.
Burma continued desultory cooperation with the UN on a child soldier action
plan signed in 2012. Progress on demobilizing child soldiers and ending forced recruitment was slowed by government denials of access to military sites and
to government-controlled border militias.
The US announced tentative re-establishment of defense links with the
Burmese military, inviting Burmese officers in February to observe the Thailandbased
multilateral Cobra Gold exercises, and in July sending US military experts
to begin basic instruction in human rights norms. The chief of the UK defense
forces visited Burma in June and the governments later announced that Britain
would invite 30 Burmese military officers to attend a major defense conference
in the UK. The year also saw UK and Australian announcements that they would
station defense attachés in Burma for the first time since 1988, and the initiation
of a European Union police reform program in the country.
The US government included Burma in its list of four countries banned from
receiving certain forms of US military assistance in 2014 under the Child
Soldiers Prevention Act. Affected programs include International Military
Education and Training (IMET), which helps train foreign militaries, and Foreign
Military Financing (FMF), which funds the sale of US military material and
services.
In June, the UN Human Rights Council urged the Burmese government to take
immediate steps to stop violence and human rights violations committed in the
name of religion. It called on the government to take all necessary measures to
ensure accountability for such abuses and expedite the establishment of a UN
human rights office in Burma.