Burma
Burma remains one of the most repressive countries in Asia, despite
promises for political reform and national reconciliation by its authoritarian
military government, the State Peace and Development Council
(SPDC). The SPDC restricts the basic rights and freedoms of all
Burmese. It continues to attack and harass democratic leader Aung San
Suu Kyi, still under house arrest at this writing, and the political movement
she represents. It also continues to use internationally outlawed
tactics in ongoing conflicts with ethnic minority rebel groups.
Burma has more child soldiers than any other country in the world, and
its forces have used extrajudicial execution, rape, torture, forced relocation
of villages, and forced labor in campaigns against rebel groups.
Ethnic minority forces have also committed abuses, though not on the
scale committed by government forces.
The abrupt removal of Prime Minister General Khin Nyunt, viewed as
a relative moderate, on October 19, 2004, has reinforced hardline elements
of the SPDC. Khin Nyunt’s removal damaged immediate
prospects for a ceasefire in the decades-old struggle with the Karen ethnic
minority and has been followed by increasingly hostile rhetoric from
SPDC leaders directed at Suu Kyi and democracy activists.
Thousands of Burmese citizens, most of them from the embattled ethnic
minorities, have fled to neighboring countries, in particular
Thailand, where they face difficult circumstances, or live precariously as
internally displaced people.
Depayin Incident
On May 30, 2003, in Depayin in northern Burma, Suu Kyi’s traveling
party was attacked by a group of armed men associated with the Union
Solidarity Development Association (USDA), a mobilization organization created by the SPDC. According to eyewitnesses, police were present
at the time of the incident, as were common criminals who had
been released from prison for the purpose of taking part in the attack.
The Burmese government has admitted to four deaths in the incident,
while eyewitnesses have reported far more. As the government continues
to prohibit any independent investigation into the incident, the
number of casualties remains unknown.
Suu Kyi, as well as scores of members and supporters of the National
League for Democracy (NLD) Party, were detained following the
attack. They were held under article 10a of the 1975 State Protection
Act, which permits the authorities to detain anyone considered a threat
to state security for up to five years without charge or trial. U.N.
sources reported that ninety-one of the NLD and pro-democracy
detainees, never charged with any crime, were released within two
months. Suu Kyi remained under house arrest at this writing.
An Aborted Attempt at Reform
In August 2003, former Prime Minister General Khin Nyunt launched
what he called a “road map” for a transition to democracy in Burma.
The SPDC pledged to eventually hold elections as part of a transition
to a democratic government. The first step was the convening of a
national constitutional convention, a process that had been stalled since
1996 after the NLD and other pro-democracy parties walked out, citing
the SPDC’s domination and manipulation of the proceedings.
In May 2004, the National Convention began work. But the SPDC
refused to release Suu Kyi and senior members of the NLD, as well as
to reopen all NLD offices. As a result, the NLD and the Shan
Nationalities League for Democracy (SNLD) and affiliated parties in
the United Nationalities Alliance (UNA) decided not to take part in the
National Convention. Without the participation of the NLD and other
political parties that won the majority of seats in the 1990 elections, the National Convention lost any serious legitimacy and genuine prospects
for instituting meaningful reform.
The sudden ouster of General Khin Nyunt in October 2004 further
diminished hopes for reform. The ousted prime minister and military
intelligence chief had been willing to engage with Aung San Suu Kyi to
break the political stalemate. Lieutenant General Soe Win, who was
named Burma’s prime minister after the dismissal, has stated publicly
that “the SPDC not only will not talk to the NLD but also would never
hand over power to the NLD.”
Political Prisoners
In 2002, the International Committee of the Red Cross reported there
were approximately 3,500 “security detainees” in Burma. Of these, at
least 1,300 were believed to be political prisoners, including elected
members of parliament. Most, if not all, were arbitrarily arrested for
exercising their freedoms of opinion and expression. The right to a fair
trial, including the right to access a lawyer, continues to be denied to
most detainees, in particular those accused of political dissent. Torture
and mistreatment of detainees is common, especially during pre-trial
detention in military intelligence interrogation centers. Authorities continue
to extend the detention of political prisoners who have served
their prison sentences by placing them under “administrative detention.”
This practice is used even with elderly and infirm prisoners.
Child Soldiers
On June 4, 2004, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the
Child issued its concluding observations on Burma’s compliance with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Committee identified a
range of concerns, including the continued recruitment and use of child
soldiers by Burma’s armed forces.
Burma has more child soldiers than any other country in the world,
accounting for approximately one-fourth of the 300,000 children currently
believed to be participating in armed conflicts across the globe. A
2002 investigation by Human Rights Watch found that as many as seventy
thousand children under the age of eighteen may be serving in
Burma’s national armed forces. Burma is believed to have an estimated
350,000 soldiers in its national army. Armed opposition groups in
Burma also recruit child soldiers, although on a much smaller scale.
Human Rights Watch documented the use of child soldiers by nineteen
different opposition groups.
While the government still denies such systematic recruitment, it has
for the first time acknowledged child soldiers in the army as an issue.
Largely as a result of an October 2003 report to the United Nations
Security Council by Secretary General Kofi Annan, the government
formed a high-level “Committee to Prevent the Recruitment of Child
Soldiers,” and announced that a task force was being formed to ensure
inspections for underage recruitment.
Government forces have released small numbers of child soldiers. In
these cases, the parents had reported the recruitment to the ICRC or
the International Labor Organization, requesting their intervention.
For instance, four boys recruited in March of 2004 were released,
apparently because of the ICRC’s involvement.
Violations against Ethnic Minorities, Particularly Women
The Burmese army continues to commit gross abuses against civilians,
particularly members of ethnic minorities associated with various resistance
movements in the country. In its campaigns against ethnic minorities,
the army engages in summary executions, torture, and rape of
women and girls.
The SPDC’s eight-year campaign of forcibly relocating minority ethnic
groups has destroyed nearly three thousand villages, particularly in areas
of active ethnic insurgency and areas targeted for economic development.
Hundreds of thousands of ethnic minorities have been forced
into as many as 200 internment centers, and those who have passed
through these sites report forced labor, extrajudicial executions, rape,
and torture committed by government troops.
There are an estimated one million internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in Burma, and several hundred thousand Burmese refugees in
Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, and especially neighboring Thailand. The
Burmese government has refused international access to areas of ongoing
conflict, cutting off humanitarian assistance to IDPs in violation of
international humanitarian law.
In February 2004, the Human Rights Watch report Out of Sight, Out of
Mind detailed the increasingly harsh policies of the Thai government
against Burmese refugees and asylum seekers. Many such individuals are
returned to Burma in violation of the internationally recognized principle
of non-refoulement.
Local and international nongovernmental organizations have documented
widespread and continuing sexual violence against ethnic
women by the military in Burma, including new reports by the
Women’s League of Burma (WLB) and the Karen Women’s
Organization (KWO) in 2004. The KWO documented 125 cases of
sexual violence committed by the SPDC’s military troops in Karen State
from 1988 until 2004, half committed by high-ranking military officers.
According to this report, 40 percent of the cases were gang rapes. In 28
percent, women were raped and then killed. The WLB reported sexual
violence in 2003 and 2004 in all provinces with significant ethnic
minority populations as well as in central Burma. Abuses included rape
of women and girls, gang rapes, murder, sexual slavery, and forced marriage.
The report implicated senior and junior military personnel as being perpetrators or complicit in the majority of documented rapes.
The SPDC has denied the findings of these reports, and women’s
organizations have reported intimidation of survivors and witnesses.
Key International Actors
The attack and arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi and her supporters in May
2003 drew widespread international condemnation. Despite repeated
visits to the country, the U.N. secretary-general’s special envoy to
Burma, Razali Ismail, faced resistance from the SPDC in his efforts to
prompt renewed political dialogue with the NLD and national reconciliation.
Various U.N. actors, including Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, the U.N.
special rapporteur on human rights in Burma, expressed deep concern
over the absence of major opposition parties from the National
Convention.
In July 2003, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which Burma joined in 1997 and is scheduled to chair in 2005, issued an
unprecedented rebuke of a member state when it called on the SPDC to
release Aung San Suu Kyi. Japan, Burma’s largest single aid donor, suspended
its development aid to Burma in the wake of the May 2003
attack.
This strong regional position has, however, changed rapidly. Both
ASEAN and Japan have since maneuvered actively to convince the
European Union to accept Burma as a new member of the Asia-Europe
Meeting (ASEM). China and Thailand continue to be the SPDC’s closest
allies, politically and economically, although both countries have
expressed some concern over the implications of General Khin Nyunt’s
dismissal.
The United States maintains economic sanctions on Burma. The
Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act of 2003 bans all imports from
Burma and reaffirms United States recognition of the NLD as the legitimate government. An accompanying executive order calls for the freezing
of assets of senior SPDC officials.