Burma
Burma’s human rights situation remained dire in 2010, even after the country’s
first multiparty elections in 20 years. The ruling State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC) continued to systematically deny all basic freedoms to citizens
and sharply constrained political participation. The rights of freedom of expression,
association, assembly, and media remained severely curtailed. The government
took no significant steps during the year to release more than 2,100 political
prisoners being held, except for the November 13 release of Nobel Peace Prize
winner Aung San Suu Kyi.
Calls mounted for an international commission of inquiry into serious violations
of international law perpetrated by all parties to Burma’s ongoing civil conflict.
The Burmese military was responsible for ongoing abuses against civilians in conflict
areas, including widespread forced labor, extrajudicial killings, and forced
expulsion of the population. Non-state armed ethnic groups have also been
implicated in serious abuses such as recruitment of child soldiers, execution of
Burmese prisoners of war, and indiscriminate use of anti-personnel landmines
around civilian areas.
The November 2010 Elections
In November Burma held long-planned elections. These took place in an atmosphere
of intimidation, coercion, and widespread corruption, with laws and regulations
strongly favoring military controlled parties.
In March the SPDC formed the Union Electoral Commission (UEC) and released a
series of laws governing the conduct of the elections, which included provisions
barring any person serving a prison sentence from party membership. This effectively
forced the National League for Democracy (NLD) to decide whether to dismiss
Aung San Suu Kyi–who was under house arrest–and more than 430 of its
jailed members, in order to re-register with the UEC. The NLD ultimately did not
re-register, and the UEC declared it illegal.
Other provisions tightly regulated the campaigning of parties and candidates,
warned against public disturbances, and expressly outlawed public criticism of the constitution and the military. The government declared illegal a boycott campaign
that some NLD members organized, and warned the public that election
boycotters could face one year in prison.
In April Prime Minister Lt. Gen. Thein Sein and 27 SPDC and government cabinet
ministers resigned their military commissions and formed the Union Solidarity
and Development Party (USDP). In August the USDP absorbed all the assets and
infrastructure of the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA), a
mass-based social welfare movement formed by the military in 1993 with more
than 26 million nominal members. The military conducted its biggest reshuffle in
years, with scores of senior officers resigning in order to run as USDP candidates.
The USDP was the only party that fielded candidates for virtually all 1,168 seats
open for contest in the national bicameral assembly and 14 regional assemblies.
The remaining seats, out of a total of 1,551, are reserved for serving military officers
as stipulated in the 2008 constitution.
By November 37 parties had registered and were contesting the elections. Many
were small, ethnic-based parties only contesting a limited number of regional
seats. Voting was not conducted in parts of 32 townships in ethnic border areas
where the government alleged there was armed conflict and instability.
Widespread irregularities, such as advance bulk voting by local officials, were
reported in some regional areas.
The USDP won more than 80 percent of the seats in the bicameral national parliament.
Results were mixed in the 14 state and regional assemblies, with some ethnic
parties gaining half the number of seats, particularly in Arakan and Shan
states. Burman-dominated regions had majority USDP candidates elected. Many
opposition parties lodged official complaints with the electoral commission citing
widespread corruption, particularly by USDP members and officials.
Ethnic Conflict, Displacement, and Refugees
The Burmese military continues to direct attacks on civilians in ethnic areas, particularly
in Karen, Karenni, and Shan states of eastern Burma, and parts of western
Burma in Chin and Arakan states. Tensions increased with ethnic armed
groups that had agreed to ceasefires with the government, such as the Kachin Independence Organization (KIO) and the United Wa State Army (UWSA), over the
government’s plans to transform these militias into Border Guard Force units
under direct Burmese army control. By the end of 2010 only five militias had
agreed, leaving large groups such as the Kachin, Wa, and Mon facing increased
military pressure to transform, partly demobilize, and surrender territory. As a
result of increased tensions, parts of 32 townships in Burma– including most of
the Wa area on China’s border–did not conduct polls in November. There are
widespread fears of resumed conflict in 2011 in ethnic areas that have experienced
uneasy peace for the past two decades.
Abuses by the Burmese military against civilians in violation of international
humanitarian law include the widespread use of anti-personnel landmines, sexual
violence against women and girls, extrajudicial killings, forced labor, torture,
beatings, targeting of food production and means of civilian livelihood, and confiscation
of land and property. All parties to Burma’s conflicts continue to actively
recruit and use child soldiers, with the Tatmadaw (state military) continuing to
use them even as the SPDC cooperates with the International Labour
Organization (ILO) on demobilizing child soldiers.
Approximately half-a-million people are internally displaced due to conflict in
eastern Burma, with more than 140,000 refugees in camps in Thailand. In
Bangladesh, there are 28,000 Rohingya refugees in official camps, and another
200,000 live in makeshift settlements or mixed in with the local population
around border areas. Millions of Burmese migrant workers, refugees, and asylum
seekers live in Thailand, India, Bangladesh, Malaysia, and Singapore.
Humanitarian Assistance
Burma’s humanitarian situation did not markedly improve in 2010 despite
attempts by international relief agencies and Burmese civil society to expand
operating space and programs in the country.
The Tripartite Core Group (TCG), a multilateral mechanism formed by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the SPDC, and the United
Nations in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis in May 2008, concluded its operations
in July. The UN continued to slowly expand its humanitarian initiative in Northern Arakan State to assist Rohingya, who have been denied citizenship and suffered
abuses by state and paramilitary forces for decades, including restrictions on
movement, livelihoods, and freedom of religion. Abuses against Rohingya
women, including restrictions on the right to marry and access maternal health,
are particularly grave. Humanitarian space throughout Burma constricted markedly
ahead of the November elections, with international humanitarian organizations
being denied work visas for staff, travel permits, and permission to expand
programs in some areas.
Calls for Accountability
In his report to the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) in March, Tomás Ojea
Quintana, the special rapporteur for the situation of human rights in Myanmar,
outlined a “pattern of gross and systematic violation of human rights which has
been in place for many years.” He concluded that “UN institutions may consider
the possibility to establish a commission of inquiry (CoI) with a specific fact finding
mandate to address the question of international crimes.” At this writing more
than 13 countries publically supported the formation of a CoI, including the
United States, the United Kingdom and several other European countries,
Australia, and Canada. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has not publically commented
on Quintana’s call.
During a general debate at the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva on September
17, Burmese ambassador U Wunna Maung Lwin denied the situation in Burma
warranted an inquiry, saying there were “no crimes against humanity in
Myanmar... (w)ith regard to the issue of impunity, any member of the military who
breached national law was subject to legal punishments...there was no need to
conduct investigations in Myanmar since there were no human rights violations
there.”
Quintana’s report to the UN General Assembly in October elaborated on the possible
parameters of a CoI, possible areas of investigation, and time frames. In late
October US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she wanted to “underscore the
American commitment to seek accountability for the human rights violations that
have occurred in Burma by working to establish an international Commission of
Inquiry.” China has actively tried to block the proposal. The European Union, which drafted the annual Burma resolution, did not pursue calls for the CoI to be
included in the resolution in the UN General Assembly.
Key International Actors
UN Secretary-General Ban expressed “disappointment” and “frustration” with the
SPDC’s lack of cooperation in responding to the UN’s long-standing call for
release of political prisoners; a free, fair, and inclusive election; and the start of a
genuine process of national reconciliation. Despite requests to the SPDC, Ban’s
special advisor on Burma, Vijay Nambiar, was not permitted to visit Burma in
2010.
Tomás Ojea Quintana visited Burma in February, but the SPDC denied him access
for further visits after his report to the HRC.
China continued to be Burma’s most supportive international ally, routinely blocking
criticism of Burma’s human rights record in multilateral forums. Chinese
Premier Wen Jiabao conducted a state visit to Burma on June 2, and Burmese
President Than Shwe visited China from September 7-11. Than Shwe paid his second
state visit to India in late July, where he signed numerous bilateral investment
deals with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. India failed to voice criticism or
concerns over Burma’s elections.
US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Kurt Campbell
visited Burma in May and met senior military leaders and Aung San Suu Kyi as
part of the Obama administration’s “pragmatic engagement” policy with the
SPDC. Campbell expressed his “profound disappointment” at the SPDC’s lack of
reciprocity, and the US government was consistently critical of the election
process. US Senator Jim Webb, who had been conducting private visits to Burma
to talk with senior SPDC leaders, postponed a trip in June due to media allegations
over Burma’s suspected nuclear program and cooperation with North Korea.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) reduced its previous criticism of
Burma in 2010. In a statement, Vietnam, the current chair of the association, stated
that ASEAN emphasized the importance of “national reconciliation in
Myanmar” and “holding general elections in a free and fair manner with the participation
of all interested parties,” which it said contributed to the country’s stability and development. However, Indonesia and the Philippines criticized the
lack of reform in Burma, particularly the elections which Philippines President
Benigno Aquino III called a “farce.”
Burma’s neighbors China, India, and Thailand, continued to invest and trade
extensively, especially in the extractive and hydro-electric energy industries.
China is building two energy pipelines from western Burma to Yunnan, and a
series of massive hydro-electric dams on the Irrawaddy River in upper Burma.
Sales of natural gas to Thailand still account for the largest share of the SPDC’s
foreign exchange earnings, which will increase markedly when the Chinese gas
pipeline project is completed in 2013.
Russia and North Korea continued to sell arms to the SPDC, despite US concerns
that North Korean sales could breach UN Security Council Resolution 1874, which
imposes curbs on weapons proliferation.