Bangladesh
Bangladesh’s overall human rights situation worsened in 2012, as the government
narrowed political and civil society space, continued to shield abusive
security forces from accountability, and flatly ignored calls by Human Rights
Watch to reform laws and procedures in flawed war crimes and mutiny trials.
Civil society and human rights defenders reported increased governmental pressure
and monitoring.
The security forces’ practice of disguising extrajudicial killings as “crossfire”
killings or legitimate confrontations between alleged criminals and security
forces continued, as did disappearances of opposition members and political
activists. A prominent labor activist was kidnapped and killed, and other labor
activists threatened.
After June 2012 sectarian violence in Arakan state in neighboring Burma, the
government responded to an influx of Rohingya refugees by pushing back boatloads
of refugees and insisting that it had no obligation to provide them sanctuary.
The government curtailed the activities of nongovernmental organizations
operating in pre-existing Rohingya refugee camps in Cox’s Bazaar in Chittagong.
Flawed trials against those accused of war crimes in the 1971 war for independence
continued, as did mass and unfair trials of the Bangladesh Rifles (now
Bangladesh Border Guards) accused of mutineering in 2009.
The government continued to demand that Indian border guards stop killing
Bangladeshi nationals who cross into India for smuggling or other crimes.
Extrajudicial Killings, Torture, and Impunity
Although there was a decline in overall numbers of civilians killed by security
forces in 2012, the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB)—a force comprised of military
and police—continued to carry out extrajudicial killings. The ruling political
party, the Awami League, pledged to bring the RAB under control when it
assumed office, but abuses persisted.
The government continued to persecute 17-year-old boy, Limon Hossain, whom
RAB officials shot and maimed in March 2011. Although the government initially
said that Hossain was injured in a botched RAB operation, it quickly retracted
the statement and filed criminal charges against him. In August 2012, an
alleged RAB informant attacked and beat Hossain in a street in his hometown.
Instead of protecting Hossain, the government filed further charges against him,
and accused him and his relatives of murdering a bystander.
The authorities failed to investigate and prosecute the RAB or other security
forces responsible for extrajudicial killings or torture. While the RAB set up an
internal investigative unit with technical assistance from the United States, no
RAB member has ever faced criminal prosecution for a human rights violation.
In April, Elias Ali, secretary of the Sylhet Division of the opposition Bangladesh
Nationalist Party (BNP), disappeared without trace. Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina called on the police to investigate Ali’s disappearance, but undermined
the effort by claiming that Ali and his driver were “hiding” at his party’s orders
to allow the opposition to blame the government. Human rights groups reported
more than 20 disappearances in 2012.
Labor Rights
Aminul Islam, a prominent labor rights activist, was found tortured and killed in
April 2012. In response to an intense outcry, the Home Ministry set up a highlevel
commission to investigate his killing, but there had been no progress in
the investigation at this writing. While there was no suggestion of political
responsibility, Prime Minister Hasina made public statements downplaying the
significance of the killing.
Workers in Bangladesh faced poor working conditions, low wages, and excessive
hours. Government repression and collusion with factory owners prevented
them from organizing effectively.
The government continued legal action against the Bangladesh Center for
Worker Solidarity (BCWS), an NGO that works closely with trade unions. Over a
dozen labor rights leaders, including BCWS leaders, faced criminal charges on a
variety of spurious grounds, including under the Explosive Substances Ordinance Act, which carries the death penalty as a sentence. Labor rights
groups faced registration problems that affected their funding and operations.
Hazaribagh Tanneries
The Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka, the capital, is considered to be one of
the world’s most polluted urban sites; some 150 leather tanneries discharge 21
thousand cubic meters of untreated effluent into the nearby Buriganga River
each day. Local residents complain of fevers, skin diseases, and respiratory and
stomach illnesses due to contamination, while tannery workers suffer from skin
and respiratory diseases due to exposure to tanning chemicals, and limb amputations
caused by accidents in dangerous tannery machinery. In some tanneries,
children as young as 11 work directly with chemicals, operate heavy tannery
machinery, or slice hides with razor blades.
In 2001, Bangladesh’s High Court ordered the government to ensure that the
tanneries installed adequate waste treatment facilities. The government ignored
that ruling. Officials from the Department of Environment and the Department of
Labour confirmed that the government does not enforce labor and environmental
laws in Hazaribagh, which exports most of its leather to China, South Korea,
Japan, Italy, Germany, Spain, and the United States.
Restrictions on Civil Society and Political Opposition
The government was increasingly hostile in 2012 to civil society groups.
Following the July 2012 publication of a Human Rights Watch report on the 2009
Bangladesh Rifles mutiny, Bangladeshi officials threatened action against
domestic rights groups who had helped conduct the research.
Of particular concern is a draft law aimed at regulating foreign donations to
Bangladeshi NGOs. Many NGOs, such as BCWS or Odhikar, had already been
facing years of delays in getting critical foreign funds released for their projects.
The bill appeared aimed at severing funds for organizations engaged in publicly
criticizing the government. In August 2012, the government announced plans to
establish a new commission charged solely with regulating NGO activities, in addition to the NGO Affairs Bureau that already exists in the prime minister’s
office.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
The government’s response to the influx of Rohingya refugees fleeing sectarian
violence in Arakan state, Burma, exposed its failure to respect the United
Nations Refugee Convention. Bangladesh pushed Rohingyas back at the border,
regardless of the risk they faced when they return to Burma, and blocked critical
humanitarian assistance.
The government suspended any third-country resettlement of the Rohingya
refugees, arguing it would encourage other Rohingya in Burma to seek refuge in
Bangladesh. Government officials labeled Rohingya “intruders” and “criminals,”
and blamed them for destroying Buddhist temples in mass riots in
October, without offering evidence to prove they were responsible.
International Crimes Tribunal and Bangladesh Rifles Mutiny
Trials against those accused of war crimes during the 1971 war of independence
continued, despite calls by the US war crimes ambassador, Stephen Rapp, and
several international groups to amend the International Crimes Tribunal Act (ICT
Act) to ensure it complied with international fair trial standards.
The trial chamber allowed several prosecution witnesses statements as evidence,
without any live testimony being heard. While the prosecution claimed
the witnesses were unavailable, the defense produced safe house logbooks
that showed they were available at the time when they were meant to appear in
court. However, the tribunal rejected the defense’s claims. In the first trial
against the accused Delwar Hossain Sayedee, defense lawyers claimed that
they could not produce their witnesses due to intimidation and threats against
them by the prosecution. The prosecution denied the claims.
Mass military trials against the 6,000 soldiers of the Bangladesh Rifles (since
renamed Bangladesh Border Guards) continued, with nearly every accused soldier
being found guilty. A mass trial in a civilian court of over 800 soldiers continued in 2012. In addition to the allegations of torture, most of the accused did
not have proper access to lawyers and were often unaware of the charges
against them. The government rejected Human Rights Watch’s concerns—published
in a July 2012 report—concerning these mass trials, which involved as
many as 800 accused being tried at one time, in one courtroom. Instead, the
government mounted a public relations campaign that denounced Human
Rights Watch and local groups that had helped to research the report.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
While Bangladesh has a strong set of laws and judicial guidelines to tackle violence
against women, implementation remains poor. Violence against women
including rape, dowry-related assaults, and other forms of domestic violence,
acid attacks, and illegal punishments in the name of fatwas or religious decrees
and sexual harassment continue.
Bangladesh reported the highest prevalence of child marriages in the world.
Archaic and discriminatory family laws for Muslims, Hindus, and Christians, continued
to impoverish many women when they separate from, or divorce spouses,
and trap them in abusive marriages for fear of destitution. The Law
Commission of Bangladesh researched and recommended reforms to these laws
in 2012.
International Community
The international community continued to press the government to respect civil
and political rights in the face of increased restrictions on political opposition
groups and civil society. The donor community was particularly vocal in calling
for swift and meaningful investigations into the murder of Aminul Islam and the
disappearance of Elias Ali, as well as calling on the government to give
Rohingya refugees sanctuary. The government often responded by suggesting
that critics were part of a conspiracy against it.
Under persistent pressure from Bangladesh, Indian authorities committed to
end all unlawful killings at their shared border.
In June, the World Bank announced that it was withdrawing its US$1.2 billion
credit assistance for building the Padma Multipurpose Bridge across the Padma
River due to evidence of serious corruption by senior government officials. In
September, the government agreed to put in place conditions that the World
Bank had demanded when the deal was suspended, including placing all public
officials suspected of involvement in the corruption scheme on leave from government
employment, appointing a special inquiry and prosecution team, and
granting an external international expert body access to investigate the corruption
charges and advise the bank. When the government announced in
September 2012 that the Padma Bridge deal was back on track, the World Bank
issued a public rejoinder stating that the project would resume only once all its
conditions had been fully and unconditionally fulfilled.
of the state’s 17 townships in October, including in several townships that did
not experience violence in June, resulting in an unknown number of deaths and
injuries, the razing of entire Muslim villages, and the displacement of an additional
35,000 persons. Many of the displaced fled to areas surrounding Sittwe,
where they also experienced abuses, such as beatings by state security forces.
Despite serious ongoing abuses, foreign governments—including the United
States and the United Kingdom—expressed unprecedented optimism about
political reforms and rapidly eased or lifted sanctions against Burma, while still
condemning the abuses and violence.
Limited Political Change and Ongoing Abuses
Burma’s national parliament and 14 regional and state assemblies completed a
first full year in operation in 2012 since the formal end of military rule. Former
military generals hold most senior ministerial portfolios and serving generals
are constitutionally guaranteed the posts of ministers of defense, home affairs,
and border affairs security. Many former military officers hold important positions
in the ruling military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party.
Two new laws passed in 2012 related to land use fail to adequately protect farmers’
rights. A new law on peaceful assembly—signed in December 2011 and
hailed as a reform by Western governments—fails to meet international standards,
providing for imprisonment for permit violations, and requiring that
protest slogans be pre-approved.
Thirteen activists in Rangoon faced charges for failing to get permission for a
demonstration held peacefully in September to oppose the armed conflict in
Kachin State. Other laws that have been used to imprison peaceful activists,
lawyers, and journalists remain on the books, including, among others, the
Unlawful Associations Act, the Electronics Act, the State Protection Act, and the
Emergency Provisions Act.
Media freedoms improved in 2012 but remain highly restricted. In August, the
government abolished pre-publication censorship that had been in place nearly
50 years but retained 16 guidelines restricting publication of articles critical of
the government or related to corruption, illicit drugs, forced labor, and child soldiers. Editors continue to self-censor out of concern for arrest and hesitate to
publish stories regarding government abuses.
The National Human Rights Commission, created in September 2011, continued
to disappoint in 2012. The commission exists by executive order and lacks independence
from the government, contrary to the Paris Principles—minimum standards
endorsed by the UN on the functioning of national human rights commissions.
Statements from Burma’s commission on Kachin and Arakan States failed
to mention any abuses by the state security forces, or government-imposed
restrictions on delivering humanitarian aid to tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons (IDPs).
After spending a total of 15 years under house arrest since 1989, and otherwise
facing travel restrictions, Aung San Suu Kyi’s right to travel domestically and
internationally was restored, and she traveled to five European countries in
June, including Oslo to accept her 1991 Nobel Peace Prize. In September she
travelled to the US where she accepted the Congressional Gold Medal in recognition
of her non-violent struggle for democracy and human rights, awarded in
2008 while she was under house arrest
However, other former political prisoners continue to face persecution, including
restrictions on travel and education. The Ministry of Home Affairs refused to
issue passports to many former political prisoners, including democracy and
human rights activists, public interest lawyers, and journalists, preventing them
from traveling abroad.
While parliament in 2012 appointed a commission to investigate land confiscation,
the practice continues throughout the country. Farmers lose their land to
private and state interests and in some cases are effectively forced to work as
day laborers on their own land. Numerous disputes about land confiscations
under the prior military juntas remain largely unresolved.
Forced labor continued in various parts of the country despite the government’s
commitment to end the practice by 2015 in an action plan agreed to with the
International Labour Organization (ILO). The army continued to have child soldiers
in its ranks, but in June, signed an action plan with the United Nations to
halt further recruitment of children and demobilize and reintegrate those already in the army within 18 months. Several non-state armed groups continue
to use and recruit child soldiers and the government continues to prevent UN
agencies from accessing ethnic areas controlled by non-state armed groups to
focus on demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers.
Ethnic Conflict and Displacement
Fighting slowed between government forces and most ethnic armed groups in
eastern Burma as negotiations on tenuous ceasefires continued. In northern
Burma, however, fighting continued between the Burmese armed forces and the
KIA.
The Burmese military continues to engage in extrajudicial killings, attacks on
civilians, forced labor, torture, pillage, and use of antipersonnel landmines.
Sexual violence against women and girls remains a serious problem, and perpetrators
are rarely brought to justice. The KIA and some other ethnic armed
groups have also committed serious abuses, such as using child soldiers and
antipersonnel landmines.
Internally displaced Kachin swelled to an estimated 90,000 in 2012, and the
government continued to prevent international nongovernmental organizations
and UN agencies access to IDP camps in KIA-held territory to provide humanitarian
assistance. Kachin fleeing to China to escape violence and persecution were
not welcome. Several thousand Kachin refugees temporarily in Yunnan province
in southwest China lacked adequate aid and protection. In August, China forced
back more than 4,000 Kachin to conflict zones in northern Burma.
More than 550,000 people remain internally displaced in Burma, including
400,000 due to decades of conflict in eastern Burma. There are an additional
140,000 refugees in camps in Thailand and several million Burmese migrant
workers and unrecognized asylum seekers who suffer due to inadequate and ad
hoc Thai policies causing refugees to be exploited and unnecessarily detained
and deported.
Some 30,000 ethnic Rohingya refugees live in an official camp in Bangladesh
and another 200,000 live in makeshift settlements or surrounding areas.
Bangladeshi authorities ordered three international aid agencies to close humanitarian operations for Rohingya refugee camps and pushed back thousands
of Rohingya asylum seekers to Burma in 2012.
Sectarian Violence and Ensuing Abuses
Burmese security forces committed killings, rape, and mass arrests against
Rohingya Muslims after failing to protect both them and Arakanese Buddhists
during deadly sectarian violence in western Burma in June 2012. Over 100,000
people were displaced by widespread abuses and arson. State security forces
failed to intervene to stop the sectarian violence at key moments, including the
massacre of 10 Muslim travelers in Toungop that was one of several events that
precipitated the outbreak. State media published incendiary anti-Rohingya and
anti-Muslim accounts of the events, fueling discrimination and hate speech in
print media and online across the country.
Violence erupted again in late October in 9 of the state’s 17 townships, with
coordinated violence and arson attacks by Arakanese against Rohingya and
Kaman Muslims—a government-recognized nationality group, unlike the
Rohingya. In some cases violence was carried out with the support and direct
involvement of state security forces and local officials, including killings, beatings,
and burning of Muslim villages, displacing an additional 35,000 Rohingya
and non-Rohingya Muslims.
Government restrictions on humanitarian access to the Rohingya community
have left tens of thousands in dire need of food, adequate shelter, and medical
care. The authorities indefinitely suspended nearly all pre-crisis humanitarian
aid programs, affecting hundreds of thousands more Rohingya who were otherwise
unaffected by the violence and abuse.
Local security forces detained hundreds of Rohingya men and boys—primarily in
northern Arakan State—and held them incommunicado without basic due
process rights. UN and international NGO staff were among the arrested and
charged. Many remain detained at this writing.
The Rohingya number approximately one million in Burma and were effectively
stripped of their citizenship in 1982 through the discriminatory Citizenship Law.
There has been little political will to repeal the law due to widespread prejudice against Rohingya, including by prominent pro-democracy figures. The government
has long restricted their rights to freedom of movement, education, and
employment.
President Thein Sein suggested in July that the Rohingya be expelled from
Burma to “third countries” or to camps overseen by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). He later appointed a 27-member commission
to investigate the violence in Arakan State and make recommendations,
but failed to include a Rohingya representative on the panel.
Key International Actors
In 2012, foreign governments expressed unprecedented optimism about
Burma’s political changes, despite evidence of ongoing human rights abuses. In
April, the European Union suspended all of its sanctions for one year, enabling
investment by European companies and lifting travel and visa bans on nearly
500 people, but retained an arms embargo.
In July, the United States eased sanctions to allow American companies to
invest in all sectors of Burma’s economy, including the controversial and
opaque oil and gas sector. The US maintained targeted sanctions against some
Burmese military officers and companies they control, and appointed its first
ambassador to Burma in 22 years.
Tomas Ojea Quintana, the UN special rapporteur on Burma, conducted his sixth
visit in late July and early August, expressing concern over alleged abuses in
Arakan State and calling for a credible investigation and a review of the 1982
Citizenship Law, which he said discriminates against Rohingya. He also voiced
concern about ongoing abuses in Kachin State and the need to release remaining
political prisoners.
Several high-profile visits to Burma in 2012 were ostensibly aimed to show support
for ongoing changes, including visits in November by US President Barack
Obama—the first by a sitting US president—in April by British Prime Minister
David Cameron, and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. President Obama gave
a historic speech at Rangoon University raising human rights concerns, including
the military’s role in parliament, ethnic conflicts, national reconciliation, and abuses against Rohingya Muslims. Other high-profile visits were explicitly
more economically motivated, including visits in May by India’s Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh, and in September by China’s top legislator, Wu Bangguo,
chairman of the Standing Committee of China’s National People’s Congress.
Others expressed concerns for the plight of Burma’s Rohingya Muslims, including
visits by Turkey’s foreign minister and a high-level delegation from the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation (OIC), which in September reached an
agreement with the Burmese government to open an office in the country to
facilitate delivery of humanitarian aid in Arakan State. President Thein Sein terminated
the agreement in October following several protests in Sittwe,
Mandalay, and Rangoon led by anti-Rohingya Buddhist monks opposing the
OIC’s involvement in the issue.
Members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) continue to
invest in and trade extensively with Burma, especially in the extractive and
hydropower industries. Burma continued to earn billions of US dollars in natural
gas sales to Thailand, little of which is directed into social services such as
health care and education. Gas dollars will increase markedly when a gas
pipeline from Arakan State to Yunnan in China is operational in 2013. Work continues
on that project, which passes through northern Shan State where the
Burmese army has moved in to secure territory and where armed conflict has led
to abuses such as torture, forced labor, and forced displacement of Kachin and
Shan.
Russia, China, and North Korea continued to sell arms to Burma in 2012, and
there are concerns that North Korean sales breached UN Security Council punitive
sanctions on North Korea passed in 2006 and 2009. In May, Thein Sein
assured South Korean President Lee Myun-bak that his government would cease
buying weapons from North Korea.