M8C8N@
The human rights situation in Malawi deteriorated significantly in 2011, with
President Bingu wa Mutharika’s government acting in an increasingly repressive
manner. Fuel and foreign currency shortages and increasing food prices have
taken a toll on the country, reversing the economic gains made during
Mutharika’s first term in office.
The government’s failure to adequately address the country’s economic problems
and the clampdown on its critics triggered a protest by civil society
activists. The government reacted to these street protests with increasing
heavy-handedness.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
In the past year Mutharika signed repressive new legislation, including Section
46 of the penal code, which allows the minister of information to ban publications
deemed “contrary to the public interest.” The president also signed the
Injunctions Law, which prevents Malawians from filing civil suits against government
officials. These new laws, which were severely criticized by civil society
activists, limit the ability of the media to operate freely and deny Malawians the
protection of the law.
Authorities also intimidated and harassed university lecturers and students
who have been at the forefront of criticizing the government’s poor human
rights and governance records. In September plainclothes police interrogated
staff of the Polytechnic University of Malawi about the existence of a political
group, Youth for Freedom and Democracy (YFD). A week later Robert Chasowa—
vice-president of YFD, university student, and outspoken government critic—
was found dead at the Polytechnic campus with a deep cut to his head.
Although police ruled his death a suicide, civil society activists accused the
government of involvement in Chasowa’s death.
In February the inspector general of police, Peter Mukhito, interrogated
University of Malawi lecturer Blessing Chisinga after he delivered a lecture on
the causes of mass protests in Malawi. In reaction, university lecturers boycotted classes, demanding an apology from Mukhito and calling on the authorities
to respect academic freedom. The Chancellor College section of the
University of Malawi’s academic staff union supported the boycott and Jessie
Kabwila Kapusula, the union’s acting president, received anonymous death
threats. Kapasula and three colleagues were later dismissed by the university
for supporting the boycott.
The government has also shown increasing intolerance towards peaceful
demonstrations. On October 11, police arrested five civil society activists—
Habiba Osman, Billy Mayaya, Brian Nyasulu, Ben Chiza Mkandawire, and
Comfort Chiseko—on charges of “holding an illegal demonstration.” They were
taking part in a small demonstration outside parliament, calling on Mutharika
to hold a referendum, for his resignation, and an early election. The activists
were released on bail five days later.
The most brutal crackdown on a peaceful demonstration took place on July 20
when police fired live ammunition and tear gas at unarmed demonstrators and
bystanders Lilongwe, the capital, Blantyre, and Mzuzu, killing 19 and leaving
scores more wounded. The police also arrested around 500 demonstrators. The
demonstrators were protesting deteriorating economic conditions and increasing
repression by the authorities. On August 10 Mutharika said he would establish
an independent commission of inquiry into the July killings. However, at
this writing the government had not set up the commission and there had been
little progress in investigating and bringing to account those responsible for the
killings.
Further civil society vigils and demonstrations were planned for August 17 and
18 to commemorate those killed in July and to raise concerns about the economy
and human rights situation. These nationwide protests were indefinitely
postponed by the organizers after the High Court issued an injunction banning
them. Persons believed to be affiliated with the ruling Democratic Progressive
Party (DPP) had applied for the injunction.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
There is a climate of fear in the country as journalists and civil society activists
who attempt to report on the human rights situation have come under increasing
attack from security forces and supporters of the DPP. Several human rights
activists have received death threats and been forced to go into hiding. In
September unknown assailants threw petrol bombs at the homes and offices of
several government critics, including activists Mcdonald Sembereka and Rafiq
Hajat and opposition politician Salim Bagus. Human rights activists alleged
that the government and DPP supporters orchestrated the attacks. At this writing
the police had neither conducted any investigations nor arrested those
responsible for the attacks.
Freedom of Press
Police and DPP supporters have also been implicated in the intimidation, arbitrary
arrest, and beating of journalists attempting to report on political events in
the country.
On October 11, police summoned deputy editor Innocent Chitosi and reporter
Archibald Kasakura, both of Malawi News, as well as George Kasakula of
Weekend Nation, after the two papers published stories about the death of student
activist Chasowa. On September 12, police arrested journalist Ernest
Mhwayo for allegedly taking pictures of President Mutharika’s farm without permission.
Police conducted a violent crackdown on journalists attempting to cover the
July protests. According to the Media Institute of Southern Africa, police beat 14
journalists, arrested three, and harassed 10 more, as they attempted to cover
the protests in Lilongwe and Blantyre. Authorities also prevented independent
radio stations from reporting on the protests. On July 20 the Malawi
Communications Regulatory Authorities, the state broadcasting regulator,
directed three independent radio stations, Capital FM, Joy Radio, and Zodiak
Broadcasting Station (ZBS), to stop live coverage of the demonstrations
because this was viewed as perpetuating violence. Although all the stations
complied with the directive, they were taken off air for several hours on the following day, a move that denied Malawians vital information about how best to
negotiate a dangerous situation.
Key International Actors
The deteriorating human rights situation in the country has led to increasing
concern from the international community and donors. In October the Malawian
government faced widespread international criticism and condemnation by
local and international civil society groups when it invited and hosted
Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir at the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA) summit in Lilongwe. Despite being a state party to
the International Criminal Court, Malawi did not arrest al-Bashir—who is wanted
by the court on charges of genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes—
upon his arrival in the country.
In August the United Nations pushed for dialogue between the Malawian government
and civil society activists to address the political and economic crisis
in the country. However, dialogue broke down after human rights activists
alleged that the government orchestrated attacks against them, accusations
that the government rejected.
In July the United Kingdom, Malawi’s biggest bilateral donor, withheld US$30
million of direct aid in reaction to the expulsion of the UK high commissioner,
Fergus Cochrane Dyet, and concerns over the deteriorating human rights situation.
President Mutharika’s brother, Justice Minister Peter Mutharika, visited the
UK in October in an attempt to repair relations between the two governments.
On July 26 the United States government said it would suspend a $350 million
aid package in reaction to the July killings of 19 protesters and bystanders.