Malaysia
Hopes that Malaysia’s human rights climate would improve following elections in
March 2008 proved unfounded. The ruling National Front coalition lost the twothirds
parliamentary majority it had enjoyed since Malaysia became independent
in 1957 but was still in power at this writing. National Front leaders continue to
insist that Malaysia’s multiethnic society is too fragile to sustain genuine freedom
of assembly and expression or full due process rights for all suspects.
The government continues to use outdated repressive laws and regulations to
silence its critics and extend its rule. One such critic is former Deputy Prime
Minister Anwar Ibrahim, now leading the opposition coalition People’s Alliance. In
what was widely viewed as a politically motivated attempt to discredit him, police
charged him with consensual sexual relations with a male aide in August 2008.
The People’s Volunteer Corps, a largely volunteer paramilitary force, continues to
commit abuses against undocumented migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers.
Detention without Charge or Trial
Malaysia uses the Internal Security Act (ISA) to indefinitely detain, without charge
or trial, individuals deemed by officials to threaten Malaysia’s national security.
This includes not only individuals suspected of planning terrorist attacks, such as
members of the militant Islamist groups Jemaah Islamiah and Darul Islam, but
also individuals allegedly promoting ethnic or religious discord.
On December 13, 2007, after the Hindu Rights Action Force (Hindraf) organized a
massive rally to draw attention to discrimination faced by Malaysia’s Indian population,
the government detained five of its leaders. In October 2008, the government
declared Hindraf an illegal organization on the grounds that it constituted a
“threat to public order and morality.” As of late November 2008, the leaders
remained in ISA custody.
On September 12, 2008, police detained three government critics under the ISA.
Raja Petra Kumaruddin, founder and editor of Malaysia’s most popular website
MalaysiaToday, was originally detained for two years for insulting Islam but was freed on procedural grounds on October 7. The government is appealing the ruling.
Authorities also detained opposition Democratic Action Party parliamentarian
Teresa Kok for a week for involvement in “activities that may spark a religious dispute,”
and Tan Hoon Cheng, a Sin Chew Daily reporter, for 18 hours.
According to the Abolish ISA Movement (Gerakan Mansuhkan ISA), 64 individuals
were in ISA detention as of October 2008.
Migrant Workers, Refugees, and Asylum Seekers
According to Malaysia’s Immigration Department, there were 2.1 million documented
migrants in Malaysia in November 2007. Undocumented migrants are
estimated at over 400,000, some 150,000 of whom are refugees or asylum seekers.
As the Malaysian Immigration Act of 1959/1963 does not distinguish between
undocumented migrant workers and refugees, all those without valid residency
status are subject to arrest, detention, and deportation. The People’s Volunteer
Corps (RELA), numbering half a million members, is empowered by law to enter
any premises and arrest “undesirable persons” and suspected undocumented
migrants. No search or arrest warrants are necessary. During 2007, close to
60,000 migrants—including children—were arrested, imprisoned, or deported.
Most migrant children are denied access to schools and some end up in exploitative
forms of child labor.
In May and June 2008, migrants told Human Rights Watch researchers how RELA
members abused them with impunity during detention and in the immigration
detention centers where RELA is responsible for security. Abuses include physical
assault, intimidation, forced entry into living quarters, extortion, theft, destruction
of residency papers, and sexual abuse.
Testimonies from migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers deported from Malaysia
to the Thai border indicate collusion between Malaysian immigration officials and
human smuggling gangs who charge steep fees to facilitate deportees’ return to
Malaysia or back to Burma.
Cases of severe physical abuse of migrant domestic workers continue to be
reported. In September 2008 a Malaysian employer forced an Indonesian domestic
worker to drink boiling water. The criminal justice system has been slow to
respond. A verdict in the case of Nirmala Bonat, burned and brutally beaten by
her employer in 2004, was expected in late November 2008.
Many of the approximately 400,000 primarily Indonesian domestic workers in
Malaysia experience withheld wages, forced confinement, and excessively long
work hours without days off; some face physical and sexual abuse. Domestic
workers are excluded from key provisions of Malaysia’s 1955 Employment Act and
their work permits tie them to a particular employer, making it difficult to report
abuse for fear of deportation.
Freedom of Assembly and Police Abuse
Article 10 of Malaysia’s constitution guarantees freedom of assembly, but the
Police Act of 1967 severely restricts its exercise in practice. No more than four persons
may assemble in public without a police license. Police are empowered to
break up unlicensed demonstrations, arrest participants, and use force if orders
to disperse are ignored. In January 2008 a peaceful protest organized by NGOs
and opposition political parties targeting inflationary pressure resulted in 56
short detentions.
Excessive use of force at public demonstrations is one of the reasons that a May
2005 Royal Commission recommended the establishment of an Independent
Police Complaints and Misconduct Commission. No such commission has been
created.
Freedom of Expression
An increasingly vibrant blogosphere and use of electronic media and communications
are challenging longstanding restrictions on free expression, but authorities
continue periodic crackdowns on dissent.
On August 25, the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission
ordered all 19 internet service providers to block MalaysiaToday, suggesting it published “libelous, defamatory and slanderous” material threatening public
order. Postings had probed government activities the leadership apparently did
not want exposed. The Malaysian cabinet overturned the closure order on
September 11.
The broadly worded 1948 Sedition Act has been used to silence bloggers who
express grievances against the government or who “promote feelings of ill will
and hostility between” ethnic groups in Malaysia. In October 2008, Kamaruddin
was put on trial for sedition for an article he wrote about a 2006 murder case.
The 1984 Printing Presses and Publications Act censors newspapers by requiring
annual renewal of publishing licenses and by controlling production and distribution
of foreign publications. The Home Affairs Ministry can restrict or ban a publication
outright on several different vaguely defined grounds and no legal remedy
or judicial review is available.
In September 2008 the ministry instructed three newspapers to “show cause”
why their publication licenses should not be suspended or rescinded. Sin Chew
Daily, a Chinese-language paper, had reported on allegedly sensitive issues
affecting ethnic relations; The Sun, an English Daily, was cited for “manipulating
and playing up numerous sensitive issues,” and Suara Keadilan, the People’s
Justice Party internal publication, had claimed that an official became paralyzed
after heart surgery.
Freedom of Religion
Islam is Malaysia’s official state religion, but the constitution protects freedom of
religion for all. Tensions periodically arise over whether Malaysia is a secular or
religious state and over attempts to widen or restrict the jurisdiction of Sharia
courts.
On August 9, 2008, some 300 protestors disrupted an open forum entitled
“Conversion to Islam,” sponsored by the Malaysian Bar Council. The protestors
contended that non-Muslims had no right to discuss Islam. The forum addressed
issues faced by families caught in jurisdictional disputes on matters such as civil
marriage, divorce and custody battles, and burial rites.
Privacy
Section 377 of Malaysia’s criminal code criminalizes “carnal intercourse against
the order of nature,” both consensual and non-consensual. Activists have urged
Malaysian authorities to repeal provisions on consensual relations and replace
the section on non-consensual sexual acts with a modern, gender-neutral law on
rape.
Human Rights Defenders
The NGO community, the Malaysian bar, lawyers, journalists, and some opposition
politicians actively defend human rights despite serious personal and professional
risks. Police arrested and detained overnight eight activists including
members of the bar and local non-governmental organizations during a December
2007 peaceful march to commemorate International Human Rights Day. Six of the
eight went on trial in October 2008.
On January 6, 2008, police used water cannons to break up a vigil organized by
the Abolish ISA movement. On September 26 and October 9, after more ISA
arrests, police broke up additional candlelight vigils opposing the ISA. In the latter
incident, police confiscated the camera of a newspaper reporter, one of 23
people temporarily detained after the vigil.
Key International Actors
Tension in the US-Malaysia relationship surfaced in 2008. While the US praised
Malaysia as a regional counterterrorism leader, officials in August expressed concern
over the filing of sodomy charges against Anwar Ibrahim, and in September
summoned Ilango Karuppannan, the charge d’affaires at the Malaysian embassy,
to protest Malaysia’s crackdown on critics.
Lord Malloch-Brown, the UK’s minister of state in the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, said the UK had also spoken with Malaysian officials about the crackdown
and had raised the issue with its EU partners and the Commonwealth Secretariat.
In a September address to the UN, Malaysian Foreign Minister Dr. Rais Yatim
objected to interference in Malaysia’s internal affairs.
Although the US Department of State’s June 2008 “Trafficking in Persons Report”
upgraded Malaysia’s status from Tier 3 to Tier 2, US Senator Lugar expressed concern
about continuing reports of trafficking of Burmese at the Thai-Malay border.
Malaysia has supported the creation of an ASEAN regional human rights mechanism,
but in July 2008 Foreign Minister Yatim said that its standards should
reflect the “ASEAN value system,” hearkening back to the “Asian values” debate
and the discredited notion that Asians value human rights less than others.