Malaysia
Malaysia’s general election on May 5, 2013, resulted in historic losses for the
ruling Barisan Nasional (BN) coalition. Although the BN won 133 seats out of
222, it lost the popular vote to the opposition Pakatan Rakyat (PKR) coalition
amid widespread allegations of election irregularities. In an attempt to explain
away the election results, Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak blamed a “Chinese
tsunami” favoring the opposition, and raised concerns about ethnic and religious
fractures in multi-ethnic Malaysia.
The election was followed by a significant deterioration in human rights and the
apparent abrupt end to Prime Minister Najib’s oft-touted reform agenda.
Relevant developments in the second half of 2013 included passage of new and
revised laws again permitting administrative detention without trial, new
arrests of opposition activists for organizing peaceful protests, and repression
of political speech.
Administrative Detention
Following the May election, the government launched a major campaign against
an apparent rise in crime that some officials attributed to the June 2012 expiration
of the Emergency (Public Order and Crime Prevention) Ordinance 1969. The
home minister recommended that the ordinance be reintroduced and then
helped push through amendments to the Prevention of Crime Act 1959 that
reauthorize administrative detention without trial. The amendments empower a
five-person government-appointed panel to impose up to two years’ preventive
detention on certain criminal suspects, decisions that are not subject to judicial
review except on procedural grounds. Up to five years of restricted residence in
remote locations could follow, renewable for another five years as decided by
the home minister.
The government also has proposed electronic monitoring for felons who have
served out their sentences in violation of their basic rights.
Freedom of Assembly and Association
To protest alleged malfeasance during May 5 parliamentary elections, the opposition
PKR coalition organized “Black 505” rallies throughout Malaysia. The government
responded by arresting persons deemed to be rally organizers for failing
to notify the police 10 days in advance as required by the Peaceful
Assembly Act (PAA). To date, police have arrested at least 43 persons on such
charges. The PAA also requires that organizers negotiate with the police on conditions
for holding assemblies. At the so-called People’s Uprising Rally in Kuala
Lumpur on January 12, 2013, the police set 27 conditions and followed up by
investigating rule violations that were either trivial or protected under international
law, such as carrying placards with “inappropriate slogans.”
In Sabah, police ordered organizers of the February 22 “Idle No More Long
March” for indigenous rights and fair elections to apply for a permit, claiming
that it was not an “ordinary” march as defined under the PAA.
The government restricts the right to freedom of association by requiring that
organizations of seven or more members register with the Registrar of Societies
in order to legally function. The registrar, appointed by the Ministry of Home
Affairs, has broad authority to deny registration and has continually delayed or
denied registration to groups critical of the government and to opposition political
parties. During 2013, an application by the three opposition parties to register
as a coalition remained mired in bureaucratic requirements, and the registrar
forced a re-run of the opposition Democratic Action Party’s Central
Executive Committee elections on a technicality. The home affairs minister has
“absolute discretion” to declare a society unlawful.
Freedom of Expression
Despite pledges by Prime Minister Najib to revoke the Sedition Act, the government
uses sedition charges to silence and punish those who question government
policies. Police charged five prominent opposition activists with sedition
for their May 13 remarks at the Kuala Lumpur and Selangor Chinese Assembly
Hall about election fraud and popular dissatisfaction with the government. One
of the five, student activist Adam Adil Abd Halim, was detained for five days
and is suspended from the university until his trial is over. In April, the government charged opposition member of parliament Tian Chua with sedition for
alleging that the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), the lead party in
the government coalition, was linked to the armed incursion at Lahad Duta in
Sabah in 2013.
Malaysian authorities maintain control over television and radio, printed newspapers,
magazines and books, and films and video. The Printing Presses and
Publication Act (PPPA) requires print publications to obtain a government
license that the home minister may revoke at any time. The Malaysian
Communications and Multimedia Act (MCMA) provides broad authority to act
against service providers that “provide content which is indecent … or offensive
in character with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten or harass any person.”
In January 2013, the government banned screening of the Tamil language movie
Vishwaroopam. In September, the police charged Lena Hendry, an NGO staff
member, with violating the Film Censorship Act by screening No Fire Zone, The
Killing Fields of Sri Lanka. The case was still pending at time of writing.
In May 2012, the Home Ministry banned the book Allah, Liberty & Love by
female Canadian author Irshad Manji. In September 2013, the High Court overturned
the ban on the Malay translation, but the Attorney General’s Chambers
planned an appeal. The publisher’s application for judicial review of his arrest
and prosecution under the Sharia Criminal Offenses (Selangor) Enactment 1995
was pending at time of writing, as was his effort to have the Federal Court
declare the law unconstitutional. The publisher also faces charges in the
Petaling Sharia Court. Although the High Court ruled in favor of Berjaya Books
(Borders Malaysia) that had stocked the book, criminal prosecution in the
Sharia court of a store salesperson for being in possession of the book was still
pending at time of writing. The English language version of the book is still
banned.
Police Abuses and Impunity
The Malaysia police force has been frequently faulted for use of excessive or
lethal force during apprehension of suspected criminals, and the torture of
detainees. During 2013, at least 12 persons died in suspicious circumstances in
police custody. In a particularly egregious case in May, truck driver N.
Dhamendran died in custody at Kuala Lumpur police headquarters—a postmortem examination found 52 injuries resulting from “sustained multiple blunt
force trauma.” In an exceptional development, five police officers have been
charged with murder. In other death-in-custody cases, police have flatly denied
any abuse, blamed illness for the deaths, resisted family-requested second
post-mortems, or relied on frequently inconclusive judicial inquests.
The government has rejected establishment of an Independent Police
Complaints and Misconduct Commission (IPCMC), an external oversight body
recommended in 2005 by a Royal Commission, which would have power to
receive and investigate complaints and to sanction those found guilty of misconduct.
The existing Enforcement Agencies Integrity Commission (EAIC) does
not have power to sanction misconduct.
Political Prosecution of Opposition Leader Anwar Ibrahim
The Malaysia government continued its politically motivated prosecution of
opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim for sodomy, appealing his January 2012
acquittal to the Court of Appeal. If convicted, Anwar faces up to 20 years in
prison and caning, and the loss of his seat in parliament.
Human Rights Defenders
Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM), a leading Malaysian human rights organization,
faced hostile government investigations throughout the year. The
Malaysian government investigated SUARAM under three different laws
between July 2012 and February 2013, under pressure from ministers who publicly
attacked SUARAM for receiving foreign funds. In August 2013, police questioned
a member of the SUARAM secretariat about a fund-raising dinner
SUARAM had held in support of its work on the Scorpene submarine corruption
case.
Police also harassed Samad Said, Malaysia’s 81-year-old poet laureate and cochair
of Bersih 2.0, the civil society coalition working for clean and fair elections.
Police detained him in September for reciting a poem in the presence of
pre-independence flags. A government civil suit against Bersih 2.0 steering
committee members, including Samad Said and co-chair Ambiga Sreenevasan,
was pending at time of writing.
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Trafficking Victims
Malaysian immigration law does not recognize refugees and asylum seekers.
The government is not a party to the 1951 Refugee Convention and lacks domestic
refugee law and asylum procedures. It takes no responsibility for migrant
children’s education. There is no evidence that an announced plan to allow
refugees to work legally had been implemented at time of writing.
The Anti-Trafficking in Persons and Anti-Smuggling of Migrants Act conflates
trafficking and people smuggling, and fails to provide meaningful protection to
victims of either crime. The government confines trafficking victims in sub-standard
government shelters without access to services until adjudication of their
legal case is complete.
Detention and Drug Policy
The Dangerous Drugs (Special Preventive Measures) Act authorizes administrative
detention without trial. The National Anti-Drug Agency maintains over 20
puspens (drug detention centers) where users are held for a minimum of two
years. Drug traffickers face mandatory death sentences, but the number of people
executed is not publicly available.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) persons
remains a persistent problem that is reinforced by government policy. In 2012,
Prime Minister Najib declared that LGBT activities do not “have a place in the
country.” In April 2013, Deputy Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin accused LGBT
rights activists of “poisoning” the minds of Muslims with “deviant practices.”
The Malaysian government led efforts to ensure that LGBT rights were excluded
from the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration adopted in November 2012.
Police regularly arrest transgender persons, especially Muslims who are considered
to be violating Sharia law provisions against cross-dressing, ridicule and
humiliate them, and jail them in lock-ups where they are subject to physical
and sexual abuse by police staff and male inmates.
The Malaysian government took no steps to repeal Penal Code article 377B,
which criminalizes consensual “carnal intercourse against the order of nature”
between persons who have reached the age of consent, or to replace article
377C on non-consensual sexual acts with a modern, gender-neutral rape law.
Key International Actors
Prime Minister Najib has announced Malaysia’s intention to seek a non-permanent
seat on the United Nations Security Council for the 2015-2016 term.
Malaysia is a member of the UN Human Rights Council but has not signed or
ratified most core human rights treaties.
The US plays an important role in Malaysia, strengthening mutual security ties
and promoting negotiations on the free trade Trans-Pacific Partnership
Agreement (TPPA), but says little publicly about Malaysia’s human rights
record. President Barack Obama was scheduled to visit Malaysia in October but
cancelled the trip due to a US budget impasse and partial government shutdown.
It would have been the first visit by a sitting US president since 1966. In
prepared remarks delivered at the time of the scheduled visit, Obama praised
Malaysia as a global model for “diversity, tolerance, and progress,” but said
nothing publicly about continuing human rights problems in the country.
Malaysia, which is a member of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
has been positioning itself as a leading moderate Muslim state, also continues
to cultivate its ties with Middle Eastern states.
At the regional level, Malaysia has blocked efforts to reach a comprehensive
agreement to protect the rights of all migrant workers in ASEAN. Relations with
the Philippines were strained in 2013 when an armed group from the
Philippines calling itself the “Royal Security Forces of the Sultanate of Sulu and
North Borneo” tried to claim a portion of the eastern Malaysian province of
Sabah. The Philippines did not support the group but sought to negotiate their
return. Malaysian forces ultimately routed the militants.
Malaysia continues to deepen its ties with China, exemplified in 2013 by an
October state visit to Malaysia by new Chinese President Xi Jinping. The two
countries agreed to improve bilateral ties and to triple the volume of bilateral
trade by 2017.