Malaysia
Malaysia continues to confound hopes that human rights progress will parallel
the countrys strong economic growth. Basic rights such as freedom of expression,
assembly, and association are subject to burdensome and unjustified
restrictions. A series of stringent and outdated laws and regulations, such as the
Internal Security Act (ISA) and Emergency Ordinance (EO), continue to undermine
basic due process rights. Routine censorship threats target bloggers; new rules
impede workers right to organize; and indigenous communities face loss of communal
land. The government has resisted widespread calls to establish an
Independent Police Complaints and Misconduct Commission, as recommended in
May 2005 by a Royal Commission.
Detention without Charge or Trial
Malaysian officials use the ISA and EO to indefinitely detain, without charge or
trial, alleged terrorists and those suspected of organized criminal activities.
Authorities have used the law against members of several Islamic groups, including
the Jemaah Islamiah (JI), Kampulan Militan/Mujaahiddim Malaysia, and Darul
Islam, as well as criminals engaging in human smuggling and passport and ID forgery.
The inspector general of police stated in June 2007 that there is no JI movement
here in Malaysia.
According to Suaram, a respected Malaysian nongovernmental organization
(NGO), as of September 2007, 87 suspects remained in ISA detention. In June
2007, four alleged JI members held for more than four years were released but
sent, under the 1933 Restricted Residence Act, to remote districts where they are
required to report regularly to local police.
The Malaysian government has not responded to a request for a visit by the UN
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights while countering
terrorism, nor has it responded to his request for information related to ISA
detention.
The government has insisted on retaining the EO, saying it needs the law to
impede the activities of criminal gangs, despite the fact that it violates constitutional due process requirements. In October 2006, in a blow to the rights of suspects,
a federal court ordered that once the internal security minister signs a
detention order, any prior police abuse or other misconduct may no longer be
challenged in court. The court reasoned that when court-ordered release of a suspect
is followed by a new detention order, a not uncommon occurrence in
Malaysia, appeal of the original order is rendered academic.
Migrant Workers, Refugees, and Asylum Seekers
Malaysian officials reported in 2007 that there were nearly 1.9 million documented
migrants in the country. Although there is no official count of undocumented
migrants, estimates suggest the total is 700,000 or more. Some 150,000 people
are believed to be either refugees or asylum seekers, only a third of whom have
been registered by UNHCR.
In July 2007, the government began one of its periodic roundups, seeking to
deport those who had entered Malaysia illegally. Some 10,000 were apprehended
during the first month of operation. In addition to deportation, those in violation
of the law face up to five years imprisonment and six strokes of the cane, as provided
for by the Immigration Act 1959/63. Such round-ups, which fail to differentiate
between people in need of international protection and other migrants, frequently
involve violence by the authorities or their agents.
The almost half million strong Peoples Volunteer Force (RELA) is empowered by
the Emergency (Essential Powers) Act 1979, as amended, to arrest and detain
undesirable persons and suspected illegal migrants. Force members, authorized
to enter and search any public or private premise without a warrant, have
raided migrant housing in the middle of the night, beating up residents, confiscating
valuables, and, at times, destroying the ID cards of legal migrants to justify
the raids.
For example, on April 5, 2007, RELA volunteers arrested some 20 Burmese
refugees and asylum seekers in downtown Kuala Lumpur. At least five had been
recognized as refugees by the office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). On June 25, 2007, at 2:00 a.m., Malaysian Immigration officials and
RELA volunteers raided the Chin Refugee Centre and Chin communities at Jalan Imbi and Jalan San Peng, Kuala Lumpur, arresting 228 asylum seekers and
refugees from Burma, most of whom UNHCR had recognized as refugees.
The migrant work force includes some 300,000 domestic workers, primarily
Indonesian. They confront a wide range of abuses, including forced confinement
in the workplace, excessively long work hours, lack of rest days, withheld wages,
and physical and sexual abuse. Domestic workers not only are excluded from key
provisions of Malaysias Employment Act of 1955, but their work permits tie them
to a particular employer, making it difficult to report abuse for fear of deportation.
While Malaysia has imposed some penalties on agencies and employers following
a 2006 agreement with Indonesia, the agreement does not extend many basic
labor law protections to domestic workers. Criminal prosecutions of abusive
employers are rare. Nirmala Bonat, whose employer burned and brutally beat her,
has remained in the Indonesian embassy since 2004 while the trial of her
employer continues.
In violation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which Malaysia has ratified,
children of migrants with temporary residence are not entitled to free public
education.
Police Abuse
Complaints directed against Malaysias police force include allegations of routine
physical abuse of detainees. In June 2007, Suhakam, the official Human Rights
Commission of Malaysia, said police responded to only 16 of the 34 cases of
police brutality brought to their attention over a one-and-a-half-year period.
Prison abuse at times includes beatings so severe that hospitalization is
required. The police also often rely on a policy of remand first, investigate later.
As a result, suspects spend days in detention, often without access to family
members or a lawyer, greatly increasing the risk of mistreatment.
Freedom of Expression
In 2007 Malaysian officials cautioned private media outlets against abusing their
privileges, advised newspapers to be wary of repeating blog criticisms of the government,
and warned webmasters and bloggers to use their power cautiously.
Critical bloggers have been sued for defamation, a powerful tool long used in
Malaysia by the government to stifle dissent.
The Internal Security Ministry sent warnings in March and July 2007 to newspapers
not to publish cyber-induced speculation on sensitive issues. The circular
reminded journalists that publishers are required to always comply with directives
issued by the ministry. The 1984 Printing Presses and Publications Act
(PPPA) requires that newspapers renew their licenses every year.
On July 13, the police used section 8 of the Official Secrets Act (OSA) to arrest
Nathaniel Tan, a staffer at the opposition Peoples Justice Party, on suspicion of
possessing documents related to government corruption. Tan was held on
remand for four days before being released on bail. The OSA is a broadly-worded
law according to which any public officer can declare any material an official
secret, a certification which cannot be questioned in court. The act allows for
arrest and detention without a warrant, and substantially reverses the burden of
proof.
Freedom of Religion
Islam is the official state religion, but the constitution protects freedom of religion
for non-Muslims. Discussions in July 2007 as to whether Malaysia was an Islamic
or a secular state grew contentious after Deputy Prime Minister Najib Abdul Razak
declared it an Islamic state. The internal security minister then banned further
media discussion, but ruled that statements by Prime Minister Badawi and
Deputy PM Razak could be aired.
In a landmark ruling, Lima Joy, a Muslim covert to Christianity, lost her six-year
battle to have the word Muslim removed from her identity card. She had argued
she was entitled to freedom of religion under article 11 of the constitution. The
top secular court ruled that only the Sharia court had jurisdiction.
Human Rights Defenders
The NGO community, the Malaysian bar, lawyers, and some opposition politicians
are active in defense of human rights despite the serious personal and professional
risks entailed.
In June 2007, during a rally in Johor Bahru organized to protest rising crime rates,
police arrested two activists from the NGO Suaram for attempting to distribute
leaflets supporting the proposed Independent Police Complaints and Misconduct
Commission. The Johor Bahru Magistrate Court remanded the two for 24 hours.
In October, the Putrajaya district police requested the Malaysian Bar Association
president, vice-president, and secretary to appear to discuss the September 26,
2006 Walk for Justice. The 2,000 strong march to the prime ministers office
delivered a memorandum urging the government to set up a Royal Commission of
Inquiry to investigate apparent corruption in the appointment of justices. In
November, police refused to issue a permit for a rally and march by the Coalition
for Clean and Fair Elections (Bersih). When some 40,000 Malaysians defied the
ban, police used chemical-laced water and tear gas to disperse peaceful participants.
Tear gas and water cannons were also used against participants in a Hindu
Rights Action Force November 25 rally. A total of 99 organizers and marchers were
charged in the aftermath. Prime Minister Badawi threatened to use the Internal
Security Act to prevent further unauthorized street demonstrations.
Key International Actors
As a key ASEAN member, Malaysian officials initially urged Burma to agree to talk
with opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi without preconditions and even suggested
that Burma could be expelled from ASEAN following its violent crackdown on
monks, students, and other protesters in September 2007. However, by
November 19, 2007, Malaysian Foreign Minister Syed Hamid Albar had backed
away from public denunciation of Burmas human rights record and was defending
ASEANs failure to take any steps to censure Burma.
Despite its own lack of enthusiasm and concern over protracted negotiations,
Malaysia has pressed reluctant ASEAN members to support a regional human
rights body.
Malaysia has not ratified any key UN conventions other than the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
New US ambassador to Malaysia James Keith noted a greater congruence
between the interests of America and Malaysia, especially related to counterterrorism,
during his May confirmation hearing before the US Senate. US-Malaysia
negotiations on a free trade agreement, however, appeared stalled at this writing,
in part because of a new Malaysian labor law rescinding key worker rights.