Malaysia
When he took office three years ago, there were great hopes that Prime Minister
Abdullah Badawi would make a break with the poor human rights record of his
predecessor, Mahathir Mohamad. Badawi raised hopes when he promised good
governance and human rights improvement. While there has been a reduction of
pressure on human rights groups and lawyers, there has been virtually no institutional
reform.
The Badawi administration has failed to dismantle the legal framework that
allows security officials to detain persons indefinitely without charge or trial.
Recommendations by the government-appointed Royal Commission to Enhance
the Royal Malaysia Police to amend and repeal such laws and to set up an independent
commission to oversee the Royal Malaysia Police have yet to be implemented.
Abuses against refugees and migrants continue to be reported and public
discussions on inter-faith issues and religious freedom are restricted.
Detention without Trial
At this writing more than 90 persons were being detained without charge or trial
for alleged threats to national security under the 1960 Internal Security Act (ISA).
Since 2001 the ISA has been used against suspected Islamist militants, primarily
alleged members of the Islamist group Jemmah Islamiyah (JI), and against individuals
suspected of involvement in counterfeiting and document forgery. Many of
the alleged JI detainees have been held for four years. In 2006, without explanation,
the government extended the detention of 25 detainees for another two
years. In May the government announced the arrests of 11 persons affiliated with
the Islamist group Darul Islam.
Under the Emergency Ordinance (Public Order and Prevention of Crime), enacted
in 1969 as a temporary measure to respond to race riots, the government has
detained 700 persons indefinitely without charge or trial in Simpang Renggam
detention center in Johor state for alleged involvement in criminal activities.
Government officials publicly acknowledge that the Emergency Ordinance is used
against criminal suspects because the police do not have sufficient evidence to
charge them. Detainees are barred by law from challenging the merits of their detention. Some have been detained for eight years. While detainees may raise
procedural challenges and on this basis occasionally are ordered released by
courts, the government often re-arrests them on the same charges. In June 2006
police re-arrested 11 detainees as they were leaving the Simpang Renggam detention
center after a court-ordered release.
Another tactic police use to extend the arbitrary detention of suspects is through
what are known as “road shows”: when a pretrial 15-day detention order is due to
expire, police seek another order in a different district. Police are known to have
used this tactic to hold individuals for as many as 143 days.
In 2006 Prime Minister Badawi joined the near universal call to close the US
detention center in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, and also urged that the two
Malaysian detainees transferred from CIA secret facilities to Guantánamo be
given a fair trial. But the prime minister failed to afford similar rights to detainees
held under the ISA or the Emergency Ordinance.
Migrant Workers, Refugees, and Asylum Seekers
Malaysian authorities continued to enforce the punitive Immigration Act. Anyone
found guilty of being in the country without the appropriate legal documentation
faces a mandatory sentence of up to five years imprisonment and up to six
strokes of the cane. The amendment also imposes mandatory caning on those
convicted of harboring five or more undocumented individuals. Malaysian authorities
have continued to round up and deport undocumented migrant workers. The
lack of effective screening procedures means that refugees, trafficking victims,
abused migrant workers, and other vulnerable groups are at risk of detention and
prosecution under the immigration laws.
A volunteer civilian armed corps, the Rela, has been authorized by the government
to question and arrest undocumented migrants. The bodies of five migrants
were recovered in February in Selayang allegedly as a result of a Rela raid. Later
that month more than 60 Indian migrant workers were clubbed by Rela and taken
to a detention camp. The workers were waiting outside the Indian High
Commission to draw attention to the unpaid wages owed them by Malaysian
employers.
In May 2006, Malaysia signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with
Indonesia regarding recruitment and treatment of approximately 300,000 migrant
domestic workers. These workers confront a wide range of abuses, including
forced confinement in the workplace, excessively long work hours, lack of rest
days, unpaid wages, and physical and sexual abuse. The new MOU does little to
address exploitative working conditions, and domestic workers continue to be
excluded from key provisions of Malaysia’s Employment Act of 1955, which would
entitle them to one rest day per week and an eight-hour work day. Their work permits
are tied to their employers, making it difficult to report abuse for fear of
repatriation. Some positive reforms were still being considered by the government
at this writing, including a requirement that domestic workers be paid at
least once a month.
Despite hosting a large number of refugees and asylum seekers Malaysia is not a
signatory to the 1951 Refugee Convention and does not have in place proper procedures
to register, document, and protect such people. According to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as of May 2006 there were more than
46,000 refugees and asylum seekers in Malaysia, including 20,000 Achenese
from Indonesia, and 11,000 Rohingyas and 11,000 Chins from Myanmar. In July
2005 the minister of home affairs announced plans to allow refugees and asylum
seekers to join the work force, but more than a year later there was no evidence
the policy was being implemented. Without work permits refugees remain vulnerable
to exploitation by employers and the police.
At this writing, the government was drafting new anti-trafficking legislation.
Freedom of Religion
Islam is the official religion of Malaysia, and ethnic Malays by definition must be
Muslim. Faiths of other ethnic groups are protected under article 11 of the constitution
which guarantees freedom of religion. For Muslims, marriage, property, and
divorce are governed by Sharia courts. Muslims who wish to renounce Islam must
seek permission from Sharia courts, although rarely granted, and can be subject
to sanctions involving years of rehabilitation.
Lina Joy, who converted to Christianity from Islam, at this writing was awaiting a
decision from the Federal Court—the highest court in Malaysia—on whether her
conversion should be considered a right under the constitution instead of a religious
matter for Sharia courts. Joy’s application to have her religious status on
her identification card changed had been rejected by the National Registration
Department on grounds she was an ethnic Malay, a decision she challenged in
the courts.
Human Rights Defenders
Fora organized around the country by non-governmental organizations to discuss
religious freedom were disrupted on several occasions in 2006 by a coalition of
Muslim groups calling themselves the Anti-Interfaith Commission. In May a mob
forcibly stopped a forum in Penang. Two Islamic Party of Malaysia (PAS) leaders
and a Muslim religious scholar were charged with illegal assembly for allegedly
participating in a demonstration against the forum in Penang. A subsequent
forum in Johor Bahru was also stopped on the advice of the police due to a
demonstration by Islamic groups outside the venue. Instead of taking action
against the groups, on July 26 Prime Minister Badawi ordered such public discussions
on inter-faith issues to be stopped.
Human rights lawyer Malik Imtiaz Sarwar, who is outspoken on religious freedom
and inter-faith issues and wrote a brief in support of Lina Joy’s case before the
Federal Court, received an anonymous death threat in August 2006. The threat
entitled “Wanted Dead” was circulated with Sarwar’s picture and text condemning
him for his support of Lina Joy.
Key International Actors
Since September 11, 2001, international criticism of Malaysia’s human rights
records has decreased. The United States, once a strong critic of Malaysia’s preventive
detention laws, is now less critical. Malaysia is the United States tenth
largest trading partner and negotiations are underway on a free trade agreement
between the two nations. The US and the United Kingdom have strong relations
with Malaysia on security issues, cooperating on training and counterterrorism
operations and conducting joint exercises.
Malaysia plays a significant role in regional and global issues. It currently chairs
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and is facilitating negotiations between the Philippine government
and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front.