Malaysia
Malaysia witnessed its first change in leadership in more than two
decades when Abdullah Badawi took over from Prime Minister
Mahathir Mohamad in October 2003. While there has been some
progress since that time—noteworthy examples include the release from
prison of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim in September
2004 and the opening of a notorious detention facility to outside scrutiny
in May 2004—significant obstacles remain in place.
Prominent human rights concerns in Malaysia include arbitrary detention
of alleged militants under the Internal Security Act (ISA); restrictions
on media freedom; constraints on judicial independence; and abuses
against refugees and migrants.
Arbitrary Detention of Alleged Islamic Militants
The Malaysian government is holding more than eighty detainees under
the ISA without charge or any type of judicial review. Over the years,
the ISA has been used as a tool to crack down on political opposition
and peaceful dissent. After September 11, 2001, the ISA took on new
life with the arrests of scores of Islamists alleged to be connected to
international terrorist groups. More than three years later, the
Malaysian government has yet to publicly produce evidence against the
detainees or bring any of them to trial.
Human Rights Watch investigations have revealed that police and security
authorities subjected many of the detainees to serious abuses,
including sexually humiliating interrogations, beatings, and sleep deprivation.
In addition, the authorities have denied the detainees basic due
process rights. In the first several weeks after their arrest, the detainees
did not have access to lawyers and were threatened with punishment
and indefinite incarceration for trying to legally challenge their detention.
Prime Minister Abdullah has taken some steps toward remedying the
abuses under the ISA. For the first time in Malaysia’s history, in May
2004, he permitted journalists to enter the notorious Kamunting
Detention Center where ISA detainees are held. According to media
reports, detainees spoke during the visits of abuses they had suffered
after their arrest. The government announced that the Malaysian
National Human Rights Commission (SUHAKAM) would conduct an
investigation into allegations of abuse at the short-term detention centers
where detainees typically are held for several weeks before being
sent to Kamunting. At this writing, however, SUHAKAM had yet to
report any findings. The government continues to bar independent
monitoring or investigation of conditions inside Kamunting prison.
Restrictions on Media Freedom
The Malaysian media continues to face significant resistance and is
muted in its criticism of government policy. The government maintains
its control through a network of laws curbing free expression, as well as
through direct day-to-day monitoring and control of the media.
Malaysiakini, an independent news website, remains one of the few
openly critical media outlets. While the new government of Prime
Minister Abdullah has not indicated that it will impose new restrictions
on the media, it has not repudiated the censorial policies of the
Mahathir government.
Independence of the Judiciary
The Malaysian judiciary has struggled to regain its independence since
the so-called “Operation Lalang” crisis of 1988, in which the government
removed several senior judges deemed likely to challenge government
policies. Time after time, in politically charged cases, Malaysia’s
judiciary has found in favor of the government, with judges aware that
their careers would suffer if they ruled otherwise.
In September 2004, Malaysia’s highest court ordered the release of
Anwar Ibrahim from prison, potentially signaling a transition toward
greater judicial independence. The former Deputy Prime Minister had
served a nine-year sentence when the court granted his appeal and overturned
the sodomy conviction against him. Anwar’s trial had been widely
criticized domestically and internationally for being politically motivated
and marred by serious violations of due process.
The court will face another test of its independence in a politically
charged case when it considers the appeal of human rights advocate
Irene Fernandez. Fernandez was convicted in 2003 under Malaysia’s
restrictive press laws for “maliciously publishing false news” and sentenced
to a year in prison. Fernandez was arrested in 1995 when
Tenaganita, a nongovernmental organization headed by Fernandez,
published a report documenting beatings, sexual violence, and inadequate
food and water in Malaysia’s immigration detention camps.
Fernandez’ seven-year trial, the longest in Malaysian history, became a
symbol of the Malaysian government’s hostile stance toward human
rights defenders. At this writing, she was out on bail pending the outcome
of her appeal.
Deportation of Refugees
In July 2004, the Malaysian Home Minister announced plans to round
up and deport some 1.2 million undocumented migrant workers, the
majority of whom are Indonesian. In 2002, a similar mass deportation
program resulted in the death of dozens of Indonesian, including children,
from dehydration and disease while stranded in transit areas waiting
to find a way home.
Among those likely to be sent back to Indonesia are some ten thousand
refugees from the war-torn Aceh region of Indonesia. These refugees
are fleeing a brutal conflict marked by routine, grave human rights violations
(see Indonesia), only to encounter further abuse in Malaysia, where they are denied status as refugees, abused by Malaysia police, and
then often sent back to Indonesia where their lives are at risk. Malaysia
is not a signatory to the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees,
and does not distinguish between Acehnese refugees and other illegal
immigrants, even though the United Nations High Commissioner of
Refugees (UNHCR) has designated all Acehnese refugees to be “persons
of concern.” In 2003, Malaysia forcibly returned thousands of
Acehnese refugees; such returns continued in 2004.
Abuse of Migrant Workers
Because of its economic success, Malaysia has long attracted migrants
from across Asia. While it relies heavily each year on more than two
million migrant workers from Indonesia, Bangladesh, the Philippines,
and India to meet its labor demands, Malaysia fails to protect their basic
rights.
Human Rights Watch research in 2004 focused on conditions faced by
Indonesian women and girls who work as domestic workers in Malaysia.
They typically work sixteen to eighteen hour days, seven days a week,
without any holidays, and often are forbidden from leaving the houses
where they work, even when not on duty. Some workers confront physical,
verbal, and sexual abuse from employers and labor agents.
Indonesian domestic workers earn U.S.$93-105 per month, less than
half the amount that Filipina domestic workers and other low-wage
workers make. Employers often fail to make complete payments or to
pay at all. In the worst cases, deceived about the conditions and type of
work, confined at the workplace, and receiving no salary, Indonesian
women are victims of trafficking and forced labor.
The Malaysian government’s inadequate monitoring of workplace conditions
and profit-motivated labor agencies prevent many domestic
workers from reporting abuses or seeking redress through the Malaysian justice system. Labor agencies do not uniformly provide
domestic workers with information about their rights or, in cases of
abuse, access to Malaysian and Indonesian authorities who could assist
them with legal, health, and other support services. In many cases, labor
agents are guilty of abuses themselves or actively obstruct domestic
workers’ access to information or help.
Indonesian domestic workers are excluded from several legal protections
guaranteed other workers by Malaysia’s employment laws and previous
bilateral labor agreements with Indonesia. For example, they are
excluded from section XII of Malaysia’s Employment Act of 1955,
which would otherwise entitle them to one day of rest per week, and
limit work hours to eight hours per day and forty-eight hours per week.
Malaysia’s immigration laws and policies often prevent domestic workers
from escaping abusive situations or seeking help from Malaysian
authorities. Domestic workers who escape from abusive situations lose
their legal status once they have left their employer’s home, and may be
classified as illegal immigrants, detained, and deported, instead of
receiving access to help.
The upcoming deportation of over one million undocumented workers,
and the proposal of enlisting help from volunteers to carry out immigration
raids, only increases the likelihood that abused domestic workers,
rather than being identified as individuals in need of protection and
support, will be summarily deported.
Key International Actors
The September 11 attacks on the United States dramatically altered the
relationship between the U.S. and Malaysia. Previously, the U.S. had
been publicly critical of Malaysia’s human rights record in general, and
its misuse of the ISA in particular. But the U.S. “war on terror” led the
U.S. to change its course and dramatically tone down its criticism.
Malaysia has cooperated extensively with the U.S. in counterterrorism
efforts, regularly sharing intelligence information and offering access to
ISA prisoners for interrogations. The countries collaborated on creation
of the Southeast Asia Regional Center for Counter Terrorism, established
in Malaysia in July 2003 with the assistance and training of the
U.S. As a result of this cooperation, Malaysian-U.S. relations have
improved significantly, and the U.S. has shown little desire to criticize
Malaysia’s human rights record. The U.S. practice indefinitely detaining
terror suspects without charge or trial in the United States, at
Guantanamo Bay, and elsewhere in the world, has weakened its desire,
as well as its ability, to engage in effective human rights advocacy on
behalf of administrative detainees in Malaysia.
In 2004, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which
Malaysia remains an influential member, assumed an increasingly
prominent role in regional affairs. ASEAN facilitated trade negotiations
among member states and between member states and non-member
countries such as India and Japan, and, in September, provided a forum
for member states to discussincreased cooperation and information
sharing on security issues. Despite its increasing importance, ASEAN
has failed to make human rights a priority, remaining silent on issues
such as Malaysia’s denial of due process rights to ISA detainees.