Nigeria
More than halfway through his term in office, President Umaru Yar’Adua and his
administration have done little to improve Nigeria’s poor human rights record.
Bloody sectarian clashes claimed hundreds of lives in late 2008 and 2009, while
the government failed to investigate, much less hold accountable, members of
the security forces implicated in numerous incidents of extrajudicial killings, torture,
and extortion. The government’s amnesty for militants in the Niger Delta
failed to address the root causes of the violence.
Despite limited gains from anti-corruption efforts, Nigeria’s political leaders continued
to enjoy near-total impunity for massive corruption and sponsoring political
violence. The National Assembly failed again to pass legislation to improve
transparency and good governance. Nonetheless, free speech and the independent
press remain fairly robust. Foreign partners took some positive steps in confronting
endemic corruption in Nigeria, but appeared reluctant to exert meaningful
pressure on Nigeria over its human rights record.
Government Corruption
Nigeria’s fledgling anti-corruption campaign produced mixed results in 2009. In
October a powerful ruling People’s Democratic Party (PDP) chieftain, Olabode
George, was convicted for financial crimes, in the most significant conviction
secured by Nigeria’s anti-corruption body since Yar’Adua came to power. The new
chairman of the central bank, Lamido Sanusi, sacked the chief executives of eight
Nigerian banks due to financial mismanagement and fraud. Farida Waziri, the
head of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), promptly filed
corruption charges against several of the bankers, but failed to indict key politicians
credibly implicated in the massive looting of the state treasury, including
former Rivers State governor Peter Odili. Several other high-profile corruption
cases initiated by Waziri’s predecessor at the EFCC have been effectively stalled.
Meanwhile, the country’s tremendous oil wealth, which could have been used to
improve the lives of ordinary Nigerians, continues to be squandered and
siphoned off by the governing elite, leaving poverty, malnutrition, and mortality
rates among the worst in the world.
Intercommunal and Political Violence
Intercommunal, political, and sectarian violence have claimed the lives of more
than 13,500 people during the past decade in Nigeria. Nigeria’s politicians continue
to manipulate ethnic and religious tensions by sponsoring violence for personal
political gain, and widespread poverty and poor governance have created an
environment where militant groups can thrive. Violent clashes in July between
government security forces and a militant Islamist group in northern Nigeria
known as Boko Haram left at least 800 dead; according to the government, most
of those killed were militants. Members of the Boko Haram group also burned
churches and attacked and killed Christians during the violence. In November
2008 more than 700 people were killed during two days of Christian-Muslim sectarian
clashes following a disputed local government election in the central city of
Jos. Intercommunal tensions are exacerbated by state and local government policies
that discriminate against “non-indigenes”—people who cannot trace their
ancestry to what are said to be the original inhabitants of an area.
Yar’Adua had pledged to reform Nigeria’s broken electoral system, but in 2009
rejected core recommendations of his electoral reform committee. The Supreme
Court, in December 2008, upheld Yar’Adua’s own controversial 2007 election. The
government has still not held accountable those responsible for the 2007 election
violence that left at least 300 dead, while a closely fought gubernatorial election
rerun in Ekiti State in April 2009 was again marred by violence, vote-rigging, and
fraud. Nonetheless, Nigeria’s judiciary continues to exercise a degree of independence
in electoral matters: Since 2007 the courts have overturned one-third
of the PDP gubernatorial election victories on grounds of electoral malpractice or
other irregularities.
Conduct of Security Forces
The government demonstrated a lack of political will to reform the police, who
were again implicated in numerous extrajudicial killings of persons in custody,
torture of criminal suspects, and widespread extortion and corruption. On July 30,
2009, the police in the northern city of Maiduguri brazenly executed the Boko
Haram leader Mohammed Yusuf in police custody. The following day his father-inlaw,
Baba Mohammed, and a former state government official suspected of funding Boko Haram, Buji Foi, were also reportedly killed in police custody. Yar’Adua
promised to promptly investigate these killings, but at this writing no one has
been held accountable.
In November 2008 the police and military were credibly implicated in more than
130 unlawful killings while responding to the election-related violence in Jos. At
this writing a panel set up by Yar’Adua to investigate the Jos violence is scheduled
to begin hearings in December 2009. The government has still not held
members of the security forces accountable for past crimes, including the massacre
of more than 200 people by the military in Benue State in 2001 and the military’s
complete destruction of the town of Odi, Bayelsa State, in 1999.
Violence and Poverty in the Niger Delta
An amnesty for armed militants in the oil-rich Niger Delta led several thousand
men, including top militant commanders, to surrender weapons to the government.
Since the latest escalation of violence began in early 2006, hundreds of
people have been killed in clashes between rival armed groups vying for illicit
patronage doled out by corrupt politicians, or between militants and government
security forces. Armed gangs have carried out numerous attacks on oil facilities
and kidnapped more than 500 oil workers and ordinary Nigerians for ransom during
this period. The amnesty offer, announced in June 2009, followed a major military
offensive in May against militants in the creeks of Delta State, which left
scores dead and thousands of residents displaced.
The government’s blanket amnesty, cash payouts to armed militants, and a proposal
to give oil-producing communities a 10 percent stake in government oil ventures
bought some respite from militant attacks, but further entrenched impunity
and failed to address the government corruption, political sponsorship of violence,
and environmental degradation that underlie the violence and discontent
in the Niger Delta. A similar amnesty granted to rival armed groups in 2004 failed
to end the Niger Delta violence.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Sharia
Twelve state governments in northern Nigeria continue to apply Sharia law as part
of their criminal justice system. Sentencing provisions such as the death penalty,
amputations, and floggings amount to cruel, inhuman, and degrading punishment.
Although the death sentences appealed to date have been overturned,
lower Sharia courts continue to hand them down. Serious due process concerns
also exist in Sharia proceedings. Most defendants are tried without legal representation.
Judges are poorly trained and, as is also common in Nigeria’s conventional
criminal courts, often rely on statements that were extracted by the police
through torture. Evidentiary standards in the Sharia codes discriminate against
women, particularly in adultery cases where standards of evidence differ for men
and women.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Nigeria’s federal criminal code punishes consensual homosexual conduct with up
to 14 years in prison. In the states applying Sharia, consensual homosexual conduct
among men is punishable by death by stoning, and by flogging in the case
of women. Draft federal legislation that would criminalize anyone who enters into
or assists a “same gender” marriage was introduced in the House of
Representatives in December 2008.
Freedom of Expression and the Media
Civil society and the independent press openly criticize the government and its
policies, allowing for robust public debate. However, journalists are still subject
to intimidation and violence when reporting on issues implicating the political
and economic elite. On September 20, 2009, Bayo Ohu, the deputy political editor
of the Guardian, one of Nigeria’s largest newspapers, was gunned down at the
entrance to his home. During the April elections in Ekiti State, PDP members
reportedly detained and assaulted three journalists inside the state government
headquarters. Journalists working for local media outlets generally enjoy considerably
less freedom than their national counterparts and are more often subjected
to harassment by government officials.
Health and Human Rights
Health indicators, including those for infant and child mortality and women’s
reproductive health and maternal mortality, remain some of the worst worldwide.
An estimated 250,000 terminal cancer and HIV/AIDS patients suffer in pain needlessly
as a result of the government’s failure to provide access to inexpensive
pain medications such as morphine.
Key International Actors
Because of Nigeria’s role as a regional power, leading oil exporter, and major contributor
of troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions, foreign governments—
including the United States and the United Kingdom—have been reluctant
to publicly criticize Nigeria’s poor human rights record.
Although US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke out forcefully against endemic
government corruption during her August visit to Nigeria, she was unwilling to
publicly condemn the serious abuses committed by Nigeria’s security forces. The
UK government continued to play a leading role in international efforts to combat
money laundering by corrupt Nigerian officials. However, in fiscal year 2009 it
provided £132 million in aid to Nigeria, including security sector aid, without
demanding accountability for Nigerian officials and members of the security
forces implicated in corrupt practices or serious human rights abuses.
Multinational oil companies operating in the Niger Delta did little to curb pollution
and environmentally harmful gas flaring and oil spills caused by ageing and
poorly maintained infrastructure.
In its February review under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism, the UN
Human Rights Council recommended, among other things, that Nigeria improve
its legal framework for the protection of human rights, declare a moratorium on
the death penalty, end torture, and reform the police and criminal justice sector.