Nigeria
Attacks by the militant Islamist group Boko Haram and abuses by government
security forces led to spiraling violence across northern and central Nigeria. This
violence, which first erupted in 2009, has claimed more than 3,000 lives. The
group, which seeks to impose a strict form of Sharia, or Islamic law, in northern
Nigeria and end government corruption, launched hundreds of attacks in 2012
against police officers, Christians, and Muslims who cooperate with the government
or oppose the group.
In the name of ending Boko Haram’s threat to Nigeria’s citizens, government
security forces have responded with a heavy-hand. In 2012, security agents
killed hundreds of suspected members of the group or residents of communities
where attacks occurred. Nigerian authorities also arrested hundreds of people
during raids across the north. Many of those detained were held incommunicado
without charge or trial, in some cases in inhuman conditions. Some were
physically abused; others disappeared or died in detention. These abuses in
turn helped further fuel the group’s campaign of violence.
The failure of Nigeria’s government to address the widespread poverty, corruption,
police abuse, and longstanding impunity for a range of crimes has created
a fertile ground for violent militancy. Since the end of military rule in 1999, more
than 18,000 people have died in inter-communal, political, and sectarian violence.
Episodes of deadly inter-communal violence, including in Plateau and Kaduna
States, continued in 2012. Abuses by government security forces and the ruling
elite’s mismanagement and embezzlement of the country’s vast oil wealth also
continued largely unabated. Free speech and the independent media remained
robust. Nigeria’s judiciary continued to exercise a degree of independence, but
many of the corruption cases against senior political figures remained stalled in
the courts.
Boko Haram Violence
Suspected Boko Haram members have carried out hundreds of attacks, including
suicide bombings, across northern and central Nigerian since 2009, killing
more than 1,600 people. The group has primarily targeted police and other government
security agents, Christians, and Muslims working for or accused of
cooperating with the government.
At this writing, suspected Boko Haram members had gunned down or bombed
worshipers in at least 16 church services in 2012. The group also burned
schools, bombed newspaper offices, and assassinated Muslim clerics, politicians,
and traditional leaders. In the first 10 months of 2012 alone, more than
900 people died in suspected attacks by the group—more than in 2010 and
2011 combined.
Conduct of Security Forces
Government security forces have been implicated in serious human rights violations
in response to the Boko Haram violence. During raids in communities
where attacks have occurred in 2012, soldiers have allegedly burned homes and
executed Boko Haram suspects or residents with no apparent links to the group.
Nigerian authorities have rarely brought anyone to justice for these crimes.
Nigeria’s police force continues to be implicated in frequent human rights violations,
including extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary arrests, and extortionrelated
abuses. Despite promising public statements by the new inspector general
of police, corruption in the police force remains a serious problem. The
police routinely solicit bribes from victims to investigate crimes and from suspects
to drop investigations. Senior police officials embezzle or mismanage
police funds, often demanding monetary “returns” from money that their subordinates
extort from the public.
Meanwhile, the authorities have still not prosecuted members of the police and
military for the unlawful killing of more than 130 people during the 2008 sectarian
violence in Jos, Plateau state, the soldiers who massacred more than 200
people in Benue State in 2001, or soldiers involved in the complete destruction
of the town of Odi, Bayelsa State, in 1999.
Inter-Communal and Political Violence
Episodes of inter-communal violence continued in both Plateau and Kaduna
States, in central Nigeria. At this writing more than 360 people had died in 2012
in these two states. Victims, including children, were hacked to death, shot,
and burned alive—in many cases simply based on their ethnic or religious identity.
Inter-communal clashes in 2012 in Adamawa, Bauchi, Benue, Ebonyi,
Nasarawa, and Taraba States left more than 185 dead and hundreds more displaced.
Federal and state authorities failed to break the cycle of violence by
holding the perpetrators of these crimes accountable.
State and local government policies that discriminate against “non-indigenes”
people who cannot trace their ancestry to what are said to be the original inhabitants
of an area—also continue to exacerbate inter-communal tensions and perpetuate
ethnic-based divisions.
Government Corruption
President Goodluck Jonathan sacked the chairperson of the leading anti-corruption
agency, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), in
November 2011, but the EFCC, under its new head, Ibrahim Lamorde, has also
made little progress in combating government corruption. At this writing, the
EFCC had filed corruption charges in 2012 against a former governor of Bayelsa
State, who had fallen out with President Jonathan, and oil marketers for their
alleged role in a fraudulent fuel subsidy scheme, but executive interference with
the EFCC, a weak and overburdened judiciary, and the agency’s own failings
have continued to undermine the effectiveness of its work.
The country’s other prominent anti-corruption agency, the Independent Corrupt
Practices and Other Related Offences Commission, filed charges in September
against a former inspector general of police, Sunday Ehindero, and a former
police commissioner for allegedly embezzling public funds. At this writing, not a
single senior political figure in Nigeria was serving prison time for corruption.
Violence and Poverty in the Oil-Producing Niger Delta
The federal government’s 2009 amnesty program—which saw some 26,000 militants,
youth, and gang members surrender weapons in exchange for amnesty
and monthly cash stipends— has reduced attacks on oil facilities in the Niger
Delta. The government has doled out these financial incentives—some US$400
million annually—from the additional oil revenue, but it has still not addressed
the underlying causes of violence and discontent in the region, such as poverty,
government corruption, environmental degradation from oil spills, and impunity
for politically sponsored violence. Meanwhile, others want part of the lucrative
rewards, and in September the government announced that an additional 3,642
“ex-militants” would be added to the program.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Nigeria’s criminal and penal codes punish consensual homosexual conduct with
up to 14 years in prison. Sharia penal codes in many northern Nigerian states
criminalize consensual homosexual conduct with caning, imprisonment, or
death by stoning. In March, a court in Nasarawa State sentenced two men to
two-year prison terms for having sexual intercourse, and in September an Abuja
court sentenced a man to three months in prison for sodomy.
In November 2011, the Senate passed sweepingly discriminatory legislation that
would criminalize anyone who enters into or assists a same-sex marriage, or
supports lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender groups or meetings. At this writing,
the House of Representatives had passed the second reading of the bill.
Similar legislation has stalled at least twice in the past amid opposition from
domestic and international human rights groups.
Health and Human Rights
Widespread lead poisoning from artisanal gold mining in Zamfara State has
killed at least 400 children since 2010. At this writing 1,500 children were being
treated for lead poisoning, but thousands of other affected children had not
received any medical care. Funds were pledged by the federal government in
May to clean up the environment but had not been released at this writing. The government has also failed to implement safer mining practices, which could
reduce the rate of lead poisoning.
Freedom of Expression and Media
Civil society and the independent media openly criticize the government and its
policies, allowing for robust public debate. Yet journalists are still subject to
arrest and intimidation when reporting on issues implicating Nigeria’s political
and economic elite. In October, a High Court judge in Abuja awarded Desmond
Utomwen, a journalist with the weekly The News magazine, more than $630,000
in damages after police officers in December 2009 severely assaulted him while
covering a protest outside a bank in Abuja, the capital.
Several journalists were also killed in 2012. In January, Nansok Sallah, news editor
for the federal government’s Highland FM, was found dead under a bridge in
Jos, and in April Ibrahim Mohammed, a film editor with Africa Independent
Television, a private station, was found dead in a pool of blood in Kaduna.
Chuks Ogu, a cameraman with a private television station in Edo State,
Independent Television, was gunned down in April in Benin City.
On January 20, Enenche Akogwu, a journalist with Channels Television—also a
private station—was killed during citywide attacks by Boko Haram on police
facilities in Kano. Boko Haram bombed the offices of a private newspaper
ThisDay in Abuja and Kaduna on April 26, killing at least seven people. The
group also threatened to attack other media establishments.
Key International Actors
Nigeria’s role as a regional power, Africa’s leading oil exporter, and a major contributor
of troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions, has led foreign governments
to be reluctant to exert meaningful pressure on Nigeria over its poor
human rights record.
The United States government in June designated three Boko Haram members
as “Specially Designated Global Terrorists,” and in August pledged to help
Nigeria develop an “intelligence fusion cell.” In November, the US State Department expressed serious concerns about Nigerian security force abuses in
combating the Boko Haram violence.
The United Kingdom continued to play a leading role in international efforts to
combat money laundering by corrupt Nigerian officials. A London court in April
sentenced powerful former Delta State governor James Ibori to a 13-year prison
term for money laundering. However, the UK continues to provide substantial
foreign aid to Nigeria, including security sector assistance, without demanding
accountability for government officials or members of the security forces implicated
in corruption or serious human rights abuses.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay warned in January and June
that Boko Haram’s attacks may constitute crimes against humanity. The
International Criminal Court (ICC) continued its “preliminary examination” of the
situation in Nigeria. The ICC prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, visited Abuja in July
and her office released a report in November stating that there is a reasonable
basis to believe that Boko Haram has committed acts constituting crimes
against humanity.