N@><I@8
Deeply entrenched human rights problems, as well as the growing threat posed
by a militant Islamist group, underscored the pressing need for President
Goodluck Jonathan to strengthen and reform the institutions that ensure security
and the rule of law. National elections in April were heralded by many as
Nigeria’s fairest. Still, campaign violence, allegations of vote rigging, and inflation
of results—particularly in the rural areas of southeastern Nigeria, President
Jonathan’s stronghold—marred the elections.
Episodes of intercommunal violence continued to claim hundreds of lives,
including ongoing violence in Plateau State, and post-presidential election riots
and sectarian killings in northern Nigeria that left more than 800 dead.
Meanwhile abuses by government security forces and the ruling elite’s mismanagement
and embezzlement of the country’s vast oil wealth continued largely
unabated. Endemic corruption, poverty, poor governance, and unchecked
police abuses have created an environment where militant groups thrive and
find ready recruits in the vast cadre of Nigeria’s unemployed youth.
A series of bombings and numerous targeted killings by the Boko Haram militant
Islamist group in northern Nigeria had at this writing left more than 425
people dead in 2011, raising concern about the government’s use of heavyhanded
tactics in responding to the problem. Suspected members of the group
carried out dozens of attacks in the northern city of Maiduguri, gunning down
police officers, politicians, traditional leaders, and opposing clerics. The group
also claimed responsibility for the November bombings in the town of
Damaturu, Yobe State, that left at least 100 people dead, and a suicide bomb
attack in August on the United Nations building in Abuja that killed 24 people
and injured more than 100 others.
The administration took some steps to improve government transparency. In
May the National Assembly passed, and President Jonathan signed into law,
the Freedom of Information Act, which guarantees the public the right to access
public records. Free speech and the independent press remained robust.
Nigeria’s judiciary continued to exercise a degree of independence but was
dogged by public allegations of corruption. Meanwhile, many of the corruption cases against senior political figures remained stalled in the courts. Foreign
partners took some important steps to confront endemic corruption in Nigeria,
but appeared reluctant to exert meaningful pressure on the government over its
human rights record.
Intercommunal and Political Violence
Intercommunal, political, and sectarian violence has claimed more than 16,000
lives since the end of military rule in 1999. Protests by opposition supporters in
12 northern states following the April 16 presidential election degenerated into
three days of violent riots and sectarian killings between Christians and
Muslims that left hundreds dead, including at least 680 in Kaduna State.
Episodes of intercommunal violence continued in Plateau State, in central
Nigeria. At this writing more than 350 people had died in 45 separate incidents
in 2011. Victims, including children, were hacked to death, shot, burned alive,
and dragged off buses and killed, in many cases simply based on their ethnic
or religious identity. Intercommunal clashes in 2011 in Bauchi, Benue,
Nassarawa, Niger, and Taraba states left more than 120 dead and hundreds
more displaced.
State and local government policies that discriminate against “non-indigenes”—
people who cannot trace their ancestry to what are said to be the original
inhabitants of an area—continue to exacerbate intercommunal tensions and
perpetuate ethnic-based divisions. Federal and state authorities failed to break
the cycle of violence by holding the perpetrators of these crimes accountable.
Conduct of Security Forces
As in previous years, the undisciplined Nigeria Police Force was implicated in
frequent human rights violations, including extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary
arrests, and extortion-related abuses. The police routinely solicit bribes
from victims to investigate crimes and from suspects to drop investigations.
Embezzlement of police funds is rife among senior police officials who also
often demand monetary “returns” from money extorted from the public by their
subordinates. Meanwhile, soldiers were implicated in several attacks on villages in Plateau State in August and September, and in extrajudicial killings in
response to Boko Haram attacks in Maiduguri.
In July the attorney general’s office filed criminal charges against five police
officers, including three assistant commissioners of police, for the 2009 extrajudicial
killing of the Boko Haram leader Mohammed Yusuf and his followers.
But the authorities have still not prosecuted members of the police and military
for the unlawful killing of more than 130 people during the November 2008 sectarian
violence in Plateau State, the soldiers who massacred more than 200
people in Benue State in 2001, or the members of the military involved in the
complete destruction of the town of Odi, Bayelsa State, in 1999.
Government Corruption
Nigeria made only limited progress with its anti-corruption campaign in 2011.
The Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) at this writing had
arraigned 35 nationally prominent political figures on corruption charges since
2003, including in 2011 a former federal minister, four former state governors,
and a former speaker and deputy speaker of the House of Representatives.
But executive interference with the EFCC, a weak and overburdened judiciary,
and the agency’s own failings have undermined the effectiveness of its work. At
this writing the commission had only secured four convictions of senior political
figures, and they faced relatively little or no prison time. The EFCC has failed
to prosecute other senior politicians widely implicated in corruption, and the
political elite continues to squander and siphon off the country’s tremendous
oil wealth, leaving poverty, malnutrition, and mortality rates among the world’s
highest.
Violence and Poverty in the Oil-Producing Niger Delta
The 2009 amnesty—which saw a few thousand people, including top militant
commanders, surrendering weapons in exchange for cash payments—has
reduced attacks on oil facilities, but kidnappings, mostly of family members of
wealthy Nigerians, continued in the Niger Delta and southeastern Nigeria. The
government made little effort to address the environmental damage from oil pollution, state and local government corruption, and political sponsorship of
armed groups, which drive and underlie violence and poverty in the oil-rich
region.
Decades of oils spills—from multinational oil company operations, sabotage of
pipelines, and bunkering (theft) of crude oil—and widespread gas flaring have
left the Niger Delta heavily polluted. A UN report in August found that oil pollution
in the Ogoniland region of Rivers State may require the world’s largest
clean up ever, at an initial cost of US$1 billion, and take up to 30 years. The UN
team found that oil contamination had migrated into the groundwater in at
least eight spill sites that Shell—the largest oil company in Nigeria—had
claimed they had remediated.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Sharia
State governments in 12 northern states apply Sharia law as part of their criminal
justice systems, which include sentences—such as the death penalty,
amputations, and floggings—that amount to cruel, inhuman, and degrading
punishment. In September a court in Zamfara State sentenced two men to
amputation of their right hands. At this writing the case was under appeal.
Serious due process concerns also exist in these proceedings, and evidentiary
standards in the Sharia codes applied in these states discriminate against
women, particularly in adultery cases.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Nigeria’s federal criminal code punishes consensual homosexual conduct with
up to 14 years in prison. In states applying Sharia, consensual homosexual conduct
among men is punishable by death (stoning), and by flogging and six
months in prison in the case of women. Federal legislation that would criminalize
anyone who enters into or assists a “same gender” marriage was introduced
in the Senate in July. Similar legislation has been introduced in the National
Assembly at least twice before and stalled amid opposition from domestic and
international human rights activists.
Health and Human Rights
Widespread lead poisoning from artisan gold mining in Zamfara State has killed
at least 500 children since 2010. At this writing 1,500 children were being treated
for lead poisoning, but hundreds of other affected children had not received
any medical care. The government has also failed to adequately clean up the
environment and regulate ongoing mining practices.
Freedom of Expression and Media
Civil society and the independent press openly criticize the government and its
policies, allowing for robust public debate. Yet journalists are still subject to
arrest and intimidation when reporting on issues implicating Nigeria’s political
and economic elite. The police arrested six journalists from the Nation newspaper
in October after they published a purported letter from former President
Olusegun Obasanjo. In October Zakariyya Isa, a journalist with the state
National Television Authority, was gunned down in Maiduguri. Boko Haram
claimed responsibility for the killing.
Key International Actors
Because of Nigeria’s role as a regional power, Africa’s leading oil exporter, and
a major contributor of troops to UN peacekeeping missions, foreign governments—
including the United States and the United Kingdom—have generally
been reluctant to publicly criticize Nigeria over its poor human rights record.
US government officials did speak out forcefully against the country’s endemic
government corruption, but they were less willing to condemn the serious abuses
committed by Nigeria’s security forces. The UK government continued to play
a leading role in international efforts to combat money laundering by corrupt
Nigerian officials, demonstrated by the April extradition from Dubai of powerful
former Delta State governor James Ibori. However, the UK increased funding to
£180 million ($280 million) in aid to Nigeria in 2011, including security sector
assistance, without demanding accountability for government officials or members
of the security forces implicated in corruption or serious human rights
abuses.
During the UN secretary-general’s visit to Nigeria in May he expressed concern
about intercommunal violence, but failed to put meaningful pressure on the
Nigerian government to allow a mission to Plateau State by his special adviser
on the prevention of genocide, after the government failed to approve the visit.