 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, with a directly elected President, Vice
 President, and a 92-member unicameral National Assembly. President Violeta
 Barrios de Chamorro was elected in a free and fair election in 1990, defeating the
 incumbent Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) candidate, Daniel Ortega.
 She delegated significant executive authority to her son-in-law, Antonio Lacayo, who
 served as Minister of the Presidency for 5 years until he resigned in September. The
 executive branch coexists with an increasingly activist National Assembly, whose
 powers were augmented as a result of reforms to the 1987 Constitution which were
 enacted in July. These reforms followed 9 months of political and institutional strug-
 gle between the executive and legislative branches, which contributed to paralysis
 of the Supreme Court and interrupted the work of the Supreme Electoral Council
 (the two other coequal branches of government). The stalemate was overcome only
 after Catholic Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo was brought in as a guarantor for
 the negotiated settlement.
 The President is commander-in-chief of the army and nominal Minister of De-
 fense; there is no Defense Ministry. On February 21, General Humberto Ortega
 stepped down after 16 years as head of the army, and President Chamorro named
 General Joaquin Cuadra as his successor for a 5-year term of office in accordance
 with the 1994 Military Code. In a constitutional reform symbolic of strengthened ci-
 vilian control and depoliticization of the military, the Sandinista Popular Army was
 
 
 officially renamed the Army of Nicaragua. The Ministry of Government oversees the
 National Police, which are formally in charge of internal security however, they
 share this responsibility on a de facto basis with the army in rural areas. Members
 of the security forces committed human rights abuses.
 Nicaragua is an extremely poor country. The economy is predominantly agricul-
 tural, dependent on sugar, beef, coffee, and seafood exports, with some light manu-
 facturing. The economy grew for the second year (after 10 years of negative growth)
 at a rate of 4 percent. Despite significant foreign debt relief negotiated during the
 year, the country continued to have a precarious balance of payments position and
 remained heavily dependent on foreign assistance. Although investment increased,
 the slow and complicated resolution of confiscated property claims and uncertainty
 over the political succession in 1996 continued to dampen the investment climate.
 The estimated rate of unemployment was 18 percent, while total unemployment and
 underemployment may have exceeded 50 percent. Inflation, which reached
 hyperinflation levels in the late-1980's through 1990, was 11 percent in 1995. The
 estimated per capita annual income is $458.
 The security forces continued to commit human rights abuses, although fewer
 than in previous years. Murders, extrajudicial killings, reports of torture and wide-
 spread mistreatment of detainees by police, and violence by criminal bands in rural
 areas of northern Nicaragua were common. A January 6 incident near the northern
 town of La Maranosa resulted in the deaths of 13 members of a criminal band and
 2 army personnel. Local human rights groups pointed to credible evidence that the
 army ambushed the band, while the army c aimed that it only acted in self-defense.
 In   ay a civiian judge absolved army personnel of all wrongdoing.
 Since President Chanorro assumed office, the focus of international attention has
 been on safeguarding the human rights of former members of the Nicaraguan Re-
 sistance (RN) since most human rights observers, including the Sandinista-led Nica-
 ragan Cente     r Human Rights (CENIDH), acknowledge that more ex-RN than
 FSLNmembers have been homicide victims. The Organization of American States
 International Support and Verification Commission (OASICIAV) recorded 370 ex-RN
 members killed from June 1990 through August 1995, with 71 of these deaths occur-
 ring during 1995. The number and percentage of these deaths attributed to the se-
 curity forces continued to decline from previous years. The conviction rate among
 the killers, particularly but not exclusively of the ex-RN, was so low that a state
 of impunity could still be said to exist.
 The security forces continued to resist implementing recommendations issued by
 the Tripartite Commission composed of the Government, the Catholic Church, and
 OAS/C AV. In September the Commission submitted a fourth report to President
 Chamorro, covering an additional 33 cases, which showed that ony 14 of 120 rec-
 ommendations contained in the three previous commission reports had been com-
 plied with. Of the 111 members of the security forces named in the report, only 4
 were found guilty of homicide and 3 of negligence-non of whom served a full sen-
 tence. In response to reiuets from the army and the Ministry of Government,
 President Chamorro asked the Supreme Court to review cases involving army and
 police officials whom the military court system had either found not guilty or failed
 to prosecute. The Supreme Court agreed to this request, and a three-judge panel
 was named to review the cases. By year's end, however, the panel had not ruled
 on a single case.
 A we   judiciary continued to hamper prosecution of human rights abusers. Arbi-
 trary arrest and detention, the slow pace of justice, and poor prison conditions also
 remained problems. On December 13, the National Assembly passed legislation cre-
 ating an independent Attorney General for Human Rights, to be staffed in 1996. Vi-
 olence against women, including rape and domestic abuse, remained a serious prob-
 lem, hut public officials took little effective action to counter it.
 RRESPECr FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The civil war formally concluded in
 June 1990 with the demobilization of the Nicar an Resistane; however, Nica-
 raguan society continued to be politically polarized and heavily armed. In particular,
 the rule of law and basic infrastructure did not extend to rural areas. Reflecting
 these sources of instability, the level of violence primarily criminal in nature has
 increased over previous years in the traditionally conflictive, poverty-stricken north-
 ern and north-central zones. At the same time, OAS/CIAV reported that deaths of
 demobilized RN combatants attributed to police and army officials continued to fall,
 both in number and as a percentage of total homicides, from a monthly average of
 6.1 in 1990 to 1.1 in 1995. The latter represents a 72 percent decrease from 1994.
 
 
 479
 A total of 71 deaths in 1995 brought to 370 the number of demobilized RN members
 who died under violent circumstances since the beginning of the Chamorro adminis-
 tration. Of the 71 dead, according to OAS/CIAV, the security forces killed 13, and
 unknown other assailants' killed 25. OAS/CIAV attributed the remainder-33
 deaths-to fellow ex-RN members or to Recontras (rearmed resistance members).
 To address the issue of ex-RN deaths, President Chamorro established the Tri-
 partite Commission in September 1992. The Commission, composed of the civilian
 Government, the Catholic Church, and OAS/CIAV, issued three reports during 1993,
 covering investigations of 88 deaths and including 120 recommendations for follow-
 up action by the Government and security forces, ranging from arrest of known per-
 petrators to investigations of probable obstruction of justice. In September the Tri-
 partite Commission submitted to President Chamorro a fourth report, covering an
 additional 33 cases plus an evaluation of the compliance level of all recommenda-
 tions contained in the three reports issued in 1993. The Commission verified that
 only 14 of the 120 recommendations contained in the first three reports had been
 fully implemented. Of 73 members of the police named in the three reports, 36 were
 tried on criminal charges and 5 were convicted. Of 38 military officials named, 20
 were tried and 2 were convicted. According to OAS/CIAV, none of those convicted
 served a complete sentence.
 Senior army and police officials had long impeded the work of the Tripartite Com-
 mission by refusing to implement its recommendations or respond to its requests for
 information. However, on June 6 army commander General Joaquin Cuadra asked
 President Chamorro to have the Supreme Court review cases involving military per-
 sonnel. The Minister of Government submitted a similar request on July 11 or re-
 view of cases involving the police. The Supreme Court president agreed to form a
 three-judge panel of court members to review the cases (10 from the army and 9
 from the police) but had produced no rulings by year's end.
 Armed bandit gups blocked highways, burned vehicles, and engaged in robbery,
 kidnaping for ransom, and murder in the conflictive northern and north-central
 zones. Clashes between these bands and security forces resulted in numerous deaths
 on bth sides and heightened tensions in the area. In response, the Government ini-
 tiated "plan cafe" (also known as "plan norte") in November 1994. During the suc-
 ceeding 6 months, the Government deployed increased numbers of army and police
 to guard coffee transport routes and to protect farmers from extortion or kidnaping.
 Local human rights gaoups reported very few cases of human rights abuses by the
 security forces deployed in the p lan, and producers gave the army and police high
 marks for responsiveness to public security needs.
 On the night of January 6, 11 members of the Meza family criminal band-a
 group with a well-documented history of extortion, arson, and murder-as well as
 2 other civilians associated with the Mesas and 2 army enlisted men were killed
 under questionable circumstances near La Maranosa, in the northern department
 of Jinotega. OASICIAV records listed two of the deceased (including one of the sol-
 diers) as demoblized for     me  embers; up to three others may have also been
 associated with the RN. The army contended that the 13 civilians, who were being
 transported in an army vehicle to a disarmament site but who had not yet been dis-
 armed, attacked their military escorts, killing 2 soldiers, and were themselves killed
 inan ensuing firefight with military personnel in a trailing vehicle. Althoughapo
 lice investigation corroborated the army's version, local human rights groups, 0AS
 CLAV, and the National Assembly's Human Rights Commission issued reports to the
 contrary. They cited forensic evidence, the volume of spent bullet cartridges and
 military supplies found in the vicinity, and eyewitnesses who claimed that the civil-
 ians had air'ady been disarmed and that a sqad of soldiers had deployed hours
 earlier at the site of the incident. These organizations concluded that the army had
 carried out a premeditated ambush, even a massacre. A civilian judge absolved the
 army of wrongdoing (see Section i.e.).
 On July 14, police lieutenant Marvin Torres shot and killed Camilo Sanchez while
 interrogating him in a police detention cll. Tores claimed that he shot Sanchez in
 anger after the latter confessed to sexually molesting a minor. With full police co-
 operation, the Attorney General's office pressed charges against Tores. Despite ini-
 til support for Tores from a public frustrated with the lack of successful prosecu-
 tions in child abuse cases, no evidence of Sanchez's confession existed except for
 Tores' testimony. The judge charged Torres with murder and denied him bail.
 Tores' trial was still pending at year's end.
 On the night of September 24, off-duty army Major Ivan Gutierrez was at a local
 amusement park with his family when some men made disparaging remarks about
 his daughter. Gutierrez removed his family and returned to kill Carlos Jose Salinas.
 Acording to eyewitnesses, Salinas was not even involved in the incident. Gutierrez
 
 
 480
 was charged on October 6 with homicide and imprisoned pending trial which had
 not begun by year's end.
 Many other incidents of political and extrajudicial killings dating as far back as
 1990 remained unresolved by year's end. In November 1991, a special Presidential
 Commission charged with investigating the February 1991 assassination of former
 RN commander Enrique Bermudez was dissolved after it claimed that there was a
 lack of evidence. The authorities took no action to reopen the case in 1995.
 On January 27, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights formally accepted the
 case of 16-year-old Jean Paul Genie for review on the charge of obstruction of jus-
 tice. Genie was slain in October 1990 in an incident involving the motorcade of then
 army commander General Humberto Ortega. The Court rejected the Government's
 argument that it lacked authority in the case due to the fact that Nicaragua had
 not yet accepted the Court's jurisdiction at the time of the incident. On December
 9, the Court formally issued summonses for General Ortega, current army com-
 mander General Joaquin Cuadra, and four other government and army officials in-
 volved in the case to testify on September 6, 1996. While those involved claimed
 that the Inter-American Court had no jurisdiction in Nicaragua, the then vice For-
 eign Minister, Jose Pallais, called on all Nicaraguans to cooperate with the Court
 and to honor obligations to the international community, although he claimed that
 the witnesses were called before the Court as private citizens. In June 1994, a mili-
 tary court had declared General Ortega and his bodyguards innocent of the killing.
 The Genie family appealed this decision to the Supreme Court, but by year's end
 the court had not ruled in the matter.
 On July 14, the Attorney General's office petitioned the Supreme Court to order
 the immediate arrest of former army Lieutenant Colonel Frank Ibarra. Ibarra was
 sentenced in 1993 to 20 years' imprisonment for the November 1992 murder of Dr.
 Arges Sequeira Mangas, director of the Association of Nicaraguan Confiscated Prop-
 erty Owners. A Leon appellate court upheld the sentence in March 1994. The Su-
 preme Court has not ruled on the Attorney General's petition nor on an appeal filed
 by Ibarra's lawyer to overturn the appellate court ruling on the grounds that a pres-
 idential amnesty covered barra's crime. Ibarra has remained at large since
 Sequeira's death.
 b. Disappearance.-While there were no reports of politically motivated disappear-
 ances in 1995, there was no progress in resolving the case of Mario Benjamin
 Mendez. He was last seen being led by three soldiers and a policeman into the
 mountains outside the northern town of Juigalpa on October 27, 1994. Mendez had
 been prominently involved in a local land dispute. Witnesses to the incident, one
 of whom police threatened and severely beat, identified the policeman and two of
 the soldiers. The army subsequently reported that the two soldiers had deserted,
 and no action was ever taken against the policeman.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no confirmed reports of torture by the authorities during 1995. However,
 there were credible reports that police frequently beat and otherwise physically mis-
 treated detainees, often to obtain confessions. Human rights groups attributed these
 abuses in part to the prevailing state of impunity, as well as to a lack of training
 in sophisticated investigative techniques that would enable the police to avoid re-
 sorting to crude, often brutal methods. CENIDH and other observers argued that
 the lack of adequate budget support for professional training, salaries and benefits,
 and proper equipment and supplies hampered efforts to improve police performance.
 In addition, the physical remoteness of judicial centers prevents prisoners' relatives
 from personally monitoring the status of ongoing cases, which detracts from police
 responsiveness to the public.
 The Office of Civil Inspection for Professional Responsibility of the Ministry of
 Government also is responsible for monitoring allegations of illegal detention and
 police abuse. Through October the office formally received 194 complaints. However,
 the office concluded that only 33 of these were human rights cases; these figures
 represent a decline from the same period in 1994-341 and 47, respectively. Civil
 inspection officials credit this drop in part to the public's willingness to present com-
 plaints directly to the police. Because no internal mechanism exists, the office is un-
 able to verify if those suspected of abuses are ever formally punished. According to
 the office, the authorities did not punish any police official for any of the abuses
 recorded. The unit's small budget and staff hamper the investigation of complaints,
 and no internal mechanism exists to pressure the Ministry of Government to take
 corrective action once the unit submits a complaint. Members of the unit consider
 its location in the Ministry building-which during the Sandinista era was the site
 of the feared Interior Ministry-to be an intimidating factor for those seeking to
 lodge complaints of police or prison abuse.
 
 
 481
 The prison system in Nicaragua remained overcrowded and underfunded, with
 medical attention virtually nonexistent and malnutrition a constant problem. Ac-
 cording to government statistics, prisons had an inmate population of 3,299, an av-
 erage of 60 percent overcapacity, as of mid-December. The prisons of Esteli,
 Chinandega, and Juigalpa housed more than double their intended capacity. The
 1995 prison budget was actually less than the 1994 budget, although the inmate
 population increased by 12 percent. Prison officials calculated that the daily expend-
 iture on prisoners fell from $3.67 per prisoner in 1992 to $3.06 in 1995. Press re-
 ports at the end of the year announced the deaths of two inmates for lack of medical
 attention.
 An estimated 10 percent of the prison population was between the ages of 15 and
 18. A lack of separate juvenile detention centers required youths to be housed in
 the same prisons as adults. Although prison officials often tried to separate youths
 and adults in different wings of the institution, crowded conditions generally made
 it impossible to prevent juveniles' contact with older prisoners. While only Managua
 has a separate prison for women, there have been no reports of problems ensuing
 from mixed facilities.
 Police station holding cells (where suspects can legally be detained for 48 hours
 before evidence must be presented to a judge) were equally overcrowded. Officials
 claimed that suspects were often left in these cells during their trials, as budgetary
 shortfalls often restricted the use of scarce fuel for the frequent transfers from pris-
 on to distant courtrooms. As a result of overcrowding in both the cells and in pris-
 ons police and penitentiary officials issued urgent calls for increased budgets to
 build more facilities and increase food purchases. Government officials claimed that
 their budget, already stretched thin, could not meet these demands.
 On September 18, university student Cardo Jiron was killed in cross fire between
 police and a gang which was in the process of assaulting Jiron. The criminals fled
 after initiating fire on the police. Police detained and severely beat several students
 who were with Jiron, believing them to be part of the gang even though they had
 no weapons. Three of the police were charged in the case.
 On December 13, a demonstration by university students and others outside the
 National Assembly left 2 protesters dead, 66 demonstrators wounded (10 by gunfire
 according to police officials), and 8 police officers wounded. (That demonstration fol-
 lowed a December 12 incident in which the students had "invaded" and temporarily
 shut down the national airport and forcibly occupied two government ministries.)
 Police officials denied issuing an order to open fire and claimed that individual offi-
 cers were forced to fire in self-defense when attacked by demonstrators hurling
 rocks and firing homemade projectiles. Some human rights groups contended that
 the demonstrators turned violent only after the police fired tear gas and acted with
 excessive force against peaceful demonstrators. The police were not adequately pre-
 pared to control the violence, and on December 14, suspended 14 officers suspected
 of being involved in the incident, pending further investigation. A commission com-
 posed of the police, the civil inspection unit, and the attorney general's office re-
 ported that the demonstration had not been authorized, cited the students for initi-
 ating the violence, accused some police officials of "unauthorized and unnecessary
 use of firearms," and called for the outfitting of riot police with nonlethal equip-
 ment. A trial o? police officers suspected of firing on the crowd is scheduled for the
 spring of 1996.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention by the po-
 lice were common. The Police Functions Law requires police to obtain a warrant
 prior to detaining a suspect and to notify family members within 24 hours of the
 detainee's whereabouts. However, the police rarely comply with this law. Detainees
 do not have the right to an attorney until they have been formally charged with
 a crime. Local human rights groups criticized the law for providing inadequate judi-
 cial oversight of police arrests.
 The constitutional reforms instituted in July reduced from 72 to 48 hours the time
 police may legally hold a suspect before they must bring him before a judge for ini-
 tial sentencing. The judge must either then order the accused released or trans-
 ferred to prison. Human rights groups complained that the police often held detain-
 ees illegally beyond the 48-hour deadline, as they had when the 72-hour rule was
 in effect, only to release them without formally charging them of any crime.
 In July police officials issued a public warning that delays in the transfer of de-
 tainees from police station detention cells to prison were creating dangerous levels
 of overcrowding of more than 30 percent beyond the designed capacity of the deten-
 tion cells. This was rapidly depleting the annual food budget.
 The Reform Law of Criminal Procedures provides for bail for certain crimes. The
 Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) recorded 171 complaints of ille-
 gal or arbitrary detention by the National Police, out of 377 police-related com-
 
 
 482
 plaints received through November. CENEDH charged that 60 percent of all com-
 plaints it received from January to August were fied against the police.
 Local human rights groups conducted a series of human rigts seminars with
 members of the police, for both active officers at their regional headquarters and
 new recruits as part of their initial training.
 Exile is not practiced. There were no reports of political violence against any citi-
 zens returning from self-imposed exile overseas as a consequence of the civil war
 of the past decade.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system comprises both civil and mili-
 tary courts. The 12-member Supreme Court of Justice is the system's highest court
 and is also responsible for nominating all appellate and lower court judges. A politi-
 cal crisis from mid-1994 until the enactment of constitutional reforms in July cre-
 ated internal political divisions within the court. A frequent lack of a quorum of
 seven judges often prevented the issuance of binding legal decisions. The reforms
 expanded the court's composition from a maximum of 9 to 12 magistrates, extended
 their term of office from 6 to 7 years, and mandated the court's division into special-
 ized chambers on administrative, criminal, and civil matters. The reforms also per-
 mitted the National Assembly and the executive branch to submit lists of candidates
 to fill court vacancies. The National Assembly elected 1 new justice on May 3 and
 5 additional justices on July 21 to bring the court up to its new complement of 12.
 In April the Supreme Court dismissed a local magistrate in Bluefields for admin-
 istrative incompetence after he authorized the provisional release of several boat
 crewmen charged with transporting cocaine. In contrast, Supreme Court officials
 maintained they had no authority to intervene with a Sandinista judge in Managua
 who was alleged to have failed to meet legal deadlines during 1995 for issuing an
 arrest warrant against a former high-level Sandinista official who had repeatedly
 refused to appear for questioning in the investigation of a May 1993 explosion of
 a terrorist arms cache in the Santa Rosa neighborhood of Managua. The judge re-
 signed on December 8. Human rights and legal groups complained about the delay
 of justice caused by judicial inaction, sometimes for years, as with the Jean Paul
 Genie case before the Supreme Court (see Section L.a.).
 The 1994 Military Code allows the civilian court system to try members of the
 military charged with common crimes, and by the end of November, 137 cases (10
 involving the army and 127 involving the police) were being processed by the civil
 system. As a result, a civilian judge in Jinotega heard the "La Maranosa" case (see
 Section L.a.) and on May 24 dismissed all charges against 21 army officials involved
 in the incident. Local human rights groups decried the Attorney General's report to
 the court for failing to take fully into account the reports on the incident by the
 human rights groups and the National Assembly's Human Rights Commission. They
 also criticized the judge's failure to summon eyewitnesses and family members to
 testify or to consider forensic evidence relevant to the case. Some observers alleged
 that the army had pressured the judge directly to obtain acquittals in the case and
 reported that relatives of the Meza family did not appeal the local judge's verdict
 for fear of army reprisals. The army denied interfering in the judicial process.
 In all criminal cases, the accused has the right to legal counsel, and defendants
 are presumed innocent until proven guilty. The presiding judge appoints attorneys
 from a standard list to represent indigent defendants, but because they are not paid
 by the State, many attorneys pay the $1.50 fine rather than represent a client with-
 out receiving any compensation. This contributed greatly to the slow pace of justice,
 as many prisoners spent more than a year in jail without a trial. The Permanent
 Commission for Human Rights (CPDH) has estimated that nearly half of all those
 incarcerated in the prison system have been awaiting trial for between 6 months
 and 2 years.
 There were no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that all persons have the right to privacy of their family and
 to the inviolability of their home, correspondence, and communications. It also re-
 quires warrants for searches of private homes and excludes from legal proceedings
 illegally seized letters, documents, and private papers. The Government respects
 these rights in practice, and there were no credible reports of official interference
 with the right of privacy.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and a free press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. The pri-
 vately owned print media, the broadcast media, and academic circles freely and
 oeny discussed diverse viewpoints in public discourse with no interference from
 t  ve MvT-t
 
 
 483
 The news medium with the largest audience is radio, but polls show that tele-
 vision is the primary source of news, particularly in the cities. Listeners receive a
 wide variety of poiti"ca viewpoints, especialy on Managua's 45 radio stations. There
 are five television stations, three of which carry news programming with partisan
 political content. There is no official state censorship, nor is self-censorship prac-
 ticed.
 On the night of July 21, in the context of an apparent campaign of harassment
 of Catholic Church-linked institutions by unidentified parties (see Section 2.c.), van-
 dals broke into the Church's official radio station, Radio Catolica, and stole trans-
 mission equipment that prevented the station from broadcasting for several hours
 until the parts were replaced. Station officials described the break-in as a "warning"
 carried out by professional criminals.
 Freedom of the press is potentially qualified, however, by several constitutional
 provisions. The Constitution stipulates that Nicaraguans have the right to "accurate
 information," thereby providing an exception by which the freedom to publish infor-
 mation that the Government deems inaccurate could be abridged. Although the
 right to information cannot be subject to censorship, there is retroactive liability es-
 tablished by law, defined as a "social responsibility," implying the potential for sanc-
 tions against irresponsibility by the press. The Legislature did not modify these pro-
 visions in the constitutional reforms, but neither did the Government invoke these
 provisions to suppress the media.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution recognizes
 the right to peaceful assembly with out prior permission. It also recognizes the right
 to public assembly, demonstration, and mobilization "in conformity with the law."
 The law requires demonstrators to obtain permission for a rally or march by reg-
 istering its planned size and location with police. The authorities routinely granted
 such permission.
 The Constitution provides for the right to organize or affiliate with political par-
 ties, and opposition and independent associations functioned freely without govern-
 ment interference or restriction. Private associations do not have legal status to con-
 duct private fund raising or receive public financial support until they receive this
 authorization from the National Assembly, which it routinely confers. Some human
 rights and political groups criticized the Assembly for extending legal recognition in
 January to the pro-   LN Revolutionary Front of Workers and Peasants (FROC)
 which in July 1993 had attacked the town of Esteli robbing five local banks and
 killing and wounding scores of citizens. Supporters of the FROC argued that a 1993
 vernment amnesty had cleared its recrd and pointed to the Assembly's April
 994 legal recgnition of the 380-Northern Front, a group of formally disarmed
 Recontras which likewise had been amnestied, as a precedent
 c. Freedom of Religion-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 On May 3, the Conference of Catholic Bishops issued a public statement criticiz-
 in  g the impasse between the executive and leglative brances on the pending con-
 Churh o Sa Feipeineon S   imila sml ngttim  explosin   cure    tCto
 A                    Fro �  . .. . p  of
 lic churches and offices, principally in Managua, Leon, and Masaya, during subse-
 quent months in what appeared to be a campaign by anonymous individuals or
 groups to intiidate the Church. Cardinal Migul Obando y Bravo and other church
 officials also received numerous telephone threats during the year; Church spokes-
 men attributed the explosions and threats to an organize effort by anti-Church ele-
 ments to prevent the planned February 1996 visit of Pope John Paul . In early
 August, the police arrested three person, including an army lieutenant, in connec-
 tioi with supplying the bombers with explosives, but the attacks continued. On Au-
 st 2    ailtay court convicted Lieutenant Alberta Elvir Quiroz and sentenced
 hm to6 years' imprisonment for misappropriation of military     t  A civilian
 court later convicted him and a former soldier of terrorism and ther. Despite these
 convictions, the small bembings continued through the end of the year.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Countr,~ Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-he Constitution provides for the right to travel and reside anywhere
 in Nicaragua and to enter andexit the country freely. The law requires citizens to
 obtain an exit visa to leave the country, but immigration authorities routinely
 granted these. However, the law also allows a judge to order immigration officials
 todeny exit visas to those involved in court cases if there is reasonable suspicion
 that the accused will abscond. Judicial experts agree that the spirit of this law was
 violated when the publisher of the daily newspaper La Tribuna was denied an exit
 visa in October after his paper published excerpts from a public reprt by the Comp-
 troller General's office alleging corruption in the property registrar's office. On N-
 vember 6, a court of appeals overturned the decision.
 
 
 484
 
 There are no government restrictions on movement within the country. The right
 of citizens to return to Nicaragua is not established in the Constitution, but, in prac-
 tice, the Government has not restricted anyone's return. The Constitution provides
 for asylum, and political refugees cannot be expelled to the country persecuting
 them.
 In 1993 the Government attempted to strip former Red Brigade terrorist, Alessio
 Cassimirri, of his Nicaraguan citizenship and to deport him. Cassimirri has been
 accused in the 1978 mur of Italian Prime Minister Aldo More. At year's end, the
 Supreme Court was still debating whether the annulment of the citizenship which
 the Sandinista Government granted him in 1988 was legal.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised their right peacefully to change their government in the na-
 tional elections of February 1990, the first election under the 1987 Constitution. The
 14-party National Opposition Union (UNO) coalition, the FSLN, and several smaller
 independent parties contested the election which international observers declared
 free and fair.
 The 1987 Constitution centers political power in the executive branch, headed by
 the President and a Cabinet appointed by the President. The President is both Head
 of State and Head of Government, as well as commander in chief of the defense and
 security forces. The Vice President has no constitutionally mandated duties or pow-
 ers. Both are elected by direct popular vote. The constitutional reforms enacted in
 July reduced the terms of office of the President and Vice President from 6 to 5
 years and prohibited the President's reelection, beginning with the next national
 elections in the fall of 1996. Also proibited from running for election as President
 are all relatives, by blood or marriage, of the incumbent president, an issue which
 President Chamorro's son-in-law (who was Minister of the Presidency until his res-
 igation on September 7) publicly questioned as a violation of his political rights.
 In addition, a group of ministers and vice ministers challenged the constitutionality
 of the new provision requiring them to resign their posts 1 year prior to running
 for high elective office in 1996. As of year's end, the court had not ruled on these
 issues.
 A single-chamber National Assembly of 92 members exercises legislative power.
 Its current members, elected concurrently with the President and Vice President in
 1990, also serve 6-year terms. Deputies elected in 1996 will serve 5-year terms. The
 constitutional reforms also stipated that 20 deputies will be elected in 1996 by
 proportional representation from national lists and 70 from lists presented in each
 of the nine departments or regions; defeated presidential candidates, of which there
 currently are two, also receive seats in the assembly, provided that they won a cer-
 tain minimum percentage of votes in the previous presidential election.
 On July 4, the President accepted 65 amendments to the 202-article Constitution
 of 1987, which had been passed by the National Assembly, ending a 9-month dis-
 pute between the executive and legislative branches. Moderate Sandinista deputies,
 who had broken away from the FSLN, joined with other parties to form the required
 60 percent majority to pass these reforms. This gave the legislative branch many
 new powers that traditionally had belonged exclusively to the executive branch, in-
 cluding powers over budget and taxation, ratification of international financial in-
 struments signed by the Government, and the right to nominate members of the Su-
 preme Court and Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the Comptroller General, the Attor-
 ney General, and the Superintendent of Banks.
 The Assembly had sought unsuccessfully to enact and implement these reforms
 unilaterally in February after the President refused to do so. After the Supreme
 Court voided the Assembly action in April, political negotiations between the two
 branches, overseen by a support group of five friendly governments (Canada, Mex-
 ico, Netherlands, Spain, an Sweden) were held but produced no results. Eventu-
 ally, Cardinal Obando y Bravo served as a guarantor in talks that produced an
 agreement called the Framework Law or "Ley Marco," which led to President
 Chamorro's promulgation of the reforms.
 The Supreme Electoral Council, an independent and coequal branch of Govern-
 ment composed of five magistrates, administers elections. All elections are by secret
 ballot; all citizens age 16 and over have the right to vote. The 1994 Military Code
 specifies that the Defense Intelligence Directorate (DID) is specifically prohibited
 from undertaking "political intelligence activities." Despite this prohibition,
 proconstitutional reform legislators denounced army colonel and former DID Direc-
 tor Lenin Cerna for using military intelligence operatives to try to influence-in
 part through intimidation of key deputies-the outcome of elections to the National
 
 
 Assembly's governing board in January. The army denied these accusations; the au-
 thorities failed to undertake any official investigation.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice against women, indigenous groups, or
 other minorities voting or participating in politics. A woman serves as President of
 the Republic, and a woman was elected in October as the new Vice President after
 the incumbent resigned to run for president in 1996. Women also hold ministerial
 and vice ministerial level posts, other senior positions in government, and legislative
 seats in the National Assembly. Two members of the National Assembly are-Miskito
 Indians; indigenous people are represented in government at both the local and na-
 tional levels.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operated without government interference, with rare excep-
 tions. Major organizations included the Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights, the
 Permanent Commission for Human Rights (CPDH), the Nicaraguan Association for
 Human Rights, the Episcopal Center for Development, and Carinal Miguel Obando
 y Bravo's Verification Commission. The OAS's international Support and Verifica-
 tion Commission, which was first installed in Nicaragua in 1990 to oversee the repa-
 triation disarmament, resettlement, and protection of human rights of the members
 of the Nicaraguan Resistane, continued its mission. In June 1993, the OAS General
 Assembly expanded the mandate of OAS/CIAV to monitor the human rights of and
 provide assistance to all those affected by the Nicaraguan civil war, regardless of
 political orientation. On June 9, the Government extended the OAS/CIAV mandate
 through June 1996.
 Army and police officials rarely took action to respond to human rights groups'
 accusations of abuses by military or police personnel. The Government took no fur-
 ther action regarding the unsolved March 1993 murder of CENIDH activist Leonel
 Gonzalez despite repeated CENIDH requests to reopen the case.
 In May OAS/CIAV formally complained to the Government after a military jeep
 fired on one of its vehicles three times. The army claimed that the soldiers were
 firing at "wild animals" and not at the vehicle. The Government called the actions
 "iresposible" and said that the army would discipline those involved in the inci-
 dent.      has been no information as to whether any such discipine was impsed.
 In June CENIDH    fied a complaint with the Inter-American Court of Human
 Rights against the Government atr police injured several CENIDH officials during
 plice attempts to break up a demonstration of striking workers outside a Managua
 match factory.
 Since its establishment in Septamber 1992, the Tripartite Commission has been
 the most effective mechanism Ior raising human rights allegations to an official
 level and eliciting a response from Government authorities. Recogzing a lack of
 police training in human rights (see Section 1.c.) ANPDH, CENIDH, and CPDH
 conducted numerous human rights workshops both at the police training academy
 and at various police headquarters throughout the country. OASICIAV began imple-
 menting an indigenous human rights network among isolated rural northern com-
 munities.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of birth, nationality, politi-
 cal belief, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, national origin, economic condi-
 tion, or social condition. In practice, however, the Government makes little or no ef-
 fort to combat discrimination. Few, if any, discrimination suits or formal complaints
 were filed with government officials.
 Women.-The police created four "women's commissariats"-two in Managua, one
 in Esteli, and one in Masaya-in response to a growing body of evidence of domestic
 abuse directed against women. The centers are annexed to local police stations and
 staffed by female police officers. They provide both social and legal help to women
 and mediate spousal conflicts. Despite this effort, however, local human rights
 groups reported that while police sometimes intervened to prevent injury in cases
 of domestic violence, they rarely charged irpetrators because they considered do-
 mestic violence a "private" crime for whi  the victim, not the State, must press
 charges. A victim wishing to prosecute must first have an injury examined and reg-
 istered by a forensic doctor, women's grups criticized the scarcity and inaccessibil-
 ity of female forensic doctors. Most domestic violence cases thus went unreported
 because of the difficulty of prosecution and the victims' fears of spousal reprisal.
 Those cases that actually reached the court usually resulted in a not guilty verdict
 due to judicial inexperience with, and lack of legal training related to, such violence.
 
 
 While there is no legal discrimination against women, they continued to suffer
 discrimination in the male-dominated culture prevalent in much of society. Women
 are underrepresented in management positions in the private sector, and they con-
 stitute the majority of workers in the traditionally low-paid education, textile, and
 health service sectors.
 According to government statistics, women have equal or somewhat better access
 to education than men. Net enrollment for girls in the primary grades is 79 percent,
 compared to 76 percent for boys. At the secondary level, 33 percent of girls and 26
 percent of boys are still enrolled.
 Children.-Children 15 years and younger make up 46 percent of Nicaragua's
 population. The Government expresses its commitment to children's human rights
 and welfare publicly but does not commit adequate funding levels for children's pro-
 grams. The lUnited Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) estimates 6,000 children
 have been abandoned by their families, some 2,000 live in orphanages, and approxi-
 mately 1,800 are in foster homes. Every year the media carry stories of dozens of
 parents who abandoned or killed their children because they were too poor or other-
 wise unable to take care of them. Because of the economic situation of many fami-
 lies, it is common for children to be found working in the fields alongside their par-
 ents, and UNICEF estimates some 20,000 work in the streets as vendors or beggars.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not legislated or otherwise man-
 dated accessibility for the disabled.
 Indigenous People.-Comprising about 6 percent of the country's population, the
 indigenous people live primarily in the northern autonomous region (RAAN) and
 southern autonomous region (RAAS), created in 1987 out of the former Department
 of Zelaya, which border the Caribbean Sea and comprise 47 percent of the national
 territory. The Government reported in May that four major identifiable tribes are
 the Miskito (numbering 140,000), the Sumu (15,000), the Garifona (1,500), and the
 Rama (1,000).
 The indigenous people of the RAAN (the Miskito and the Sumu) have their own
 political party, the Yatama, with strong representation in regional and municipal
 councils and one deputy in the National Assembly. Indigenous people participate in
 government at both the local and national levels. The 1987 Autonomy Law requires
 the Government to consult the indigenous regarding the exploitation of their areas'
 resources. The central Government often made decisions without adequate depart-
 mental or community consultation. As in previous years some indigenous groups
 complained that central Government authorities excluded the indigenous people of
 the Atlantic coast from meaningful participation in decisions affecting their lands,
 cultures, traditions and the allocation of natural resources. Critics of government
 policy cited official statistics that unemployent approached 70 percent in the
 RAAS and was nearly 90 percent in the RAAN, far above national averages.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Most Nicaraguans are of mixed background,
 and ethnicity is not a barrier to political or economic success. However, various in-
 digenous groups from both the RAAN and the RAAS sometimes linked the Govern-
 ment's failure to expend resources in support of the Atlantic coast population to the
 largely ethnic, racial, and religious (principally members of the Moravian church)
 minorities that predominate in that region.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of workers
 to organize voluntarily in unions. Legally, all public andprivate sector workers, ex-
 cept those in the military and the police, may form and join unions of their own
 choosing, and they exercise this right extensively. New unions must register with
 the Ministry of Labor and be granted legal status before they may engage in collec-
 tive bargaining. Some labor groups reported occasional delays in obtaining this sta-
 tus and claimed that, in some cases, the Labor Ministry deliberately interfered with
 the already lengthy bureaucratic process to make it still longer. Nearly half of the
 formal sector work force, including agricultural workers, is unionized, according to
 labor leaders.
 Nicaragua's unions are independent of the Government. Affiliation to or activity
 in political parties or associations is grounds for dissolution of a trade union under
 the existing Labor Code; however, the Government does not enforce this provision.
 Many unions and federations are affiliated with political parties, most notably with
 the FSLN, the Nicaraguan Socialist Party, the Christian Democratic Union, and,
 until 1992, the Nicaraguan Communist Party.
 The Constitution recognizes the right to strike. The Labor Code requires a 60 per-
 cent majority vote of all the workers in an enterprise to call a strike. It also restricts
 strikes in rural occupations where production may be damaged. Workers may strike
 legally only after they have exhausted other methods of dispute resolution, including
 
 
 487
 mediation by the Ministry of Labor and compulsory arbitration. Unions generally
 regard these lengthy procedures as too expensive and time consuming and fre-
 quently ignore them when initiating a strike, a practice which continued in 1995,
 resulting in a majority of strikes being declared illegal. The Labor Code prohibits
 retribution against strikers and union leaders for legal strikes. However, this protec-
 tion may be withdrawn in the case of an illegal strike.
 Both a brief strike by electrical workers in January and a 7 week teachers' strike
 in the spring ended peacefully and with minimal violence. However, on May 17 a
 demonstration organized by the violence-prone Sandinista Transport Cooperative
 "Parrales Vallejos' resulted in a clash with police that left two demonstrators and
 one police officer dead. CENIDH officials and the pro-Sandinista media claimed that
 the officer died as a result of "friendly fire," but an investigation by the Ministry
 of Government's civil inspection unit agreed with the Government's account that
 gunfire originating from the striking union's compound killed the officer and that
 the two demonstrators were killed w en police returned fire.
 On January 18, President Chamorro partially vetoed a reform of the country's 50-
 year old Labor Code which the National Assembly had passed in late 1994. Because
 it was otherwise occupied with the constitutional reform debate and other priority
 legislative matters, the National Assembly had not taken action on the veto by
 year's end and agreed to work out differences with the executive as part of the con-
 stitutional reforms compromise reached in June.
 Unions freely form or join federations or confederations and affiliate with and par-
 ticipate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to bargain collectively. The Chamorro Government generally sought to fos-
 ter resolution of pressing labor conflicts, usually in the public sector, through infor-
 mal negotiations rather than through formal administrative or judicial processes.
 Despite unfavorable economic conditions and unfamiliarity with the practice during
 a decade of central government planning and political direction under the Sandi-
 nistas, collective bargaining is becoming more common in the private sector.
 Seventeen firms, employing some 7,000 workers, operated in the single export
 processing zone (EPZ); a second zone is in the process of opening. In June the Min-
 ister of Labor reminded employers in the zone that while they receive tax conces-
 sions, the law does not exempt them from compliance with any of its labor provi-
 sions. Managua-based representatives of the American Institute for Free Labor De-
 velopment (AIFLD) contend that the Labor Ministry has thus far failed to enforce
 its call for compliance with the Labor Code. Of the 17 enterprises, only 1 (a state-
 owned firm) has a union. Labor leaders and employers have provided conflicting ac-
 counts as to why unions do not represent workers in other firms. Local labor leaders
 told the AIFLD representative that employers threatened workers with dismissal if
 they join a union. EPZ officials maintained that no union has received sufficient
 support from the workers to allow one to form and that the workers receive better
 wages and benefits than the average worker.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there is no evidence that it is practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits child
 labor that can affect normal childhood development or interfere with the obligatory
 school year. The current Labor Code allows children between the ages of 12 to 16
 to work but only with parental permission. The law limits the work day for such
 children to 6 hours and prohibits night work. Children under age 14 are prohibited
 from working in factories but can be used in agricultural work if the work does not
 interfere with their schooling. While the law requires school attendance through the
 sixth grade, it is not enforced. Moreover, because of the economic needs of many
 families and little government initiative, child labor rules were rarely enforced ex-
 cept in the small, modern sector of the economy.
 A recent UNICEF study, citing 1993 statistics, estimated that some 108,000 chil-
 dren under the age of 15 are involved in some sort of labor in the formal and infor-
 mal sectors of the economy. The same report estimated that 72,000 children under
 the age of 15 help with planting and harvesting crops. Children age 10 or older
 often worked for less than $1.00 per day on the same banana plantations and coffee
 plantations as their parents. Many small children work in the busy streets of Mana-
 gua hawking merchandise, cleaning automobile windows, or begng.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.--Over the objections of the trade union rep-
 resentatives, a commission made up of representatives from the Government, labor,
 and the private sector set sectoral minimum wages in mid-1991. The labor groups
 argued that the monthiy minimum wage rates were inadequate given the high cost
 of living. Adjusted periodically, the mnimum wage in November ranged from $30
 (236.70 cordobas) in the agricultural sector, through $39 (307.71 cordobas) for
 
 
 central government employees, to $65 (512.85 cordobas) in the banking sector. Ac-
 cording to a 1991 estimate by the Government's National Commission on the Stand-
 ard of Living, the minimum wage did not provide a family of four with the income
 to meet its basic needs. Enforcement of the minimum wage is lax, and some employ-
 ers reportedly paid their workers less, particularly in the agricultural sector. How-
 ever, recent Ministry of Labor surveys indicate that some 86 percent of urban area
 workers earned mere than the minimum wage.
 The Constitution provides for an 8-hour workday with weekly rest and establishes
 the right to a safe and healthy workplace. The standard legal workweek is a maxi-
 mum of 48 hours, with 1 day of rest weekly.
 The Ministry of Labor's Office of Hygiene and Occupational Security is responsible
 for verifying compliance with health and safety standards. The office lacks adequate
 staff to enforce these extensive standards. Workers have no specific right to remove
 themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employ-
 ment.
 In 1995 the International Labor Organization's Committee of Experts (COE) cited
 Nicaragua for its failure to enact changes in the Labor Code that would grant work-
 ers in small agricultural enterprises equal rights to workers' compensation as those
 granted to other w  -earners. The COE also noted that the Government had taken
 no steps to ban night work by women. However, the COE did note that women's
 organizations and female deputies in the National Assembly disagreed with any at-
 tempts to restrict female integration into the work force and called for legislation
 that would regulate maternity protection instead.
