 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, with a directly elected president, vice
 president and unicameral legislature. President Arnoldo Aleman was elected in a
 free and lair election in 1996, defeating his closest competitor, Daniel Ortega of the
 Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN). Aleman took office on January 10.
 The Supreme Electoral Council is an independent fourth branch of government. The
 judiciary is independent but continues to be susceptible to political influence.
 The President is the supreme chief of national defense and security forces. Presi-
 dent Aleman named a civilian to be Defense Minister to head a first-ever civilian
 Defense Ministry. The Ministry of Government oversees the National Police, which
 is formally charged with internal security. However, the police share this respon-
 sibility with the army in rural areas. Reflecting enhanced civilian control, the secu-
 rity forces' conduct improved, although some members continued to commit human
 rights abuses.
 Nicaragua is an extremely poor country, with an estimated per capita income of
 $465. The economy is predomnnantly agricultural, dependent on sugar, beef, coffee,
 and seafood experts, with some light manufacturing. The economy grew an esti-
 mated 5 percent in 1997-the fourth year of growth after a decade of contraction.
 The inflation rate was about 8 percent. The unemployment rate was officially esti-
 mated at 14 percent, with underemployment reaching 35 percent. Private invest-
 ment increased, but was hindered by the slow resolution of long-standing property
 disputes stemming from massive confiscations by the Sandinista government of the
 1980's. In November the National Assembly passed a new property law intended to
 resolve confiscated property claims. The country continued to have a precarious bal-
 ance of payments position and remained heavily dependent on foreign assistance.
 The Government s human rights record improved measurably, but some serious
 problems remain. Soldiers were ill-prepared for the law enforcement duties they reg-
 ularly performed in rural areas and sometimes killed criminal suspects instead of
 detaining them. Police beat and otherwise abused detainees, often to obtain confes-
 sions. There were few allegations, and no confirmed cases, of torture by the authori-
 ties. Prison and police holding cell conditions are poor. Security forces arbitrarily
 arrested and detained citizens. The judiciary is sometimes subject to political influ-
 ence and corruption. Large case backlogs, long delays in trials, and lengthy pretrial
 detention are problems. In response to these problems, the Supreme Court and Na-
 tional Assembly launched a series of comprehensive structural reforms of the judi-
 cial system. However, the weak judiciary continued to hamper prosecution of human
 rights abusers. Discrimination against women and indigenous people is a problem.
 Violence against women, including rape and domestic abuse, remained a serious
 problem. Child labor is also a problem.
 The Government, through its Ministry of Defense, disarmed 1,200 members of
 loosely associated rural criminal bands at the end of July. Many were former mem-
 bers of the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN, or contras). The Government also disarmed
 423 members of a pro-Sandinista group on December 25 and declared that any re-
 maining members of armed bands would be treated as criminals. Nonetheless, mur-
 der and kidnaping in northern rural areas were common. The opposition FSLN
 staged a series of mostly nonviolent road blocks and strikes in April and instigated
 violent student protests in June and July in an attempt to pressure the Aleman
 Government into concessions. The police reacted responsibly in using appropriate
 nonlethal means to confront the Sandinista-backed students, who used potentially
 lethal homemade weapons against the police.
 The Tri artite Commission, composed of the Government, the Catholic Church,
 and OAS/CIAV (the OAS International Support and Verification Commission), for-
 mally ended its work on October 18, 1996, after finishing a 4-year-long review of
 slayings early in the decade of ex-RN members, other demobilized combatants, and
 of impunity enjoyed by their killers. The Commission sent 83 cases involving 164
 murders, as well as 181 specific recommendations, to the Government for followup.
 In August the military judicial system, which is charged with investigating abuses
 committed in the course of performance of official duties by soldiers and police, re-
 ported that it had complied with all but 1 of the 62 recommendations under its ju-
 risdiction. However, only one soldier and five policemen cited by the Commission
 ever served a prison sentence.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings by government officials.
 
 
 The army killed five members of a criminal band as they slept June 18 at La
 Patriota. Due to lack of local police presence, residents had asked the army to act
 against the bandits, who had terrorized the town. The army justified the attack say-
 ing that the group was outside its corresponding "peace enclave," in which the mem-
 bers of the bandit group were supposed to have gathered in preparation for disarm-
 ing. Human rights organizations suggested that the group's presence outside of the
 enclave may have been due to the Government's failure to deliver sufficient food to
 the enclave. Human rights groups criticized the army's action, but La Patriota resi-
 dents applauded it. The army undertook no investigation of the killings.
 Members of an army patrol reportedly shot 16-year-old Irma Lopez in the head
 at point-blank range at Wamblan on December 23 1996 after a firefight between
 the patrol and a rearmed bandit group led by her boyfriend, "Sanate." Members of
 the Wamblan Peace Commission (a grass-roots human rights organization) claimed
 that Lopez may have been raped before being murdered. The Tripartite Commission
 had previously cited the army patrol's leader, captain Gabino Gomez, for homicide
 when he was still a lieutenant in 1991. Although an army investigation found no
 evidence of wrongdoing, a military court turne[ the case over to the Jinotega de-
 partment prosecutor's office for followup by the civilian 4udiciary.
 The army attempted to impede judicial authorities investigations of the case.
 Sixth military district officials reported a false location of Lopez's body to the pros-
 ecutor handling the case, apparently to thwart her efforts to exhume it. The defense
 counsel representing the army moved to recuse the Jinotega department criminal
 judge who had been handling the case, citing a visit by a foreign diplomat as having
 influenced her objectivity.In a familiar ploy to hinder the prosecutor's investiga-
 tion, the army reported that all nine members of Gomez's patrol, including a lieu-
 tenant, had deserted and were therefore unavailable to provide testimony. In spite
 of other advances toward professionalization, the army demonstrated in this case a
 penchant for shielding officers and soldiers accused of involvement in human rights
 abuses.
 In September 1996, policeman Juan Isidro Flores shot and killed peasant Mario
 Amador Duarte in Nueva Segovia department while the latter was in detention on
 suspicion of having stolen vegetables. Flores claimed that he was attempting to dis-
 arm Duarte when he accidentally discharged the round that killed the suspect. The
 p olice detained Flores police immediately afterward. Subsequently, however, the po-
 ce were unable to provide any information regarding the case, and the police in-
 spector general's office claimed that it had no record of the case.
 The Nicaraguan Pro-Human Rights Association (ANPDH) concluded in April that
 the June 2, 1996, deaths of bandit leader Sergio Palacios and his associate Ricardo
 Guzman near Waslala were not due to a firefight with an army patrol, as the army
 claimed. Rather, ANPDH and some other observers concluded that Palacios was
 killed when soldiers detonated a booby-trapped radio. It was revealed in June that
 a forged letter, purportedly from the U.S. Ambassador, had been used to lure
 Palacios to his death. The ANPDH's efforts to reopen the official investigation of
 this incident were unsuccessful.
 The disarming of members of rural criminal bands on July 21 at Ayapal success-
 fully brought to an end the Government's efforts, through its Ministry of Defense,
 to diban members of the "Northern Front 3-80." Approximately 1,200 men belong-
 ing to this loose umbrella organization of ex-RN members were disarmed and given
 food, clothing, seed for planting, and small plots of land. The Government also com-
 pleted disarmament of 423 members of the pro-Sandinista Andres Castro United
 Front (FUAC) on December 25. With the conclusion of the FUAC disarmament, the
 Government declared the disarmament campaign at an end and said that any re-
 maining members of irregular armed groups would be treated as common criminals
 and would be subject to attack by the army. In spite of the disarmament campaign,
 armed bands engaged in murder, robbery, and kidnaping for ransom in the northern
 and north-central zones.
 The civil war formally concluded in June 1990 with the demobilization of the Nic-
 araguan Resistance; however, society continued to be politically polarized and, de-
 spite the Government's disarmament campaigns, heavily armed. -In particular, the
 rule of law, basic infrastructure, and conditions to guarantee personal security and
 economic opportunity did not extend to all rural areas. Reflecting these sources of
 instability, the level of violence, primarily criminal in nature, has remained high in
 the traditionally conflictive, poverty-stricken northern and north-central zones. Dur-
 ing 1997 there was an average of one murder every 2 days in these areas, according
 to the press. Although there were no confirmed cases of politically motivated mur-
 ders of either demobilized former RN members or former members of the Sandinista
 Popular Army (EPS), criminally motivated murders of members of both groups were
 common.
 
 
 In response to coffee producers' concerns, the Government continued to deploy sol-
 diers and plice to guard coffee transport routes and to protect farmers from extor-
 tion or kidnaping duing the harvest seasons. The deployment effectively reduced
 the level of criminal violence in the affected areas.
 To address the issue of unresolved ex-RN deaths, President Chamorro established
 the Tripartite Commission in September 1992. The Commission concluded its review
 in October 1996 and turned 83 human rights cases involving 164 allegedly mur-
 dered ex-combatants, as well as 181 specific recommendations, over to the Govern-
 ment for followup. In August the military judicial system, which is charged with in-
 vestigating abuses committed in the course of performance of official duties by sol-
 diers and police, reported that it had complied with all but one of the 62 rec-
 ommendations (from 42 cases) corresponding to its jurisdiction. However, only one
 soldier and five policemen cited by the Commission ever served a partial or whole
 sentence. Some human rights observers described the military judicial system's find-
 ings as an effort to maintain impunity of human rights abusers within the ranks
 of the army and police.
 In September the army promoted Rodrigo Gonzalez from lieutenant colonel to
 colonel. Gonzalez, the former head of the sixth military region that covers the de-
 partments of Matagalpa and Jinotega, was cited by the Tripartite Commission for
 negligence and obstruction of justice in the case of the 1991 killing at Wamblan of
 former RN member Heliodoro Splinger.
 On the recommendation of a special commission created to investigate the killings
 of a university worker and a student and the wounding of scores of other students
 during the December 1995 student riots, a Managua criminal court tried 16 police-
 men. In October 1996, the court exonerated the accused of all charges. However, the
 National Police administratively sanctioned the 16 to 30 days' confinement to bar-
 racks.
 There were no new developments related to the February 1991 killing of former
 RN commander Enrique Bermudez.
 In February the Supreme Court let stand a 1994 military court ruling that ab-
 solved then-general Humberto Ortega and his bodyguards in the death of 16-year-
 old Jean Paul Gonie (Genie was slain in 1990 during an incident involving members
 of General Ortega's motorcade.) Genie's parents had sought recourse through the
 Supreme Court, arguing that the military court had no jurisdiction and that the
 case should be remanded to a civilian court. The Supreme Court found that the
 Genie appeal lacked a specific, actionable complaint and that the military tribunal
 had followed proper procedures. The Genies appeal had been pending since 1994.
 The Supreme Court's decision followed a January verdict by the Inter-American
 Court of Human Rights against the Government for "unreasonable delay and ob-
 struction of justice" in the Genie case. The Government complied with the Inter-
 American Court's order to pay the Genie family $20,000 in damages.
 In February the Supreme Court reaffirmed a lower court finding that a previous
 political amnesty granted to fugitive murderer and former army major Frank Ibarra
 did not apply and reaffirmed his 1993 sentence in absentia to 20 years' imprison-
 ment for the November 1992 murder of Dr. Arges Sequeira Mangas, president of
 the Association of Nicaraguan Confiscated Property Owners. A warrant for Ibarra's
 arrest was issued in March, but Ibarra was believed to have already fled the coun-
 try. He has remained a fugitive from justice since Sequeira's murder.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Use of torture is a punishable crime under the law; however, there were a few alle-
 gations of torture by the authorities. There were credible reports that police beat
 and otherwise physically mistreated detainees, often to obtain confessions. Human
 rightsrus attributed these abuses in part to the prevailing state of impunity.
 The police lack professional training in sophisticated investigative techniques and
 often resort to brutal methods to s~ve cases. Inadequate budget support for profes-
 sional training, salaries and benefits, and proper equipment and supplies also ham-
 pered efforts to improve plice performance.
 Police, including memers of a newly created riot control unit, responded with
 tear gas and other nonlethal means to violent Sandinista-instigated student protest-
 er in June and July. The FSLN-organized student protests opposed the Govern-
 ment's interpretation of a constitutional provision that 6 percent of the national
 budget be dedicated to the universities. Many of the students employed potentially
 lethal homemade firearms. Although clashes between police and students resulted
 in numerous injuries on both sides, all major local human rights organizations (ex-
 cept the Sandinista-affiliated CENIDH) characterized police use of force as propor-
 tionate and appropriate in most instances. One policeman, Ricardo Romero Bomlla,
 was arrested for excessive use of force after he was filmed by a television camera-
 
 
 man beating university rector Adrian Meza Soza during a confrontation with stu-
 dents. Because Romero committed the abuse while performing official duties, he was
 charged in the military justice. system. A military court tried, convicted, and sen-
 tenced him to 18 months' imprisonment in September. Another series of road blocks
 and strikes by the FSLN in April was resolved through negotiation. During those
 disturbances, olice engaged protesters in only a few isolated instances.
 The ANPDH reported in 1996 that the police beat 15-year-olds Marco Antonio
 Gonzalez and Abelardo Rodriguez while in custody, the latter in Boaco department
 by  lice lieutenant Venancio Obando, and that police subjected 14-year-old Juan
 Carlos Garcia to electrical shocks while in detention on Corn Island. According to
 the ANPDH, Captain Luciano Hurtado Escobar was involved in the latter incident.
 The plice inspector general's office reported in September that it had no record of
 complaints that the ANPDH claimed it filed and had no record of investigations un-
 dertaken in any of the alleged incidents.
 The Office of Civil Inspection for Professional Responsibility of the Ministry of
 Government is responsible for monitoring allegations of illegal detention and police
 abuse. During the year, the office received 360 formal complaints involving 449 po-
 lice officers. The office concluded that, of the 323 complaints it had investigated, 42
 were human rights cases. Of 56 policemen determined to be responsible for human
 r ghts violations, the authorities had administratively sanctioned53 by year's end.
 The unit's small budget and staff hampered effective investigations and publicity.
 The police inspector general's office reported in September that six police officers
 had been discharged dishonorably between January and September for unspecified
 abusive conduct. The National Police issued new standards for ethical conduct and
 discipline in an effort to improved police human rights performance.
 Prison conditions are poor. The prison system remained overcrowded and under-
 funded, with medical attention virtually nonexistent and malnutrition a constant
 problem. According to government statistics, prisons had a total inmate population
 of 3,946 as of July, an average of 28 percent over capacity. Prison officials calculated
 that the daily expenditure per prisoner for food was $1.00 and reported that the an-
 nual budget for food remained constant in spite of the growing prison population.
 Average daily caloric intake therefore fell to 750-800 calories, well below the 1,800
 calories per day recommended by the United Nations. However, many prisoners re-
 ceived additional food from visitingfamily and friends. Medical care available to
 prisoners fell far short of basic needs. Lack of available medical care led prisons to
 release ill prisoners convicted of lesser offenses. Some prisons and many police hold-
 ing cells were dark, poorly ventilated, and unhygienic. At the Bluefields prison,
 there were only 4 showers and 4 toilets for 97 prisoners.
 As of August, 10.4 percent of the prison population was between the ages of 15
 and 18. Youths were housed in the same prisons as adults for lack of juvenile deten-
 tion centers, although in different wings of the prisons. While only Managua has
 a separate prison for women, there have been no reports of problems ensuing from
 mixed facilities. Women were also housed in separate wings in facilities outside the
 Manaa area and were guarded by female custodians. Self-declared homosexuals
 were housed separately at the Managua prison. Police station holding cells were
 overcrowded by an average of 30 percent. Officials claimed that suspects were often
 left in these cells during their trials, as budgetary shortfalls often restricted the use
 of fuel for frequent transfers from prison to distant courtrooms.
 Ministry of Government, police, and penitentiary officials met with the inter-
 national donor community in August to issue an urgent call for increased budgets
 to build more facilities and increase food purchases. Several churches and national
 and international nongovernmental orgamzations (NGO's) donated foodstuffs, beds,
 and medicine to the prison system to help alleviate shortfalls, which remained se-
 vere.
 Prison guards received human rights training from nongovernmental organiza-
 tions and the Catholic Church, and generally treated prisoners well. However, there
 were isolated instances of abuse. For example, the ANPDH reported 32 minor inci-
 dents of abuse in the police holding cells at Esteli.
 The Government permits prison visits by independent human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention by the po-
 lice were common. The Police Functions Law requires police to obtain a warrant
 prior to detaining a suspect and to notify family members within 24 hours of the
 detainee's whereabouts. However, the police rarely complied with this law. Detain-
 ees do not have the right to an attorney until they have been formally charged with
 a crime. Local human rights groups criticized the law for providing inadequate judi-
 cial oversight of police arrests.
 The constitutional reforms enacted in July 1995 reduced from 72 to 48 hours the
 time police may legally hold a suspect before they must bring him before a judge
 
 
 to decide if charges should be brought. The judge must then either order the accused
 released or transferred to prison. Due to lack of prison space, there were over 1,000
 prisoners in badly overcrowded police holding cells, most of whom were being held
 illegally beyond the 48-hour deadline.
 Lengthy pretrial detention also remained a problem. Contrary to law, 35.6 percent
 of prisoners had been jailed for 6 months or more without a trial. Many prisoners
 spend more than a year in jail without a trial.
 The ANPDH recorded 94 complaints of illegal or arbitrary detention by the Na-
 tional Police and army from January through July, a slight increase from 1996. As
 in past years, incidents of arbitrary detention were most common in the rural north-
 ern and north-central regions, where much of the civil war was fought.
 Exile is not practiced. There were no reports of political violence against any citi-
 zens returning from civil war era self-imposed exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent but continues to be
 susceptible to political influence. Human rights and lawyers' groups complained
 about the delay of justice caused by judicial inaction, sometimes for years. Judicial
 actions and findings were reportedly often influenced by judges' political sympathies
 or acceptance of bribes. It is estimated that only 12 percent of trials resulted in con-
 victions.
 The judicial system comprises both civil and military courts. The 12-member Su-
 preme Court of Justice is the system's highest court and is also responsible for
 nominating all appellate and lower court judges. The Court is divided into special-
 ized chambers on administrative, criminal, constitutional, and civil matters.
 A multiyear administration of justice reform program was begun during 1997. In
 June the National Assembly passed a new Judicial Organic Law which is intended
 to overhaul the current archaic structure of the court system. However, the Presi-
 dent had not signed the bill into law by year's end, due to differences over technical
 points. Enactment of the law was expected in early 1998. The Government submit-
 ted to the Assembly a draft judicial career bill that would establish minimum pro-
 fessional standards for judicial appointees. The Government also appointed a com-
 mission to supervise revision of the country's outdated and ineffective criminal codes
 and procedures. Eventual reform of these codes is expected to reduce judicial delays
 and resulting excessive pretrial detention.
 The 1994 Military Code requires the civilian court system to try members of the
 military charged with common crimes. From January to August the Attorney Gen-
 eral for Penal Affairs' office received 136 complaints from civilians against members
 of the military. It referred 72 of these to civilian courts for trial. At the end of Au-
 gust, courts had sentenced members of the military to prison in 10 of the cases and
 found those involved in 6 cases innocent. The other 56 cases were in stages of judi-
 cial processing, which the Attorney General for Penal Affairs called "evidence of the
 worsening problem of backlog in the judicial system."
 In criminal cases, the accused has the right to legal counsel, and defendants are
 presumed innocent until proven guilty. The presiding judge appoints attorneys from
 a standard list to represent indigent defendants, but, because they are not paid by
 the State, many attorneys pay a $1.50 fine rather than represent such clients. Ac-
 cording to the ANPDH, approximately 90 percent of indigent defendants go to trial
 without an attorney to represent them. This contributes greatly to the slow pace of
 justice. Individuals without the means to contract private counsel are often forced
 to turn to law students or have no counsel at all. Under the Napoleonic legal sys-
 tem, a trial does not consist of a public hearing but rather a desk review by a mag-
 istrate of the accused person's file. An initial hearing is usually held within the con-
 stitutionally mandated 10 days. Although very simp e cases or those with high pro-
 file or outside interest may be resolved quickly, many languish for months. Due to
 a lack of administrative coordination between judges and the penal system, many
 prisoners remained in prison after their release date.
 Nicaragua lacks an effective civil law system. As a result, cases more properly
 handled in a civil proceeding are often transmuted into criminal proceedings. One
 party is then effectively blackmailed, being jailed due to action by the party wield-
 ing greater influence with the judge. In addition, this heavy civil-based criminal
 caseload claims attention from an overburdened public prosecutor's office and di-
 verts resources that could be directed toward genuine criminal matters.
 The Supreme Court removed Managua judge German Vasquez from office in Au-
 gust after he had been widely criticized for incompetence and political bias. In Janu-
 ary Vasquez sentenced FSLN activist Nester Moncada Lau to 18 months' imprison-
 ment aftr police arrested the latter on January 10, the day of President Aleman's
 inauguration, on charges of terrorism. Vasquez ordered Moncada released on parole
 March 21. Police suspected that Moncada, who was arrested near the headquarters
 
 
 596
 of President Aleman's political party with 800 grams of explosives, had intended an
 inauguration day attack.
 The Supreme Court undertook a generally successful campaign to punish and dis-
 courage corruption in the judiciary. By year's end, the court had removed 57 judges
 and magistrates for corruption, malfeasance, and incompetence.
 There were no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that all persons have the right to privacy of their family and
 to the inviolabili  of their home, correspondence, and communications. It also re-
 quires warrants or searches of private homes and excludes from legal proceedings
 illegally seized letters, documents, and private papers. The Government generally
 respected these rights in practice.
 In November the National Assembly passed a new property law intended to re-
 solve long-standing property disputes stemming from massive confiscations by the
 Sandinista government of the 1980's. The law implements President Aleman s cam-
 paign promise that the poor would receive titles to properties received during Sandi-
 nista-era land redistributions, and that wealthier beneficiaries would either have to
 ar  for such properties or return them. The law calls for strengthened judicial and
 itral procedures to expedite settlement of property disputes. The new law has
 been strongly criticized by some members of the claimant community.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and a free press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. The pri-
 vately owned print media, the broadcast media, and academic circles freely and
 openly discussed diverse viewpoints in public discourse without government inter-
 ference.
 The news medium with the largest national audience is radio, but polls show that
 television is the primary source of news in the cities. Listeners receive a wide vari-
 ety of political viewpoints, especially on Managua's 65 radio stations. There are six
 television stations, four of which carry news programming with partisan political
 content. There is no official state censorship, nor is self-censorship practiced.
 Freedom of the press is potentially qualified, however, by several constitutional
 provisions. The 1987 Constitution stipulates that citizens have the right to "accurate
 information," thereby providing an exception by which the freedom to publish infor-
 mation that the Government deems inaccurate could be abridged. Although the
 right to information cannot be subject to censorship, there is retroactive liability es-
 tablished by law, defined as a "social responsibility," implying the potential for sanc-
 tions against irresponsibility by the press. The legislature did not modify these pro-
 visions in the 1995 constitutional reforms, but neither did the Government invoke
 these provisions to suppress the media.
 Although the National Assembly passed a bill in September 1996 which would
 have established a professional journalists' guild, it was never signed into law. The
 executive's reticence was due in part to the journalistic community's sharp division
 over whether such a law would improve the quality of journaism or merely restrict
 the freedom of speech. There was no movement in the National Assembly to revive
 the proposal.
 The overnment does not restrict academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution recognizes
 the right to peaceful assembly without prior permission. It also recognizes the right
 to public assembly, demonstration, and mobilization "in conformity with the law."
 The Government generally respects the right of assembly, although the law requires
 demonstrators to obtain permission for a rally or march by registering its planned
 size and location with the police. The authorities routinely granted such permission,
 but many groups chose not to register because, they claimed, the process was too
 cumbersome. With the exception of the violent June-July student protests (see Sec-
 tion 1.c.), the Government took no action against demonstrations.
 The Constitution provides for the right to organize or affiliate with political par-
 ties, and opposition and independent associations functioned freely without govern-
 ment interference or restriction. Private associations do not have legal status to con-
 duct private fund raising or receive public financial support until they receive this
 authorization from the National Assembly, which it routinely confers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 In April the National Assembly rejected an initiative by FSLN deputies to pardon
 six men serving sentences for bombings of Catholic churches that occurred during
 1994-96. At year's end, only 2 of the 16 men originally accused remained in prison.
 Five were found innocent, two completed full sentences, two were released on bail,
 
 
 one was released due to illness, and four were released after having served partial
 sentences. The bombings of churches in Masaya, Managua, and Leon, which caused
 only superficial structural damage, ceased in August 1996.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right to travel and reside anywhere
 in the country and to enter and exit the country freely. The law requires citizens
 and residents to obtain an exit visa to leave the country, but immigration authori-
 ties routinely granted these for a small fee. The right of citizens to return to Nica-
 ragua is not established in the Constitution, but, in practice, the Government has
 not restricted anyone's return.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 Constitution provides for asylum, and refugees cannot be expelled to the country
 persecuting them. The issue of the provision of first asylum did not arise; there were
 no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they feared persecu-
 tion.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised their right peacefully to change their government in free and
 fair national elections in October 1996 held under the auspices of the Supreme Elec-
 toral Council (CSE), an independent branch of government. Voters elected the Lib-
 eral Alliance's Arnoldo Aleman president from a field of 24 candidates with 51 per-
 cent of the vote, against 38 percent for FSLN candidate Daniel Ortega. Over 90 per-
 cent of eligible voters registered, and 76 percent of eligible voters voted. Over 3,000
 national and international observers declared the elections free and fair, despite
 some logistical and organizationalprblems.
 The 1995 reforms to the 1987 Constitution established a more even distribution
 of power and authority among the four coequal branches of government. The execu-
 tive branch is headed by the President and a cabinet appointed by the President,
 who is both head of state and head of government, as well as supreme chief of the
 defense and security forces. The Vice President has no constitutionally mandated
 duties or powers. Both the President and Vice President are elected to 5-year terms
 by direct popular vote, with the possibility of a runoff between the top two can-
 didates if one does not obtain at least 45 percent of the vote on the first ballot. The
 Constitution does not permit reelection of the President.
 A single-chamber National Assembly exercises legislative power. In October 1996,
 voters chose 93 members, including 20 deputies from nationwide lists, 70 from lists
 p resented in each of the 15 departments and the 2 autonomous regions, and 3 de-
 feated presidential candidates who obtained a minimum percentage of the national
 vote. Members elected concurrently with the President and Vice President in 1996
 are to serve 5-year terms.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice against women, indigenous groups, or
 other minorities voting or participating in politics. Women served as president and
 vice president until January 10, and a woman serves as president of the CSE. Addi-
 tionally, 3 of 12 Supreme Court justices are women; women hold ministerial, vice
 ministerial, and other senior positions in government; and voters elected 10 women
 to the National Assembly in October 1996. Two members of the National Assembly
 claim indigenous heritage.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 With the exception of some peace commissions, human rights groups operated
 without government interference. Major organizations included the Nicaraguan Cen-
 ter for Human Rights (CENIDH), the Permanent Commission for Human Rights
 (CPDH), the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights, the Episcopal Center for
 Development, and cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo's verification commission. The
 OAS's International Support and Verification Commission, which was established in
 1990 to oversee the repatriation, disarmament, resettlement, and protection of the
 human rights of the members of the Nicaraguan Resistance, successfully completed
 its mission and closed on June 30. In 1993 CIAV's mandate had been expanded to
 include all those affected by the civil war. In July a small successor organization
 to OASICIAV, the OAS Technical Cooperation Mission (TCM), opened at the request
 of the Government. The TCM's presence was focused on 13 at-risk municipalities,
 where it worked on conflict resolution, reconciliation, improving local government,
 and extending legal infrastructure.
 The OAS/CIAV and the Catholic Church helped create more than 70 peace com-
 missions in the northern and central parts of the country, intended to give inhab-
 
 
 598
 itants of the area a means of dispute resolution, a means of monitoring human
 rights abuses, and a vehicle for expressing their concerns to government authorities.
 Many of the commissions operate in areas that are without any governmental pres-
 ence, and serve as surrogates for absent police and courts. The Government granted
 legal standing to many of these grassroots organizations during the year. Some
 peace commission members reported that soldiers, rural police, and local residents
 sometimes misunderstood their efforts at advocacy on behalf of jailed criminals, in-
 terpreting them as challenges to law enforcement officials' authority. Some commis-
 sion members reported that, as a result, police and army noncommissioned officers
 and officers (up to the rank of major) physically threatened them. Police and sol-
 diers' threats caused significant attrition from the commissions.
 The ANPDH, the CENIDH, the CPDH, and the Catholic Church's verification
 commission conducted numerous human rights workshops at the police training
 academy, at various police headquarters, and with army units throughout the coun-
 try. However, the ANPDH and the Esteli peace commission complained that police
 regularly failed to follow up on their accusations of abusive police behavior, even
 though the police generally acknowledged having received their complaints. The po-
 lice inspector general's office admitted that it responded to only 135 of the 333 cases
 which the ANDPH presented during the year, but claimed that many of the
 ANDPH's complaints were either unfounded or too old to permit a meaningful inves-
 tigation. Some military officers received internationally sponsored human rights
 training.
 In December 1995, the National Assembly passed a law creating a human rights
 ombudsman's office, with the Ombudsman to be elected by the Assembly. The
 Aleman administration publicly supported filling the position, and the Assembly in-
 scribed a dozen candidates in November, but none was able to obtain the 56 votes
 (60 percent) required for election. Election of an ombudsman is likely sometime in
 1998.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of birth, nationality, politi-
 cal belief, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, national origin, economic condi-
 tion, or social condition. In practice, the Government made little or no effort to com-
 bat discrimination. However, few, if any, discrimination suits or formal complaints
 were filed with government officials.
 Women.-The most prevalent violations of women's rights involved domestic and
 sexual violence, which were widespread and underreported. The National Police re-
 ported 1,095 instances of rape during 1996, but believed the true number of such
 crimes to be perhaps four times that figure: Many women are still reluctant to re-
 port abuse or fie charges due to social stigmas attached to victims of rape. How-
 ever, police stated that the apparent rise in rape cases from previous years is at
 least partially due to the increased willingness of rape victims to report the crimes
 perpetrated against them.
 The National Police confirmed local human rights groups' charges that while po-
 lice sometimes intervened to prevent injury in cases of domestic violence, they rare-
 ly charged perpetrators. Those cases that actually reached the courts usually re-
 sulted in a not guilty verdict due to judicial inexperience with, and lack of legal
 training related to, proper judicial handling of such violence.
 The police manage "women's commissariats" in nine cities-Managa, Esteli,
 Bluefields, Leon, Masaya, Boaco, Jinotega, Rivas, and Tipitapa-which are sup-
 ported in part by foreign assistance. The centers are annexes of local police stations
 and are staffed by female police officers. They provide both social and legal help to
 women and mediate spousal conflicts. A 1996 Criminal Code reform entitled Law
 against Aggression against Women criminalized domestic violence and provided for
 up to 6 years' imprisonment for those found guilty of perpetrating such violence.
 e law also provided for the issuance of restraining orders in cases in which
 women fear for their safety.
 Although the Constitution provides for equality between the sexes, some authori-
 ties and society in general often did not respect this in practice. While discrimina-
 tion against women is technically illegal, reports of such discrimination were per-
 sistent throughout the year. Women are underrepresented in management positions
 in the private sector, and they constitute the majority of workers in the traditionally
 low-paid education, textile, and health service sectors. Women have equal or some-
 what better access to education than men. Primary school enrollment rates for boys
 and girls are estimated at 73 and 75 percent, respectively; secondary school enroll-
 ment rates are 39 and 47 percent.
 
 
 Children.-Children 18 years of age and younger make up approximately 53 per-
 cent of the population. The Government expresses its commitment to children's
 human rights and welfare publicly but does not commit adequate funding levels for
 children's programs. Education is compulsory through the sixth grade, but this pro-
 vision is not enforced. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), using 1993
 statistics, estimated that 6,000 children have been abandoned by their families,
 some 2,000 live in orphanages, and approximately 1,800 are in foster homes.
 UNICEF reported that 65 percent of children are literate, and that 20 percent of
 children from 6 to 9 years of age work. The Labor Ministry estimated that about
 100,000 children under age 14 are illegally employed. Of these, it estimated that
 72,000 were employed in the annual harvests. Others are forced by their parents
 to work in the streets of Managua as vendors or beggars. Child prostitution exists
 but is not common.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not legislated or otherwise man-
 dated accessibility for the disabled. However, through international NGO's, foreign
 governments, and thepublic health care system, the Government procured thou-
 sands of prostheses and other medical equipment for veterans and former resistance
 members. Through its clinics and hospitals, the Government provides care to war
 veterans and other disabled persons, but the quality of care is generally poor.
 Indigenous People.-Comprising about 6 percent of the country's population, the
 indigenous people live primarily in the Northern Autonomous Atlantic Region
 (RAAN) and Southern Autonomous Atlantic Region (RAAS), created in 1987 out of
 the former department of Zelaya, which border the Caribbean sea and comprise 47
 p ercent of the national territory. Acording to the Government's May 1995 census
 which underounted the population by as much as 25 percent in some rural areas),
 the four major identifiable tribes are the Miskito (with approximately 140,000 mem-
 bers), the Sumo (15,000), the Garifuna (1,500), and the Rama (1,000).
 The indigenous people of the RAAN (principally the Miskit and the Sumo) have
 their own political party, the Yatama, with representation in regional and municipal
 councils. In an effort to encourage indigenous participation in the 1996 elections, the
 CSE distributed electoral and civic education materials in four languages, including
 Miskito and Sumo. The CSE undertook similar efforts in preparation for the March
 1998 regional elections in the RAAN and RAAS.
 The 1987 Autonomy Law requires the Government to consult the indigenous re-
 garding the exploitation of their areas' resources. Indigenous people claim that the
 central Government often made decisions without adequate community consultation.
 As in previous years, some indigenous groups complained that central government
 authorities excluded the indigenous people of the Atlantic coast from meaningful
 participation in decisions affecting their ands, cultures, traditions, and the alloca-
 tion of natural resources. A majority of indigenous people have no access to health
 care. Critics of government policy cited official statistics that unemployment ap-
 proached 70 percent in the RAAS and was nearly 90 percent in the RAAN, far above
 national averages. However, calculation of reliable employment statistics was com-
 plicated by the fact that most of the working indigenous population on the Atlantic
 is engagedin subsistence fishing or farming.
 A 650-member tribe in the RAAN, the Awas Tingni, sued the Government in
 1996, claiming that its decision to award a long-term lumber concession to a Korean
 flrm on a portion of the land it claims as its own was a violation of the American
 Convention on Human Rights. In February the Supreme Court declared the Govern-
 ment's concession to the Korean firm unconstitutional. The case was before the
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights at year's end. The Government has
 worked with indigenous groups in the past to reach compromises, but in this case
 countered that the area the Awas Tingni claim, 392,500 acres, was excessive for a
 tribe of its size. The root of the dispute was the Government's failure to demarcate
 the land; other indigenous groups, squatters, former RN, and soldiers also have
 claims to the same area. With international financial support, in 1996 the Govern-
 ment formed a commission to demarcate lands in the RAAN and RAAS.
 National Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Most citizens are of mixed background, and
 ethnicity is not a barrier to political or economic success. However, various indige-
 nous groups from both the RAAN and the RAAS sometimes linked the Government's
 failure to expend resources in support of the Atlantic coast population to the exist-
 ence of ethnic, racial, and religious (principally members of the Moravian church)
 minorities that predominate in that region.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of workers
 to organize voluntarily in unions, and this right was reaffirmed in the new Labor
 Code which entered into effect in November 1996, replacing the antiquated 1944
 
 
 600
 code. Legally, all public and private sector workers, except those in the military and
 the police, may form and join unions of their own choosing, and they exercise this
 right extensively. New unions must register with the Ministry of Labor and be
 granted legal status before they may engage in collective bargaining. The new code
 legally recognizes cooperatives, into which many transportation and agricultural
 workers are organized. Less than half of the formal sector work force, including ag-
 ricultural workers, is unionized, according to labor leaders. Union membership con-
 tinued to fall during the year. The unions are independent of the Government, al-
 though many are afiliated with political parties.
 The Constitution recognizes the right to strike. The Labor Code requires a major-
 ity vote of all the workers in an enterprise to call a strike. Workers may strike le-
 gally only after they have demonstrated that they have just cause to strike and have
 exhausted other methods of dispute resolution, including mediation by the Ministry
 of Labor and compulsory arbitration. Although the 1996 Labor Code streamlined
 these procedures with labor leaders' input and consent, they were often ignored. Of
 -seven strikes between January and July, four were declared illegal, and three were
 quickly resolved between the parties to the disputes. None were declared legal.
 The Labor Code prohibits retribution against strikers and union leaders for legal
 strikes. However, this protection may be withdrawn in the case of an illegal strike.
 The 1996 Code provides protected status to union leaders, requiring that companies
 receive permission from the Labor Ministry after having shown just cause in order
 to fire union executive board members. Such protection is limited to nine individuals
 per union.
 Unions freely form or join federations or confederations and affiliate with and par-
 ticipate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to bargain collectively, and this right was reaffirmed in the 1996 Labor
 Code. The Government generally sought to foster resolution of pressing labor con-
 flicts (usually in the public sector) through informal negotiations rather than
 through formal administrative or judicial processes. According to the reformed Code,
 companies engaged in disputes with employees must negotiate with the employees'
 union if the employees have thus organized themselves.
 Nineteen firms, employing some 15,000 workers, operate in the government-run
 export processing zone (EPZ), and a private EPZ contains another firm with 500 em-
 ployees. Four additional zones were authorized but had not opened by year's end.
 While EPZ officials maintain that labor laws are more strictly enforced in the EPZ
 than elsewhere, union representatives have long maintained that the Labor Min-
 istry is doing a poor job of enforcing the Labor Code in the EPZ's. In response to
 these complaints, the Labor Ministry opened a new office in the Managua free trade
 zone in February. Of the 19 EPZ enterprises, only 2 are unionized. EPZ officials
 claimed that, due to memories of the corrupt and ineffective unions of the 1980's,
 workers in the other 17 EPZ enterprises simply have no interest in unionizing. They
 also claim that wages and working conditions in EPZ enterprises are better than
 the national average.
 Although one Sandinista union made an effort to organize workers at the Cupid
 factory in the EPZ, the Labor Ministry overturned the new union's certification. The
 Labor Ministry concluded that Sandinista labor organizers had intimidated the
 workers into calling for a union, a charge which workers and factory management
 confirmed. In September Cupid received the Labor Ministry's first-ever award for
 excellence in labor-management relations.
 The Labor Ministry verified that there were some cases of sexual harassment of
 females workers in the EPZ's. However, it found that such problems were no more
 common in the EPZ's than in other sectors of the economy.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. However, the Labor Ministry reported that some child men-
 dicants were forced to beg by the parents, and that some were "rented" by their par-
 ents to organizers of child be gars (see Section 6.d.). Parents forced many rural chil-
 dren to participate in annual harvests.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Although
 not specifically addressing forced or bonded child labor, the Constitution prohibits
 child labor that can affect normal childhood development or interfere with the oblig-
 atory school year. Recognizing that child labor in the informal sector of the economy
 continues to be a serious problem, the Government created in August a new commit-
 tee for the eradication of child labor headed by the first lady. The 1996 Labor Code
 raised the age at which children may begin working with parental permission from
 12 to 14 years. Parental permission to work is also required for 15- and 16-year-
 olds. The law limits the workday for such children to 6 hours and prohibits night
 work. However, because of the economic needs of many families, a cultural legacy
 
 
 601
 of child work among peasants, and lack of effective government enforcement mecha-
 nisms, child labor rules are rarely enforced except in the small, formal sector of the
 economy.
 An August study conducted by the Labor Ministry concluded that over 100,000
 children under 14 years of age work, principally in the annual harvest of crops such
 as coffee, cotton, bananas, tobacco, and rice, and in city streets hawking merchan-
 dise, cleaning automobile windows, or bgging. The Labor Ministry reported that
 many child mendicants are forced to beg by their parents, and that many are
 "rented" by theiparents to organizers of child beggars. Children the age of 10 or
 older often worked for less than $1.00 per day on the same banana and coffee plan-
 tations as their parents. Working children averaged a 47-hour workweek, according
 to a 1993 UNICEF study.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.--The minimum wage is set through tripartite
 (business, government, and labor) negotiations, and must be~approved by the Legis-
 lative Assembly. A new minimum wage scale took effect November 1 the first in-
 crease since 1991. Minimum wages vary by sector. Examplds'of monthly rates are:
 agriculture, $30.61 (300 cordobas); fisheries, $51 (500 cordobas); construction, $49
 (480 cordobas); government, $35.71 (350 cordobas); and banking, $71.42 (700 cor-
 dobas). The minimum wage falls far below government estimates of what an urban
 family must spend each month for a basic-basket of goods ($142.85, or 1,400 cor-
 dobas). The vast majority of urban workers earn well above the minimum rates.
 The new Labor Code maintains the constitutionally mandated 8-hour workday;
 the standard legal workweek is a maximum of 48 hours, with 1 day of rest weekly.
 The new code establishes that severance pay shall be from 1 to 5 months' duration,
 depending on the duration of employment and the circumstances of firing. However,
 persons fired for cause may be denied severance pay through a process requiring
 employers to demonstrate proof of worker misconduct. It also establishes an obliga-
 tion of an employer to provide housing to employees who are temporarily assigned
 to areas beyond commuting distance. The Labor Code seeks to bring the country
 into compliance with international standards and norms of workplace hygiene and
 safety, but the Ministry of Labor's office of hygiene and occupational security lacks
 adequate staff and resources to enforce these provisions. The new code gives work-
 ers the right to remove themselves from dangerous workplace situations without
 jeopardy to continued employment.
