 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, with a directly elected President Vice
 President, and a 92-member unicameral National Assembly. President Violeta
 Barrios de Chamorro was elected in a free and fair election in 1990 defeating the
 incumbent Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN). She has delegated signifi-
 cant executive authority to her son-in-law, Presidency Minister Antonio Lacayo. The
 executive branch coexists with an increasingly independent National Assembly,
 which has become the central forum for political debate. With an unprecedented de-
 gree of cooperation among the FSLN, key parties belonging to the National Opposi-
 tion Union (UNO) coalition that had supported President Chamorro's election in
 1990, and several moderate parties, the Assembly passed significant legislation on
 labor, civil-military relations, and property compensation bonds, and is currently
 working on constitutional reforms.
 The President, in her capacity as commander in chief and Minister of Defense,
 and the Ministry of Government are legally responsible for overseeing the Sandi-
 nista Popular Army (EPS) and the National Police, respectively. In practice, how-
 ever, in the absence of a defense ministry, Nicaragua's security forces continued to
 be led by senior officers who maintained ideological and political links to the FSLN
 and who operated with substantial institutional and legal autonomy. Nevertheless,
 civilian control over the National Police was more evident in 1994, particularly dur-
 ing two transportation strikes. Moreover, on September 2, President Chamorro
 signed into law a Military Code, passed by the National Assembly, which estab-
 lished institutional mechanisms intended to strengthen civilian control of the secu-
 rity apparatus. The law provides for the retirement of current EPS Commander
 General Humberto Ortega in February 1995, presidential appointment of his succes-
 sor to a term limited to 5 years, civilian court jurisdiction over common crimes com-
 mitted by military and police personnel, prohibition of "political intelligence activi-
 ties" by the EPS's Defense Intelligence Directorate (DID), and civilian oversight of
 the newly created military social security system and of EPS-operated private enter-
 prises. By the end of 1994, it was not clear whether all of these provisions would
 be implemented successfully.
 The economy is predominantly agricultural, dependent on sugar, beef, seafood and
 banana exports, with some light manufacturing. After years of hyperinflation and
 negative growth, the inflation rate was about 20 percent and real growth approxi-
 mately 3 percent in 1994; per capita annual income was estimated at $410. Unem-
 ployment and underemployment totaled over 50 percent, while the investment cli-
 
 
 457
 mate remained unsettled. Although the Government's fiscal deficit has been cut by
 80 percent since 1990, Nicaragua remained heavily dependent on foreign aid.
 e security for     eersisted in com    gsig    cant human rights abuses, al-
 hough    ey are dec   in number. Murer, etraudici, klng, torture, wide-
 spread mistreatment of  tainees, and violence by parmilitary and criminal bands
 in rural areas were common. Since President Chamorr nssumed office, the focus
 of international attention has been on safeguarding the human rights of former
 members of the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN) since most human rights observers, in-
 clud ing the Sandinita uman rights organi ation CENIDH, acknowledge that more
 ex-RN than FSLN members have been homicide victims. The Organization of Amer-
 ican States International Support and Verification Commission (OAS/CIAV) esti-
 mates that 270 ex-RN were killed from June 1990 through 1994. The conviction rate
 among killers of ex-RN is so low that a state of impunity for abuses committed
 against ex-RN can still be said to exist.
 The Tripartite Commission, composed of the Government, the Catholic Church,
 and OAS/CLAV, has issued recommendations which the security forces continued to
 resist implementing in 1994. The Commission, whose meetings the Government con-
 venes, met 18 times during the year, a reduction from 48 meetings in 1993, and
 failed to produce any reports.
 A weak judiciary continued to hamper prosecution of human rights abusers. An
 office of human rights within the Attorney General's office, created in 1992, re-
 mained unstaffed; discussions about creating a human rights ombudsman independ-
 ent of the executive continued during the year. Violence against women, including
 rape and domestic violence, continued to be a serious problem, with the Government
 taking little effective action to counter it.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Klling.-The civil war formally concluded in June
 1990 with the demobilization of the Nicaraguan Resistance. However, politically mo-
 tivated or connoted violence continued into 1994, as Nicaraguan society continued
 to be both politically polarized and heavily armed. The police, army, and Sandinista
 militants continued to kill demobilized RN combatants, but the number of such
 murders dropped from a monthly average of 6.1 in 1990 to 4.0 in 1994. With the
 demobilization of the 380 Northern Front (FN-380) in April and smaller bands of
 rearmed ex-RN (recontras) in August, the situation in the trouble-ridden north
 calmed somewhat. According to OAS/CIAV, the National Police or EPS killed 7
 former combatants through November 1994, unknown assailants killed 11, and re-
 armed EPS veterans (known as recompas) killed 3. However, it attributed the ma-
 jority-23 deaths-to other ex-RN memibers or recontras. The total of 44 deaths in
 1994 brought to 270 the number of ex-RN members who died under violent cir-
 cumstances since the beginning of the Chamorro administration. OAS/CIAV and na-
 tional human rights group continued to report details of these human rights abuses
 to the Government and the media.
 To address the issue of ex-RN deaths, President Chamorro established the Tri-
 partite Commission in late 1992. The Commission, composed of the civilian Govern-
 ment, the Catholic Church, and CIAV, issued three reports during 1993, covering
 investigations of 88 deaths and including 120 recommendations for government foE-
 lowup action, ranging from arrest of known perpetrators to investigations for ob-
 struction of justice. Of these, the Commission has verified that the Government
 complied fully with three of the recommendations in the first report. Consistent
 with an expanded mandate granted to CIAV by the June 1993 OAS General Assem-
 bly a fourth Commission report discusses 33 additional cases of both Sandinista
 and ex-RN deaths, plus an evaluation of the compliance level of all the recommenda-
 tions contained in the 1993 reports. This report was expected to be released in late
 1994 but was delayed into 1995. Senior EPS and police officials continued to impede
 the work of the Commission by their refusal to implement its recommendations or
 respond to its requests for information. Only a handful of officials named in the first
 report, dated January 1993, received criminal or administrative sanctions. Although
 the EPS claimed that it had punished several soldiers named by the Commission's
 report as wrongdoer, by year's end the Commission had not received any confirm-
 n documentation to this effect.
 fthose perpetrators named by the Commission, CIAV later listed five who later
 committed additional human rights abuses. They are police officers Johny Jose
 Rugama (cases 110 and 113), Captain Benito Dias Perez (.case 149), and Santiago
 Irias (mentioned in the special case of La Trinidad in te thir Tripartite Commis-
 sion report) as well as Etnio Obregon Ruiz of the EPS (case 61). In December the
 
 
 458
 Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) released the names of four po-
 lice officals and three EPS officials who were involved in five separate human
 rights incidents. It said the military convicted and sentenced them, but none is be-
 nid bars. One soldier, EPS Lieutenant Jose Antonio Barberena, had been sen-
 tenced once before for killing a fellow soldier. In neither instance has he served time
 in prison.
 Human rights groups such as CIAV and CENIDH have witnessed continued vio-
 lence in rural areas of northern Nicaragua, primarily as a result of land disputes
 and criminal activity. Since July 1993, ClAYhas calculated that 45 percent of the
 homicides it investigated were committed by rearmed former Resistance members
 (recontras). The majority of the victims were demobilized resistance members or
 their families who lived in the community. CENIDH reported that during the first
 quarter of 1994, there were 3 homicides of FSLN members, bringing the total num-
 ber of FSLN homicides from May 1990 through March 1994 to 169. During the same
 period, CENIDH reported that 513 "ex-RN and recontras" were homicide victims.
 Due to the remoteness of many of the conflict zones, coupled with popular fear of
 retribution or apparent frustration with the inability to bring the perpetrators to
 justice, an undetermined number of other deaths are believed by some resistance
 members to go unreported.
 Other incidents of political and extrajudicial killing dating from 1990 remained
 unsolved. On March 21, a band of renegade recontras led by Jose "Omar" Castro
 kidnaped Javier Barahona, a prominent local FSLN official and ex-mayor of Wiwili
 in Juigalpa department. They seized Barahona from a public bus in broad daylight
 and later tortured and murdered him, despite negotiation efforts by both the church
 and CIAV to secure Barahona's release. At year's end, the authorities had not
 brought Barahona's killers to justice. In November 1991, the Government dissolved
 the special presidential commission charged with investigating the February 16,
 1991, assassination of former RN commander Enrique Bermudez, claiming a lack
 of evidence. A British investigative team found no new evidence in 1993, and the
 Government took no further action in the case in 1994.
 In June 1994 a military court declared EPS General Humberto Ortega and his
 bodyguards innocent of organizing or covering up the 1990 killing of high school stu-
 dent Jean Paul Genie, but declared the case still unresolved. This followed the De-
 cember 1993 decision of the Supreme Court to remand the case to the military
 courts. Several human rights groups criticized both the Supreme Court's ruling
 which rejected an appeal by Raymond Genie, the boy's father, to order the case tried
 in a civilian court, and the military court's acquittal. The cited numerous irregular-
 ities, including the nonadmissibility or disappearance of certain key pieces of evi-
 dence, as we las te conflict of interest of one of the Supreme Court judges who,
 after his retirement, acted as defense attorney for the bodyguards. Raymond Genie
 filed two appeals with the military court: The court rejected an a ppeal regarding
 the June verdict, but in August it accepted the second, requesting the trial be sent
 to the Supreme Court where the case currently awaitsjudgment. At the same time,
 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights referred the Genie case to the
 Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which heard the case on November 18 on
 the issue of delay of justice and is expected to render a decision in the spring of
 1995. The Government had argued that the Court could not rule on the murder it-
 self, as it took place prior to Nicaragua's acceptance of the Court's special jurisdic-
 tion.
 On March 10. the Leon appellate court reinstated the 20-year prison sentence
 given to former EPS Lt. Colonel Frank Ibarra, leader of a pro-FSLN paramilitary
 group, Punitive Forces of the Left (FPI), for the November 23, 1992 assassination
 of Dr. Arges Sequeira Manga, then director of the Association of Nicaraguan Con-
 fiscated Property Owners. The same court overturned an earlier ruling granting
 Tharra immunity under an August 1993 amnesty. Tharra's lawyer appealed the mat-
 ter to the Supreme Court, which had not ruled by year's end. Tharra remained at
 large, and no apparent effort has been made to capture him; the police at one point
 claimed there was no warrant out for his arrest. The Government petitioned the
 Leon applate court to obtain such a warrant, although it continued to argue that
 Tharra's conviction made this step superfluous. On March 12, the EPS publicly de-
 nounced the Leon court's ruling, claiming it would lead to instability regarding
 those who had reeived previous amnesties from the Government.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Teatment or Punis hment.-
 The Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights recorded 118 cases of inhuman and
 degrading treatment in 1994. In the majority of the cases, those accused of the
 abuses were the National Police, who often held the victims for days, only to release
 them without formally charging them with any crime. The reere other credible se-
 
 
 ports during the year that the police beat and otherwise physically mistreated de-
 tainees, often to obtain confessions.
 Three nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) worked together in 1994 to im-
 prove prison conditions as a result of innumerable complaints regarding police bru-
 tality in prisons as well as in police holding cells. Following complaints of mistreat-
 ment in police detention cells, representatives from the Nicaraguan Center for
 Human Rights (CENIDH) visited the holding cell of the criminal investigation office
 and found the cells poorly ventilated due in part to solid metal doors and metal
 sheeting in the ceiling.
 In June the prison population was 2,900, of which more than 10 percent were be-
 tween ages 15 and 18, owing to the complete lack of juvenile detention facilities.
 The prisons had overcrowded cells, medical attention was nonexistent, and there
 was extensive malnutrition. Following accusations that prisoners received dietary
 intake of only 500 calories per day, the Government announced plans to increase
 the budget by $1 million, allowing each prisoner an average of $0.91 per day for
 food. Ministry of Government officials stated that they did not have sufficient funds
 to improve the conditions of prisons under their jurisdiction. The office of civil in-
 spection for professional responsibility of the Ministry of Government, established
 in 1991, is charged with monitoring prison conditions. However, due to the unit's
 small budget and staff, it is able to investigate few complaints.
 d. Arbitray Arrest, Detention, or Exie.-Arbitrary arrest and detention by the po-
 lice were common. The Police Functions Law establishes procedures for the arrest
 of criminal suspects, which require police to obtain a warrant from a police official
 prior to detaining a suspect. The law requires police to notify family members of
 a detainee's whereabouts within 24 hours, but the poice rarely comply. Detainees
 do not have the right to an attorney until they have been formally charged with
 a crime. Local human rights groups criticized the law for providing inadequate judi-
 cial oversight of police arrests.
 The Constitution declares that all detained persons have the right to be brought
 before a judge within 72 hours, but the authorities frequently ignored this in prac-
 tice. Local human rights groups reported that the authorities routinely detained
 suspects far beyond the limits established under the Constitution.
 The civil inspection unit also monitors police wrongdoing, including illegal deten-
 tion. Through October 1994, the civil inspection unit received 360 complaints of
 abuse of power, illegal detention, and negligence. Victims ified 80 percent of the
 complaints against the poie and the other 20 percent against prison guards, immi-
 gration officials, and other enforcement authorities. No internal mechanism exists
 to verify what official actions, if any, the Ministry of Government takes against
 these officials, once the unit submits the complaint to it. The location of the civil
 inspection unit in the Ministry building, which during the Sandinista era was the
 site of the feared Interior Ministry, is cited by members of the unit as an intimidat-
 ing factor for those seeking to lodge complaints of police or prison abuse.
 Athough the Constitution provides access to legal counsel for detainees after they
 have been charged with a crime, in practice police do not act to protect this right.
 The Reform Law of Penal Procedures provides for the release on bail of persons ac-
 cused of certain crimes. Previously, the law permitted detainees to remain at liberty
 prior to trial only for complling personal reasons, such as ill health.
 ANPDH recorded 183 complaints of illegal detention through 1994. Over half of
 the incidents of illegal detention occurred in the north central regon of the country,
 most of which were attributable to the National Police. CENID  also criticized the
 police, noting that, from January 1993 to March 1994, 48 percent of all complaints
 involved abuses by the police. CENIDH and other observers cited many impedi-
 ments to improved police performance and responsiveness to the public, including
 the lack of professional training, low salaries, and inadequate resources, as well as
 the physical remoteness of judicial centers that prevented relatives of prisoners from
 personally inquiring into the status of ongoing cases.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The judicial system, comprising both civilian and
 military courts, is headed by a nine-membr Supreme Court of Justice. The Su-
 preme Court names appeals court and lower court judges. On December 13, 1993,
 the National Assembly approved the nominations of four Supreme Court replace-
 ments, giving the court a non-Sandinista majority for the first time since President
 Chamorro took office. Nonetheless, the inability to obtain a working quorum ham-
 pered the work of the Supreme Court, in part due to internal divisions in the Court
 and in part due to the Assembly's refusal to act on an executive branch nomination
 in May to fill a vacancy on the Court. Two of the nine seats on the Supreme Court
 remained vacant at the end of the year.
 
 
 460
 The Ministry of Government and Attorney General's office attempted several
 times during 1993 and 1994 to issue summonses to former Sandinista Ministry of
 the Interior and Immigration Service official Luis Guzman to testify in the Santa
 Rosa arms cache investigation. The Sandinista' udge in charge of the case has re-
 peatedly failed to meet legal deadlines for rendering a decision on whether or not
 the authorities should arrest Guzman for refusing to appear for questioning.
 Police authorities commonly refused to implement decisions of lower court judge
 with which the police disagreed. Many Nicaraguans who returned to the country fol-
 lowing the 1990 election after a decade in exile sued for the return of their prop-
 erties confiscated under the Sandinista regime. In several cases, after the presiding
 magistrate ordered the return of an illegally confiscated property to the original
 owner, the police refused to enforce eviction orders against occupants, who were fre-
 quently prominent members of the FSLN or security forces. In the widely reported
 case of Jaime Solorzano, lice repeatedly refused to arrest the illegal occupants
 even after they fired on te judge who attempted to serve the eviction order and
 wounded Mr. Solorzano's son. This case remains unresolved. The Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights ruled on February 1 that the Government had vio-
 lated the American Convention on Human Rights by refusing to return properties
 owned by the Matin family which the Government illall seized in 1979. The Lib-
 yan-Nicaraguan Friendship Association-an arm of the Libyan Government--cur-
 rently occupies the properties.
 Until the enactment of the new Military Code on September 2, the military court
 system was responsible for investigating, prosecuting, and trying common crimes
 committed by or against members of the armed forces or  lice. Military courts often
 failed to investigate complaints or try cases against meb  of the military brought
 under the old code. They frequently imposed only light sentences against soldiers,
 and military authorities often failed to enforce them (see Section 1). The military
 court's acquittal of General Ortega and his bodyguards of the murder of Jean Paul
 Genie and the military's lack of compliance with the recommendations of the Tri-
 partite Commission are cases in point. The new Military Code specifies that all com-
 mon crimes committed by members of the military will be tried in civil court. By
 year's end, the authorities had begun poesing thre cases, twoivointhp-
 lice and one involving the EPS, under the new Code,          ilith o
 In all criminal cases, the accused has the right to legal counsel, and defendants
 are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Publicly funded attorneys to represent
 indigent defendants do not exist. Obtaining justice is a slow, uncertain process, and
 the authorities regularly arrested persons and held them without bail for months
 before they appeared in court. The CPDH estimated that nearly half of all those in-
 carceratedin the prison system had been awaiting trial for between 6 months and
 2 years.
 There were no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Famil , Home, or Coespondence-The
 Constitution establishes that all persons havete eright to privacy of their famly
 and to the inviolability of their home, correspondence, and communications. It also
 requires warrants for searches of private homes and excludes from legal proceedings
 illegally seized letters, documents, and private papers. However,in April the police
 burst mnto the home of the Bishop of Leon looking for the driver of an illegally
 parked truck. The driver and two workmen were delivering material to a nearby
 chapel and had sought refuge in the Bishop's residence after being chased by the
 police. The police entered the residence without a warrant, caught the workmen,
 and beat them in front of the Bishop. The lice later released the three uncharged
 persons, and Vice Minister of Government Fran Cesar personally visited n adpolo-
 gized to the Bishop (the police also apologized). The Bishop made no formal com-
 plaint.
 Article 26 of the new Military Code prohibits the Defense Intelligence Directorate
 from undertaking "political intelligence activities" and plaes it under the authority
 of the President as head of all armed forces. Despite the new law, several political
 parties have complained that infiltration by the DID into their groups has not
 ceased.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Volations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-In several instances, police and the EPS used indiscriminate or unnecessary
 force, resulting in deaths or injuries to civilians. Despite the efforts of local human
 rights organizations, the authorities took no action to discipline senior officials nor
 to punish those who committed the abuses.
 An EPS patrol wounded 11 persons on February 8 when it indiscriminately
 opened fire with machine guns and rcket-propelled grenades on the town of
 Tomayunca in the mistaken belief that it harbored an armed recontra group. In fact
 the group had passed through hours earlier. Both CPDH and ANPDHlater tesary
 
 
 461
 to the absence of combatants in the village. The EPS publicly acknowledged the at-
 tack and accused the patrol leader of "negligence" but took no further action.
 On May 2, some 300 police officers armed with clubs and guns violently evicted
 450 families of squatters, many of whom were former members of the EPS and the
 RN, and destroyed their makeshift homes in an area known as "Villa
 Reconciliacion." The land was claimed by a cooperative represented by a former San-
 dinista official, Oscar Loza, accused of murdering two prisoners during his tenure
 as operations chief of the FSLN security service. Although the police maintained
 that they were acting under official orders, the magistrate publicly stated that he
 had never issued an eviction order, and the police never produced any evidence that
 one existed.
 A group of EPS soldiers reportedly chasing a group of local bandits entered the
 village of Puerto Viejo on April 23 and claimed that several men fired at them from
 the house of Porfirio Rayo. Mrs. Rayo later said the army opened fire without warn-
 ing, killing a stranger and her husband, mortally wounding her 23-year-old son and
 injuring her two other children. She denied any involvement of her family in crimi-
 nal activity;, investigations by ANPDH, CIAV, and CPDH supported Mrs. Rayo's tes-
 timony. The authorities took no action to resolve this incident.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and a free press, and the Government in large measure respects these rights. Di-
 verse viewpoints were freely and openly discussed in public discourse, in the pri-
 vately owned print media, in the broadcast media, and in academic circles.
 The news medium with the largest audience is radio, but polUs show that tele-
 vision is the primary source of news, particularly in the cities. Listeners can receive
 a wide variety of political viewpoints, especially on Managua's 45 radio stations. In
 1994 there were no incidents of radio stations being attacked or subjected to inci-
 dents of sabotage, as occurred in previous years. There  seven television stations,
 five of which carry news programming with marked political overtones. The remain-
 ing two stations carry no local news. There is no official state censorship, nor is self-
 censorship practiced.
 As a consequence of the lack of complete civilian control ever the police, police
 harassment of journalists has continued. In July l~lice attacked journalist Melba
 Sanchez as she covered the assault by ex-RN me      on ocal government build-
 ings in Chinandega. The police beat her with fists and rifle butts and destroyed her
 camera. Partly as a result of this action, the reresentatives of the two journalis
 unions, the three main human rights NGO's, the president of the National Assem-
 bly's human rights commission, and the chief of police signed a cooperative agree-
 ment for the protection of the human rights of journalists on Jul 27. In an unprece-
 dented move, the Inspector General ofPolic disciplined the off  involved in the
 Sanchez beating. The punishment of 15 days' confinement to desk duty, however,
 was widely regarded as too light to be an effective deterrent.
 Freedom of the press is also potentially qualified by several constitutional prvi-
 sions, one of which stipulates that Nicaraguans have a right to "accurate in~ra
 tion," thereby providing a legal basis by which the freedom to publish information
 the Government deems inaccurate could be abridged. Although the right to informa-
 tion cannot be subject to censorship, there is retroactive liability established by law,
 defined as a "social responsibility," implying sanctions against irresponsibility by
 the press. Finally, the Constitution provides that the mass media are at the service
 of the national interests," implying that the Government may suppress media activ-
 ity it decides is not in the national interest. There were no instances of the Govern-
 ment citing these prvisions to suppress the media, although in early October the
 Government closed down an independent news show on government-owned Radio
 Nigua for 24 hours atr it unfavorably reported a meeting of the Social Demo-
 cratic Party attended by Minister of the Presidency Antonio Lacay. The Govern-
 ment gave no justification for the closure, nor for the quick reopening under heavy
 press pressure.
 The Constitution recognizes, and the Government respects in practice, academic
 freedom in higher education.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution recognizes
 the right to peaceful assembly without friornpermission. It also recognizes the right
 to public assembly, demonstration, an  t mblzation "in onformity with the law."
 Demonstrators must obtain permission for a march after registering its planned size
 and location with police. The authorities routinely grant such eermission.
 The Constitution provides for the right to organize er affilate with political par-
 ties, and opposition and independent associations functioned freely without govern-
 
 
 462
 mert interference or restriction. Private associations do not have legal status until
 they receive this designation from the National Assembly, which it routinely confers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this in_prctice.
 d. Freedom of Moivenent Within the County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right to travel and reside anywhere
 in Nicaragua and to enter and exit the ountry freely. There are no government re-
 strictions on movement within the country. The right of citizens to return to Nica-
 ragua is not specifically established in the Constitution, but, in practice, the
 Chamorm Government has not restricted anyone's return. The Constitution provides
 for asylum, and political refugees expelled from Nicaragua cannot be sent back to
 the country persecuting them. In 1994 there were no reports of political violence
 against any returning Nicaraguan citizens.
 In 1993 the Government attempted to strip former Red Brigade terrorist, Alessio
 Cassimirri, of his citizenship and to deport him. Cassimirri has been accused in the
 1978 murder of Italian Prime Minister Aldo Moro. At year's end, the Supreme Court
 was still debating the case, which must decide whether the annulment of the citi-
 zenship which the Sandinista government granted him in 1988 was legal.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised their right peacefully to change their government in the first
 election under the 1987 Constitution, which took place in February 1990. The 14-
 party UNO coalition, the FSLN, and several smaller parties contested the election,
 which international observers declared free and fair. The Constitution centers politi-
 cal power in the executive branch, which consists of the President, Vice President,
 and a Cabinet appointed by the President. The President is both Head of State and
 Head of Government, as well as commander in chief of the defense and security
 forces. Currently the President is also Minister of Defense, but this is not constitu-
 tionally mandated. The Vice President has no constitutionally mandated duties or
 powers. Both are elected for 6-year terms by direct popular vote.
 The National Assembly exercises legislative power. Its members also serve 6-year
 terms. Ninety members are elected under a proportional representation system from
 nine departments or regions; defeated presidential candidates, of which there are
 two, also receive seats in the Assembly, provided they won a certain minimum per-
 centage of votes in the previous presidential election. In December 1993, the Na-
 tional Assembly resumed operation following a 15-month period during which the
 withdrawal of the UNO coalition, which had moved into opposition to President
 Chamorro's Government, denied the legislature a working quorum. Deputies from
 the FSLN, the center group (former UNO deputies who had defected to a
 progovernment stance in mid-1992), and three parties which had either defected or
 been expelled from UNO joined to reactivate the Assembly and consider a legislative
 agenda that included constitutional reform. Although the remaining UNO members
 continued to insist that only a special constituent assembly should enact constitu-
 tional reform, the UNO deputies gradually rejoined the Assembly in January. Later
 in the year, the coalition espoused constitutional reform by the Assembly in which
 the UNO deputies participated.
 Local elections held in the two Atlantic Coast departments in February were wit-
 nessed by over 150 international election observers and judged free and fair.
 An independent branch of government, the Supreme Electoral Council, admin-
 isters elections. All elections are by secret ballot, with all citizens aged 16 and over
 having the right to vote. There are no restrictions in law or practice against women,
 indigenous groups, or other minorities voting or participating in politics. A woman
 serves as President of the Republic, and women hold a ministerial-level post and
 other senior positions in government. Two members of the National Assembly are
 Miskitos; indigenous people are represented in government at both the local and na-
 tional levels.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Four major local nongovernmental human rights organizations operate freely
 without government interference: the Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights, the
 Permanent Commission for Human Rights, the Nicaraguan Association for Human
 Rights, and Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo's verification commission. In addition,
 CIAV, pursuant to its expanded mandate authorized by the June 1993 OAS General
 Assembly, carries out human rights related activities covering all those affected by
 the Nicaraguan civil war, whatever their political affiliation.
 
 
 463
 Human rights groups operated without impediment in Nicaragua. However, their
 reports of human rights abuses committed by EPS and police personnel to respon-
 sible officials of these institutions or to concerned civilian authorities seldom elicited
 concrete responses. The Government took no action regarding the unsolved March
 1993 murder of CENIDH activist Leonel Gonzalez despite repeated requests from
 that organization to reopen the case.
 Since its establishment in September 1992, the Tri partite Commission has been
 the most effective mechanism for raising human rights allegations to an official
 level and eliciting a response from government authorities. However, the Govern-
 ment has implemented only three of the Commission's recommendations.
 On December 1, police lieutenant Julio Cesar Toledo threatened a CIAV official
 attempting to serve a judge's release order for a former resistance member being
 illegally detained in a Somoto prison. The day before, Lieutenant Javier Martinez
 and Captain Denis Tinoco had threatened the judge who signed the order. Despite
 formal complaints lodged by both CIAV and the judge, the three police officials re-
 ceived only mild administrative reprimands.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of 'birth, nationality, politi-
 cal belief, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, national origin, economic condi-
 tion, or social condition."
 Women.-While there is no legal discrimination against women, they continued to
 suffer discrimination in the male-dominated culture prevalent in much of society.
 Women occupy senior positions in government, the trade union movement, and so-
 cial organizations, but are underrepresented in management positions in the private
 sector. They are the majority of workers in the traditionally low-paid educational
 textile, and health service sectors. A report the International Foundation for Global
 Competitiveness published in August claimed that women worked on average 21
 more hours per week than men, 77 hours to 56 hours. Moreover, the report con-
 cluded, 41 percent of all households headed by women in 1993 lived in a state of
 poverty (up from 32 percent in 1992).
 In a July report covering the southwestern portion of the country, the Nicaraguan
 Social Security Institute (INSSBI) stated that "every 24 hours five women are sexu-
 ally assaulted by strangers, five more by members of their own family." The report
 claimed that the majority of the assaults took place in the countryside and in the
 poorer areas of the cities. CENIDH quoted police statistics for 1993 of 1,741 cases
 of assault against women, of which 40 percent were crimes of rape. Because victims
 often were reluctant topublicize their charges, it is likely that such abuse was sig-
 nificantly underreporte.
 m     human Agts groups reported that police sometimes intervene to prevent
 injury in cases of domestic violence but that they rarely charge the perpetrators be-
 cause they consider domestic violence a "private crime for which the victim, not the
 State, should press charges. A victim wishing to prosecute must first have an injury
 examined and registered by a forensic doctor, women's groups complained of the
 scarcity and inaccessibility of female forensic doctors. Most domestic violence cases
 thus go unreported, not only because of the difficulty of prosecution but also for fear
 of spousal reprisal. Those cases that actually make it to court usually result in a
 not guilty verdict due to judicial inexperience with and lack of legal training related
 to such violence.
 The Ixchen centers and the Luisa Amanda Association of Nicaraguan Women, a
 Sandinista mass organization, provided medical and psychological counseling to
 women, as well as legal advice in divorce cases and to victims of rape and other
 violence. In November these groups joined with some 20 other Nicaraguan NGO's
 dedicated to women's issues to create the "Women's Network Against Violence" to
 promote women's rights and to pressure the Government to ratify the Inter-Amer-
 ican Convention for the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence
 Against Women, which Nicaragua signed on June 9, 1994.
 Judging from available statistics, women appear to have equal or better access to
 education than men. For example, net enrollment for girls in the primary grades
 is 79 percent, compared to 76 percent for boys. An the secondary level, it is 33 per-
 cent for girls and 26 percent for boys.
 Children.--Children 15 years and younger make up 46 percent of Nicaragua's
 population. The Government is publicly committed to children's human rights and
 welfare, but resources for programs for children are inadequate. The INSSBI esti-
 mated that it receives from 5,000 to 6,000 cases of mistreatment annually for chil-
 dren under the age of 10. The authorities conduct investigations if a parent makes
 a formal complaint, but this rarely happens. Every year the media carry stories of
 
 
 464
 dozens of children abandoned or killed by parents who are too poor or otherwise un-
 able to take care of them. Because of the economic situation of many families, thou-
 sands of children must work in the fields alongside their parents or in the streets
 as vendors or beggars.
 Indigenous People.-The indigenous people are concentrated in four major areas.
 On the Atlantic coast and in the eastern highlands are the Miskito (numbering
 160,000), the S, th the Rana, and the black Carib (these last three exist in very
 small numbers). The Government considers these peoples identifiable tribes.
 The Miskito tre is the largest ethnic group inthe North Atlantic Autonomous
 Region (the RAAN one of two such regons created in 1987 from the former depart-
 ment of Zelaya).  he indigenous people of the RAAN (the Miskito and the Sumu)
 have their own political party, the Yatama, with strong representation in regional
 and municipal councils. Indigenous people participate in government at both the
 local and national levels. However, in many instances, the Government makes deci-
 sions at the national level without adequate departmental or community consulta-
 tion. Therefore, as in previous years, there were complaints that the authorities ex-
 clude the indigenous peoples of the Atlantic coast from meaningful participation in
 decisions affecting their rands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural re-
 sources.
 The fledgling, Atlantic coast-based Center for Human, Citizen, and Autonomous
 Rights strongly links autonomous rights with human rights for the inhabitants of
 the region andcontends the central Government has granted business concessions
 in the autonomous regions without consulting the two relevant regional govern-
 ments. The 1987 autonomy law deals with the ethnic minorities of the Atlantic
 Coast. It pledges that indigenous people shall have the right to participate in the
 exploitation of the resources of the region. While the law stipulates the structure
 of the Atlantic Coast governments, it does not outline any specific mechanism or
 regulations the central Government should employ to determine use of local re-
 sources.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Most Nicaraguans are of mixed mestizo
 background, and ethnicity does not appear to be a barrier to political or economic
 success. Various indigenous groups from both the northern and the southern Atlan-
 tic regions have criticized the Government for its failure to expend resources in sup-
 port of the Atlantic coast population, which mainly comprises ethnic, racial, and re-
 ligious minorities (particularly, members of the Moravian church). Successive
 central governments in Managua have traditionally neglected the minorities on the
 Atlantic coast. This has often taken the form of making decisions on exploitation
 of resources in the region without adequate consultation.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not legislated or otherwise man-
 dated accessibility for the disabled. In August the FSLNs Organization of Handi-
 capped Revolutionaries joined with the ex--based Institute of War Victims in pe-
 titioning the Social Security Institute to provide aid to victims of Nicaragua's civil
 war--some of whom have been waiting over 30 months for such help. The Social
 Security Institute says that it pays benefits to some 30,000 victims of the civil war,
 including partly or totally handicapped victims, widows, orphans, and mothers of
 war victims, each of whom receives an average of $21 monthly. The Institute claims
 that those who protested in August either had verification cases pending or are in-
 eligible for the benefits because they have outside employment or other disqualifica-
 tions.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution guarantees the right of workers to
 organize voluntarily in unions. Legally, all public and private sector workers, except
 those in the military and the police, may form and join unions of their own choosing,
 and they exercise this right extensively. New unions must register with the Ministry
 of Labor, which must grant legal status before they may engage in collective bar-
 gaining, some labor groups report occasional delays in obtaining this status. It is
 likely that in some cases, the Labor Ministry has deliberately interfered with the
 already lengby bureaucratic process to make it lengthier. Nearly half of the work
 force, including agricultural workers, is unionized, according to labor leaders.
 Nicaragua's umons are independent of the Government. Affiliation to or activity
 in political parties or associations is grounds for dissolution of a trade union under
 the existing Labor Code; however, the Government does not enforce this provision.
 Many unions and federations are affiliated with political parties, most notably with
 the FSLN, the Nicaraguan Socialist Party, the Christian Democratic Union, and,
 until 1992, the Nicaraguan Communist Party.
 The Constitution recognizes the right to strike. The Labor Code requires a 60-per-
 cent majority of all the workers in an enterprise to call a strike. It also restricts
 
 
 strikes in rural occupations where produce may be damaged. Workers may strike
 legally only after they have exhausted other methods of dispute resolution, including
 mediation by the Ministry of Labor and compulsory arbitration. As a result, unions
 regard these lengthy procedures as too expensive and time-consuming and fre-
 quently ignore them when initiating a strike; this practice continued in 1994, with
 the majonty of strikes declared illegal.
 The =r Code prohibits retribution against strikers and union leaders for legal
 strikes. However, this protection may not extend to illegal strikes. In June the Su-
 preme Court voted to uphold a 1993 government decision to fire 144 customs work-
 ers. The Court justified its decision in part by citing an unrelated 1992 strike, in
 which the authorities claimed lives were endangered when demonstrators blocked
 the runway of the international airport. Transportation strikes to protest high fuel
 prices occurred in January and August, with relatively little violence.
 The 1994 International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee on Freedom of As-
 sociation issued a report critical of the Government for various 1992 arrests of union
 officials without sufficient cause, who were later released without charge. The ILO's
 Committee of Experts (COE) noted that the draft text of the new Labor Code (which
 the National Assembly passed on December 22 but was not signed into law by year's
 end) did not remove restrictions on the right to strike of rural workers, grant the
 right to associate of public servants, or reduce the number of workers in an enter-
 prise required to call a strike to a simple majority
 Unions freely form or join federations or confederations and affiliate with and par-
 ticipate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to bargain collectively. The Chamorro Government's labor negotiations
 continued primarily to be ad hoc efforts to resolve pressing labor conflicts, usually
 in the public sector. Despite unfavorable economic conditions and unfamiliarity with
 the practice, following 10 years of central planning, collective bargaining is becom-
 ing more common in the private sector. In 1994 the ILO's COE argued that the
 labor law provision requiring Ministry of Labor approval of collective agreements
 violates Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining ratified
 by Nicaragua in 1967.
 During 1994 13 firms, employing some 5,000 workers, operated in the single ex-
 port processing zone. Although the zone's firms receive tax concessions, Nicaraguan
 law does not exempt them from compliance with any of its labor provisions. Never-
 theless, of the 13 enterprises, only 1 (a state-owned firm) has a union. Labor leaders
 and employers have provided conflicting accounts as to why unions do not represent
 workers in the other firms. Labor leaders contend that employers have told workers
 that they will be fired if they join a union. Free trade zone officials maintain that
 no union has received sufficient support from the workers to allow one to form and
 that the workers already receive more than adequate benefits.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there is no evidence that it is practiced. In 1991 the As-
 sembly repealed the decree which empowered the police to impose penalties involv-
 ing compulsory labor a move specifically a pplauded in the ILO's 1994 COE report.
 d. Minimum Age or Employment of Chigen.-The Constitution prohibits child
 labor that may affect normal childhood development or interfere with the obligatory
 school year. Education is compulsory to age 12, and the law prohibits employment
 of children under the age of 14. Nevertheless, because of the prevailing economic
 conditions, more than 100,000 children reportedly work up to 12 hours a day. Many
 are employed on family farms. Many children aged 10 or older work for less than
 $1.00 per day on the same cotton farms, banana plantations, and coffee plantations
 where their parents are employed. Many small children work in the busy streets
 of Mana             merchandise, cleaning automobile windows, and begging. Al-
 though the Ministry of Labor rarely enforces it, the child labor law is generay ob-
 served in the small modern sector of the economy.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-Over the objections of the labor representa-
 tives, a commission made up of representatives from government, labor, and the ri-
 vate sector set sectoral minimum wages in mid-1991. The labor groups argued that
 the monthly minimum wage rates (raning from $30 in the agricultural sector,
 through $39 for central government employees, to $65 in the banking sector) were
 inadequate, given the high cost of living. According to a 1991 estimate by the Gov-
 ernment's National Commission on the Standard of Living, the minimum wage did
 not provide a family of four with the income to meet its basic needs. Enforcement
 of the minimum wage is lax, and some employers reportedly pay less, particularly
 in the agricultural sector. However, Ministry of Labor surveys indicated that some
 86 percent of urban area workers earned more than the minimum wage.
 
 
 466
 
 The Constitution establishes an 8-hour workday with weekly rest and establishes
 the right to a safe and healthy workplace. The standard legal workweek is a maxi-
 mum of 48 hours, with 1 day of rest.
 The Ministry of Labor's Office of Occupational Health and Safety is responsible
 for verifying compliance with health and safety standards. The Office lacks ade-
 quate staff to enforce these extensive standards. The ILO's COE criticized the Gov-
 ernment for the Ministry's failure to enforce standards Nicaragua has committed to
 implement regarding the threat of occupational cancer, including measures for spe-
 cial protection for workers at risk and periodic medical examinations of these worik-
 ers during and after their exposure. Workers have no specific right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
