 NICARAGUA
 The Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) rules
 Nicaragua. The 1987 Constitution institutionalized Sandinista
 executive and party control over the country's military and
 security forces and central direction of the national economy.
 The FSLN has thus in 9 years transformed a popular uprising
 against the Somoza dictatorship into rule by a small elite
 which claims to be the vanguard of an irreversible revolution.
 The claimed legitimacy of Sandinista rule is widely challenged
 by civic opposition groups, as well as an armed Nicaraguan
 Resistance. However, the FSLN has suppressed peaceful
 opposition to its rule, claiming that such opposition
 constitutes collaboration with the armed Resistance and
 foreign aggression, and uses its monopoly of the security
 apparatus, the broad powers conferred upon the security forces
 by the Constitution, and coercive legislation, such as the law
 for the maintenance of order and public security, to neutralize
 independent groups, suppress opposition, and maintain its
 monopoly on power.
 The People's Sandinista Army (EPS) and the Ministry of
 Interior, in addition to their normal military and police
 structures, have an extensive internal security apparatus.
 Using Soviet bloc and Cuban instruction and techniques, and
 directed by the Sandinista party, they have developed an
 effective internal control system capable of paramilitary
 sweeps in rural areas to destroy the support base of the armed
 resistance as well as surveillance and infiltration of all
 independent organizations in the cities.
 The economy is a combination of state and private ownership.
 Although professing a commitment to a mixed economy, Sandinista
 leaders have characterized the Nicaraguan revolution as
 Socialist. The regime exercises regulatory authority over
 much of the economy, is openly hostile to private initiative,
 and expropriates private property for political as well as
 economic purposes. Flight of human capital, frequent and
 unpredictable economic decrees, high military expenditures,
 and lack of confidence by the private sector have combined
 with the effects of the war to produce sharp economic decline
 and hyperinflation.
 In January the Central American presidents declared in San
 Jose, Costa Rica, that each country in Central America would
 unilaterally comply with the 1987 Guatemala accords, including
 implementation of democratization, political pluralism, and a
 general amnesty. Nicaragua lifted the state of emergency,
 restoring among other things the right to strike, and
 abolishing special tribunals to try persons suspected of
 counterrevolutionary activity. However, the Government
 maintained effective control of opposition activity through a
 combination of legal and extralegal tactics. In March a
 preliminary cease-fire agreement was reached between the
 Government and the Nicaraguan Resistance at Sapoa. The Sapoa
 Accord called for compliance with the Guatemala agreement and
 Resistance participation in a national dialog on
 democratization. Although a truce remains in effect, a final
 cease-fire has not been achieved.
 Since that time, the Sandinista regime gradually reduced the
 political opening available to the civic opposition, using
 intimidation and attack by government-controlled mobs to
 inhibit public demonstrations. On July 10, Sandinista police
 used force to break up a peaceful demonstration at the town of
 
 
 643
 NICARAGUA
 Nandaime, arresting a number of the demonstrators, and using
 their subsequent trial as a means of continued intimidation of
 the regime's critics. The United States Ambassador and seven
 other U.S. Embassy officers were expelled from Nicaragua on
 July 11 for allegedly orchestrating opposition activity.
 Since July 10, the Government has refused permission for all
 outdoor opposition demonstrations. The independent newspaper
 La Prensa and a number of independent radio stations in
 operation for most of 1988 have also come under government
 pressure. Their-owners have been threatened or assaulted by
 government officials, and they have been subjected to periodic
 suspensions for printing or broadcasting allegedly false
 reports critical of the Government.
 In October the National Assembly reduced outside support for
 independent institutions through legislation making it a crime
 for any Nicaraguan entity to receive funds provided by
 specified U.S. Legislation. The Assembly also granted sweeping
 new emergency powers to the Nicaraguan President. On balance,
 the Guatemala, San Jose, and Sapoa agreements have resulted in
 only temporary and reversible improvements in human rights in
 Nicaragua. The 1987-88 report of the OAS Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) noted "significant but
 precarious advances" for human rights in Nicaragua. With the
 situation exacerbated by the conflict between the Government
 and the Resistance forces, there continued to be charges
 against both sides of such human rights abuses as politically
 motivated killings, disappearances, torture, and illegal
 detentions.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Based on information provided by the independent Permanent
 Commission on Human Rights (CPDH), through August 1988 there
 were reports of 28 politically motivated killings, the
 majority attributed to Sandinista security forces. Many of
 these killings involved persons who were detained by state
 security or by military forces for alleged resistance
 activity, or for fleeing or resisting military recruitment.
 Several opposition political leaders were killed in 1988.
 Opposition groups and the CPDH asserted that these killings
 were politically motivated; the Government attributed them to
 common criminals. There has been no conclusive evidence in
 these cases. Although prosecution of EPS troops for criminal
 activity, including murder, is fairly common, there is no
 record of prosecutions of EPS soldiers for these alleged
 political killings. Among the killings attributed to the
 Sandinista Government by opposition and human rights groups
 were:
 --Walter Antonio Morales Silva, from Managua, was
 reportedly killed on February 4 by Lieutenant Victor Julio
 Rios Zamora after being detained and having his truck
 confiscated.
 --Two labor activists leading a march of peasants to a
 rally sponsored by the Labor Unity and Action Central
 Organization were killed March 5 by Sandinista troops near the
 village of El Tunea, Matagalpa department.
 
 
 644
 NICARAGUA
 --Fidel Anastasio Garcia Sevillo, a farmer from Acopyapa,
 Chontales, was taken into custody by the EPS on March 19,
 accused of giving food to the armed resistance. He was
 reportedly killed the next day by members of the Gaspar Garcia
 Laviana Battalion.
 --A Sandinista patrol from Matiguas on March 21 allegedly
 tortured and killed five civilians, including a Catholic lay
 worker, at San Pablo Del Apanteillo De Zabolar.. They had been
 mutilated and had deep cuts on the legs, arms, and abdomens;
 the five persons had been accused of being resistance
 collaborators. A report of the murders was made by Monsignor
 Carlos Santi, Bishop of Matagalpa, during his March 27 Palm
 Sunday Mass at the Cathedral in Matagalpa.
 --Eleazar Herrera Herrera, President of the Matagalpa
 chapter of the Nicaraguan Conservative Party, was murdered on
 July 27. The Sandinista police maintain that the murder was
 committed by three of Herrera's disgruntled ranch employees.
 However, Conservative Party leaders and other civic opposition
 groups assert that Herrera was killed for political reasons.
 The U.S. funded Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights
 (ANPDH), a nonprofit organization independent of the Resistance
 forces, claims that through June, 130 noncombatant peasants
 were killed by the EPS, with most of them having undergone
 torture prior to their death.
 The Resistance has also been accused of political killings by
 representatives of the international press, human rights
 organizations, and the Sandinista Government. The following
 are examples of killings attributed to the Resistance as
 reported to the Witness for Peace organization, which charges
 that Resistance forces killed 38 civilians between late March
 and the end of August:
 --Chilo Murillo, a member of a Sandinista reserve unit
 and a resident of San Antonio, near Nueva Guinea, was
 reportedly kidnaped on April 13. He was later found dead, and
 two former prisoners of the Resistance reported that
 Resistance troops claimed to have done the killing.
 --Alfonso Hernandez Garcia was reportedly taken from his
 home near the November 21 resettlement community in Matagalpa
 on July 4 by a group of Resistance fighters and killed by the
 Resistance during an attack on the cooperative.
 --On July 18, Resistance forces allegedly abducted five
 men from the Ronald Paredes cooperative, Jinotega. The five
 were reportedly lined up and shot by the Resistance; two.of
 them were killed.
 --Resistance forces were reported to have forced their
 way into a house in Cerro Blanco, Nueva Segovia, on August 2,
 and shot and killed an ex-Resistance leader who had received
 government amnesty.
 --Perfecto Gonzalez Sanchez was reported to have been
 killed by the Resistance on August 29 in a house in Waslala,
 Matagalpa. Gonzalez was in charge of the state distribution
 store in the Las Brisas cooperative and a member of the
 cooperative's militia.
 The ANPDH, in its report covering the first half of 1988,
 claimed it had reopened several cases in which Resistance
 
 
 NICARAGUA
 Commanders brought to trial by the Office of the Military
 Prosecutor of the Nicaraguan Resistance for murder or
 kidnaping had been acquitted due to "legal irregularities"
 suggesting a lack of prosecutorial zeal. Some sentences,
 after a retrial, were reportedly reversed or stiffened.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances generally involve persons detained by the EPS
 or by state security forces. EPS military recruitment
 practices include the roundup of young males at schools, movie
 theaters, and public events. Military recruiters periodically
 halt vehicles and remove draft-age men. Those detained usually
 are not provided an opportunity to notify their families of
 their detention. Some who resist Sandinista pressure to join
 the military have disappeared. Persons who are accused of
 having provided support to the Resistance (e.g., giving food
 to Resistance forces as they move through an area) also have
 disappeared after EPS or security forces have detained them
 for questioning. Fifty-six reports of disappearances were
 filed with the CPDH as of August 1988.
 The Government has charged the Resistance with a policy of
 kidnaping civilians; the Government human rights organization,
 the National Commission for the Promotion and Protection of
 Human Rights (CNPPDH), claims that from 1980 to 1987, 7,037
 people were abducted by the Resistance, 6,005 of whom were
 civilians, and that more than 1,240 civilians were kidnaped in
 the first half of 1988. From January through August, 18
 allegations of kidnaping by the Resistance had been filed with
 the CPDH. The Resistance released 104 Sandinista military and
 Nicaraguan civilians on December 29. Forty-four of the
 released prisoners returned to Nicaragua, while 60 prisoners
 decided to remain in Honduras as refugees.
 Disappearances also occur when prisoners are transferred
 between various government prison facilities without
 notification. For example, five prisoners in the model prison
 in the town of Tipitapa disappeared on July 9 when guards took
 them to an unknown location. Among the five prisoners was
 Reynaldo Aguado Montealegre, a former Sandinista army
 lieutenant, who had been accused of spying for the United
 States. The five were returned to the model prison 21 days
 later. The prisoners reported they had been taken to El
 Chipote prison in Managua for further interrogation, during
 which they were threatened with death by El Chipote guards.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There are three types of prisons in Nicaragua--State Security
 (DGSE) facilities, national penitentiary prisons, and open
 farms. Most of Nicaragua's prisoners are held in the first
 two systems, and most abuses occur there. Interrogation of
 detainees is normally conducted in DGSE prisons. During
 interrogation, detainees have been subjected to various forms
 of physical and psychological torture, including food and
 water deprivation, mock executions, and being beaten while
 their hands are manacled behind their backs or while they are
 hung by their hands. CPDH reports that physical torture is
 more commonly used against-peasants, while psychological
 methods are utilized against members of civic, political, or
 labor organizations., Death threats against prisoners and
 their family members are also common.
 
 
 646
 NICARAGUA
 The DGSE prisons generally are not open to inspection by any
 international human rights group, including the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Prisoners in DGSE jails
 are often kept in the dark in isolation cells. Food is scanty
 and at El Chipote, the best-known DGSE facility, often consists
 of only a spoonful of rice and beans three times a day. The
 systematic use of these interrogation techniques by the DGSE
 reflects a deliberate government policy which targets political
 prisoners in DGSE prisons or its secret jails. Torture is not
 often used in the national penitentiary system, but conditions
 are harsh and beatings of political prisoners are common.
 Leaders of the civic opposition detained by state security
 following their return from a meeting in Guatemala in January
 report that they were made to strip and assume degrading
 positions while being photographed. These photographs have
 subsequently been sent to the former prisoners on such
 occasions as their birthdays. Opposition leaders were also
 placed in small closet-like cells for several hours,
 aggressively interrogated, and threatened; death threats were
 made against them and their families. Families of opposition
 leaders arrested following the July 10 Nandaime demonstration
 reported that conditions in the La Granja prison outside
 Granada jeopardized the inmates' health. They reported a lack
 of adequate food, bedding, sanitary facilities, and medical
 attention. Medical problems such as fungus infections,
 rashes, malaria, dengue fever, and conjunctivitis often
 remained untreated. Overcrowded prison cells require many
 prisoners to sleep on damp, dirty floors. The CPDH asserts
 that many ex-National Guardsmen, many of whom were summarily
 tried, are serving long prison terms with inadequate health
 care, in many cases developing chronic health problems.
 As of June 30, the ANPDH reported 66 prisoners of war were
 held by the Resistance. Six of the prisoners were ill, while
 many others complained of skin infections, headaches, and
 anemia; one of the 4 women said she had been sexually abused.
 In general, prison conditions were Spartan. Of those prisoners
 released by the Resistance on December 29 who subsequently
 returned to Nicaragua, several alleged that they had been
 tortured while in Resistance prisons, according to Sandinista
 media.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrests or detention of persons suspected of being Resistance
 supporters are common, particularly in rural areas. Although
 the Constitution provides that a detainee must be brought
 before a competent legal authority within 72 hours of arrest,
 suspects are often held for months without charges or access
 to counsel. Short-term arrest and interrogation
 is an integral part of the Government's harassment of the
 civilian opposition. Persons suspected of
 counterrevolutionary activity are generally picked up at night
 by the DGSE. Detainees are normally held until they agree to
 confess their guilt or implicate others in counterrevolutionary
 activities. Persons suspected of views critical of the
 Government often are detained and charged with common crimes
 rather than for treason or espionage. Civic opposition leaders
 are generally apprehended openly, but without warrants. Many
 of those suspected of aiding the Resistance are detained
 secretly and without warrants. The CPDH has reported that
 peasants have been charged with counterrevolutionary
 activities upon refusal to join one of the FSLN's mass
 organizations.
 
 
 647
 NICARAGUA
 In August the EPS and state security launched a campaign to
 eliminate suspected Resistance supporters. According to local
 sources, many hundreds of peasants in Northern and Central
 Nicaragua were detained without formal charges. These
 individuals were accused of giving food to Resistance forces.
 The DGSE continued its practice of detaining and holding
 political, labor, and civic leaders for short periods of time
 before releasing them without having charged them with any
 crime or violation of law. Twelve opposition leaders were
 detained in January following their meetings in Guatemala with
 the Resistance and released several days later without charge.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Anti-Somocista Popular Tribunals, or TPA's, were abolished
 in January as part of the package of steps announced by
 President Ortega to comply with the Guatemala accord. The
 TPA's had been established in 1983 to prosecute persons
 accused of counterrevolutionary activity. Cases in progress,
 chiefly those being tried under the Law for Maintenance of
 Order and Public Security, a vague and broadly drafted law
 which criminalizes a wide range of antigovernment activities
 and all subsequent cases under this law, were moved to the
 regular courts.
 In January a requirement that judges be lawyers was abolished,
 the number of courts was increased, and former TPA judicial
 members were converted into judges to try cases formerly
 handled by the TPA's. Following the lifting of the state of
 emergency, the Government made increased use of a Somoza-era
 police code which provides for police courts, under Ministry
 of Interior jurisdiction. Under the police code, police
 instructor judges may impose summary sentences of up to 6
 months for offenses such as disturbing the peace. The police
 commenced using this power to harass and intimidate independent
 labor organizations and opposition political groups. Twelve
 persons were sentenced to 6 months' detention under this
 provision for antidraft demonstrations in Masaya in March.
 Eight members of an opposition peasant union were sentenced in
 May by a police court to 6 months in jail for disturbing the
 peace. The incident came a week after villagers prevented
 soldiers from detaining union leaders who had protested
 against the draft.
 Trial proceedings are subject to considerable influence from
 the executive, posing serious obstacles to a fair proceeding.
 The trial of 38 persons for taking.part in the demonstration
 at Nandaime on July 10 illustrates the deficiences in the
 Sandinista court system. Defense attorneys were restricted
 in access to their clients. Court sessions were conducted
 without notifying defense attorneys and without providing or
 showing defense attorneys copies of the Government's
 evidentiary documents. The judge, a Sandinista army
 lieutenant with some legal background, was formerly with the
 TPA court system. Many of the judge's procedural rulings have
 been appealed to the Supreme Court. However, the Supreme
 Court itself is highly politicized; in December 1987, three
 Supreme Court justices resigned, citing the executive branch's
 disrespect for the Court and its decisions. They were
 replaced by appointees who are strong supporters of the FSLN
 and its ideology.
 
 
 648
 NICARAGUA
 There is a wide range of estimates on the number of political
 prisoners in Nicaragua. The CPDH estimates a total of 6,200
 political prisoners, plus approximately 2,000 former members
 of the Somoza National Guard. The Government reports that
 1,822 former guardsmen and 1,432 persons convicted of
 counterrevolutionary activities are in the national
 penitentiary system. The ICRC has certified the government
 figures, but the ICRC acknowledges that it has not been
 allowed to visit state security prisons or interrogation
 facilities.
 The Organization of American States (OAS) Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) reviewed the status of
 ex-national guard prisoners as specified by the section of the
 Sapoa cease-fire accords dealing with amnesty of political
 prisoners. The IACHR report and its recommendations were
 forwarded to the OAS Secretary General. However, the
 Secretary General stated he will not release the report until
 authorized by both the Nicaraguan Government and the Resistance
 or until decisions established in the Sapoa agreement have
 been carried out. Without a complete survey of all prisons
 and detention facilities, it is impossible to establish an
 accurate figure for political prisoners. It is clear,
 however, that official government figures do not include a
 significant number of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The lifting of the state of emergency in January put into
 effect Article 26 of the Constitution, which provides for the
 inviolability of home, correspondence, and communications, and
 respect for citizens' honor and reputation. By law, a private
 home may be searched only with a warrant from a competent
 judge or other expressly authorized official, to prevent a
 crime from being committed, or to avoid injury to persons or
 goods. However, homes of civic opposition members have been
 searched without warrant. Unauthorized search of homes to
 find draft-age men is common, and in rural areas military and
 DGSE troops frequently search homes without a warrant. In one
 case reported by the San Francisco Examiner, EPS soldiers in
 January occupied a home temporarily abandoned during nearby
 fighting; when the occupants returned later that day, the
 soldiers stole about $90 from them and raped a woman.
 The Government monitors the telephones of political, labor
 union, and other leaders; it examines correspondence mailed
 both within the country and from abroad. A wide network of
 DGSE informants monitors the activities of persons suspected
 of anti-Sandinista attitudes. Although Sandinista Defense
 Committees (CDS) claim to be changing their orientation from
 political and ideological control to that of more conventional
 public service organizations, neighborhood surveillance
 continued to be a function of the CDS throughout 1988.
 Forced resettlement on the extensive scale of previous years
 did not occur in 1988. Between 18,000 and 25,000 government
 workers were laid off early in the year in order to cut
 government expenditures and state enterprise operating costs.
 An unknown number of these urban employees were relocated to
 work on state coffee and cotton farms or agricultural
 cooperatives. The Government publicized this as part of a back
 to the land movement.
 
 
 649
 NICARAGUA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution provides for freedom of speech and
 press, the Government frequently abridged these freedoms.
 Most of the mass media are owned by the Government or by
 pro-Sandinista organizations. In 1987 following the signing
 of the Guatemala accord which called for "complete freedom for
 television, radio, and the press," the Government allowed the
 reopening of the La Prensa newspaper, Radio Catolica, and
 several other independent radio stations. Requests by private
 organizations to open a-television station have been turned
 down. Since reopening, La Prensa and the independent radio
 programs have been outspoken in criticism of government
 policies and actions and have obtained a significant share of
 the news market. Nevertheless, they operate under continuing
 government controls and pressures designed to restrict their
 freedom. In December, the Government prohibited any
 governmental entity from placing notices or advertisements in
 La Prensa, which the Government accused of working for the
 -U.S. Government.
 Despite the'lifting of the state of emergency in January, the
 provisional law on communications media remained in effect;
 this law stipulates, among other things, that the media should
 express a legitimate concern for the defense of the revolution,
 and authorizesthe Media Directorate of the Ministry of
 Interior to order suspensions and eventual closure of media
 which report false stories. The Government made extensive use
 of this law, as well as of Decrees 511 and 512 which regulate
 the publication of information relating to internal security,
 national defense, and economic information, to attempt to
 control the independent media. In April Radio Corporation
 director Jose Castillo was physically assaulted by Minister of
 Interior Tomas Borge because of the station's criticism of
 government handling of a labor union hunger strike. In May
 the Government began a series of temporary suspensions of
 radio programs whose broadcasts, in the opinion of the
 Government, violated existing laws.
 On May 14, the Ministry of Interior informed the officials of
 eight radio news programs that their broadcasts had violated
 the media law and the Law on Maintenance of Order and Public
 Security by reporting on the economic crisis and opposition to
 the military draft. Media suspensions'have been frequent
 since this warning. On July 11, Radio Catolica was suspended
 indefinitely and La Prensa closed for 15 days for reporting
 the opposition demonstration at Nandaime the previous day;
 Radio Catolica was subsequently allowed to resume broadcasting,
 but without its news program. During periods of special
 interest such as the Resistance/Government cease-fire talks,
 the Government required that all radio stations broadcast only
 government programming under a system of a national radio
 network;
 Other restrictions on the media include control of supplies of
 newsprint. In March La Prensa suspended publication for .a
 short period because of a shortage of paper, and the Government
 refused permission for La Prensa to obtain paper from a U.S.
 source. Paso A Paso, a weekly paper of the Liberal Independent
 Party, has also reported government obstacles to the purchase
 of newsprint. The editor of Paso A Paso, Joaquin Mejia, was
 severely beaten by unknown assailants on September 22; his
 
 
 650
 NICARAGUA
 party has charged that the beating was motivated by Mejia's
 critical reporting about the Sandinista regime.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for the rights of association,
 assembly, and peaceful demonstration. In a letter to the
 Secretary General of the United Nations, Nicaraguan Vice
 Foreign Minister Victor Hugo Tinoco stated, "with the lifting
 of the state of emergency (on January 19) the right to
 assemble and demonstrate shall enter into force." However, on
 January 20, the Ministry of the Interior reissued a police
 regulation on political meetings which requires that organizers
 of all outdoor public demonstrations obtain prior permission
 from the Sandinista police.
 Following the July 10 demonstration at Nandaime, the police
 denied permission for all outdoor political events, despite
 repeated requests to march. Prior to July 10, the Government
 only selectively granted permission for opposition
 demonstrations. For example, permission was denied for
 rallies to be held April 17 in San Ramon, Matagalpa, and May 8
 in Jinotepe. When permission was granted, it was usually
 given shortly before the scheduled time of the event, and
 radio stations were warned not to publicize demonstrations
 before the events were authorized.
 Rally organizers reported government intimidation and
 harassment, and demonstrators were subject to violence from
 Sandinista-controlled mobs, or "Turbas." On January 22,
 members of the January 22 Mothers of Political Prisoners
 organization were attacked at the Office of the Democratic
 Coordinator in Managua during their anniversary celebration.
 Police watched as the Turbas stoned the mothers; three persons
 were injured. A mob also attacked and broke up an
 International Women's Day rally organized by the Democratic
 Coordinator on March 6 in Masaya. Turbas attacked participants
 with rocks, chains, and iron bars while the police stood by.
 The Indian Law Resource Center, a private group in Washington,
 wrote that Sandinista agents tried to prevent a rally by
 Miskito leader Brooklyn Rivera in early 1988 in Puerto
 Cabezas, and then attacked a rally held by Rivera in March.
 On July 10 in Nandaime, police broke up an opposition rally
 using tear gas, rocks, and clubs, beating many of the
 participants. The regime accused the marchers of initiating
 the violence as part of a United States destabilization plan
 directed against Nicaragua. Thirty-eight of the demonstrators
 were imprisoned and tried for participation in the Nandaime
 march. Most of those arrested were released, with varying
 degrees of exoneration, in November and December.
 A number of private and professional organizations exist in
 Nicaragua. Their members are usually able to meet together
 inside the country and to maintain contacts with foreign
 counterparts inside Nicaragua and abroad. However, private
 organizations have been the focus of verbal attacks by
 Sandinista officials and by the Sandinista press; the Superior
 Council for Private Enterprise (COSEP), an umbrella
 organization of business and professional associations, has
 been described, along with opposition political parties and
 the Catholic Church, as acting against the Nicaraguan
 revolution and for the United States. Property of members of
 private sector associations has been confiscated by the
 Government. On October 6, the National Assembly passed
 legislation making it a crime for Nicaraguan entities to
 
 
 651
 NICARAGUA
 receive funds or other assistance from certain U.S. Government
 sources, including the National Endowment for Democracy.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. Eighty-
 five percent of the Nicaraguan people are Roman Catholics.
 Many of the remainder belong to Protestant, Evangelical, or
 Pentecostal denominations. There are no direct restrictions
 on religious activity or association, but the regime has a
 generally hostile attitude toward the Catholic Church, which
 it sees as a rival to Sandinista control of Nicaraguan society.
 In 1988 the Sandinistas intimidated and harassed individual
 Catholic priests as well as the hierarchy of the Church. On
 July 19, the chief of police warned Monsignor Oswaldo Mondragon
 to "desist from calling on his congregation for disorder,
 civil disobedience, and violation of the order and public
 security of the country." The Sandinista press charged that
 Mondragon's El Calvario church had been a meeting place for
 demonstrations by political groups. (Mondragon had been
 active in social and religious work among the poor, in
 particular among independent market vendors who oppose
 government economic controls. Mondragon had also allowed the
 January 22 Mothers of Political Prisoners to to use his church
 for vigils.) The CPDH reported that congregants at a Catholic
 church in La Flor, Rio San Juan Department, were harassed by
 an armed EPS patrol in February.
 Sandinista propaganda attacks were also directed at the head
 of the Church in Nicaragua, Cardinal Obando y Bravo. Cardinal
 Obandc was appointed by the Government as the president of the
 National Reconciliation Commission formed under the Guatemala
 accords; he is a "witness" to the Sapoa cease-fire talks; and,
 along with OAS Secretary General Baena Soares, is a member of
 the Sapoa Accords Verification Commission. The Government and
 its media attempted to impugn the Cardinal's objectivity.
 Sandinista-controlled women's groups conducted weekly protests
 in front of the Archdiocese Curia, demanding that the cardinal
 intercede with the armed Resistance on behalf of relatives
 allegedly held prisoner by the Resistance. On April 19,
 Sandinista-controlled radio stations charged that Cardinal
 Obando y Bravo was an accessory to "crimes and murders"
 allegedly committed by the Resistance.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government imposes restrictions on foreign travel through
 use of passport and exit visa requirements. The regime limits
 some opposition figures to single-exit visas, while it often
 denies both passports and exit visas to young men of draft
 age, professionals with skills needed by the regime, and
 political opponents whose views it does not wish to have
 expressed overseas. In September the Government quadrupled
 the fee for a passport to the equivalent of $40, beyond the
 reach of many Nicaraguans. A program which allows Nicaraguan
 citizens to visit family members living in Costa Rica and
 Honduras at special border posts is frequently blocked by the
 Nicauragan authorities on scheduled weekends; clandestine
 departures by Nicaraguans to Honduras and Costa Rica continue,
 and the Government has used military forces at times to block
 these departures.
 
 
 652
 NICARAGUA
 There were no reports of refugees forcibly repatriated from
 Nicaragua in 1988, and, in general, the Government's treatment
 of refugees has been good.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Sandinista regime contends it was democratically elected
 in 1984. However, many observers viewed that election as
 flawed, and severe restrictions on access to political power
 continue.
 The Constitution states that "political pluralism assures the
 existence of participation of all political organizations in
 the economic, political, and social affairs of the country,
 without ideological restrictions except for those which seek a
 return to the past or advocate the establishment of a similar
 political system." The reality, however, is that political
 power is concentrated in the hands of the FSLN, a Marxist-
 Leninist party that describes itself as the country's
 "vanguard." The 9-member FSLN National Directorate actually
 runs the country, in consultation with the 103-member FSLN
 Party Assembly (not to be confused with the National Assembly).
 Party penetration of the governmental apparatus is particularly
 visible in the EPS. Power within the FSLN is organized
 vertically, with the party's National Directorate making all
 major decisions. The responsibility for implementing the
 Directorate's orders flows downward through the Sandinista
 Party Assembly, FSLN organizational departments, and regional
 party cadres. Sandinista mass organizations play a supportive
 role, functioning primarily as instruments for political
 control and indoctrination.
 A number of other political parties and factions exist, most
 of which oppose the Sandinistas; seven have representation in
 the National Assembly. Aside from this essentially symbolic
 representation in the Assembly, the opposition has no share in
 governing the country.
 The next general elections are scheduled for 1990. Municipal
 and Central American parliamentary elections will probably be
 held in 1990, combined with the presidential and national
 assembly elections. In August 1988, the National Assembly
 passed an electoral law, as required by the Constitution.
 This law, which has constitutional status, was not in force at
 year's end because it had not been officially published by the
 Government. According to opposition political leaders, the
 law contains clauses that discriminate against the opposition
 parties and would effectively exclude them from the political
 process, maintaining the FSLN's one-party control. Four
 opposition parties represented in the National Assembly walked
 out of the month-long election law debate and continue to
 oppose many of the law's provisions as being antidemocratic.
 The FSLN has encouraged the participation of women in political
 life. Twelve of the 63 seats in the National Assembly are
 filled by women. There are nine female alternates from the
 FSLN to the National Assembly. The political opposition has
 no women filling its 33 seats in the National Assembly,
 although Muriam Arguello of the Conservative Party is the
 first woman to head a faction of a political party in
 Nicaragua. Women have been appointed to high ranking
 government jobs including ambassador to the United Nations,
 ambassador to Costa Rica, chief of the Sandinista police, and
 Minister of Health.
 
 
 653
 NICARAGUA
 A national dialog between the Government and the civic
 opposition began in 1987, following the signing of the
 Guatemala accords. However, the dialog quickly broke down due
 to government refusal to consider fundamental constitutional
 reforms which could have jeopardized the FSLN monopoly on
 power. Another attempt at natonal dialog was undertaken in
 conjunction with the Sapoa cease-fire talks which calls for
 the Resistance eventually to participate in the talks.
 However, the dialog and the cease-fire talks had both been
 broken off by midyear.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has allowed visits by some inLeui.azional human
 rights organizations but has not allowed complete access to
 prisons. It has responded to inquiries from the United
 Nations Human Rights Commission and the IACHR.
 In 1980 the Government established a progovernment human
 rights body called the National Commission for the Promotion
 and Protection of Human Rights (CNPPDH). The CNPPDH functions
 as an arm of the Foreign Ministry. devoting itself to the
 investigation of reported Resistance human rights abuses and
 the defense of the regime's human rights records. The
 Permanent Commission on Human Rights (CPDH), the only
 independent human rights group in Nicaragua, faces a
 continuing campaign of government harassment. The CPDH is
 denied access to the regime's prisons and is not allowed to
 seek information from Ministry of Interior personnel.
 Prisoners and their families have been warned not to report
 abuses to the CPDH, and the organization's employees have been
 subjected to threats, physical attacks, and defamation
 campaigns in the government press.
 The ANPDH, based in San Jose, Costa Rica, is a U.S. Government-
 funded group independent of but sympathetic to the Resistance,
 which trains Resistance combatants in respect for human
 rights, and which investigates and reports allegations of
 abuses.
 ICRC representatives visit prisons which are part of the
 national penitentiary system, but, as is the case with all
 other human rights organizations, they are denied access to
 the DGSE prisons. ICRC delegates are not allowed to visit
 security detainees until their interrogation is over and they
 have been transferred to prisons under the responsibility of
 the national penitentiary system.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Nicaragua's minorities, numbering some 80,000 Indians and
 26,000 English-speaking blacks, live primarily on the Atlantic
 Coast. Sandinista efforts after 1979 to integrate the Atlantic
 Coast politically with the rest of Nicaragua alienated many of
 the coast peoples, generated many human rights abuses, and led
 to mass flights of Indians to Honduras. An autonomy statute
 was promulgated in September 1987 which purports to establish
 a democratic and responsive program for meeting the special
 needs of the Caribbean coast minorities. However, it fails to
 address major issues of fundamental concern to the area's
 indigenous groups.
 
 
 654
 NICARAGUA
 The Indian Law Resource Center, in an April 1988 paper, wrote
 of the continuing war between the Miskito, Sumo, and Rama
 Indians and the Sandinista Government, in which the latter has
 committed many human rights abuses, including forced
 relocation, destruction of villages, mass imprisonments,
 killings, and disappearances. In 1988 the Government conducted
 three rounds of negotiations with some 6f the leaders of the
 Indian resistance organization Yatama, without reaching
 agreement on a cease-fire, autonomy for the Atlantic Coast, or
 other items in the agenda. Several small groups of Indian
 resistance fighters concluded separate agreements with the
 Sandinista Government during the year. The Government also
 continued to facilitate the return of Miskito refugees from
 Honduras. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 office in Managua reported that 7,994 Nicaraguans had returned
 through UNHCR programs through the end of September.
 Women are not subject to any special restrictive measures by
 the Government ana partisipate actively in most levels of the
 economy and society. However, the traditional cultural
 constraints imposed upon women in Nicaraguan society remain
 largely unaltered.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Article 87 of the Constitution provides Nicaraguan workers the
 right to associate in organizations of their own choosing and
 to elect their own representatives. In practice, however, the
 Government often uses coercion, economic pressure, or force to
 impede workers' rights to organize and elect their
 representatives. For example, in May, the Labor Action and
 Unity Central (CAUS), a Communist union and one of the four
 independent unions in the labor alliance Permanent Workers
 Congress (CPT), defeated a Sandinista union in elections for
 labor representaties at the Tona brewery in Managua. The
 defeated Sandinista Workers Central (CST), with the behind-the-
 scenes support of Commander Victor Tirado, began a campaign
 to oust the freely elected CAUS leaders. This campaign finally
 culminated on August 17, when some 300 turbas and a reserve
 military unit occupied the brewery. After firing 47 CAUS
 union members at Tona, a new labor directorate was "elected,"
 largely composed of demobilized Sandinista soldiers.
 According to independent labor leaders, the Ministry of Labor
 and Sandinista police were involved in the CST's ouster of the
 CAUS union representatives. The Tona labor dispute is a
 textbook example of the problems facing independent unions
 when they attempt to challenge a Sandinista-controlled union
 which is backed by the Government and FSLN mass
 organizations.
 The right to strike is recognized in Article 83 of the
 Constitution. However, a decree law in 1981 stipulated that
 any worker who incited a strike could be jailed for up to 3
 years. The Government in February used the Somoza labor code
 to declare a strike of automobile and construction workers
 illegal. The Government authorized the dismissal of the
 striking workers and dispatched hundreds of prisoners to
 replace them. In April, about 60 workers began a hunger
 strike to pressure the Government to accede to the strikers'
 demands. At the same time, hundreds of workers organized in
 small groups to solicit funds so the strike could continue.
 In response, the Government used special units of Ministry of
 
 
 655
 NICARAGUA
 Interior troops known as the Black Berets (Boinas Negras) to
 intimidate the hunger strikers and their supporters. The
 hunger strike finally ended on May 15 after the Government cut
 water and electricity to the union headquarters; 28 supporters
 of the hunger strike were arrested.
 The Sandinista Workers Central (CST) is affiliated with the
 Soviet-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. The other
 major Sandinista labor central, the Rural Workers Association
 (ATC) is not affiliated with any international body. Anti-
 Sandinista trade unions are allowed a measure of freedom to
 maintain international contacts, although subject to government
 surveillance and harassment. For example, the Confederation
 of Labor Unification (CUS) is affiliated with the American
 Federation of Labor/Congress of Industrial Organizations
 (AFL-CIO) while other unions are associated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trqade Unions (ICFTU) and
 the World Confederation of Labor (WCL). The Government
 assigns Sandinista organizations to represent the Nicaraguan
 workers and employer associations in the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), giving rise to frequent credentials
 challenges in that organization.
 A number of complaints alleging violations of ILO conventions
 on freedom of association, and the right to organize and
 bargain collectively have been filed against the Government of
 Nicaragua by ICFTU, WCL, the Latin American Central of Workers
 (CLAT), and the International Organization of Employers (IOE).
 In September an ILO study mission was dispatched to Nicaragua
 to investigate these allegations. Based on the results of
 this mission, the Committee on Freedom of Association concluded
 in November that the situation of employers' and workers'
 organizations and their members in Nicaragua was so serious as
 to warrant a commission of inquiry unless the Government of
 Nicaragua provided information "demonstrating a change of
 attitude" and "a clear desire to make progress" before the
 Committee's February 1989 meeting.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Articles 82 through 88 of the Constitution contain a number of
 labor rights, including the right to negotiate individual or
 collective bargaining agreements. Nicaraguan workers, however,
 do not enjoy these rights in practice. The Government of
 Nicaragua does not prohibit, but also does not participate in,
 collective bargaining with independent labor unions; it
 directs its own Sandinista-controlled union, the CST, to
 accept what the Government proposes. With respect to working
 conditions, the Government simply does not negotiate with
 unions on this issue. In November, Jaime Wheelock, Minister
 of Agriculture-Livestock Development and Agrarian Reform, told
 members of the Sandinista-controlled union that if the workers
 attempted to strike he would "cut off their hands."
 Restrictions on opposition union organizing activity are
 mostly extraofficial and indirect. Union activists are
 subject to state-sponsored intimidation by Sandinista
 militants. There are no economic priority zones where
 additional restrictions or regulations on labor apply.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Although there is no official policy of using forced labor,
 the Government uses its mass organizations to mobilize local
 communities to perform specific economic development projects.
 
 
 656
 NICARAGUA
 The CDS chiefs in various neighborhoods are responsible for
 organizing these labor crews for weekend work projects. Since
 the CDS is responsible for control of certain ration cards,
 failure to participate in these work projects can result in
 economic sanctions.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 14 legally are not permitted to
 work. Article 84 of the Constitution states that, "child
 labor that can affect normal childhood development or
 interfere with the obligatory school year is prohibited."
 This law is generally enforced in the small modern sector of
 the economy, but children frequently work on family farms at
 an earlier age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government has not strictly enforced employer compliance
 with occupational health and safety requirements. In June the
 Government suspended the National System for Ordering Work and
 Salaries, although it continues to serve as a "reference
 point" for employers in determing wages and salaries. The
 minimum wage for workers varies from sector to sector. For
 example, the average wage for agricultural workers is about
 $14 per month (plus food allocations and incentives). The
 average minimum wage for the industrial and service sectors is
 about $21 per month. With hyper-inflation having reached five-
 digit figures for 1988, the real purchasing power of workers
 has plummeted dramatically over the past year and the living
 standard for the working class has declined sharply. The
 government periodically adjusts state workers' salaries;
 however, as President Ortega recently acknowledged, these
 salaries are not adequate to provide the basic needs of
 workers.
 The legal work week in Nicaragua is 48 hours for most
 workers. The legal workday for agricultural workers is 6
 hours, and the work day in the mining sector is 7 hours.
 
 
 657
