 NICARAGUA
 After more than 10 years of Sandinista rule, a democratically
 elected Nicaraguan Government took office in 1990. Violeta
 Chamorro, backed by a coalition of 14 parties representing a
 wide political spectrum, was elected President. Chamorro's
 coalition, the National Opposition Union (UNO), also won a
 majority in the National Assembly. International observers
 declared that the elections were free and fair, and the
 Sandinistas publicly turned power over to President Chamorro
 on April 25.
 The military and police continued to be controlled by
 Sandinistas in 1990 despite the change in administration. In
 transition accords signed between the new Government and
 outgoing Sandinista leaders, Humberto Ortega was designated to
 remain as head of the Nicaraguan armed forces, Although he
 nominally reports to the Minister of Defense, a portfolio held
 by President Chamorro, in practice Ortega retains almost
 complete autonomy in the conduct of military affairs. Rene
 Vivas, also a Sandinista, remained as head of the police. The
 General Directorate of State Security (DGSE), which was
 responsible in past years for numerous. and significant human
 rights violations, was moved from the Ministry of Interior to
 the Sandinista People's Army (EPS) and renamed the Directorate
 of Defense Intelligence (DID), with veteran Sandinista Lenin
 Cerna remaining as its chief.
 Armed conflict between the Sandinista Peoples Army (EPS) and
 the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN) formally ended in 1990. As
 part of an accord negotiated by representatives of the new
 Government and Resistance leaders in March, the former rebels
 agreed to demobilize and give up their weapons. The last of
 the Resistance weapons were destroyed in a ceremony at San
 Pedro de Lovago on June 27. The size of the Sandinista army
 was reduced to approximately 28,000 by the end of the year.
 Nicaragua began the transition from a state-run economy to a
 mixed economy in 1990. The new Government returned to former
 owners several enterprises confiscated by the Sandinistas and
 run as nationalized companies, introduced a new currency, and
 initiated economic stabilization measures, partly in an effort
 to stimulate the private sector and to encourage foreign
 investment. Nevertheless, the economy continued to be
 dominated by state-run enterprises under Sandinista
 management, and the Government confronted intense Sandinista
 opposition as it moved slowly to implement its privatization
 program. Throughout its first 8 months in office, the
 Government faced other major problems in implementing its
 economic reforms. In the 2-month period between the election
 and Chamorro's inauguration, the Sandinista regime stripped
 government ministries of office equipment, vehicles, and other
 resources; greatly increased the money supply, exacerbating
 inflation; and passed legislation to prevent the new
 administration from removing Sandinista supporters from top
 public service jobs. After the new Government took office,
 strike-related violence instigated by the Sandinistas resulted
 in six deaths, numerous injuries, and much physical damage.
 In 1990 there was a marked improvement in human rights
 conditions. The country made important strides toward
 democratic freedoms, including the holding of elections which
 reflected the popular will, the growth of a critical
 opposition press, and the ability of independent trade unions
 
 
 NICARAGUA
 to organize freely. Major human rights concerns during the
 year included the discovery of clandestine graves, continuing
 politically motivated killings, some involving members of the
 security forces, police abuse of detainees, and a lack of
 effective prosecution of military and police personnel who
 commit human rights violations.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Throughout 1990 there were sporadic incidents of political and
 extrajudicial killing. In several cases the police or
 military forces appeared to be responsible for the deaths. In
 virtually all cases the police mounted, at best, halfhearted
 investigations of the incidents and did not bring the
 perpetrators of the killings to justice. While the Chamorro
 Government deplored these killings, some local human rights
 groups charged that the Government did not aggressively press
 the police or military to prosecute those responsible.
 Disputes in rural areas between groups of Sandinista
 supporters (sometimes backed by the police and EPS) and UNO
 sympathizers resulted in dozens of deaths in 1990. The great
 majority of these casualties were among UNO sympathizers. On
 September 24 in San Juan del Rio Coco, workers at a Sandinista.
 cooperative opened fire on a group of demobilized Resistance
 members and other peasants who sought to negotiate a share of
 state-owned land in the area. The former Resistance members
 and other peasants had previously alerted the local Red Cross
 of their peaceful intentions and were unarmed as they
 approached the cooperative; five persons were killed,
 including three demobilized Resistance members and two of the
 peasants who accompanied them. In another incident in Waslala
 on October 2, demobilized Resistance members attempted to
 dislodge Sandinistas who ha? occupied the mayor's office and
 regional branches of several ministries. Police opened fire
 on the demonstrators, killing four former Resistance
 combatants. The Sandinista newspaper Barricada reported on
 April 29 that UNO supporters had broken into the home of Noel
 Antonio Murillo and killed him. The victim was a member of a
 Sandinista cooperative in Nagarote and had been a Sandinista
 militant since 1974.
 Other rural deaths occurred in La Sabana on August 6, when
 police used force to dislodge UNO supporters who occupied city
 council offices following a disputed mayoral election. When
 the police forcibly dislodged the protesters, six UNO
 supporters died, including their mayoral candidate. The
 Ministry of Government, which is responsible for the police,
 launched an investigation of the incident but had not reported
 its findings as of the of year's end.
 Rural violence continued throughout the fall of 1990. On
 November 9, some 2,000 demonstrators gathered in Nueva Guinea
 to support a demobilized combatant who was on a hunger strike
 to protest government noncompliance with promises to the
 Resistance. Sandinista mobs began stoning the crowd, then
 police and soldiers attacked with tear gas, fragmentation
 grenades, automatic weapons, and bayonets. At least six
 protesters were killed and dozens wounded. On November 14, as
 police used tear gas to clear other protesters blocking the
 
 
 703
 NICARAGUA
 bridge in the town of Sebaco, two grenades exploded, killing 4
 policemen and wounding 14 others, along with 6 civilians. The
 exact circumstance of the explosions was unclear to
 eyewitnesses, but in early December police announced the
 detention of a suspect.
 In the northern town of Jalapa on December 16, townspeople and
 demobilized Resistance combatants occupied the police station
 to protest continued Sandinista police presence in the area.
 The next day, and for several days thereafter, police, EPS and
 armed Sandinista civilians--following a negotiated turnover of
 the police station-carried out reprisals against former RN
 members and their sympathizers. Government accounts
 acknowledge 11 dead and 20 wounded. There were no police or
 EPS casualties in the operation, although initial reports
 indicate one FSLN civilian casualty.
 There were numerous credible reports of attacks on demobilized
 members of the Resistance-. The Nicaraguan Association for
 Human Rights (ANPDH) documented many of these charges. In one
 case, Jesus Hernandez Gonzales, who recently had been
 demobilized from the Resistance, was reportedly killed by a
 Sandinista army lieutenant and a soldier in Mulukuku on July
 18. Witnesses told ANPDH that the soldiers stopped Hernandez
 to query him about a weapon he was carrying, then shot him in
 the back as he walked away after answering their questions.
 In addition, there have been numerous credible accounts of
 beating and intimidation of former Resistance members.
 In none of these cases was the ANPDH able to learn the status
 of official investigations or judicial proceedings. Because
 security forces were allegedly involved in the killings,
 investigation and prosecution of the crimes were the
 responsibility of the military justice system rather than the
 civilian courts (see Section 1.e.). However, in another case,
 ANPDH learned that the military courts sentenced two army
 reservists and two members of a Sandinista cooperative to 15
 years in prison for killing former Resistance combatant Jose
 Andres Zamora Torrez on June 11 in La Esperanza.
 On January 1, 1990, a pickup truck carrying three Catholic
 nuns and a bishop was attacked near Siuna in a military-style
 ambush. The religious workers were traveling from Managua to
 Puerto Cabezas for a church meeting when the ambush occurred.
 A report on the incident prepared by Americas Watch concluded
 that members of the Resistance were responsible for the
 attack. Americas Watch based its conclusion principally on
 the testimony of two youths who claimed to have been kidnaped
 by a band of Resistance members just prior to the incident.
 In support of its findings, Americas Watch also noted that the
 religious workers were traveling in a truck similar to
 vehicles used by Sandinista security forces, and that
 ambushing military vehicles was a common tactic of the
 Resistance. Nevertheless, there remained doubts in some
 quarters that the Resistance had been responsible. The
 Resistance had not operated in the area for months prior to
 the attack, but a new Sandinista military outpost was set up
 nearby only 8 days before the ambush. Moreover, there were
 doubts about the credibility of the two witnesses, access to
 whom was tightly controlled by Ministry of Interior
 officials. At the end of 1990, local human rights groups
 continued to pursue the Siuna investigation, believing that
 additional witnesses might be willing to come forward in the
 more open atmosphere of the Chamorro administration.
 
 
 704
 NICARAGUA
 While incidents of political violence were more common in
 rural than in urban areas, several politically motivated
 killings occurred in Managua when Sandinistas staged a violent
 strike in July. Six people were killed and dozens injured
 before the Government was able to end the crisis through
 negotiations with the Sandinistas.
 In a case of urban violence linked to security forces,
 16-year-old Jean Paul Genie was killed by automatic weapons
 fire while driving in Managua the night- of October 28. His
 car was riddled with 19 bullet holes, and more than 50 shell
 casings were found at the attack site. Several witnesses
 initially reported seeing a convoy of military personnel in
 Jeep Renegades on the highway at the time of the attack.
 Convoys of Jeep Renegades are used exclusively to transport
 Army Commander in Chief Humberto Ortega and his brother,
 former President Daniel Ortega. No one had been arrested or
 charged in connection with the crime as of the end of the
 year. The Permanent Commission on Human Rights (CPDH) charged
 the police with concealing evidence in an effort to protect
 those responsible for the murder.
 b. Disappearance
 After years of civil conflict in Nicaragua, there continued to
 be discrepancies in accounting for former Resistance and
 Sandinista combatants, as well as civilians, who are listed as
 missing. For example, as of the end of 1990, ANPDH still was
 trying to account for many of the nearly 5,000 Resistance
 combatants or supporters it reported had disappeared during
 the Sandinista regime. The previous government denied
 assertions that its security forces were responsible for
 widespread disappearances. The Nicaraguan Center for Human
 Rights (CENIDH) says it cannot account for nearly 1,000
 youths, who the Center charges were kidnaped by the Resistance
 during the conflict and remained prisoners after
 demobilization. This claim was not supported by observers who
 monitored Resistance demobilization, including teams from the
 Organization of American States (OAS) and the verification
 network of Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo.
 The discovery in mid-1990 of a number of clandestine graves
 near or on former Sandinista military installations provided
 evidence of what may have happened to some of the missing. On
 June 7, local ANPDH workers in Mokoron reported the discovery
 of an unmarked mass grave dating from 1983. The grave
 contained 11 sets of remains, including those of a child and
 at least 1 woman. The victims were identified by family
 members from articles of clothing or personal effects.
 According to family members, most of the victims had last been
 seen alive after they were picked up by Sandinista army troops
 for evading compulsory military service. On August 15,
 another mass grave was uncovered in Murra. It contained 16
 victims, all members of the Assembly of God evangelical
 church, which opposed the draft and had been accused of aiding
 the Resistance. According to other members of the
 congregation, the victims had been lured from a church service
 to a meeting with a local bank official, where they were
 captured by EPS troops, driven to the gravesite, and shot.
 The Murra victims were identified by clothing and personal
 effects, as well as identity cards from a local cooperative
 farm. In September the National Assembly's Committee on Human
 Rights and Peace questioned Colonel Hugo Torres, a member of
 the Sandinista army general staff, on the status of the
 investigations of these gravesites. Torres reported that
 
 
 705
 NICARAGUA
 investigators were awaiting additional forensic and
 pathological reports before reaching any conclusions. He
 claimed that unidentified foreign pathologists had shed doubt
 on the initial accounts concerning the two graves.
 Because of the alleged involvement of military personnel, the
 military justice system handled the investigations at Mokoron
 and Murra. In addition to the discoveries at Murra and
 Mokoron, independent human rights groups have identified
 numerous other gravesites. By the end of the year, no charges
 had been filed in connection with the crimes, and the military
 investigators had not announced their findings. In September
 the Nicaraguan Ambassador to the Organization of American
 States (OAS) invited the Inter-American Human-Rights
 Commission (IAHRCY to examine human rights conditions in
 Nicaragua, and specifically requested that the IAHRC
 investigate reports of clandestine graves. ANPDH field
 personnel involved in the Sandinista gravesite investigations
 reported having received death threats.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Incidents of torture and cruel or inhuman punishment continued
 to be reported, in the penal system, and in police detention
 facilities. Local human rights groups charged that short-term
 police detention on questionable or nonexistent charges was
 used to intimidate the Sandinistas' political opponents. Some
 detainees were subjected to beatings or other rough treatment,
 stripped of their clothing, or given inadequate food,
 according to CPDH.
 While most allegations of cruel treatment involved detention
 by the police, the army at times used similar tactics. For
 example, the CPDH reported one incident in which members of
 the army f6rcibly took two youths to a military base, where
 they were beaten. In October Minister of Government Carlos
 Hurtado stated that he was aware of the allegations of torture
 by security forces. and pledged to appoint civilians to a
 newly created inspection department to investigate such
 charges.
 The CPDH reported in late October that food and medical care
 were inadequate at Managua's Modelo prison and that 45
 prisoners required medical attention or surgery but were not
 being treated. Prison officials claimed their budget was
 inadequate to improve the food or medical service. Some
 prisoners told CPDH they had been harassed by guards, who
 ridiculed than as they were strip-searched after returning
 from family visits or work details.
 Aristides Sanchez, a political adviser of the demobilized
 Resistance, accused the police of torture while he was held at
 the El Chipote detention facility for allegedly stockpiling
 illegal weapons in his office. Sanchez, who has a serious
 heart condition, said he was confined to tiny, dark cells,
 subjected to lengthy interrogation, and exposed to frequent
 threats and insults in an effort to harass him
 psychologically. He noted that his interrogators were
 holdovers form the Sandinista police--his political
 antagonists during years of work with the Resistance. Sanchez
 claimed that after several days of detention he was drugged,
 forced to sign a false confession, then taken to the airport
 and sent out of the country. His departure was based
 
 
 706
 NICARAGUA
 on an agreement reached between his family and the
 Government.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Police Functions Law establishes procedures for the arrest
 of criminal suspects. The law was criticized by local human
 rights groups in 1990 for providing inadequate judicial
 oversight of police arrests. The law requires police to
 obtain a warrant prior to detaining a suspect, but the warrant
 is issued by the chief of police instruction, who is a police
 officer and not a judge. After seizing a suspect, police are
 required by the law to notify family members of the detainee's
 whereabouts, but in practice this is rarely done, according to
 the CPDH. Detainees do not have the right to an attorney
 until they have been formally charged with a crime.
 Police may detain a suspect for up to 9 days while gathering
 evidence to present to the public prosecutor or local judge.
 If the detainee is released before the end of 9 days, the
 police need not justify the detention to a member of the
 judiciary. Throughout 1990 the police frequently used
 detention under the provisions bf the Police Functions I.aw to
 intimidate and harass the Sandinistas' political opponents.
 For example, the CPDH cited the case of William Martin
 Gonzalez Madriz, an anti-Sandinista activist who was detained
 by police without formal charges on numerous occasions between
 1987 and the spring of 1990.
 In August UNO Deputies in the National Assembly introduced
 legislation to reform the Police Functions Law to permit
 police to detain a suspect for no more than 3 days before
 presenting evidence of the alleged crime to a competent
 judge. The Government opposed the change, arguing that 3 days
 was insufficient time for a thorough investigation in many
 cases. The proposed reform was discussed by the National
 Assembly's Justice Committee but did not come to a vote before
 the full Assembly during its 1990 session.
 Human rights groups did not cite long-term arbitrary detention
 as a problem during the year. Except in the case of Aristides
 Sanchez's departure from Nicaragua under duress, exile was not
 used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system comprises both military and civilian
 courts. The military court is responsible for investigating,
 prosecuting, and trying crimes committed by or against members
 of the armed forces or police. Proceedings of the military
 courts are secret but may be released to the public if the
 army authorities so choose. Nicaraguan human rights groups
 argue that civilians charged with crimes against military
 personnel should be tried in a civilian, not a military
 court. These groups charge that the military court often
 fails to investigate or try cases against members of the
 military, and that even when soldiers are convicted, they
 either receive light sentences or the sentences are not
 enforced.
 The Constitution provides for the right to a speedy trial.
 The accused has the right to legal counsel; if he cannot
 afford his own attorney, he is represented by a public
 defender named by the presiding judge. All attorneys in the
 community take turns serving pro bono as public
 
 
 NICARAGUA
 defenders. If the accused does not speak Spanish, he is
 entitled to an interpreter. Bail is granted only rarely, as
 when the accused is ill or aged. Defendants are presumed
 innocent until proven guilty. Those convicted have the right
 of appeal.
 Critics of the Sandinista regime charged that it had
 politicized the judiciary. The new Government began in 1990
 to establish an independent judiciary. By naming four new
 justices to the nine-member Supreme Court, President Chamorro
 achieved a rough balance at the top of the judicial system,
 but Sandinista appointees continued to predominate in the
 lower courts. There were no charges of prosecution for
 political offenses or of cases of imprisonment without due
 process during 1990. With the re-lease on February 14 of 39
 political prisoners incarcerated during the Sandinista regime,
 local human rights groups reported that no other political
 prisoners remained in Nicaraguan jails.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Throughout the year, Sandinista mobs (turbas), sometimes
 joined by the police or army, frequently used forced entry
 into private homes as a means to intimidate their political
 opponents. Prominent UNO supporters typically were singled
 out for these attacks, in which the turbas smashed windows,
 damaged automobiles and other property, and shouted death
 threats. The police or military often said they were
 searching for arms as a pretext for entering houses. In some
 cases, security forces allegedly also robbed the homes they
 entered.
 Local human rights groups claimed that former DGSE officers
 continued to operate as they had under the Ministry of
 Interior, collecting intelligence on political opponents of
 the FSLN by using wiretaps and other electronic surveillance,
 intercepting mail, and searching private homes and offices.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 With the inauguration of the Chamorro Government, opposing
 viewpoints were more freely expressed privately, in print and
 broadcast media, and in academic circles. Two opposition
 daily newspapers circulated freely and without censorship.
 Both the pro-Sandinista El Nuevo Diario and the Sandinista
 party newspaper Barricada regularly criticized officials and
 policies of the Chamorro Government. The daily La Prensa
 offered a progovernment viewpoint but sometimes criticized the
 Chamorro Administration. The paper regularly criticized the
 Sandinistas. Several weeklies, including those critical of
 the Government such as a new Sandinista publication El
 Semanario, were published and distributed without restriction.
 Critics of the Government also freely used broadcast media.
 On several occasions during the year, however, radio stations
 were closed temporarily as result of acts of violence. During
 the July general strike, the progovernment station Radio
 Corporacion was forced off the air after its transmitter was
 blown up. In October transmission facilities at the
 Sandinista station Radio La Primerisima were destroyed in an
 arson attack. A progovernment radio station in Leon also was
 attacked and forced off the air during the July strikes. As
 
 
 708
 NICARAGUA
 of year's end, police had made no arrests in connection with
 the Radio Corporacion and Radio La Primerisima attacks.
 Throughout most of 1990, the two television stations in
 Nicaragua were government-operated, first by the Sandinista
 government, then by the Chamorro administration. In late
 fall, the Chamorro Government leased one of the channels to a
 private Nicaraguan company but precluded locally produced news
 and other broadcasting on the channel. The Government
 discouraged efforts by one non-Sandinista independent
 television license-holder to launch an independent channel.
 Legislation passed by the Sandinistas just prior to Chamorro's
 inauguration permitted licensing of private stations. (The
 democratic opposition had long sought this reform, but it was
 not passed until the Sandinistas faced the prospect of losing
 access to the government television monopoly).
 Although both television stations were government-operated
 throughout most of 1990, opposition views were aired in
 nightly news broadcasts, produced by the Sandinistas, which
 freely criticized the Government. The Sandinistas had
 previously denied their opponents access to television time,
 but during the election campaign did agree to allow an UNO
 newscast to run.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Both supporters and critics.of the Government freely organized
 political parties and other associations in 1990. In the
 aftermath of the election, both progovernment and opposition
 groups openly held meetings and demonstrations and publicized
 their views. Progovernment groups were sometimes attacked by
 Sandinista turbas, as during a May 1 rally in Managua by
 independent unions.
 Sandinista mass organizations such as the Juventud Sandinista
 continued to operate, while the number of independent and
 progovernment organizations grew. Opponents of the Chamorro
 Government staged numerous marches and demonstrations
 throughout 1990.
 Opposition and independent associations of all sorts coexisted
 in Nicaragua throughout 1990. Private associations of any
 kind may be formed without restrictions but do not have legal
 status until they receive this designation from the National
 Assembly. Such legal recognition is routinely conferred.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. Although
 Nicaragua is at least 80 percent Roman Catholic, other
 religious groups practice without hindrance. Protestant
 denominations proselytize actively and now constitute as much
 as 20 percent of the population. Missionaries and church
 workers freely enter the country to engage in religious
 activities as well as development assistance. Radio Catolica,
 which was closed several times under the Sandinista regime,
 operated freely throughout 1990. The homilies of Cardinal
 Obando Bravo were featured regularly in La Prensa and on
 national television.
 
 
 709
 NICARAGUA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no government restrictions on freedom of movement.
 Citizens leaving the country must obtain exit visas; under the
 Chamorro Government, this is a revenue-generating measure, and
 these visas are routinely issued upon submission of one's
 passport and the required fee. The Sandinista Government had
 used exit visas to restrict travel by political opponents and
 young men of draft age.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Nicaraguan political system was transformed in 1990. In
 February, under close scrutiny by OAS and U.N. observers,
 supported by a host of other election monitors, the opposition
 UNO coalition defeated the FSLN, winning both the presidency
 and a solid majority in the National Assembly.
 The presence of international observers helped to reduce
 campaign violence sharply by the beginning of 1990 but did not
 put an end to-other forms of campaign abuses. For instance,
 the Sandinistas routinely drew on state resources for partisan
 campaign purposes. Trucks belonging to the army or state
 enterprises were used to transport supporters to FSLN campaign
 events. While the opposition gained some access to the media,
 government television and radio were used for the most part to
 promote FSLN candidates and rallies. The FSLN spent
 government funds for campaign rallies and publicity materials.
 Sandinista leaders agreed to turn power over to Chamorro and
 the UNO coalition but vowed at the same time to "govern from
 below." Sandinista efforts to undermine Chamorro began in the
 2-month transition period between the election and the
 inauguration. The Sandinistas mounted an intense campaign to
 ensure that they retained control of the army and police. In
 a transition protocol, the new Government acceded to this
 demand.. Thus, despite their electoral defeat, the Sandinistas
 retained control of the security apparatus in Nicaragua.
 Through this and other measures, the Sandinistas sought to
 deny the Nicaraguan electorate the reforms it had endorsed in
 the February election.
 While the UNO deputies coordinated closely with the Cabinet on
 most policy initiatives, the legislators showed a degree of
 independence characteristic of a democracy. In the months
 following the inauguration of Chamorro and the seating of the
 new Assembly, issues of public policy were debated freely in
 the legislature, and UNO deputies showed increasing
 independence, voting against the position of the executive on
 some issues. Assembly committees began to call on Cabinet
 ministers to explain government policies with which committee
 members disagreed. In September the Government initiated a
 new forum to try to broaden participation in and forge a
 consensus on economic and social policy decisions. The
 "national dialog" (concertacion) included representatives of
 political parties, private sector groups, labor federations,
 and the Government. The Sandinistas originally refused to
 join the process, but later they too participated in an open
 and public policy dialog.
 
 
 NICARAGUA
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Four domestic human rights groups operated in Nicaragua in
 1990. Two are pro-Sandinista: the Nicaraguan Center for
 Human Rights (CENIDH) and the National Commission for the
 Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (CNPPDH). The CNPPDH
 continued to receive government funding despite its political
 leanings, but late in 1990 the Assembly began consideration of
 a bill to disband the group. The two other domestic human
 rights organizations are the Permanent Commission for Human
 Rights (CPDH) and the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights
 (ANPDH). Both of these organizations received funding from
 the U.S. Government or private U.S. donors. The CPDH was
 founded during the later Somoza years and continued to
 function after the revolution despite Sandinista harassment.
 ANPDH was founded after the revolution to train the Resistance
 in acceptable human rights practices and to investigate
 reports of Resistance abuses.
 The Chamorro Government permitted the free discussion by human
 rights groups 6f'alleged violations committed during the
 Sandinista regime as well as during its own tenure. However,
 the Ministry of Government, which is responsible for
 overseeing the police, was slow to release its findings
 regarding a number of incidents, including: the deaths in the
 town of La Sabana in the month of August (see Section l.a.); a
 shooting attack on the home of union leader Carlos Huembes
 (see Section 6.a.); and the destruction of transmitters at
 Radio Corporacion during the Sandinista-provoked general
 strike in July (see Section 2-a..). By early fall, some local
 human rights groups had begun to urge the National Assembly's
 Committee on Human Rights and Peace to call on the Minister of
 Government.to explain the status of these ihvestigations.
 International human rights organizations also were active in
 Nicaragua in 1990. The Inter-American Human Rights Commission
 (IAHRC) reported on conditions in Nicaragua, and the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) sent a team to
 investigate complaints of worker rights abuses dating from the
 Sandinista regime. The OAS monitored human rights conditions
 of the demobilized Resistance. Witness for Peace had a
 permanent office in Managua in 1990, and Americas Watch staff
 visited during the year. According to government sources and
 local human rights groups, Amnesty International staff did not
 visit Nicaragua in 1990. Other international election
 monitoring groups were in Nicaragua during the electoral
 campaign and transition period.
 As one of its first acts, the new Government issued a
 statement recognizing the jurisdiction of the Inter-American
 Human Rights Court, which the Sandinistas had refused to do
 during their 10 years in power. In September the Government
 formally invited the IAHRC to report on human rights
 conditions in the country.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of
 "birth, nationality, political belief, race, gender, language,
 religion, opinion, national origin, economic position or
 social condition." Most Nicaraguans are of mixed mestizo
 background, and skin color does not appear to be a barrier to
 
 
 711
 NICARAGUA
 political or economic success. The Chamorro administration
 was the first in Nicaraguan history to appoint a Nicaraguan of
 indigenous Indian background to a ministerial level position.
 The Atlantic Coast regions populated by blacks and Indians,
 which were granted limited self-government in 1987, elected
 local leaders in the February 25 blections; they sought
 authority to provide the citizens of the coast a greater share
 in the benefits of the region's natural resources. The
 locally elected officials, however, faced difficulties in
 asserting authority over Sandinista-managed state enterprises
 and complained that central government assistance following
 heavy flooding in May was insufficient.
 Women continued to suffer de facto discrimination in the
 male-dominated culture prevalent in some sectors of
 Nicaragua. This culture did not prevent women from occupying
 senior positions in government, the trade union movement, and
 social organizations. Given the large number of women in the
 legal and medical professions, particularly in the public
 sector, women appear to have access to education at all
 levels. However, women remain relatively few in government
 and private business. The Government did not make civil
 rights a priority in its first months in office; senior
 government officials made few public statements on the topic
 and introduced no legislation or decrees concerning civil
 rights.
 Violence against women, including domestic violence such as
 wife beating, exists in Nicaragua. However, a lack of
 reliable statistical data makes it very difficult to determine
 the true extent of the problem. Victims of such abuse
 frequently are reluctant'to report it or to press charges,
 leading to the likelihood that it is significantly
 underreported. The Sandinista mass organization, the Luisa
 Amanda Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women (AMNLAE),
 assists in protecting the rights of women and bringing cases
 of violence against individual women to the Government's
 attention. AMNLAE operated a network of "women's houses"
 which offered medical and psychological counseling to women,
 as well as legal advice in divorce cases and to victims of
 rape and other violence.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Under the Constitution and as implemented by the Chamorro
 Government, workers are free to form and join unions of their
 own choosing. During the Sandinista regime, these rights were
 frequently impeded through the use of coercion, economic
 pressure, or force. Various ILO committees had found the
 previous regime in violation of ILO Convention 87 on freedom
 of association and Convention 98 on the right to organize and
 collective bargaining. The Chamorro Government has cooperated
 with ILO contact missions in their investigation of such
 violations, and a special ILO Commission of Inquiry which
 visited Nicaragua in June and September is expected to present
 its findings in Spring 1991. Unions formed by the Sandinistas
 during their rule continue to be subservient to the Sandinista
 political party. Independent unions, although supporters of
 UNO in the February election, are independent of the
 Government and the UNO political leadership. New unions must
 register with the Ministry of Labor and be granted legal
 status before they may engage in collective bargaining with
 management. Legal status was routinely granted by Labor
 
 
 712
 NIC7AGUA
 Ministry officials of the Chamorro Government, although early
 in the administration some union leaders complained that the
 Ministry was processing their applications too slowly.
 Article 83 of the Constitution provides workers the right to
 strike. The Sandinistas' National Workers Front (FNT)
 organized two so-called general strikes in the first months of
 the Chamorro administration; the strikers' motives were
 political rather than economic. In the July general strike, a
 minority of Sandinista activists blocked access to Government
 ministries and state enterprises, denying entry to employees
 who wanted to work. In September some 40 armed Sandinista
 supporters occupied the facilities of ENABUS, the Managua bus
 company, claiming to represent worker demands. Yet more than
 1,100 of the 1,400 ENABUS employees issued a public statement
 asserting their desire to continue working. The
 pro-Sandinista bank employees' unions staged a more
 conventional work slowdown in early September and again in
 October to back demands for higher wages and job security.
 Labor disputes in 1990 were predominantly in the public
 sector. The Government resolved the general strikes in May
 and July by agreeing to some Sandinista demands and leaving
 others for subsequent negotiations by mixed commissions of
 government, business, and labor representatives. The
 Sandinista unions claimed, with some justification, that the
 Government did not comply with many of the points in the
 agreements they had negotiated in May and July. Independent
 unions, on the other hand, generally complained that the
 Government yielded too much in the negotiation under pressure
 of Sandinista violence. The independent unions, like many
 other political allies of the-Government, generally faulted
 the Chamorro administration for failing to consult
 sufficiently with them.
 Several incidents of violence against independent labor
 leaders occurred in 1990. Three workers from the Montelimar
 sugar mill were killed in May,- and seven were wounded,
 allegedly by police officers, after pro-Sandinista mill
 managers refused to recognize a vote by Montelimar workers to
 switch the mill's union affiliation from the Sandinista
 Workers' Central (CST) to the independent Autonomous
 Nicaraguan Workers' Central (CTN-A). The police officers
 alleged to have been involved were suspended pending an
 investigation by the military court. Another violent attack
 on an independent union leader occurred in July when the home
 of Carlos Huembes, Secretary General of the Nicaraguan Workers
 Central (CTN), was the target of a drive-by shooting.
 Huembes's wife and children were also at home at the time, but
 there were no injuries. Sandinista turbas also attacked
 Huembes during a May Day March. Some of his supporters
 required hospitalization after they were stoned by the turbas.
 Unions may freely form or join federations or confederations,
 and affiliate with international bodies. Seven Sandinista
 centrals-have formed the National Workers' Front (FNT), while
 four independent centrals belong to the Permanent Congress of
 Workers (CPT). The Sandinista CST was affiliated with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions through
 most of the year but withdrew in November. The progovernment
 Confederation of Labor Unity (CUS) is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the CTN
 with the World Confederation of Labor.
 There are no export processing zones in Nicaragua.
 
 
 NICARAGUA
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Constitution provides for the right to bargain
 collectively. The Chamorro Government's labor negotiations in
 1990 were primarily ad hoc efforts to resolve pressing
 conflicts. Faced with continued hostile Sandinista union
 leadership throughout the public sector, the Government did
 not attempt to renegotiate the collective bargaining
 agreements signed by the outgoing Sandinista regime.
 Collective bargaining was not common in the private sector,
 which had just emerged from 10 years of state control of
 economic decisionmaking.
 The Chamorro Government abolished Decree 530, a Sandinista
 edict that required collective bargaining agreements to be
 approved by the Government before they could become
 effective. The ILO's Committee of Experts had requested the
 cancellation of this decree because it violated Convention 98
 on collective bargaining. The Labor Code prohibits
 discrimination against union organizers. In 1990 several
 government agencies, including the Ministry of Education,
 dismissed or transferred Sandinista union activists. In these
 cases, the Government maintained that the activists were
 removed for "just cause" unrelated to labor organizing or
 because they held positions of confidence. In July Sandinista
 organizers of the general strike charged the Government with
 intimidation when they were detained by the police and warned
 that their strike activities were illegal.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Article 86 of the Constitution provides that "all Nicaraguans
 have a right to choose and exercise freely their profession or
 trade and choose their place of work." Union officials in
 Nicaragua have made no charges that the practice of forced or
 compulsory labor exists in Nicaragua.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 14 legally are not permitted to
 work. Article 84 of the Constitution states "child labor that
 can affect normal childhood development or interfere with the
 obligatory school year is prohibited." This law is generally
 enforced in the small modern sector of the economy, but young
 street vendors ply their trade in Managua and children
 frequently work on family farms at an earlier age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no minimum wage legislation currently in effect in
 Nicaragua. The Government has unilaterally adopted the
 equivalent of $50 per month as the minimum wage in the public
 sector, an amount which is not sufficient to provide workers a
 minimally decent standard of living. Draft legislation
 submitted to the National Assembly in September called for the
 minimum wage to be set by a committee of government-business,
 and labor officials. The Assembly did not vote on tb"Is
 legislatiz-during its 1990 session. Real wages fell in -
 Nicaragua during 1990, causing the standard of living for many
 workers to decline.
 The Constitution specifies an 8-hour workday in a workweek of
 48 hours with 1 day of rest. Health and safety standards also
 are provided for by the Constitution. The Ministry of Labor's
 Office of Inspection is responsible for verifying compliance
 
 
 714
 NICARAGUA
 with health and safety standards and rules prohibiting
 employment of children. Owing in part to the deployment of
 too few inspectors and other resources, few on-site
 inspections occurred during 1990.
 
 
 715
