 NICARAGUA
 The Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), a one-party
 Communist dictatorship, has ruled Nicaragua since a broad
 opposition coalition toppled the Somoza dictatorship in 1979.
 The FSLN has ignored its 1979 commitment to the Organization
 of American States (OAS) to install and foster a genuinely
 democratic system of government. In 1987 a new Constitution
 institutionalized Sandinista control over the country's
 national security apparatus (army and state security) and over
 the national economy. Both an internal civic opposition and
 an armed resistance movement (RN) have long challenged the
 legitimacy of FSLN rule in Nicaragua.
 The Sandinista Popular Army (EPS) and the Ministry of Interior
 (MINT), in addition to their normal military and police
 structures, maintain an extensive and repressive internal
 security apparatus. Using Warsaw Pact and Cuban instructors,
 they have developed a tight internal control system which
 engages in surveillance and infiltration of the legal
 political opposition, and which includes the "Committees for
 the Defense of the Revolution," a system of neighborhood
 informers based on the Cuban model to monitor and control the
 population. The EPS and the MINT are under the direct control
 of the Sandinista party.
 Although the economy is technically "mixed", the Sandinista
 leadership has made it clear that the State and the economy
 are unalterably Socialist. The Government exercises
 regulatory authority over much of the economy, is openly-
 hostile to private initiative, and has expropriated private
 property for political as well as economic reasons. Dissident
 political expression is often punished by the withholding of
 food ration cards and other economic punishments.
 Under pressure, at a series of Central American summits and in
 meetings with the internal opposition, the FSLN in 1989
 committed itself to take actions which could have an important
 impact on the human rights situation: to move up national
 elections from February 1991 to February 1990; to allow
 political parties and the media to operate with greater
 freedom; to grant amnesty to political prisoners; to suspend
 the military draft during the electoral period; to repeal or
 amend certain draconian laws of public order; and to refrain
 from confiscation of private property for political purposes.
 However, there is serious doubt about Sandinista intentions to
 conduct a free and fair election and to relinquish power if
 they lose. The political opposition and independent media
 operated somewhat more freely than in 1988.
 Because of serious continuing abuses, the general human rights
 situation in Nicaragua remained poor in 1989. Political and
 extrajudicial killings are still being reported, the political
 opposition still suffers considerable harassment and
 intimidation, the Government continues to hold political
 prisoners, and the writ of the security forces still runs deep
 and wide. While the Sandinistas have allowed the political
 opposition and independent media to operate with more formal
 freedoms as elections approach, Nicaragua remains a one-party
 State. Whether this new "political space" was simply a
 tactical move by the Sandinistas and will not last beyond the
 internationally monitored February 1990 election was a major
 human rights concern at year's end.
 
 
 668
 NICARAGUA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were reliable reports of political and extrajudicial
 killings throughout 1989. The human rights organization
 Americas Watch (AW) reported a "pattern of summary executions
 by government forces." Amnesty International (AI), in an
 October 6, 1989, update on the human rights situation in
 Nicaragua, reported that it "has continued to receive reports
 of cases of apparent summary execution of noncombatants in war
 zones during 1989 from both domestic and international human
 rights organizations." AI stated that, while it had not yet
 had the opportunity to verify such cases independently or
 interview surviving family members, it nevertheless "noted
 that several cases have been documented independently by more.
 than one source." The Inter-American Commission on Human
 Rights (IAHCR), in a 1989 report, also reported "complaints"
 of extrajudicial killings "chargeable" to government forces.
 Precise numbers of those summarily killed by government forces
 remain elusive. AW reported 51 killings attributable to the
 Sandinistas between March 1988 and.June 1989. AI reported 56
 killings in its October 1989 update, but some of these predate
 1988 and 1989. Another reliable human rights organization
 reported government forces summarily executed 9 RN members and
 13 peasants-in 1989. On December 10 in the rural town of
 Masatepe a United Opposition Union (UNO) political rally was
 attacked by $andinista'thugs. The ensuing melee resulted in
 one person being stabbed to death with a machete, while
 numerous other persons were injured.
 It is clear that government security forces continued to carry
 out extrajudicial killings of Nicaraguan citizens. While
 specific c~ses are more readily available for 1988 and
 earlier, reliable observers reported the continuation of this
 pattern of abuse in 1989. For example, AI reported that
 Sandinista soldiers from the Los Millones army base killed
 five children and one adult who were celebrating a birthday
 party in Comarca los Pases, Chontales, on January 28, 1989.
 In another case, the EPS killed a Roman Catholic lay preacher
 from Matiguas, Matagalpa, on January 27, 1989. Carmelo
 Mairena Rosales, a farmer from the area of Rio Blanco,
 Matagalpa, was taken from his home on December 24, 1988, and
 removed to a state security facility in nearby Matiguas. His
 dismembered body was found on December 27. No one has been
 charged with this murder., RN members reported that the EPS
 captured an RN commander, 'Toro," and seven of his men'on
 October 3, 1989, and executed them the next day. The bodies
 were not recovered.
 Most extrajudidial killings attributable to the Government
 take place in the isolated and rugged areas of central
 Nicaragua, long areas of sympathy and support for the armed
 resistance. The killings seem designed to cow the local
 population; residents in these areas have long reported a
 climate of fear and intimidation, based on the apparent
 willingness of local Army and MINT forces to kill suspected
 resistance sympathizers.
 In response to charges of such abuse, the Government took
 action against 13 EPS soldiers for the murders of 7
 
 
 669
 NICARAGUA
 civilians. Nine of these soldiers were convicted, and
 reportedly are serving prison terms of from 6 to 30 years.
 Two soldiers were in the trial process, and two others were
 being sought by authorities at year's end. Both AI and AW
 claim that the Government has not been consistent in
 investigating cases and prosecuting suspects.
 The RN has also been accused of engaging in summary
 executions, usually of suspected informers or Sandinista
 spies. Between March 1988 and April 1989 the organization
 Witness for Peace charged that the RN carried out 20 killings
 of noncombatants in Nicaragua. Although RN leaders denied
 most of these allegations, they accepted some as valid and
 prosecuted many of those involved. RN commander Isaac Blacker
 Hurtado, alias "Israelita," was found guilty of the
 premeditated murder of an alleged Sandinista agent in August
 1989. Blacker was tried by an RN tribunal created to judge
 cases involving RN members in serious crimes. Five other RN
 members were given lengthy sentences for carrying out a
 torture-murder."
 b. Disappearance
 Reports of disappearances generally involve persons initially
 detained by the EPS or state security forces on charges of
 draft evasion or collaborating with the RN. EPS military
 recruitment practices include late evening roundups of young
 males at schools, movie theaters and other public sites, and
 at military check points where "recruiters" halt vehicles and
 remove draft-age men. Those so detained are usually not given
 an opportunity to notify their families, and relatives must
 search in military installations throughout the country to
 determine if the missing person has been conscripted or has in
 fact disappeared. Some who resist conscription have
 disappeared permanently.
 The Government and private human rights monitoring
 organizations have charged the RN with kidnaping peasants for
 conscription and taking them into Honduras. An independent
 human rights organization reported 18 cases of kidnapings by
 the RN from January to August 1989. The RN says that many of
 these persons claimed as missing have in fact volunteered for
 service with the Resistance. The RN released 104 Sandinista
 military and Nicaraguan civilians from its holding areas in
 Honduras on December 29, 1988. Forty-four of the released
 prisoners returned to Nicaragua, while 60 decided to remain in
 Honduras as refugees.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Nicaragua's three types of prisons include State Security
 (DGSE) facilities, national penitentiary prisons, and open
 farms. The majority of Nicaragua's prisoners are held in the
 first two systems, and most human rights abuses occur there.
 Interrogation of detainees is usually conducted in DGSE
 detention facilities. During interrogation detainees have
 been subjected to various forms of physical and psychological
 torture, including food and water deprivation, mock
 executions, and beatings. The nongovernmental Permanent Human
 Rights Commission (CPDH) reports that physical torture is more
 commonly used against peasants, while psychological methods
 are utilized against members of civic, political, and labor
 organizations. Death threats against prisoners and their
 families are also common. The systematic use of these
 
 
 670
 NICARAGUA
 interrogation techniques by the DGSE reflects a deliberate
 policy which targets political prisoners in DGSE prisons or
 its secret jails.
 AI representatives visited the Las Tejas DGSE detention center
 in Matagalpa in March 1989. The center was temporarily empty,
 but the visitors noticed several closet-like cells, which the
 MINT claimed were no longer in use. Subsequent interviews
 with prisoners in the national penitentiary system prison in
 Juigalpa, however, revealed that such cells were still being
 used to force prisoners tb cooperate with their captors. The
 cells are less than a square meter in size; the prisoner
 cannot move his arms and legs. Al added that "the cells have
 no openings for light or air and are pitch-dark." Bringing
 the us6 of these cells to the attention of the MINT, AI
 reminded the MINT that it had previously claimed it no longer
 used such cells or such interrogation methods. In June 1989
 AI reported that it had received a communication from the MINT
 claiming that the MINT had converted the cells into closet
 spaces.
 Al further reported that prisoners who participated in a
 hunger strike in February 1989 at the Modelo jail in Tipitapa
 were taken to the El Chipote interrogation center and were
 systematically physically abused--held handcuffed and naked,
 deprived of water, and several were beaten. This treatment
 went on for a number of days. Al stated that 13 of the hunger
 strikers were reported to have been severely beaten, and that
 one of them, Rosenda Rugama Guadamuz, was beaten into
 unconsciousness and removed to the prison infirmary.
 Three prisoners, former National Guardsmen Silvio Mayorga,
 Miguel Cordero, and Guadalupe Pineda, have allegedly been so
 severely mistreated during their 10 years of imprisonment that
 a judge in Managua's Fourth Criminal Court ordered them
 released. The release order was ignored by the director of
 the national penitentiary system, and the same judge who
 ordered the release subsequently annulled it. Silvio
 Mayorga's condition worsened to the point where he was finally
 placed in a civilian hospital in September 1989.
 Several of the almost 1,900 former National Guardsmen who were
 freed after a 10-year imprisonment on March 17 reported brutal
 treatment during their incarceration, including sexual
 torture, beatings, poor sanitary conditions, denial of medical
 care, and rations of spoiled food. Other former National
 Guardsmen still in prison (39 remain jailed) also report
 systematic mistreatment which they claim has continued through
 1989.
 As reported in the Sandinista media, some of the 44 former
 prisoners of the RN who returned to Nicaragua in early 1989
 alleged they were tortured and generally abused while in
 resistance prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides that a detainee must be brought
 before a competent legal authority within 72 hours of arrest;
 this provision is often ignored, and suspects have been held
 for months without charges or access to counsel. Short-term
 arrest and interrogation appear to be an integral part of the
 Government's counterinsurgency tactic of harassing and
 intimidating suspected RN supporters, especially in isolated
 areas of the countryside. Such suspects are generally picked
 
 
 671
 NICARAGUA
 up at night by the DGSE and normally held until they agree to
 confess or implicate others in counterrevolutionary
 activities. Persons suspected of views critical of the
 Government are often detained and charged with common crimes.
 The CPDH has reported that in some areas peasants have been
 charged with "counterrevolutionary activities" if they refuse
 to join Sandinista mass organizations.
 The Government arbitrarily detained hundreds of peasants in
 1989 during large-scale roundups of suspected RN supporters in
 the departments of Chontales, Matagalpa, and Jinotega. Entire
 families were detained for days in primitive jail facilities
 for allegedly giving food and assistance to RN forces. Former
 National Guardsmen residing in Nicaragua have reported
 widespread abuse and arbitrary arrest. The leaders of this
 group have been picked up by DGSE agents and threatened with
 rearrest or even death if they did not cease their organizing
 work in the ex-prisoners association or if they did not become
 DGSE informers.. Members of the private sector Cattleman's
 Association, most of whom are reportedly in favor of the
 political opposition, claim they were arrested on fabricated
 charges of aiding the RN.
 The Government in past years used the Law for Maintenance of
 Order and Public Security, a vague instrument which
 criminalized a wide range of antigovernment activities, to
 charge and sentence many Nicaraguans for political and
 "counterrevolutionary" activities. As part of an agreement
 reached with the political opposition on August 4, 1989,
 concerning electoral conditions, the Government repealed this
 law in October.
 Also as part of the August 4 agreement, the Sandinista
 Government reformed certain aspects of the Law of Juridical
 Functions of the Sandinista Police on October 10, 1989. The
 reform of this law technically eliminates the authority of the
 Sandinista Police'to imprison persons, restoring this
 authority to the judicial branch of government. The reformed
 law also requires that a written warrant be used for arrest,
 except in cases of flagrant crimes. The reformed law
 nevertheless continues to allow police detention for up to 9
 days (essentially the same as the previous law), but the
 police must now take into account any evidence provided by a
 defense attorney. The new version, however, apparently
 eliminates the previous broad discretionary right of the
 police to imprison persons, on their own authority, for up to
 2 years. The reformed law still contains articles that could
 permit abuses. For example, it authorizes police arrests
 based on "written orders from other organisms", probably a
 reference to the MINT's State Security branch (DGSE) and, in
 some cases, military authorities. By year's end, it was not
 yet clear if the reformed law will, in practice, substantially
 reduce arbitrary detentions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Anti-Somocista Popular Tribunals, basically nonprofessional
 political courts, were abolished in January 1988.
 Nevertheless, many of the untrained judges of these Tribunals
 have been moved into the regular court system. The influx of
 these often poorly-prepared jurists has politicized the
 regular court system to a greater extent than previously was
 the case. Three Supreme Court Justices resigned in December
 1987, charging that the Executive Branch showed no respect for
 the court and its decisions.
 
 
 672
 NICARAGUA
 The majority of Nicaragua's political prisoners were tried and
 convicted by the Anti-Somocista Popular Tribunals. Despite
 the abolition of these Tribunals, their cases have not been
 reviewed. Nevertheless, the Government pardoned 1,783 former
 National Guardsmen and 72 other prisoners in March 1989.
 Thirty-nine Guardsmen were not pardoned because the Government
 claimed they were too dangerous to release and were guilty of
 especially vicious crimes; the 39 responded that they were
 still being held because of their refusal to submit to
 "reeducation." A number of human rights organizations charged
 that the decision not to release the 39 was politically
 motivated. In addition, there was criticism that, in choosing
 which of the Guardsmen it would release, the Government had
 not followed the criteria for release set forth in an IACHR
 report on the prisoners. This report resulted from the 1988
 Sapoa negotiations between the Nicaraguan Government and the
 RN, in which it was agreed that there would be a release of
 former.National Guardsmen on the basis of an IACHR
 investigation and recommendation. The IACHR report, however,
 has never been made public, reportedly at the insistence of
 the Sandinista Government. In its annual report, the IACHR
 said, "by denying a pardon to the 39 persons, the Government
 of Nicaragua continues to be in violation of the provisions of
 the American Convention on Human Rights."
 In a few instances, the judicial system or National Assembly
 has released or pardoned criminals apart from a more general
 amnesty. In April an appellate court freed three Nicaraguans
 who were convicted in June 1988 for passing "secret" economic
 data to the U.S. Embassy; the court ruled that the government
 documents were not secret and that there was no law against
 the distribution of government economic information. In a
 separate case, the National Assembly pardoned three prisoners
 who had been serving long-term sentences for espionage,
 treason, or 6ther activities against the State.
 The August 1989 Internatio~nl Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) semiannual census of political, prisoners showed 1,268
 "counterrevolutionaries" and he 39 former Guardsmen. The
 ICRC count did not include, however, persons held in state
 security interrogation and detention facilities. Since August
 1988, the Sajdinistas have released, according to their
 statistics, some 1,358 peasants accused of counter
 revolutionary activities. However, the charges against these
 persons have not been dropped, nor their sentences pardoned;
 they could be returned to custody at any time. Under
 Nicaraguan law, the only institution that can grant
 provisional liberty is the judicial branch, while the National
 Assembly is the only institution that can legally pardon
 prisoners. The Government in any case did not publish a list
 of the peasants given provisional freedom nor make available
 information on where they had previously been detained.
 Consequently, it was extremely difficult for human rights
 monitors to determine whether the prisoners released were
 convicted "counterrevolutionaries" or detainees who had been
 held without charge or trial.
 The question of how many political prisoners the Government is
 holding is a contentious one. The Government admits to
 holding some 1,300 political prisoners. Some local human
 rights organizations, such as the CPDH or the U.S.-funded
 Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH), believe the
 number may be three or four times greater. AI and AW accept
 as more likely a total figure closer to that provided by the
 Government. The Government has stated that it would publish a
 
 
 673
 NICARAGUA
 master list of all prisoners it is holding for all crimes.
 This would allow the Government's list to be crosschecked with
 those of various human rights groups. The Government has yet
 to publish its list, however, and until it does the total
 number of prisoners held, political and common, will remain
 unknown. The Government at year's end stated that it would
 not release the remaining political prisoners until "concrete"
 steps are taken to begin the process of demobilizing the RN.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 According to Article 26 of the Constitution, the Government
 cannot violate the home, correspondence, or communication of
 Nicaragua's citizens. By law, a private home may only be
 searched with a warrant from a competent judge or another
 expressly authorized official to prevent a crime from being
 committed or to avoid injury to persons or goods. Despite
 these restrictions, homes of civic opposition leaders have
 been searched without a warrant. Unauthorized searches of
 homes to locate-draft-age men have been common. In rural
 areas, military and DGSE troops routinely search homes without
 a warrant.
 The Government also routinely monitors the telephones of
 political, business, and labor leaders; it intercepts and
 examines correspondence mailed both within the country and
 from abroad. A wide network of DGSE informants monitors the
 activities of persons suspected of anti-Sandinista attitudes
 or behavior. In sum, putative national security needs have
 largely overridden the Constitution on the inviolability of
 the home and private communications.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Prior to the formal suspension of offensive operations in
 March 1988, civilian casualties due to indiscriminate
 artillery fire were common. As noted in the case of RN
 commander -Toro" (see Section l.a.), the rights of prisoners
 were not always respected. Both sides in the armed conflict
 have been accused of killing prisoners. The Government
 suspended its declared cease-fire on November 1, 1989. By
 year's end, it was not yet clear if this action would
 seriously impede the activities of humanitarian organizations
 in conflictive areas. The RN, in several cases, suspended
 officers who were tried and convicted of human rights
 violations in the conduct of their field operations.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 While the state of emergency--which permitted broad
 restrictions on freedom of speech and press--was lifted in
 January 1988, the Provisional Law on Communications Media
 remained in effect. This law grants the Media Directorate of
 the MINT significant power over the press, including the power
 to order suspensions. In May 1989, the Independent
 Journalists Association filed a lawsuit against the Government
 for its continued use of the Provisional Law on Communications
 Media. The Sandinista-dominated Supreme Court decided in
 favor of the Government, and the Independent Journalists
 Association denounced the action before the IACHR.
 
 
 674
 NICARAGUA
 During the August 4 meeting with the internal opposition, the
 Government agreed to reform the more onerous aspects of the
 media law, especially those parts dealing with MINT control
 over the media. The law was reformed in September 1989, but
 the changes appeared to be minimal. The Supreme Electoral
 Council.(SEC), during the electoral period, will be "charged
 with applying the media law and appropriate regulations in all
 areas pertaining to the electoral law." This leaves the vast
 majority of media affairs under the control of the MINT.
 Regarding the new media law, the IACHR said in its annual
 report that the law, "grants excessive and counterproductive
 powers to the Ministry of the Interior," which it
 characterized as a "political agency." The IACHR also
 criticized the new law for maintaining a "goverhment monopoly
 on television."
 Nicaragua's only daily opposition newspaper, La Prensa, and
 independent radio stations have been outspoken throughout the
 year in their criticism of the Government. Nevertheless, they
 operate under continuing government pressure designed to
 intimidate'and restrict their freedom of expression. For
 example, the Government continued its prohibition against any
 government entity placing notices or advertisements in La
 Prensa, which the Government accuses of being a spokesman for
 the RN and the United States Government. In November 1989,
 the independent Radio Catolica was the subject of a complaint
 filed by t Sandinista radio station, charging Radio Catolica
 with violating the electoral'law by broadcasting partisan
 political ads. The SEC warned the radio station not'to do so
 again; Radio Catolica rejoined by ndting it is forced to carry
 Sandinista propaganda and electoral activities whenever the
 Government deems them "news" and forces all the media to carry
 the items on nationwide networks.
 While the situation of the media improved, compared to 1988,
 the Government continued to engage in a pattern of censorship
 and harassment. The MINT warned the director of the
 independent radio station Radio Corporacion to modify the tone
 of his commentaries. Three employees of Radio Corporacion
 were threatened by State Security agents because of their
 employment at a station opposed to the Government. The
 Government also warned La Prensa in writing that its
 editorials should show more respect for the leaders of the
 revolution. Officials of Radio C~tolica's news program were
 also warned by the Government to be more cautious in
 presenting information and to "project less violence" in the
 station's news broadcasts. Other sources of intimidation of
 the media include government control of supplies of newsprint,
 a particular problem for La Prensa, and the arbitrary delay in
 releasing equipment and spare parts for opposition media from
 customs control, a problem encountered by Radio Corporacion.
 Radio Catolica's news broadcasts resumed on March 20 after
 being curtailed on July 11, 1988, following its coverage of
 the Sandinista breakup of an opposition rally in Nandaime, but
 the independent radio news broadcast "Cinco en Punto" (Five
 O'clock Sharp) was suspended in January following its
 transmittal of news on cuts in the Nicaraguan defense budget.
 A foreign journalist from Freedom House was expelled in July
 after being accused of spying. Sandinista authorities seized
 500 copies of an exile newspaper, Nicaragua Hoy, at the
 Managua airport in November, refusing to allow them into the
 country.
 
 
 NICARAGUA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for the rights of association,
 assembly, and peaceful demonstrations. However, opposition
 political rallies during the year often continued to be marred
 by the presence of Sandinista-controlled mobs--the so-called
 turbas. The turbas generally attempt to provoke violence, and
 they often succeed. Opposition rallies throughout the country
 in October and November 1989 witnessed rock-throwing incidents
 and beatings. The Sandinista toughs usually attacked
 stragglers arriving late to the rally or stoned those on the
 fringes of it. The opposition has begiin to register
 complaints about these activities with the SEC and with
 international observers, but the Sandinistas generally deflect
 criticism of the actions of the turbas by claiming that they
 are simply a spontaneous manifestation of the people's
 enthusiasm. In two instances, turba attacks against
 opposition rallies resulted in large-scale violence and
 death. The press and observer organizations wrote extensively
 about these incidents in Cofradia on December 3 and Masatepe
 on December 10..
 Citizens in the more isolated parts of the country have
 reported being directly threatened with physical harm if they
 attend opposition rallies. Workers have been threatened with
 losing their jobs if they attend opposition events. Such an
 incident happened in the town of Nandaime prior to a rally on
 November 19. Several U.S. Congressmen were shown threatening
 letters left at the doorsteps of the citizens of Muelle de los
 Bueyes, Chontales, the night before a November 12 opposition
 rally. The departments of Matagalpa, Jinotega, and Chontales
 have witnessed significant Sandinista harassment of those
 wishing to attend opposition events. In general, the more
 isolated the area, the more direct have been the threats. A
 UNO rally in Masatepe on December 10 was disrupted by
 Sandinista thugs; one UNO supporter was mortally wounded in an
 assault attributed to the thugs by electoral observers of the
 bipartisan, U.S.-based Center for Democracy.
 For much of 1989 legal assembly was impeded by the
 Government's requirement that all outdoor demonstrations
 receive prior approval from police authorities. Many rallies
 were effectively crippled by the withholding of government
 permission until the last moment. Publicity for the rallies
 was prohibited until such permission was obtained. Commencing
 in September 1989, however, prior permission was no longer
 needed for political rallies that form part of the electoral
 campaign. The opposition was able to plan and carry out
 outdoor rallies without such prior permission.
 The Government sent a circular note to all diplomatic missions
 in Managua in June stating, in part, that foreign diplomats
 were not permitted to observe political rallies or meetings.
 Members of Managua's diplomatic community were privately
 informed by the Government that the ban applied only to U.S.
 diplomats. On July 31, four U.S. Congressmen were ordered by
 MINT officials to leave the city of Diriamba, where they had
 been invited by an opposition party to attend an outdoor
 rally. The Congressional delegation was escorted out of town
 by MINT officials, who told the Congressmen that their safety
 could not be guaranteed.
 A number of private and professional organizations exist in
 Nicaragua. Their members are able.to meet and to maintain
 contact with their foreign counterparts. Several of these
 
 
 676
 NICARAGUA
 private organizations, however, have been the focus of verbal
 attacks by FSLN officials and by the Sandinista press. The
 Superior Council of Private Enterprise (COSEP), for example,
 has been described by the Government as an agent acting
 againgt'Nicaragua. The private civic organization, Via
 Civica, which has been active in encouraging voter
 registration and education in connection with the February
 elections and which receives funding from the U.S. National
 Endowment for Democracy, was the subject of harsh attacks in
 the pro-Sandinista daily El Nuevo Diario.
 The Government continued its policy of confiscating the
 property of its private sector critics. In June 1989, the
 farms of three leading coffee growers, who were also COSEP or
 coffee'growers' association leaders, were confiscated
 following their criticism given during a meeting of the coffee
 association in the town of Natagalpa of Government economic
 policies. The three were charged with "discouraging
 production" and.fomenting anarchy and social chaos during a
 period of economic crisis.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 organized labor, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for the free exercise of religion.
 Nicaragua is 85 percent Roman Catholic; the rest of the
 population belongs to a variety of Protestant denominations or
 professes no faith. There are no'direct restrictions on
 religious activity or association, but the regime has a
 generally hostile attitude toward the Catholic Church, which
 it views as a rival to its control over Nicaragdan society.
 The Government's relations with the leader of the Catholic
 Church in Nicaragua, Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo, continued
 to be hostile during 1989. Sandinista-controlled women's
 groups conducted weekly protests for much of the year
 demanding that the Cardinal intercede on behalf of relatives
 allegedly held prisoner by the RN, and the Sandanista-
 controlled press printed occasional articles clearly designed
 to undermine the position of the Church and its leaders. On
 the other hand, the Government permitted the former leader of
 the Church's social action program, COPROSA, to return to
 Nicaragua in order to resurrect the program, and President
 Ortega announced in March that 10 foreign priests expelled in
 1984 could return to Nicaragua. The Government did not return
 to the Church COPROSA's vehicles and equipment, which it
 confiscated when it shut the program'down in 1985.
 d: Freedom of Movement Within'the Cbuntry,,Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government imposes restrictions on foreign travel through
 the use of exit visa reqhirements. The Government limits some
 opposition'figures -o singl6-exit visas; it also often denies
 exit visas to young men of draft age or to professionals with
 skills needed by the State.' Exiles returning to Nicaragua aie
 required to sign a document upon arrival declaring that they
 renounce any ties with the RN. There were no reports of
 refugees being forcibly expelled from Nicaragua in 1989.
 Several prominent figures who have in the past been associated
 with the RN voluntarily returned from self-proclaimed exile;
 they reportedly encountered no special harassment.
 
 
 677
 NICARAGUA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution states that "political pluralism assures the
 existence of participation of all political organizations in
 the economic, political, and social affairs of the country,
 without ideological restrictions except for those which seek a
 return to the past or advocate the establishment of a similar
 political system." While a wide variety of political parties,
 ranging from Communist to conservative, have legal status, the
 right of citizens to peacefully change their government has
 not yet been tested in Nicaragua.
 The Marxist-Leninist Sandinista Party, more than the formal
 institutions of government, is the de facto ruler of
 Nicaragua. Its nine-man Directorate makes all the essential
 decisions 'f state, which are subsequently endorsed by the
 various ministries and the 103-member National Assembly. The
 powerful EPS ano MINT are for all practical purposes
 instruments of the Sandinista Party and are used to ensure its
 monopoly of power. This symbiotic relationship between the
 party and the State throws into serious question the right of
 citizens to change their Government. "Bourgeois" formalisms,
 such as free elections, are not central to the Sandinista
 political philosophy. Thus, while recognizing that the
 Sandinista Government has in fact taken many steps to
 establish the formal mechanisms for free elections, their
 commitment to holding free and fair elections in 1990, with
 the possibility of a real turnover of power to an elected
 opposition, continued to be viewed with skepticism by many
 observers.
 The October voter registration process for the elections was,
 for the most part, orderly, but opposition figures complained
 that registration was somtimes obstructed by the Government in
 rural areas, where the opposition anticipate support, and said
 their observers did not always receive their credentials
 promptly.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government states that it welcomes international scrutiny
 of its human rights record, but has shown itself to be
 sensitive to attempts to probe too deeply into its human
 rights practices. It cdntinued during 1989 to attack
 independent Nicaraguan human rights groups. The
 Government-sanctioned human rights group focused virtually all
 of its attention during the year on alleged human rights
 abuses by the RN.
 International human rights groups made visits during 1989. AI
 and AW both conducted prison inspections, but AI's visits were
 to State Security detention centers that had been emptied of
 prisoners. The ICRC visited political prisoners held in the
 regular national penitentiary system, and was continuing
 negotiations with the Government over visits to detention
 centers. The IACHR also visited Nicaragua, but its full
 report on political prisoners was not published, reportedly at
 the insistence of the Government. The IACHR 1989 annual
 general report did include sections on Nicaragua, which
 concluded that the trials of ex-National Guardsmen lacked
 validity under international human rights law.
 
 
 678
 NICARAGUA
 The CPDH;was founded to document abuses during the rule of the
 deposed dictator Anastasio Somoza, and its work has continued
 during the Sandinista regime. The CPDH has been the target of
 many Sandinista attempts to discredit it, the latest occurring
 in September 1989 when the Government attempted to malign the
 organization's reporting on political prisoners. CPDH members
 report frequent harassment and threats. The CPDH is routinely
 denied access-to government prisons and is not allowed to seek
 information from MINT personnel. In July 1989 CPDH
 investigators were denied entry to the town of La Libertad in
 Chontales, where they wished to investigate numerous charges
 of human rights abuses. CPDH Executive Secretary Lino
 Hernandez was told by MINT officials that the MINT had issued
 orders to keep him out of town. Prisoners and their families
 are warned by Government officials not to report abuses to the
 CPDH.
 Other Nicaraguan organizations that investigate and record
 allegations of human rights violations include the Office of
 Legal Assistance for Ethnic Minorities of the Atlantic Coast,
 the Office of Legal-Assistance of the Evangelical Committee
 for Development Aid, and the Legal Aid Office of the Central
 American University. The ANPDH, based in San Jose, Cgsta
 Rica, is a U.S.Government-funded group independent of the RN
 but clearly opposed strongly to the Sandinista regime. It
 trains RN combatants in respect for human rights, and
 investigates reports of RN abuses. The ANPDH opened an office
 in Managua in 1989.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Nicaragua's minorities, numbering some 80,000 Indians and
 26,000 English-speaking blacks, live primarily on the Atlantic
 coast. Sandinista efforts after 1979 to integrate the
 Atlantic coast more closely with the rest of Nicaragua
 alienated much of the coast-population and generated many
 human rights abuses, including forced relocation, destruction
 of villages, mass imprisonments, killings, and
 disappearances. These conditions led to mass flights of
 Indians to Honduras. An autonomy statute was-promulgated in
 September 1987 which purports to establish a democratic and
 responsive program for meeting the special needs of the
 Atlantic coast minorities. However, it fails to address major
 issues of fundamental concern to the area's indigenous groups,
 such as allocation of income from regional resources. In June
 1989 Indian leaders Brooklyn Rivera and Steadman Fagoth
 announced they would return to Nicaragua to reintegrate into
 their communities and to participate in Atlantic coast
 political life. They and other Indian leaders returned in
 August and September.
 The Government also continued to-facilitate the return of
 Miskito refugees from Honduras. The U.N. High Commissioner
 for Refugees,(UNHCR) office in Managua reported that 2,557
 Nicaraguaris had returned through UNHCR programs through the
 end of September, including 884 Miskito Indians who returned
 from Honduras, and four who returned from'Costa Rica.
 Violence against women, including domestic violence such as
 wife beating, exists in Nicaragua. Howe~er, a lack of
 reliable statistical data makes it very difficult to determine
 the true extent of this problem. Victims of such abuse
 frequently are reluctant to report it or to press charges,
 leading to the likelihood that it is significantly
 
 
 679
 NICARAGUA
 underreported.
 The Government does not tolerate such violence. In
 particular, the Sandinista mass organization, the Luisa Amanda
 Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women (AMNLAE), assists in
 protecting the rights of women and bringing cases of violence
 against individual women to the Government's attention.
 AMNLAE also urges government sanctions against publications
 that may contribute to violence against women by publishing
 articles that feature women as sex objects. Women are not
 subject to any special restrictive measures by the Government,
 and they participate in most levels of the economy and society.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Article 87 of the Constitution provides workers the right to
 associate in organizations of their own choosing and to elect
 their own representatives. In practice, however, the
 Government often uses coercion, economic pressure, or force to
 impede workers' rights to organize and elect their
 representatives. For example, in October 1989 the leadership
 of the government-controlled Sandinista Workers' Central (CST)
 used economic coercion to expel the leadership of an
 independent construction union, SCAAS. The CST was able to
 capitalize on government control of the country's battered
 construction industry to coerce workers to renounce the
 leadership of the SCAAS, an affiliate of the anti-Sandinista
 Independent Confederation of Labor (CGT-I). With unemployment
 at about 60 percent in the construction sector, the CST was
 able to use the threat of job loss to lure workers from the
 CGT-I and to establish a rump Sandinista-controlled SCAAS,
 which then was given legal status by the Government.
 The right to strike is recognized in Article 83 of the
 Constitution. However, a decree law in 1981 stipulated that
 any worker who incited a strike could be jailed for up to 3
 years. In May 1989, a series of wildcat strikes by teachers
 broke out throughout the country. The teachers complained
 about the dramatic drop in their purchasing power due to
 hyperinflation and currency devaluations. In response, the
 Government and the Sandinista-controlled mass organizations
 launched a propaganda campaign to discredit the teachers,
 accusing them of being "unpatriotic" and "agents of the U.S.
 Embassy." In fact, the majority of the disaffected teachers
 were members of the Sandinista-controlled National
 Association of Nicaraguan Educators. The strikes were
 eventually quelled through economic coercion and Sandinista-
 sponsored intimidation.
 The CST is affiliated with the Communist-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions. The other major Sandinista labor
 body, the Rural Workers Association, is not affiliated with
 any international body. Anti-Sandinista trade unions are
 allowed a measure of freedom to maintain international
 contacts, although subject to Government surveillance and
 harassment. For example, the Confederation of Labor
 Unification is affiliated with the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), and the Confederation of
 Nicaraguan Workers is affiliated with the World Confederation
 of Labor (WCL).
 ICFTU, WCL, the Latin American Workers' Central, and the
 
 
 680
 NICARAGUA
 International Organization of Employers (IOE) have filed a
 number of complaints against the Government of Nicaragua.
 These complaints allege that the Government violated
 International Labor'Organization*(IL0) Convention 87 on
 Freedom of Association by, among other things, the murder,
 assault, intimidation, and imprisonment of trade union
 leaders, the destruction of their property, and denial of
 their right to express their views. These complaints have
 alleged the harassment, intimidation, and imprisonment of
 employer representatives and the confiscation of their
 property. In September 1988, an ILO. study mission was
 dispatched to Nicaragua to investigate these allegations.
 Based on the mission's report and conclusions, the ILO
 Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA), at its November
 1988 meeting, urged the Government to take concrete measures
 in the shortest period of time to apply fully the Conventions
 on Freedom of Association, including changes in legislation
 and the release of worker and employer representatives from
 prison. The CFA recommended the establishment of a Commission
 of Inquiry unlebs the Government provided information
 demonstrating a~change of attitude and a clear desire to make
 progress before the Committee's next meeting.
 At its November 1989 meeting the CFA summarized the various
 Freedom of Association complaints brought against the
 Government of Nicaragua by the ICFTU, the WCL, and the IOE.
 Acknowledging some cooperation from the Government, the
 Committee noted its failures to respond to requests and
 recommendations and continuing contradictions between
 statements of the complainants and the Government, and
 recommended that the matter be referred to a Commission of
 Inquiry (COI).
 During 1989 the ILO Committee of Experts (COE) and Committee
 on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (CACR)
 also considered complaints against Nicaragua. The COE noted
 the lifting of the state of emergency, but cited reports of
 ILO representatives and committees indicating that a number of
 excessively severe regulations remained in effect, including
 the General Provisional Act which forbids the publication,
 distribution, circulation, exhibition, dissemination, showing,
 transmission, or selling of writings which compromise or
 endanger internal security, national defense, or national
 economic stability. Noting that elements of the media had
 been suspended under this Act, the Committee called on the
 Government to give full guarantees of expression to worker and
 employer representatives so they could defend the interests of
 their members.
 The COE noted that 60 strike actions had been recorded in 1988
 but that trade union organizations had reported pressure and
 repressive measures against strikers. The COE noted other
 provisions or omissions in Nicaraguan legislation which do not
 accord with Convention 87, including: failure to guarantee
 the right of association to public servants and other groups
 of workers; requirement of approval of an absolute majority of
 workers in a work place in order to form a union; and
 excessive limitations on the right to strike, including the
 Government's authority to refer strikes to compulsory
 arbitration. The COE expressed the hope that new legislation
 correcting these and other deficiencies would be promptly
 enacted.
 The CACR also observed the persistende of divergencies between
 law and practice and the full application of ILO Conventions
 
 
 681
 NICARAGUA
 87 and 98 (collective bargaining), and requested the
 Government to take promptly all measures necessary to
 eliminate restrictions concerning the right of employer and
 worker representatives to freely exercise the rights
 guaranteed by these two conventions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Articles 82 through 88 of the Constitution contain a number of
 labor rights, including the right to negotiate individual or
 collective bargaining agreements. Nicaraguan workers,
 however, do not enjoy these rights in practice. The
 Government does not prohibit, but state-owned companies also
 do not engage in, collective bargaining with independent labor
 unions. Moreover, the Government directs its own
 Sandinista-controlled union, the CST, to accept what the
 Government proposes. With respect to working conditions, the
 Government simply does not negotiate with unions on this issue.
 Restrictions on: independent union organizing activity are
 mostly extraofficial and indirect. Union activists are
 subject to state-sponsored intimidation by Sandinista
 militants. There are no economic processing zones where
 additional restrictions or regulations on labor apply.
 In its 1989 report, the COE repeated its longstanding request
 to the Government to repeal Decree 530, which requires that a
 collective bargaining agreement must be approved by the
 Government before it can become effective, in violation of
 Convention 98 on collective bargaining.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Although there is no official policy of using forced labor,
 the Government uses its Sandinista Defense Committees (CDS) to
 mobilize local communities to perform specific economic
 development projects, ostensibly on a voluntary basis. The
 CDS chiefs in various neighborhoods are responsible for
 organizing these labor crews for weekend work projects. Those
 who do not participate in these projects are reportedly
 subject to a range of sanctions that could affect their
 working conditions, housing situation, or children's schooling.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 14 legally are not permitted to
 work. Article 84 of the Constitution states "child labor that
 can affect normal childhood development or interfere with the
 obligatory school year is prohibited." This law is generally
 enforced in the small modern sector of the economy, but
 children frequently work on family farms at an earlier age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government has not strictly enforced employer compliance
 with occupational health and safety requirements. In June
 1988, the Government suspended the National System for
 Ordering Work and Salaries, although it continues to serve as
 a "reference point" for employers in determining wages and
 salaries. The minimum wage for workers varies from sector to
 sector. For example, the average wage for agricultural
 workers is about $32 per month. The average minimum wage for
 industrial workers is $58 per month, and in the service sector
 about $19 per month.
 
 
 682
 NICARAGUA
 For state workers, these salaries are augmented by food
 allocations and other incentives. With hyperinflation having
 reached five-digit figures for 1988, and likely to reach
 four-digit figures in 1989, the real purchasing power of
 workers has plummeted dramatically over the past year and the
 living standard for the working class has declined sharply.
 The Government periodically adjusts state workers' salaries;
 however, Government officials have acknowledged that these
 salaries are not adequate to provide the basic needs of
 workers. The legal workweek in Nicaragua is 48 hours for most
 workers. The legal workday for agricultural workers is 6
 hours, and the workday in the mining sector is 7 hours.
 
 
 683
