NICARAGUA
Similarly, the report's discussion of freedom of speech and press emphasizes how pro-Sandinista and antigovemment groups harassed and committed acts of violence against the center-right news media, without specifically identifying the political affiliations of the anti-government groups. The report does note that policemen beat two journalists attempting to cover a clash between police and striking customs workers, implying that they were beaten because they worked for a pro-Sandinista newspaper. But a more even-handed treatment of press freedom issues would also have explicitly included incidents of violence for which recontra groups were responsible.
The report's section on violations of humanitarian law in internal armed conflict does not mention any incidents for which nongovernmental groups were responsible. For example, in May, a recontra group known as 380 Northern Front destroyed a telecommunications fransmission tower that linked Nicaragua internally and with the rest of Central America, causing an estimated $350,000 in damage. (This group was also responsible for the August kidnapping of government negotiators.) In July, members of the Nicaraguan Resistance National Salvation Democratic Front also attempted to destroy the electrical towers that allow communications with other Central American countries. Such acts are prohibited by humanitarian law, as the State Department has repeatedly noted in a decade of reporting violations by El Salvador's FMLN guerrillas. The State Department's departure from its traditional application of legal principles is apparency without explanation.
The report sets forth numerous instances where the perpetrators of political and extrajudicial killings have gone unpunished, but fails to convey the full scope of such impunity and the manner in which it fuels continuing human rights violations in Nicaragua. The Tripartite Commission has documented that in 627 cases of extrajudicial killing with political overtones occurring between June 1990 and March 1993, more than 90% of the perpetrators went unpunished or avoided judicial prosecution altogether. The report does correctly place blame on the Chamorro government for not having "been able or willing to try, convict and punish offenders" including members of the police and military, but notes that impunity continues in Nicaragua because members of the police and army can only be tried by the military court system, which rarely convicts and punishes offenders.
The report tends to gloss over the adverse consequences of the government's repeated amnesties for political and common crimes by noting only that national and international human rights groups have condemned these amnesties, without stating how the amnesties themselves have contributed to continued violence in Nicaragua. Human Rights Watch/Americas and other commentators have identified the near-total impunity resulting from these amnesties, and the inability of the Chamorro government to mete out justice, as the greatest obstacles to improving the human rights situation in Nicaragua.
251
CRITIQUE 1993
Likewise, the 1993 report focuses, as did its predecessor, on the poUtical bias of Sandinista judges, rather than judges of all political affiliations, implying that Sandinista judges are the only ones influenced by their political views. In a nation as politically polarized as Nicaragua, this implication is without foimdation. The report states that President Chamorro's nomination of four Supreme Court replacements gave the Court a non-Sandinista majority for the first time since 1990, and is likely to have a positive effect on human rights since the Supreme Court appoints appeals court and lower court judges. However, as Human Rights Watch/Americas has pointed out, 70% of Sandinista-appointed judges have already been replaced during President Chamorro's tenure, with only a limited impact on the human rights situation. So long as the government is unable to exert control over the police and army, and promulgates amnesties that undermine judicial authority, there is little basis for anticipating that the ability of non-Sandinista Supreme Court judges to appoint lower court judges will itself do much to improve human rights in Nicaragua.
In contrast to past practice, the 1993 report appears to have made some effort to treat Nicaragua's three non-governmental human rights groups more even-handedly. These groups are the Nicaraguan Human Rights Center (CENIDH), the Pennanent Commission for Human Rights (CPDH) and the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH), and the report cites data produced by all three. This is a promising development, given the polarization in Nicaragua and the diverse political persuasions of the three human rights groups. Likewise, when discussing the operation of international and non-governmental human rights organizations in Nicaragua, the report properly provides specific examples of threats, violence and harassment suffered by all three Nicaraguan human rights groups.
Yet even here there is still subtie evidence of bias. For example, the report invokes the findings of CENIDH, a group sympathetic to the Sandinista party, in its discussion of police abuse against striking workers and other Sandinista supporters. Although the report says that one human rights group condemned the use of excessive violence by the EPS against recompas who had attacked the town of Esteli, it would be more accurate to say that all three human rights organizations denounced both the recompas' attack and the EPS's violent response.
In the context of worker rights, the report notes a single example of police violence against strikers at the San Antonio sugar mill. By noting only one example without additional commentary, the report appears to suggest that violence against striking workers is limited. However, a review of the reports for the last several years makes clear that violence against strikers is more extensive and ongoing. In addition to the reported violence at the San Antonio sugar mill, which prompted the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions to issue an urgent appeal to the Nicaraguan government, the police also
252
NICARAGUA
reacted violently in 1993 against those involved in a transportation strike, as well as striking customs workers.
In compliance with the State Department's revised instructions for the preparation of the Country Reports, the report succinctly notes that no legislation exists to aid Nicaraguans with disabilities, despite the high visibility of disabled veterans from the civil war, and adds that there were no public calls to aid the disabled during 1993. The report also details issues of children's welfare, including child prostitution and child labor. However, while noting that funding levels for children's programs such as health services and primary education are inadequate, the report fails to set forth how this affects child welfare in a nation where 75% of the children live in poverty.
The 1993 report is inadequate in its discussion of discrimination against women. It paints in broad strokes the de facto discrimination suffered by women in Nicaragua and reiterates comments from previous reports that local human rights groups monitor violence against women, without noting the pervasiveness and severity of violence against women. Surveys conducted in Nicaragua estimate that 75-80% of Nicaraguan women experience physical violence in their homes. Moreover, in October, the National Police produced statistics showing a 45% increase in violence against women from January to September 1993 compared to the corresponding period in 1992. The omission of this data is a serious flaw in the report. In contrast to its predecessor, the 1993 report gives no statistics regarding the poverty and unemployment levels of women. Nor does it mention or evaluate the implementation of new legislation designed to improve the status of women. To comment more effectively on discrimination against women, the report should have also discussed the effectiveness and implementation of the more stringent rape law passed in 1992. Likewise, it should have commented on the effectiveness of a 1992 law aimed at requiring fathers to provide for children bom out of wedlock.
Finally, the discussion of discrimination based on sexual orientation is also inadequate. The report mentions the 1992 Penal Code amendments criminalizing behavior that "induces, promotes or practices in a scandalous manner sexual intercourse between people of the same sex," and concludes that these did not result in any curtaihnent of free speech. But it makes no mention of whether violence against individuals based on sexual orientation occurs in Nicaragua.
253
CRITIQUE 1993
NIGERIA
Once again, this year's State Department report provides a commendable account of human rights in Nigeria. Yet while the report pulls no punches in condeming abuses by Nigeria's military government, it misses the mark by failing to emphasize the broader significance of the setback to democracy and human rights caused by the events of 1993 in West Africa's most populous country.
After years of promises by the previous military regime that a democratically elected civilian goverrmient would eventually take over, Nigeria took one step forwards and six steps backwards during 1993. For all its faults, and it had many, the transition to civilian rule program set into place by the government of Gen. Ibrahim Babangida offered Nigerians a chance to elect their own local, state and federal officials. The transition program, however, failed to result in the installation of an elected civilian government on the federal level.
Beginning in 1990, Nigerians went to the polls to elect local goverrmient officials and councils. Candidates had to belong to one of the two political parties that the military government created and whose manifestos, constitutions and platforms it wrote. In 1991, there were elections for state officials and assemblies, and in 1992 for a National Assembly. The presidential election, scheduled for 1992, were delayed until June 12, 1993. This election did take place and was monitored by national and international observers, who concluded that the vote had been fair. Gen. Babangida, however, annulled the results without demonstrating any proof to support his claims that there had been fraud and rigging. The initial reaction of the United States to the cancellation of the June 1993 elections was clear and sfrong; however, this initial response later gave way to a number of concessions. By the end of the year, during the interim government of Ernest Shonekan, Nigeria had gained a seat on the UN Security Council, a coup which some Nigerians viewed as a vote of confidence in the country.
Former Defense Minister Gen. Sani Abacha took office in a bloodless military coup in November, after the "resignation" of Shonekan, the civilian head of the Interim National Government appointed by Gen. Babangida. On his first day in office. Gen. Abacha dissolved every remnant of the program for civilian rule. His uncompromising attitude to political rights was immediately made clear in his inaugural address to the nation on November 18:
The following decisions come into immediate effect: The Interim National Government is hereby dissolved. The national and state assemblies are also dissolved. The state executive councils are dissolved. . . . All local governments stand dissolved. . . . The National Electoral Commission is hereby
254
