 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, with a directly elected President, Vice
 President, and a unicameral National Assembly. President Violeta Barrios de
 Chamorro was elected in a free and fair election in 1990 defeating the incumbent
 Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) candidate, baniel Ortega. In October
 Arnoldo Aleman defeated Ortega in free and fair presidential elections and took of-
 rice January 10, 1997. The executive branch coexists with the activist National As-
 sembly. The Supreme Electoral Council is an independent fourth branch of govern-
 ment. The judiciary is independent but weak.
 _The President is the supreme chief of national defense and security forces. Presi-
 dent Chamorro served as nominal Minister of Defense; there was no Defense Min-
 istry. President-elect Aleman named a civilian to be Defense Minister to head a ci-
 vilian-led Defense Ministry in his Government. The Ministry of Government over-
 sees the National Police, which are formally charged with internal security. How-
 ever, they share this responsibility with thv army in rural areas. The National As-
 sembly's approval in August of a new Organic Police Law helped to strengthen civil-
 ian control of the National Police and established a new ofice of professional re-
 sponsibility. Reflecting enhanced civilian control, the security forces' conduct im-
 proved, although some members continued to commit human rights abuses.
 Nicaragua is an extremely poor country. The economy is predominantly agricul-
 tural, dependent on sugar, beef, coffee, and seafood exports, with some light manu-
 facturing. The economy grew an estimated 5 percent in 1996-the third year of
 growth after a decade of contraction. Despite significant foreign debt relief nego-
 tiated during the year, the country continued to have a precarious balance of pay-
 ments position and remained heavily dependent on foreign assistance. Although in-
 vestment increased, the slow and complicated resolution of confiscated property
 claims continued to hinder private investment. The unemployment rate was offi-
 cially estimated at 17 percent, while total unemployment and underemployment
 may have reached 50 percent. The inflation rate was about 11 percent. Estimated
 per capita annual income was c470.
 The Government's human rights record improved measurably, but serious prob-
 lems remain. Police use of excessive force resulted in instances of extrajudicial kill-
 ing, but these diminished from previous years. Police beat and otherwise abused de-
 tainees, often to obtain confessions. Torture, once a major problem, was rare. Prison
 conditions are poor. Security forces arbitrarily arrested and detained citizens. The
 judiciary is weak, and large case backlogs, long delays in trials, and lengthy pretrial
 detention are problems. A weak and antiquated judiciary continued to hamper pros-
 ecution of human rights abusers. The authorities at times infringed upon citizens'
 privacy rights. Discrmination against women and indigenous people is a problem.
 Violence against women, including rape and domestic abuse, remained a serious
 problem, but public officials took little effective action to counter it. Murder and kid-
 naping by criminal bands in northern rural areas were common.
 The Organization of American States' International Support and Verification
 Commission (OASCIAV) reported 26 deaths of members of the former Nicaraguan
 Resistance (RN) occurring during the year, none of which it attributed to the secu-
 rity forces, unlike previous years. However, the conviction rate among killers, par-
 ticularly but not exclusively of ex-RN, was so low that a state of impunity could still
 be saidto exist. The Tripartite Commission, composed of the Govenment, the
 Catholic Church, and the OAS/CIAV, formally ended its work on October 18 after
 finishing its 4-year-long review of slaygs earlier in the decade of ex-EN members
 and other demobilized combatants and impunity enjoyed by their killers. The Com-
 mission sent 83 cases involving 164 murders, as well as 181 specific recommenda-
 tions, to the Government for folHowup, but little action had been taken by year's end.
 Only i of 211 persons it cited as being involved in the slayings that occurred since
 
 
 513
 1990 was in jail during the year. In June the Supreme Court finished its review
 of judicial proceedings undertaken in 26 Tripartite Commission cases in which army
 and police officials stood accused, but in which the military court system had either
 issued acquittals or failed to prosecute. The Court found deficiencies in procedure
 in one-third of the cases and sent them back to the Government for prosecution or
 other appropriate action.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings by government officials.
 Then-National Police Commander Fernando Caldera stated publicly that police-
 man Roberto Sanchez used excessive force when he shot university student Donaldo
 Romero in the back on June 21 in Managua. Romero, suspected of car theft, was
 killed shortly after his companion attacked Sanchez and other police officers.
 Sanchez was immediately dismissed from the police force, and a Managua district
 court judge sentenced him to prison in July.
 In September policeman Juan Isidro Flores shot and killed peasant Mario Amador
 Duarte in Nueva Guinea department while the latter was in detention on suspicion
 of having stolen vegetables. Flores claimed that he was attempting to disarm Duarte
 when he accidentally discharged the round that killed the suspect. Flores was de-
 tained by police.
 Bandit leader Sergio Palacios ("El Charro") and his associate Ricardo Guzman
 (Garza") were killed near Waslala on June 2. The Catholic Church, citing reports
 from area residents, asserted that a booby-trapped radio killed Palacios and
 Guzman when it exploded. The army claimed that its soldiers happened upon
 Palacios and Guzman by chance and killed them in an ensuing gunbattle. The
 Church, which had served as mediator in disarmament talks between Palacios and
 the army, publicly criticized the killing but did not directly accuse the army.
 The civi war formally concluded in June 1990 with the demobilization of the Nic-
 araguan Resistance; however, society continued to be politically polarized and heav-
 ily armed. In particular, the rule of law and basic infrastructure and conditions to
 guarantee personal security and economic opportunity did not extend to rural areas.
 Reflecting these sources of instability, the level of violence, primarily criminal in na-
 ture, has remained high in the traditionally conflictive, poverty-stricken northern
 and north-central zones. According to the OASICIAV, a total of 26 demobilized ex-
 RN members were murdered during the period January-June (not including armed
 bandits who were ex-RN); bringing to 396 the number of demobilized RN members
 who died under violent circumstances since the beginning of the Chamorro adminis-
 tration. Of the 26 killed during 1996, according to OAS/CIAV, the security forces
 killed none, and rearmed resistance members (recontras) are known to have killed
 10.
 Armed bandit groups, some of which claimed political agendas, blocked highways,
 burned vehicles, and engaged in robbery, kidnaping for ransom, and murder in the
 lawless countryside of the northern and north-central zones. From January to June,
 63 clashes between bandits and security forces resulted in 93 police and army cas-
 ualties and an unknown number of bandit casualties. During the same period, the
 army and police arrested 218 bandits. The OAS/CIAV received an average of two
 reports per day of peasants fleeing their homes for fear of violence, and an average
 of 1.5 reports per day of homicide in these areas, a rate that has varied little during
 the past 6 years.
 In response to coffee producers' concerns, the Government deployed soldiers and
 police to guard coffee transport routes and to protect farmers from extortion or kid-
 naping during the 1994-95 and 1995-96 harvest seasons. Local human rights
 groups reported very few cases of human rights abuses by the security forces de-
 ployed in the operation. The deployment effectively reduced the level of criminal vio-
 lence in the affected areas. Army and police conducted another similar operation as
 an extension of troop reinforcements to ensure security of voters and election offi-
 cials during the 1996 election campaign.
 To address the issue of unresolved ex-RN deaths, President Chamorro established
 the Tripartite Commission in September 1992. The Commission concluded its review
 in October and turned 83 human rights cases involving 164 allegedly murdered
 excombatants, as well as 181 specific recommendations, over to the Government for
 followup, but the Government had taken no further action by year's end. The Com-
 mission issued three internal reports during 1993, covering investigations of 88
 deaths and including 120 recommendations or followup action by the Government
 and security forces, ranging from arrest of known perpetrators to investigations of
 
 
 514
 obstruction of justice. In September 1995, the Commission submitted to President
 Chamorro a fourth report covering an additional 33 cases plus an evaluation of the
 compliance level of all recommendations contained in the 3 earlier reports. The
 Commission verified that only 14 of the 120 recommendations contained in the first
 3 reports had been fully implemented, while 40 had been partially implemented. Of
 73 members of the police named in the 3 reports, the courts tried 36 on criminal
 charges and convicted 5. Of 38 military officials named, the courts tried 20 and con-
 victed 2. According to the OAS/CIAV, none of those convicted served a complete sen-
 tence.
 In June the Supreme Court finished a year-long review of judicial procedures em-
 ployed in 26 Tripartite Commission cases undertaken at the direction of President
 Chamorro. Army commander Joaquin Cuadra and Minister of Government Sergio
 Narvaez, whose ministry controls the National Police, had requested the review in
 1995. The Court', review focused on military court procedures followed in the pros-
 ecutions of army and police officials who were found not guilty, or cases of those
 named in the reports but never prosecuted. The Court found deficiencies in proce-
 dure in 4 cases, said that another 4 cases should be reopened should new evidence
 come to light, and found no fault with the other 18. Army and police officials ar-
 rested no one on related charges, but police officials ordered that searches be under-
 taken for officers cited by the court.
 In June a jury found army major Ivan Gutierrez innocent of the September 1995
 slaying of Carlos Jose Salinas. The Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights (CENIDH)
 suspected Gutierrez paid Salinas' mother to persuade the jury to exonerate him.
 On December 13, 1995 a demonstration by university students and others outside
 the National Assembly resulted in a confrontation with police that left 2 protesters
 dead, 66 wounded (10 by gunfire according to police officials), and 8 police officers
 wounded. The police were not adequately prepared to control the violence. A new
 riot control unit has since been formed and equipped. A trial of police officers sus-
 pected of firing on the crowd was underway at year~s end.
 In August the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) participated
 in an exhumation of a mass grave found at Masaya national park. It said that this
 was one of 70 covert graves of persons allegedly murdered by Sandinista revolution-
 aries in 1978-79 found since the end of the civil war. The ANPDH reported that
 a total of 84 corpses had been exhumed from 8 covert graves, but said that it knew
 of more than 217 others that had not been exhumed. No government investigations
 were undertaken.
 In November 1991, a special presidential commission charged with investigating
 the February 1991 killing of former RN commander Enrique Bermudez was dis-
 solved after it claimed that there was a lack of evidence. A 1993 Scotland Yard in-
 vestigation established no new leads with which to open the case, and no progress
 was made during the year.
 In September the Inter-American Court of Human Rights heard testimony on a
 charge of obstruction of justice regarding the investigation of the 1990 killing of 16-
 year-old Jean Paul Genie. (Genie was slain following an incident involving members
 of the motorcade of then-army commander General Humberto Ortega.) The Court
 rejected the Government's argument that the Court lacked authority in the case be-
 cause Nicaragua had not, at the time of the killing, accepted the Court's jurisdiction.
 The Government had previously said that all officials would testify if called, but nei-
 ther army commander General Joaquin Cuadra nor General Ortega appeared when
 the Court called them in September. The Government's legal representative in the
 case separately told the Court that the Government opposed Cuadra's and Ortega's
 appearane because the Court hadsuffiientevideneto proceed to a judgment; a
 military tribunal headed by General Cuadra had already found General Ortega in-
 nocent in June 1994 (and he should not be subjected to double jeopardy); and, the
 Supreme Court had not yet ruled on the Genie family's appeal requesting that the
 it assert civilian jurisdiction in the case. At year's end, the Supreme Court had not
 yet ruled on the Genie family's petition.
 On July 14, 1995, the Attorney General's office petitioned the Supreme Court to
 order the immediate arrest of former army Major Frank Ibarra. Ibarra was sen-
 tenced in absentia in 1993 to 20 years' imprisonment for the November 1992 murder
 of Dr. Arges Sequeira Mangas, president of the Association of Nicaraguan Con-
 fiscated Property Owners. Ibarra has remained a fugitive from justice since
 Sequeira's death.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 The Government failed to respond to a request from the United Nations Working
 Group on Disappeared Persons for more information on the 1994 disappearance of
 Sandinista activist Mario Benjamin Mendez.
 
 
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although use of torture is a punishable crime under the law there were isolated
 instances of torture by the authorities. There were also credible reports that police
 beat and otherwise physically mistreated detainees, often to obtain confessions.
 Human rights groups attributed these abuses in part to the prevailing state of im-
 punity. Another important contributing factor in such abuses by the police is the
 lack of professional training in sophisticated investigative techniques that would en-
 able the police to avoid resorting to brutal methods. Inadequate budget support for
 professional training, salaries and benefits, and proper equipment and supplies also
 ampered efforts to improve police performance.
 On May 22, a Boaco district court judge sentenced police officers Orlando Brizuela
 and Carlos Suazo to 1 year in prison each for abuse of authority, sexual assault,
 wounding, and wrongfully detaining a prisoner after the two beat and tortured Juan
 Pablo Reyes. They burned Reyes and threatened him with death after being ar-
 rested for committing a minor offense on May 2. The ANPDH reported that the po-
 lice beat 15-year-olds Marco Antonio Gonzalez and Abelardo Rodriguez while in cus-
 tody, the latter in Boao department by police officer Venancio Obando. The police
 too  no action to investigate these incidents. The ANPDH reported that prison
 guards subjected 15-year-old Juan Carlos Garcia to electrical shocks while in deten-
 tion on Corn Island.
 The Office of Civil Inspection for Professional Responsibility of the Ministry of
 Government is responsible for monitoring allegations of illegal detention and police
 abuse. Through September the office received 192 formal complaints involving 241
 police officers. The office concluded that, of the 98 complaints that it had inves-
 tigated through September 25 were human rights cases. Of 45 policemen deter-
 mined to be responsible for human rights violations, the authorities had administra-
 tively sanctioned 29 through September. The unit's small budget and staff ham-
 pered effective investigations and publicity. The Ministr7 of Government frequently
 does not follow up on the office's recommendations. Civil inspection officials said
 that police commanders often hindered their investigations by refusing to share per-
 tinent information. The Ministry of Government took no action to improve police co-
 operation with the civil inspection unit.
 Prison conditions are poor. The prison system remained overcrowded and under-
 funded, with medical attention virtually nonexistent and malnutrition a constant
 problem. According to government statistics, prisons had a total inmate population
 of 3,752 as of August, an average of 82 percent over capacity. The prisons of Esteli,
 Chinankdega, and Bluefields housed more than double their intended capacity. The
 prison budget remained constant, although the inmate population increased by 14
 percent during the year. Prison officials calculated that the daily expenditure on
 prisoners fell from $3.67 per prisoner in 1992 to $2.79 in 1996. Prison officials re-
 ported that the annual budget for food remained constant in spite of the growing
 prison population and that average daily caloric intake therefore fell to 750 to 800
 calories, well below the 1,800 calories per day recommended by the United Nations.
 However, many prisoners received additional food from visiting family and friends.
 Medical care available to prisoners fell far short of the basic needs of all prisoners,
 while 200 chronically ill prisoners were in particularly bad condition. Lack of avail-
 able medical care led prisons to release ill prisoners convicted of lesser offenses.
 Three prisoners charged with serious offenses died in prison in 1995 of malnutrition
 and lack of medical care.
 As of August, 11.6 percent of the prison population was between the ages of 15
 and 18. Youths were housed in the same prisons as adults for lack ofjuvenile deten-
 tion centers, though in different wings of the prisons. While only Managua has a
 separate prison for women, there have been no reports of problems ensuing from
 mixed facilities. Women were also housed in separate wings in facilities outside the
 Managua area and were guarded by female custodians. Police station holding cells
 were overcrowded by an average of 30 percent. Officials claimed that suspects were
 often left in these cells during their trials, as budgetary shortfalls often restricted
 the use of fuel for frequent transfers from prison to distant courtrooms. As a result
 of overcrowding in both the cells and in prisons, police and penitentiary officials is-
 sued urgent calls for increased budgets to build more facilities and increase food
 purchases. Government officials responded that the budget could not be stretched
 to meet these demands.
 Prison guards received human rights training from nongovernmental organiza-
 tions (NG's) and the Catholic Church, and generally treated prisoners well How-
 ever, there were instances of abuse, some of which involved minors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention by the po-
 lice were common. The Police Functions Law requires police to obtain a warrant
 prior to detaining a suspect and to notify family members within 24 hours of the
 
 
 516
 detainee's whereabouts. However, the police rarely complied with this law. Detain-
 ees do not have the right to an attorney until they have been formally charged with
 a crime. Local human rights groups criticized the law for providing inadequate judi-
 cial oversight of police arrests.
 The constitutional reforms instituted in July 1995 reduced from 72 to 48 hours
 the time police may legally hold a suspect before they must bring him before a judge
 to decide if charges should be brought. The judge must then either order the accused
 released or transferred to prison. Due to lack of prison space, there were over 1,000
 prisoners in badly overcrowded police holding cells most of whom were being held
 illegally beyond the 48-hour deadine. The CENIbH denounced one particularly
 egregious case, that of 13-year-old Dolores Juarez Salmeron, who was arbitrarily de-
 tained by police for 16 days. The new Organic Police Law passed in August allows
 the National Police to hold its own members suspected of wrongdoing up to 20 days
 while conducting initial investigations, which contravenes the constitutionally man-
 dated 48-hour maximum period.
 The ANPDH recorded 77 complaints of illegal or arbitrary detention by the Na-
 tional Police and army from January through June. The number represents a sig-
 nificant decline from previous years. As in past years, incidents of arbitrary deten-
 tion were most common in the rural northern and north-central regions, where
 much of the civil war was fought.
 Exile is not practiced. There were no reports of political violence against any citi-
 zens returning from civil war era self-imposed exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent but weak. Human
 rights and lawyers' groups complained about the delay of justice caused by judicial
 inaction, sometimes for years.
 The judicial system comprises bth civil and military courts. The 12-member Su-
 preme Court of Justice is the system's highest court and is also responsible for
 nominating all appellate and lower court judges. The Court is divided into special-
 ized chambers on administrative, criminal, constitutional, and civil matters.
 The 1994 Military Code requires the civilian court system to try members of the
 military charged with common crimes. From January to Au gust the Attorney Gen-
 eral for Penal~ Affairs' offie reeived 136 complaints from civilians against members
 of the military. It referred 72 of these to civilian courts for trial. At the end of Au-
 gust, courts had sentenced members of the military to prison in 10 of the cases and
 found those involved in 6 cases innocent. The other 56 cases were in stages of judi-
 cial processing, which the Attorney General for Penal Affairs called "evidence of the
 worsening problem of backlog in the judicial system."
 In criminal cases, the accused has the right to legal counsel, and defendants are
 presumed innocent until proven guilty. The presiding judge appoints attorneys from
 a standard list to represent indigent defendants, but, because they are not paid by
 the State, many attorneys pay a $1.50 fine rather than represent such clients. Ac-
 cording to the ANPDH, approximately 90 percent of indigent defendants go to trial
 without an attorney to represent them. This contributes greatly to the slow pace of
 justice, and many prisoners spend more than a year in jail without a trial. The Per-
 manent Commission for Human Rights (CPDH) has estimated that nearly half of
 all those incarcerated in the prison system have been awaiting trial for between 6
 months and 2 years.
 The Supreme Court removed Yali judge Federico Schneegan from office in August
 after he had been widely criticized by human rights o anizations for accepting
 bribes and sexually abusing female prisoners. The CEN  H claims that Schneegan,
 in reaction to public denunciations made by the CENIDH's Yali representative, of-
 fered to pay bandit leader "El Ruco* 3,500 cordobas to kill the representative. "El
 Rucod" reported Schneegan's offer to police who then detained him. He was dead 2
 hours after his detention; police contended he committed suicide. Schneegan was not
 charged with any crime.
 There were no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that all persons have the right to privacy of their family and
 to the inviolability of their home, correspondence, and communications. It also re-
 quires warrants for searches of private homes and excludes from legal proceedings
 illegaly seized letters, documents, and private papers. The Government, however,
 did not always respect these rights in practice.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and a free press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. The pri-
 vately owned print media, the broadcast media, and academic circles freely and
 
 
 openly discussed diverse viewpoints in public discourse without government inter-
 ference.
 The news medium with the largest audience is radio, but polls show that tele-
 vision is the primary source of news, particularly in the cities. Listeners receive a
 wide variety of political viewpoints, especially on Managua's 45 radio stations. There
 are five television stations, three of which carry news programming with partisan
 political content. There is no official state censorship, nor is self-censorship prac-
 ticed.
 Freedom of the press is potentially qualified, however, by several constitutional
 Srevisions. The Constitution stipulates that citizens have the right to "accurate in-
 ormation," thereby providing an exception by which the freedom to publish informa-
 tion that the Government deems inaccurate could be abridged. Although the right
 to information cannot be subject to censorship, there is retroactive liability estab-
 lished by law, defined as a "social responsibility," implyin the potential for sanc-
 tions against irresponsibility by the press. The legislature id not modify these pro-
 visions in the constitutional reforms, but neither did the Government invoke these
 provisions to suppress the media.
 The passage of a law in September that established a professional journalists'
 guild was perceived by some as a blow to freedom of expression. The law requires
 Nicaraguan journalists in the Managua area to have a bachelors degree in journal-
 ism or 5 years of journalistic experience in order to be accredited by a college of
 journalists and also requires media owners in the capital area to ensure that they
 employ only accredited journalists. The law was proposed by a journalists' associa-
 tion seeking to establish professional standards, but opposition forces claim that the
 law restricts the freedom of others to publish or state their views in the media. To
 mollify' the opposition, the National Assembly amended the law to restrict its appli-
 cation to the national capital, where most of the media outlets are nonetheless lo-
 cated.
 The Government does not restrict academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution recognizes
 the right to peaceful assembly without prior permission. It also recognizes the right
 to public assembly, demonstration, and mobilizstion "in conformity with the law."
 The Government generally respects the right of assembly, although the law requires
 demonstrators to obtain permission for a rally or march by registering its planned
 size and location with the police. The authorities routinely granted such permission,
 but many groups chose not to register because, they claimed, the process was too
 cumbersome. In most cases, the Government took no action against illegal dem-
 onstrations.
 The Constitution provides for the right to organize or affiliate with political par-
 ties, and opposition and independent associations functioned freely without govern-
 ment interference or restriction. Private associations do not have legal status to con-
 duct private fund raising or receive public financial support until they receive this
 authorization from the National Assembly, which it routinely confers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 Sporadic bombings of Catholic churches continued through August. Most of the at-
 tacks occurred in Masay, Managua, and Leon, involved some small explosive de-
 vices, and caused minor damage to structures but no casualties. Church officials
 characterized the attacks as efforts by extremists to intimidate the Church and halt
 its civic education campaigns. In November a criminal court in Leon convicted 12
 men for a number of the bombings and sentenced them to between 3 and 15 years
 in prison. Following the convictions, FSLN assembly deputies unsuccessfully tried
 to pass legislation pardoning the 12 persons. Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo and
 other church officials reported receiving anonymous telephone throeats.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right to travel and reside anywhere
 in the country and to enter and exit the country freely. The law requires citizens
 and residents to obtain an exit visa to leave the country, but immigration authori-
 ties routinely granted these for a small fee. However, the law also allows a judge
 to order immigration officials to deny exit visas to those involved in court cases if
 there is reasonable suspicion that the accused may abscond. The right of citizens
 to return to Nicaragua is not established in the Constitution, but, in practice, the
 Government has not restricted anyone's return.
 The Government cooerates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees another humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 Constitution provides for asylum, and political refugees cannot be expelled to the
 country persecuting them. The issue of the prevision of first asylum dlnot arise;
 
 
 518
 there were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they feared
 persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised their right peacefully to change their government in free and
 fair national elections in October, held under the auspices of the Supreme Electoral
 Council (CSE), an independent branch of government. Voters elected the Liberal Al-
 liance's Arnoldo Aleman President from a field of 24 candidates with 51 percent of
 the vote, against 38 percent for FSLN candidate Daniel Ortega. Over 3,000 national
 and international observers declared the elections free and fair, despite some
 logistical and organizational problems. Observers from individual political parties
 monitored nearly all polling stations. The FSLN and some other losing parties
 claimed systematic irregularities in the process amounted to fraud, but the CSE's
 exhaustive, and closely monitored, vote tally verification process confirmed the final
 tallies. Nonetheless, at year's end the FSLN called the electoral process "legal but
 not legitimate."
 The 1995 reforms to the 1987 Constitution established a more even distribution
 of power and authority among the four coequal branches of government. The execu-
 tive branch is headed by the President and a cabinet appointed by the President,
 who is both head of state and head of government, as well as supreme chief of the
 defense and security forces. The Vice President has no constitutionally mandated
 duties or powers. Both the President and Vice President are elected to 5-year terms
 by direct popular vote, with the possibility of a runoff between the top two can-
 didates if one does not obtain at least 45 percent of the vote on the first ballot. The
 Constitution does not permit reelection. Early in 1996, the Supreme Court dismissed
 challenges against the constitutionality of the prohibitions contained in the 1995 re-
 forms against close relatives of an incumbent president, by blood or marriage, from
 running for election as president. Based on this and on constitutional prohibitions
 against candidates who had at any time given up their citizenship or were subject
 to legal prosecution, the CSE in July unanimously voted to disqualify 3 of the can-
 didates running for the presidency.
 A single-chamber National Assembly exercises legislative power. In October voters
 chose 93 members, including 20 deputies from nationwide lists, 70 from lists pre-
 sented in each of the 15 departments and 2 autonomous regions, and 3 defeated
 p residential candidates who obtained a minimum percentage of the national vote.
 Members elected concurrently with the President and Vice President in 1996 are to
 serve 5-year terms.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice against women, indigenous groups, or
 other minorities voting or participatin in  litics. Women served as President and
 Vice President, as well as president of the Supreme Electoral Council. Additionally,
 3 of 12 Supreme Court justices are women; women hold ministerial, vice ministerial,
 and other senior positions in government; and voters elected 9 women to the Na-
 tional Assembly in October. Two members of the National Assembly were Miskito
 Indians; indigenous people are represented in government at both the local and na-
 tional levels.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operated without government interference, with rare excep-
 tions. Major organizations included the Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights, the
 Permanent Commission for Human Eights, the Nicaraguan Association for Human
 Rights, the Episcopal Center for Development, and Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bra-
 vo a verification commission. The OAS's International Support and Verification Com-
 mission, which was established in 1990 to oversee the repatriation, disarmament,
 resettlement, and protection of the human rights of the members of the Nicaraguan
 Resistance, was scheduled to complete its mission in December, but its mandate was
 extended an additional 6 months. In June 1993, the OAS General Assembly ex-
 panded the mandate of the OAS/CIAV to monitor the human rights of, and provide
 assistance to, all those affected by the civil war, rather than just ex-RN, which had
 been its original task. OAS/CIAV and the Catholic Church helped create 45 "peace
 commissions" in the northern and central parts of the country, intended to give in-
 habitants of the area a means of dispute resolution, a means of monitoring human
 rights abuses, and a vehicle for expressing their concerns to government authorities.
 The CENIDH complained that then-National Police Commander Fernando
 Caldera obstructed its investigations into alleged human rights abuses by police offi-
 cers and severed all contact with the CENIDH for a short period during the year.
 
 
 The Ministry of Government's civil inspection office also made similar complaints
 regardin lak of police cooperativeness (see Section 1..).
 The ANPDH, th CENIDH, and the CPDH conducted numerous human rights
 workshops both at the police training academy and at various police headquarters
 throughout the country. The Catholic Church conducted human rights training for
 army units that were deployed to the northern and north-cntral regions in May to
 provide security to citizens and electoral workers during the June-July voter reg-
 istration. The military distributed human rights manuals to its personnel. Some
 military officers received internationally sponsored human rights training.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of birth, nationality, politi-
 cal beief, race, gender, laue, reigion, opinion, national origin, economic condi-
 tion, or social condition. In practice, however, the Government made little or no ef-
 fort to combat discrimination. Few, if any, discrimination suits or formal complaints
 were filed with government officials.
 Women.-The most prevalent violations of women's rights involved domestic and
 sexual violence, which were widespread and vastly underreported. The 528 reports
 of rape received by the National Police in 1993, the most recent year for which po-
 lice statistics are available, represented only a fraction of the rapes that occurred.
 According to human rights activists, women are often reluctant to report abuse or
 file charges, in part due to social stigmas attached to victims of rape. Local human
 rights groups reported that while police sometimes intervened to prevent injury in
 cases of domestic violence, they rarely charged perpetrators. Those cases that actu-
 ally reached the courts usually resulted in a not guilty verdict due to judicial inex-
 perience with, and lack of legal training related to, proper judicial handling of such
 violence.
 The police manage six "women's commissariats"-two in Managua, one in Esteli,
 one in Bluefields, one in Leon, and one in Masaya-supported in part by foreign as-
 sistance. The centers are annexes of local police stations and staffed by female police
 officers. They provide both social and legal help to women and mediate spousal con-
 flicts. Through May 1995, the centers recorded 1,816 cases of violence against fe-
 males, which included 705 cases of rape of girls from 4 to 15 years old. The National
 Assembly passed in August a new Law Against Aggression Against Women, de-
 signed to serve as the basis for prosecution of crimes against women.
 Although the Constitution provides for equality between the sexes, some authori-
 ties and society in general often did not respect this in practice. While discrimina-
 tion against women is technically illegal, reports of such discrimination were per-
 sistent throughout the year. Women are underrepresented in managementpositions
 in the private sector, and they constitute the majority of workers in the traditionally
 low-paid education, textile, and health service sectors.
 According to government statistics, women have equal or somewhat better access
 to education than men. Net enrollment for girls in the primary grades is 79 percent,
 compared with 76 percent for boys. At the secondary level, 33 percent of girls and
 26 percent ofbys are enrolled.
 Children.-Children 15 years of age and younger make up approximately 45 per-
 cent of the population. The Government expresses its commitment to children's
 human rights and welfare publicly but does not commit adequate funding levels for
 children's programs. Education is compulsory through the sixth grade, but this pro-
 vision is not enforced. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), using 1993
 statistics, estimated that 6,000 children have been abandoned by their families,
 some 2,000 live in orphanages, and approximately 1,800 are in foster homes. Every
 year the media carry stories of parents who abandoned or killed their children be-
 cause they were too poor or otherwise unable to take care of them. UNICEF re-
 ported that 11.3 percent of all children from 6 to 14 years of age were employed
 or looking for work in the informal or agricultural sectors. Many children work dur-
 ing annual harvest, and approximately 30,000 children work in the streets of Mana-
 gua as vendors or beggars. Child prostitution exists but is not common.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not legislated or otherwise man-
 dated accessibility for the disabled. However, through international NGO's, foreign
 governments, and the public health care system, the Government procured thou-
 sands of prostheses and other medical equipment for veterans and former resistance
 members. Through its clinics and hospitals, the Government provides care to war
 veterans and other disabled persons, but the quality of care is generally poor.
 Indigenous People.-Comprising about 6 percent of the country's population, the
 indigenous people live primarily in the Northern Autonomous Atlantic Region
 (RAAN) and Southern Autonomous Atlantic Region (RAAS), created in 1987 out of
 
 
 520
 the former department of Zelaya, which border the Caribbean sea and comprise 47
 percent of the national territory. According to the Government's May 1995 census
 (which undercounted the population by as much as 25 percent in some rural areas),
 the four major identifiable tribes are the Miskito (with approximately 140,000 mem-
 bers), the Sumo (15,000), the Garifuna (1,500), and the lama (1,000).
 The indigenous people of the RAAN (principally the Miskito and the Sumo) have
 their own political party, the Yatama, with representation in regional and municipal
 councils. In an effort to encourage indigenous participation in the October elections,
 the CSE distributed electoral and civic education materials in four languages, in-
 cluding Miskito and Sumo. The 1987 Autonomy Law requires the Government to
 consult the indigenous regarding the exploitation of their areas' resources. The
 central Government often made decisions without adequate departmental or com-
 munity onsultation. As in previous yers, some indigenous groups complained that
 central government authorities excluded the indigenous people of the Atlantic coast
 from meaningful participation in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions,
 and the allocation of natural resources. Critics of government policy cited official
 statistics that unemployment approached 70 percent in the RAS and was nearly
 90 percent in the RAAN, far above national averages.
 A 650-membr tribe in the RAAN, the Awas Tigni, sued the Government, claiming
 that its decision to award a long-term lumber concession to a Korean firm on a por-
 tion of the land it claims as its own was a violation of the American Convention
 on Human Rights. The Government has worked with indigenous groups in the past
 to reach compromises, but in this case countered that the area the Awas Tigni
 claim, 392,500 acres, was excessive for a tribe of its size. At the root of the dispute
 was the Government's failure to demarcate the land. Other indigenous grou s,
 squatters, ex-RN, and soldiers also have claims to the same area. At year's end, the
 courts had not yet ruled on the Awas Tigns'claim.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minoritis.-Most Nicaraguans are of mixed background,
 and ethnicity is not a barrier to political or economic success. However, various in-
 digenous groups from both the RAAN and the RAAS sometimes linked the Govern-
 ment's failure to expend resources in support of the Atlantic coast population to the
 existence of ethnic, racial, and religious (principally members of the Moravian
 church) minorities that predominate in that region.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of workers
 to organize voluntarily in unions, and this right was reaffirmed in the new Labor
 Code which entered into effect in November, replacing the antiquated 1944 code. Le-
 gally, all public and private sector workers, except those in the military and the po-
 lice, may form and join unions of their own choosing, and they exercise this right
 extensively. New unions must register with the Ministry of Labor and be granted
 legal status before they may engege in collective bargaining. The new code legally
 recognizes cooperatives, into which many transportation workers are organized.
 Slightly less than half of the formal sector work force, including agricultural work-
 ers, is unionized, according to labor leaders. Union membership continued to fall
 during the year. The unions are independent of the Government, although some are
 affiliated with political parties.
 The Constitution recognizes the right to strike. The Labor Code requires a major-
 ity vote of all the workers in an enterprise to call a strike. Workers may strike le-
 gally only after they have demonstrated that they have just cause to strike and have
 exhausted other methods of dispute resolution, including mediation by the Ministry
 of Labor and compulsory arbitration. The new Labor Code streamlines these proce-
 dures, often previously ignored because they were expensive and cumbersome.
 Union leaders reported being satisfied with the reformed mechanism for requesting
 legal authorization to strike. The Labor Code prohibits retribution against strikers
 and union leaders for legal strikes. However, this protection may be withdrawn in
 the case of an illegal strike. The new code provides protected status to union lead-
 ers, requiring that companies receive permission from the Labor Ministry after hav-
 ing shown just cause in order to fire union executive board members. Such protec-
 tion is limited to nine individuals per union.
 Unions freely form or join federations or confederations and affiliate with and par-
 ticipate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to bargain collectively, and this right was reaffirmed in the new Labor
 Code. The Government generally sought to foster resolution of pressing labor con-
 flicts (usually in the public sector) through informal negotiations rather than
 through formal administrative or judicial processes. According to the reformed code,
 
 
 521
 
 companies engaged in disputes with employees must negotiate with the employees'
 union if the employees have thus organized themselves.
 Eighteen firms, employing some 10,000 workers, operate in the government-run
 export processing zone (EPZ), and a private EPZ contains another firm with 500 em-
 ployees. Three additional zones were authorized but had not opened by year's end.
 While EPZ officials maintain that labor laws are more strictly enforced in the EPZ
 than elsewhere, Managua-based representatives of the American Institute for Free
 Labor Development and union representatives have long maintained that the Labor
 Ministry is doing a poor job of enforcing the Labor Code in the EPZ's. Of the 19
 EPZ enterprises, only 2 are unionized. EPZ officials claimed that, due to memories
 of the corrupt and ineffective unions of the 1980's, workers in the other 17 EPZ en-
 terprises simply have no interest in unionizing. They also claim that wages and
 working conditions in EPZ enterprises are better than the national average.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there is no evidence that it is practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits child
 labor that can afect normal childhood development or interfere with the obligatory
 school year. The new Labor Code raised the age at which children may begin work-
 ing with parental permission from 12 to 14 years. Parental permission to work is
 also required for 15- and 16-year-alds. The law limits the workday for such children
 to 6 hours and prohibits night work. However, because of the economic needs of
 many families and lack of effective government enforcement mechanisms, child
 labor rules are rarely enforced except in the small, modern sector of the economy.
 A UNICEF study, citing 1993 statistics, estimated that some 108,000 children under
 the age of 15 are involved in some sort of labor in the formal and informal sectors
 of the economy. The same report estimated that 72,000 children under the age of
 15 help with planting and harvesting crops such as coffee, cotton, bananas, tobacco,
 and rice. Children the age of 10 or older often worked for less than $1.00 per day
 on the same banana plantations and coffee plantations as their parents. Many small
 children work in the streets of Managua hawking merchandise, cleaning automobile
 windows, or begging. Working children averaged a 47-hour workweek, according to
 UNICEF.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A 1991 executive branch decree established
 minimum wage rates, but they have not been adjusted for inflation since then. As
 a result, the purchasing power of the minimum wage has fallen some 50 percent
 over the past 5 years. Minimum wages vary by sector. Examples of monthly rates
 are: Agriculture, $17.44 (150 cordobas); construction, $22.09 (190 cordobas~ govern-
 ment, $27.21 (234 cordobas); manufacturing, $29.07 (250 cordobas); and banking,
 $34.88 (300 cordobas). The minimum wage falls far below government estimates of
 what an urban family must spend each month for a basic basket of goods ($140.70,
 or 1,210 cordobas). In reality, the vast majority of urban workers earn well above
 the minimum rates.
 The new Labor Code maintains the constitutionally mandated 8-hour workday;
 the standard legal workweek is a maximum of 48 hours, with 1 day of rest weekly.
 The new code establishes that severance pay shall be from 1 to 5 months' duration,
 depending on the duration of employment and the circumstances of firing. It also
 establishes an obligation of an employer to provide housing to employees who are
 temprarily assigued to areas beyond commuting distance. The new Labor Code
 seeks to bring the country into compliance with international standards and norms
 of workplacehygiene and safety, but the Ministry of Labor's office of hygiene and
 occupational security lacks adequate staff and resources to enforce these provisions.
 The new code gives workers the right to remove themselves from dangerous work-
 place situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
