 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, governed by President
 Violeta Barrios de Chamorro and a National Assembly-elected in
 a free and fair election in 1990.' The President has given the
 lead for the direction of the Government to her son-in-law,
 Antonio Lacayo, the Minister of the Presidency. The National
 Opposition Union (UNO), a 14-party coalition which supported
 Chamorro's presidential bid, holds a solid majority in the
 National Assembly. The Sandinista Front for National
 Liberation (FSLN), which was defeated in the 1990 elections,
 retains minority representation in the legislature. Sandinista
 justices outnumber Chamorro appointees five to four on the
 nine-member Supreme Court, but neither group has the six-vote
 majority necessary to decide cases. Few cases of human rights
 violations were brought before the courts during the year.
 The Ministry of Government and the President, acting as her own
 Defense Minister, are the civilian authorities legally
 responsible for overseeing the National Police and Sandinista
 People's Army (EPS). In practice, however, Nicaragua's
 security forces continued to be led by Sandinista appointees
 who operated with substantial autonomy. Police and military
 officials were repeatedly named in human rights violations
 committed during the year. The Ministry of Government took
 several positive steps in 1991 in response to these reports,
 establishing the Civil Inspection Unit to investigate police
 wrongdoing, the National Penitentiary Commission to review
 prison conditions, and the Human Rights Directorate to respond
 to outside inquiries about human rights. The army took no
 similar steps in response to complaints of human rights abuse
 in its area of jurisdiction.
 Nicaragua continued efforts to rebuild its predominantly
 agricultural economy in 1991. Per capita income was estimated
 at less than $300 per year in a 1991 report of the
 International Monetary Fund. In March the Government
 implemented a structural adjustment program which cut inflation
 to about 1 percent per r onth and ended the practice of weekly
 currency devaluations.
 Major human rights problems in 1991 included: continued
 extrajudicial killings, mistreatment of detainees, and other
 abuses by security forces; violence by paramilitary bands in
 rural areas; the backlogged and often partisan judicial system;
 and the Government's continuing failure to investigate and
 prosecute those responsible for human rights abuses.
 Nongovernmental human rights groups criticized the Government's
 failure to investigate past abuses. In a report on Nicaragua
 released in February 1991, the Inter-American Commission on
 Human Rights (IACHR) stated that "particular mention should be
 made of the biased behavior of the security forces, which have
 become a'state within a state, acting in concert with one
 particular political party and to the detriment of the civilian
 authority of the democratically elected, constitutional
 Government."
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Politically motivated violence was commonplace in 1991. The
 civil war, which formally concluded in June 1990 with the
 
 
 679
 NICARAGUA
 demobilization of the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN), left
 Nicaraguan society both politically polarized and heavily
 armed. Prior to leaving office after their electoral defeat,
 the Sandinistas distributed weapons to many of their
 supporters; some members of the RN also cached supplies of arms
 before demobilizing. In September 1991, Minister of Government
 Carlos Hurtado named a bipartisan disarmament commission to
 develop a strategy for collecting the 35,000 to 100,000 weapons
 estimated to be in civilian hands.
 There were numerous credible reports that demobilized RN
 combatants were killed by the police, army, or Sandinista
 militants during the year. In virtually all cases, there were
 no investigations or prosecutions of the perpetrators of these
 killings. According to the International Support and
 Verification Commission (CIAV) of the Organization of American
 States, 45 former RN combatants were killed during the first 10
 months of the year; in 1990, 36 former combatants were killed
 in the six months following their formal demobilization on June
 27. CIAV records attributed 45 of these killings to FSLN
 supporters and 21 to the police, army, or former state security
 officers. CIAV provided details of the homicides and other
 alleged human rights abuses to the Ministry of Government. As
 of October 31, CIAV had received full or partial-respbnses to
 13 of the 73 homicide cases it reported.
 Local human rights monitors charged that security forces
 continued to be staffed by many former members of the General
 Directorate of State Security (DGSE), which was cited for
 repeated human rights violations under the Sandinista
 government. While most ex-DGSE officers assumed positions in
 the military, some in rural areas became police officers. In
 December the Ministry of Government confirmed that several
 former DGSE officers had been removed from their positions.
 Much of the rural violence in 1991 involved land disputes. In
 one instance, documented by local and international'human
 rights monitors, some 200 unarmed peasants approached the
 Sandinista cooperative Corinto Finca-on February 28 to claim a
 share of its land. Cooperative members opened fire, killing 5
 and wounding 11. Five cooperative members were charged by
 police as a result of the incident. According to the
 independent Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH),
 their cases were subsequently dismissed when a court determined
 that some statements had been obtained improperly from the
 accused. In another case, a band of armed men, identified in
 press reports as demobilized RN combatants, attacked the Carlos
 Fonseca Amador cooperative near the town of Cafen. The
 attackers shot three youths.and burned buildings at the
 cooperative before withdrawing. In October the pro-Sandinista
 Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights (CENIDH) reported that 56
 FSLN militants had been killed since Chamorro took office and
 attributed many of these deaths to demobilized RN combatants
 who had rearmed.
 In mid-1991, some demobilized RN combatants began to rearm in
 small groups. These "recontras" conducted several armed
 attacks to press demands that the Government comply with
 promises made to the RN at the time of demobilization. In
 making these demands, the recontras echoed calls by other
 demobilized RN members for improved security guarantees in the
 face of continued harassment by the police, military, and armed
 Sandinista militants, and they also urged the Government to
 keep its promise to provide farmland to former combatants. Two
 of the most prominent recontra leaders, Jose Angel Moran (known
 
 
 680
 NICARAGUA
 as "El Indomable") and Encarnacion Valdivia ("Tigrillo"),
 rearmed after their homes were attacked by Sandinista
 militants. Moran's pregnant wife was killed in the attack on
 his home.
 On July 21, a band of recontras attacked and briefly occupied
 the Centroamerica hydroelectric power facility in Matagalpa
 Department, killing two and kidnaping two others. On July 25,
 a band of recontras led by Moran attacked the police station in
 the town of Quilali in Nueva Segovia and in the ensuing
 violence two police officers and two recontras were killed.
 Moran was also accused in the'June 6 death of police Captain
 Luis Meza and his secretary, who were ambushed on the road from
 Jinoteca to San Rafael del Norte. Based on the results of a
 police investigation, a local judge ordered Moran's arrest;
 Moran denied responsibility for the deaths and called for a
 full investigation of the incident.
 Sandinistas also formed armed bands known as "recompas,"
 reportedly composed largely of retired members of the EPS. On
 August 21, a mine exploded beneath a truck traveling on the
 road from El Cua to Pita del Carmen in Jinotega Department,
 killing 16, including 7 recontras. Although police initially
 reported that the attack was the work of a rival band of
 recontras, a CIAV team concluded that the mine was not the work
 of recontras. An ANPDH investigation pointed to EPS
 involvement in the mining, while other credible sources
 ascribed the attack to the recompas. In a November 28
 incident, demobilized ex-RN member Mario Vivas Maldonado was
 kidnaped and murdered while accompanying a disabled comrade
 being transported for medical treatment in a clearly marked
 CIAV vehicle. Also kidnaped and robbed in the incident were
 Vivas' wife, the disabled ex-RN member, and the female driver
 of the vehicle. While the victims' belongings were recovered
 by the EPS, those responsible were not apprehended.
 On February 16, former RN commander Enrique Bermudez was
 assassinated in front of Managua's Intercontinental Hotel. A
 police investigation had not identified any suspects in the
 murder as of the end of the year. A special commission named
 by President Chamorro to monitor the investigation criticized
 police for: failing to cordon off the crime scene immediately
 following the shooting and not listing all witnesses present;
 reporting initially that no bullet had been found at the scene,
 then later producing one; discrepancies in the forensic reports
 with respect to the trajectory of the bullet through the body;
 and failure to mention in the police report all evidence
 photographed at the scene. In April the Government requested
 assistance from the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
 in providing answers to four specific questions raised by
 Nicaraguan investigators. The FBI responded to the specific
 requests, providing information from its files and arranging
 the exhumation and autopsy of Bermudez' remains in Miami. In
 contrast to forensic medical examinations performed in Managua,
 the FBI autopsy revealed that Bermudez was killed by two 7.62
 millimeter bullets, rather than a single shot. In November the
 special presidential commission announced its dissolution,
 citing the lack of progress in the Nicaraguan police
 investigation.
 A police investigation widely thought to be lacking credibility
 revealed no suspects in the October 28, 1990, murder of Jean
 Paul Genie. Genie was killed by automatic weapons fire while
 driving on Managua's Masaya highway; several witnesses placed
 General Humberto Ortega's motorcade at the scene of the
 
 
 681
 NICARAGUA
 murder. A Managua district judge reinterviewed key witnesses
 and examined physical evidence in the case, but by year's end
 had not named any suspects. A special commission composed of
 National Assembly deputies was formed to monitor the Genie
 investigation. The Commission invited a team of Venezuelan
 criminal investigators to review the Genie case in an effort to
 identify likely suspects. The Venezuelan team issued a report
 August 27 naming General Ortega's bodyguards as the prime
 suspects.
 Those responsible for major incidents of political and
 extrajudicial killing dating from 1990 had not been brought to
 justice by the end of 1991. Military courts acquitted members
 of the security forces charged in connection with violent
 incidents in Las Sabanas, August 13, 19L90; Yolaina, October 29,
 1990; Nueva Guinea, November 2, 1990; and Jalapa, December'16,
 1990. Human rights monitors had charged the police and
 military with excessive use of force in each of these cases.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known'cases of abduction by official forces
 during the year. However, there were several cases in which
 recontras kidnaped members of the police or army and later
 killed them. Recontras kidnaped three former DGSE officers in
 El Sarayal July 17; the three are still missing and believed to
 be dead.
 Local human rights groups estimated that as many as 1,000
 persons remain unaccounted for since the end'of the war. As in
 1990, the continuing discovery of clandestine graves dating
 from the Sandinista era (1979-90) provided information as to
 the whereabouts of some of the disappeared. Among such
 discoveries in 1991 were clandestine graves at Correntada Larga
 in the South Atlantic Coast region and at two sites in Esteli,
 Department. At Correntada Larga, witnesses reported that over
 a 2-week period in 1981 DGSE officers tortured 37 peasants in a
 farmhouse before killing a total of 67 in the surrounding
 area. In April family members found at least 35 sets of
 remains, including some buried in prison uniforms or in garbage
 bags, at a common grave located on a military base near
 Bluefields in the South Atlantic Coast region. According to
 credible reports, six of these victims were executed by
 Sandinista troops in 1985 following a clash with RN
 combatants. Although the diggers were continuing to uncover
 additional sets of remains, officials of the military justice
 system closed the site to further excavation.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were numerous credible reports during the year of
 beatings and other physical mistreatment of persons detained by
 the police, often to obtain confessions from detainees. The
 Government generally failed to investigate and prosecute those
 responsible for cases of mistreatment. For example, ANPDH
 reported that police officers in a Managua substation beat one
 detainee at the time of capture and threatened to detain his
 wife and children unless he signed a confession.
 During 1991 human rights groups visited most of the facilities
 in the Nicaraguan penitentiary system. The physical abuse
 common in police detention centers was rare in the prisons.
 ANPDH reported isolated cases of beatings and occasional use of
 solitary confinement as punishment. In general, however, human
 
 
 682
 NICARAGUA
 rights monitors indicated that mistreatment of prisoners
 typically took the form of inadequate food and medical
 attention.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Police Functions Law establishes procedures for the arrest
 of criminal suspects. The law was criticized by local human
 rights groups in 1991 for providing inadequate judicial
 oversight of police arrests. The law requires police to obtain
 a warrant prior to detaining a suspect, but it is issued by a
 police official rather than a judge. After detaining a
 suspect, police are required by the law to notify family
 members of the detainee's whereabouts, but in practice this is
 rarely done. Detainees do not have the right to an attorney
 until they have been formally charged with a crime.
 Arbitrary arrest and detention by the police were common
 practices in 1991. Under the terms of the Police Functions
 Law, a suspect may be detained for up to 9 days before he is
 brought before a judge. If released before the 9-day deadline,
 the police are not required to justify the detention. Human
 rights monitors note that the nine-day period contravenes the
 constitutional requirement that a detainee appear before a
 competent judicial authority within 3 days of detention. The
 National Assembly specified the 3-day deadline in the Reform
 Law of Penal Procedures, passed on March 8. The Assembly did
 not amend the Police Functions Law, however, and local human
 rights groups reported that detainees continued routinely to be
 held without charge for more than the three days allowed by the
 Constitution. The Civil Inspection Unit of the Ministry of
 Government, which is responsible for monitoring and correcting
 police wrongdoing, uncovered more than 50 cases of illegal
 detention in its first full quarter of operation (March through
 June.) In some cases, the unit obtained the release of the
 detainees after intervening with police.
 Although the Constitution provides that detainees are to
 receive access to legal counsel once they have been charged
 with a crime; in practice police do not act to protect this
 right. In visits to Managua police detention facilities in
 April, CENIDH investigators found that only 32 percent of
 detainees had been informed of their right to counsel. The
 Reform Law of Penal Procedures, approved by the National
 Assembly in March, provides for the release of accused
 criminals on bail. Previously, detainees were permitted to
 remain at liberty prior to trial only for compelling personal,
 reasons, such as ill health. CENIDH opposed the release of
 prisoners on bail as favoring the rich at the expense of the
 poor, but most human rights monitors applauded the reform.
 Although passed by the National Assembly in March and
 promulgated in July, the Reform Law had not been implemented at
 year's end. After the judiciary claimed it lacked the
 resources to enact the reforms, the National Assembly postponed
 implementation of the new law until February 1992.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system comprises both military and civilian
 courts. The military court is responsible for investigating,
 prosecuting, and trying crimes committed by or against members
 of the armed forces or police. Proceedings of the military
 courts are secret but may be released to the public if the army
 authorities so choose. Military courts often fail to
 investigate or try cases against members of the military. Even
 
 
 683
 NICARAGUA
 when soldiers are convicted, they either receive light
 sentences or the sentences are not enforced.
 The accused has the right to legal counsel; if he cannot afford
 his own attorney, he is represented by a public defender named
 by the presiding judge. Defendants are presumed innocent
 unless proven guilty. Those convicted.liave the right of
 appeal. The Constitution provides for the right to a 'peedy
 trial but, in practice, many persons arrested and held without
 bail spend months in jail before appearing in court. The
 Permanent Commission for Human Rights (CPDH) estimates that one
 third of all those incarcerated in the prison system have been
 awaiting trial for between three months and two years.
 The 1991 Reform Law of Penal'Procedures, which had not been
 implemented by year's end,.modifies some court'procedures. It
 reestablishes trial by jury and allows individual citizens to
 denounce criminal activities directly to a judge. Previously,
 all.accusations of criminal wrongdoing were processed first by
 the police, who'determined whether the case merited further
 action. The Reform Law was approved unanimously by the
 National Assembly and without opposition from the judiciary.
 Subsequently, however, several members of the Supreme Court
 criticized its provisions as too costly and administratively'
 unwieldy for the judiciary to implement at.current funding
 levels, and implementation waspostponed until February'1992.
 The judiciary in Nicaragua continues to be dominated by
 Sandinista appointees. The Supreme Court, which is responsible
 for naming lower court judges, reports that approximately
 one-third of the Sandinista government's judicial appointees
 have been removed or transferred. Critics in the Nicaraguan
 Bar Association and human rights monitors argue that the
 Sandinistas' partisan influence on the courts did not
 appreciably diminish in 1991 since the dismissals were few and
 the transfers allowed Sandinista judges to remain in the
 judicial system, albeit in new jobs. Sandinista appointees'to
 the nine-member Supreme Court outnumber Chamorro appointees
 five to four, but neither group alone has the six votes needed
 to decide cases.
 On December 22, President Chamorro declared an amnesty for "all
 political and related common crimes" committed since May 10,
 1990. This decree extended the amnesty granted in 1990 to
 those responsible for prior political crimes. Some human
 rights monitors criticized this decree as a setback to their'
 efforts to bring known human rights abusers to justice.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family. Home, or
 Correspondence
 There were numerous credible reports of police and army units
 entering homes or businesses without judicial authorization.
 Often this forced entry was conducted as part of a search for
 contraband weapons. Political opponents of the Sandinistas
 were the-principal targets of forced entry onto their property,
 as well as other intimidation tactics. On the night of June
 18, following National Assembly action on a bill opposed by the
 Sandinista deputies, the private homes of prominent UNO
 officials in several cities were bombed in coordinated
 attacks. Durihg the year, ANPDH also received reports that
 recontra combatants had forced their way into homes and small
 stores to commandeer boots, food, and other supplies.
 
 
 684
 NICARAGUA
 Vocal opponents of the Sandinistas, including some independent
 human rights groups, reported that their telephones were tapped
 and that their mail often showed signs of tampering.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Fieedom of Speech and Press
 Diverse viewpoints were freely and openly discussed in public
 discourse, in print and broadcast media, and in academic
 circles. There are two television stations, one owned and
 operated by the Government, and one operated by a private
 company which leased the station from the State. The
 government station broadcasts two news programs nightly, one
 produc&d by its own news team and a second by the Sandinista
 opposition, and also provides extensive coverage of National
 Assembly debate. In 1990 licenses were granted to several
 other television production companies. As of the end of 1991,
 none had begun broadcasting, apparently for lack of financing
 and programming.
 Pro-Sandinista mobs attacked sevdral pro-UNO radio stations
 during the year. In late June, supporters of the
 pro-SandinistaFront for Popular'Struggle occupied the
 facilities of Radio Corporacion in'Managua, 'Radio Dario in
 Leon, Radio San Cristobal in Chinandega, and La Voz de
 Matagalpa in Matagalpa, forcing their broadcasts off the air.
 Several other stations closed down under threats of attack.
 All of the occupied stations were subsequently vacated
 peacefully,- and no arrests were made in connection with the
 takeovers. During a 2-day rampage on November 9 and 10,
 Sandinista mobs again damaged the studios of Radio Corporacion
 and Radio Dario and the transmitter of Radio San Cristobal.
 Although Sandinista appointees continued to predominate among
 faculty and administrators in the Nicaraguan educational
 system, alternative viewpoints were increasingly expressed in
 the academic community.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Numerous marches and demonstrations were held throughout the
 year by groups representing a range of political views.
 Demonstrators must obtain permission for a march after
 registering its planned size and location with police. This
 permission is routinely granted. Opposition and independent
 associations of all sorts coexisted in Nicaragua throughout
 1991. Private associations of any kind may be formed without
 restrictions but do not have legal status until-they receive
 this designation from the National Assembly. Such legal
 recognition is routinely conferred.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. Although
 Nicaragua is at least 80 percent Roman Catholic, other
 religious groups practice without hindrance. Protestant
 denominations proselytize actively and now constitute as much
 as 20 percent of the population. Missionaries and church
 workers freely enter the country to engage in religious
 activities as well as development assistance.
 
 
 685
 NICARAGUA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no government restrictions on movement within or from
 Nicaragua.
 Nearly 200,000 former RN combatants, their families, and other
 refugees have been repatriated to Nicaragua since
 demobilization in June 1990. Their return to Nicaragua was
 accomplished without incident'under the supervision of CIAV and
 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Their
 reintegration into the Nicaraguan society and economy, however,
 has been more problematic, witn many repatriates still awaiting
 land to farm and adequate protection of their physical security
 (see Section l.a.).
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government.
 In the February 1990 election, Nicaraguans exercised the right
 to change their government peacefully. The election, contested'
 by the 14-party UNO coalition, the FSLN, and several smaller
 parties, was declared free and fair by international observers.
 Violeta Chamorro won the Presidency, and UNO obtained a
 majority of seats in the National Assembly. The next elections
 for the Presidency, Assembly, and municipal councils are
 scheduled for 1996.
 The National Assembly was characterized by free-flowing and at
 times acrimonious debate throughout the year. Fifty-two of the
 92 Assembly seats are held by parties of the UNO coalition, and
 39 by the Sandinistas. The Government continued the National
 Dialog in 1991, encouraging the participation of progovernment
 as well as opposition groups. Through this process, begun in
 1990, the Government sought to forge a broad consensus on
 social and economic policy.
 On several occasions during the year, Sandinista-directed mobs
 violently attacked elected representlatives. One example of
 such violence occurred on June 18, following Assembly action to
 return to their former owners properties that had been
 confiscated by the Sandinista government and distributed to its
 partisans. Sandinista mobs forced their way into the offices
 of elected mayors in cities throughout the country, including
 Managua, Masaya, Granada, and Matagalpa. In Managua, the mobs
 struck one councilman in the head with a pipe and threatened
 other city employees with firearms. Small bombs exploded at
 the homes or offices of prominent UNO politicians and the
 presidents of the National Conservative Party and the
 Independent Liberal Party. On November 9, following an
 explosion- at the tomb of FSLN founder Carlos Fonseca,
 Sandinista mobs burned and looted the offices of the mayor of
 Managua, among other violent acts. Police failed to intercede
 to stop the violence.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government generally permitted local and international
 human rights monitors to operate freely in Nicaragua in 1991.
 There were three local human rights orginzations the Nicaraguan
 Center for Human Rights (CENIDH), the Permanent Commission for
 Human Rights (CPDH), and the Nicaraguan Association for Human
 Rights (ANPDH). CENIDH is a pro-Saridinista monitor, whose
 
 
 686
 NICARAGUA
 director is a member of the FSLN Assembly, the party's supreme
 standing body. The CPDH and the ANPDH are not affiliated with
 any party but are known for their active criticism of abuses
 committed under the Sandinista government. The CPDH was
 founded during the later Somoza years and was staunchly
 critical of that regime. It continued to function after the
 revolution despite Sandinista harassment. ANPDH was founded in
 1986 to train the Nicaraguan Resistance in acceptable human
 rights practices and to investigate reports of abuse. Both
 groups have received funding from U.S. government sources or
 private donors. In May the National Assembly voted to disband
 the National Cormission for the Protection and Promotion of
 Human Rights (CNPPDH), a government-funded organization
 established by the Sandinistas to defend their human rights
 record.
 The Ministry of Government, which is responsible for the police
 and the prison system, took several steps in 1991 to identify
 and correct human rights abuses. In January it named Ulises
 Somarriba to head the Ministry's newly created Civil Inspection
 Unit, charged with investigating complaints of human rights
 violations or abuse of authority by Ministry employees.
 Somarriba had regular contact with local human-rights monitors
 throughout 1991. The Ministry named local human rights
 monitors and church representatives to the National
 Penitentiary Commission and permitted access to police and
 prison facilities (see Section l.c.). In July it named Juan
 Manuel Siero to head a new Human Rights Directorate charged
 with responding to nongovernmental organizations concerned with
 human rights
 International human rights organizations also were active in
 Nicaragua in 1991. The IAHRC reported in February on
 conditions in Nicaragua. A Commission of Inquiry from the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) .issued a report in
 response to complaints of worker rights abuses under the
 Sandinista government. Human rights c6nditions of the
 demobilized RN combatants were monitored by CIAV's Office of
 Follow-up and Verification of Rights and Guarantees, and by the
 verification network of Cardinal Miguel Obakdo y Bravo.
 Witness for Peace, a U.S.-based ecumenical group founded-to
 document Resistance abuses during the war, maintained an office
 in Managua. Americas Watch made frequent visits from its San
 Salvador office and issued a July report on human rights
 conditions in Nicaragua.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The CQnstitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of
 "birth, nationality, political belief, race, gender, language,
 religion, opinion, national origin, economic position, or
 social condition." Most Nicaraguans are of mixed mestizo
 background, and skin color does not appear to be a barrier to
 political or economic success. Women continued to suffer de
 facto discrimination in the male-dominated culture prevalent in
 some sectors although this did not prevent women from occupying
 senior positions in government, the trade union movement, and
 social organizations. Women are underrepresented in management
 positions in the private sector and form the majority of
 workers in the traditionally low-paid education, textile, and -
 health services sectors.
 Violence against women, including rape and wife beating, occurs
 in Nicaragua. -Because victims often are reluctant to publicize
 
 
 687
 NICARAGUA
 their charges, it is likely that such abuse is significantly
 underreported. Local human rights groups report that police
 sometimes intervene to prevent injury in cases of domestic
 violence, but that the perpetrators are rarely charged or tried
 for their acts. The Ixchen Centers and the Luisa Amanda
 Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women, a Sandinista mass
 organization, provided medical and psychological counseling to
 women, as well as legal advice in divorce cases and to victims
 of rape and other violence.
 The Government has been criticized for its failure to expend
 resources in support of the Atlantic Coast population, which is
 composed largely of ethnic/racial and religious minorities.
 Successive central governments in Managua have traditionally
 neglected the minorities on the Atlantic coast, extracting
 natural resources while expending a disproportionately small
 amount of state funds in the region.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right.of Association
 All workers, except the military and the police, are entitled
 to form and join unions of their own choosing, and they
 exercise this right extensively. New unions must register with
 the Ministry of Labor and be granted legal status before they
 may engage in collective bargaining with management. Some
 labor groups report occasional delays in obtaining legal
 status. Nearly half of Nicaragua's work force, including
 agricultural workers, is unionized, according to labor leaders.
 Workers also freely exercise their right to strike. Under the
 terms of the LaborCode, workers may strike legally only after
 they have exhausted other methods of dispute resolution,
 including mediation by the Ministry of Labor. There were
 numerous strikes in Nicaragua in 1991, mostly in the public
 sector. Although most of the strikes did not follow Labor Code
 requirements, the Government generally did not declare the
 strikes illegal or punish workers who participated. One
 exception was a strike at the Corona cooking oil factory in
 July. The Ministry of Labor declared the strike illegal and
 authorized Corona management to dismiss the strikers. The
 Government also called in police to remove strikers from
 customs facilities in March and from Managua's Convention
 Center in April. The Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights
 charged police with excessive use of force in these incidents.
 During the first five months of 1991, Sandinista public sector
 unions staged a series of strikes and lockouts in hospitals,
 customs depots, banks, schools, and other government offices.
 Sandinista workers typically did not have majority worker
 support for the work stoppages but used intimidation and
 threats of violence to prevent other employees from entering
 the workplace. With these strikes, Sandinista-led workers
 sought not only increased economic benefits but also to
 challenge the Chamorro Government politically.
 Broad strike actions were threatened by Sandinista unions
 following introduction of the Government's economic structural
 adjustment program on March 3, but this threat subsided when
 the two sides concluded a "labor truce" on March 18. Under the
 terms of this agreement, the Government increased salaries for
 health and education workers and made a commitment to
 compensate other workers for any loss of purchasing power as a
 result of its adjustment program.
 
 
 688
 NICARAGUA
 On November 1, armed Sandinista workers occupying the German
 Pomares sugar mill opened fire on non-Sandinista employees who
 arrived to begin work on the first day of the sugar cane
 harvest. One non-Sandinista workbr, Obdulio Herrera, was
 killed and another wounded. An independent union leader had
 previously urged-police protection for the independent workers,
 but none was provided. Polide arrested two Sandinista
 unionists but later released them without charge. Facing
 Sandinista death threats, independent union leaders were forced
 to resign from the mill, and the independent union was broken.
 Unions may freely form or join federations or confederations
 and affiliate with international bodies.
 In February a Commission of Inquiry of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) issued a report in response to a 1987
 complaint that the then-Sandinista government had violated
 various ILO conventions. The report concluded that although
 worker rights violations had occurred previously, most had been
 corrected by the time the Commission conducted its site visits
 in 1990. The Commissioners concurred with complainants'
 charges that during the Sandinista regime there was a failure
 to respect basic civil liberties related t6 the exercise of
 trade union rights. They concluded that labor laws in effect
 under the Sandinistas were used to establish a system of trade
 union monopoly at variance with ILO conventions. In its
 recommendations to the Chamorro Government, the Commission
 urged the Ministry of Labor to improve mechanisms for effective
 tripartite consultations and to review requirements that
 participants in collective bargaining first obtain legal
 status. The ILO Governing Body accepted the Commission's
 report and agreed to review Nicaragua's progress in
 implementing the recommendations at its June 1992 meeting.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Constitution provides for the right to bargain
 collectively. The Chamorro Government's labor negotiations in
 1991 continued primarily to be ad hoc efforts to resolve
 pressing labor conflicts, including these in the health and
 education sectors. Collective bargaining is not common in the
 private sector, due to unfavorable economic conditions and
 continued unfamiliarity with the practice following 10 years of
 central economic planning.
 In mid-1991 the Government drafted a decree specifying
 conditions for establishing export processing zones. One
 export zone, containing fewer than five firms, was established
 during the year. The firms receive tax concessions but operate
 nnder the same labor laws in effect for other Nicaraguan
 companies.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution provides that "all Nicaraguans have a right to
 choose and exercise freely their profession or trade and choose
 their place of work." No charges that the practice of forced
 or compulsory labor exists in Nicaragua were made in 1991.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 14 legally are not permitted to
 work. The Constitution prohibits "child labor that can affect
 normal childhood development or interference with the
 obligatory school year." The child labor law is generally
 
 
 .689
 NICARAGUA
 observed in the small modern sector of the economy, but the
 Ministry of Labor rarely enforces it, and young street vendors
 ply their trade in Managua and children frequently work on
 family farms at an earlier age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 In May the National Assembly passed legislation establishing a
 tripartite commission responsible for setting a minimum wage at
 regular intervals. In August, over the objections of worker
 representatives, the government and employer delegates voted to
 establish sectoral minimum wages; the levels of their minimum
 wages were not sufficient to provide a decent standard of
 living for a worker and family. The Ministry of Labor's
 inspection department, which is responsible for enforcing the
 law, had received few complaints of noncompliance as of year's
 end.
 The Constitution specifies an eight-hour workday in a workweek
 of 48 hours with one day of rest. Health and safety standards
 also are provided for by the Constitution. The Ministry of
 Labor's Office of Hygiene and Occupational Security is
 responsible for verifying compliance witk health and safety
 standards. Due in part to the deployment of too few inspectors
 and other resources, few on-site inspections occurred during
 1991.
 
 
 690
