 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, with executive, legislative, judicial, and
 electoral branches of government. President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, who was
 elected in a free and fair election in 1990 as the candidate of the 14-party National
 Opposition Union (UNO), governs through an appointed Cabinet; she has delegated
 comprehensive executive authority to her Presidency Minister and son-in-law, Anto-
 nio Lacayo. UNO, which broke with the President over her policy of governing with
 the assistance of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), declared itself
 in opposition to the Government and boycotted votes in the National Assembly for
 most of the year. During 1993 the President continued to rule through executive de-
 crees with the force of law, depending on the FSLN bloc and nine former UNO dep-
 uties (the "center group') to support her few legislative proposals. In December
 three additional UNO parties decided to return to the Assembly, reducing the origi-
 nal UNO bloc to seven parties.
 The President (as nominal Minister of Defense) and the Ministry of Government
 are legally responsible for overseeing the Sandinista Popular Army (EPS) and the
 National Police, respectively. In practice, however, Nicaragua's security forces con-
 tinued to be led by Sandinista officers who operated with substantial institutional
 and legal autonomy; EPS Commanding General Humberto Ortega and his general
 staff openly resisted presidential attempts to assert civilian control over the EPS.
 With the deaths of nine former members of the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN) attrib-
 utable to the police and the EPS, the number of serious human rights violations
 committed by the state security forces declined slightly in 1993, but most of these
 violations went unpunished.
 Nicaragua's efforts to reactivate its predominantly agricultural economy were un-
 successful, as economic growth remained stagnant. The country's balance of pay-
 ments position was precarious; the investment climate, unsettled. The estimated
 rate of open unemployment was 20 percent, while total unemployment and
 underemployment approached 50 percent. Nicaragua's estimated per capita income
 of $400 per year was one of the lowest in the Western Hemisphere. Inflation, which
 by 1992 had been slashed to under 4 percent, increased to about 20 percent during
 
 
 504
 1993; the purchasing power of salaried workers dropped 15 percent in the first half
 of 1993. Although the Government's fiscal deficit has been cut by 80 percent since
 1990, Nicaragua remained heavily dependent on foreign aid.
 Major persistent human rights problems included: continued political kidnapings
 and murders; extrajudicial killings, torture, mistreatment of detainees, and other
 abuses by security forces; and violence by paramilitary bands in rural areas. The
 Government's continuing failure to prosecute and punish those responsible for
 human rights abuses and the backlogged and often partisan judicial system contrib-
 uted to the impunity with which human rights violations occurred. The Government
 was reluctant to challenge the police and the EPS over human rights violations. Ad-
 ditionally, while the Government's repeated amnesties for those guilty of "political
 crimes" and related common crimes, including murder, were intended to promote
 national reconciliation, they arguably lessened restraints on those inclined to com-
 mit human rights abuses. There were continued problems with violence against
 women (including rape and wife beating).
 An Office of Human Rights within the Attorney General's office, created in 1992,
 remained unstaffed. A Tripartite Commission on political violence, composed of the
 civilian Government, the Catholic Church, and the Organization of American States'
 International Support and Verification Commission (OAS/CIAV), sent the President
 3 reports covering 50 murder cases; the reports recommended sanctions against
 some members of the police and the EPS. Although two of the police officers were
 convicted of murder and legal action is pending against some of the other policemen
 named, no action was taken against any implicated EPS officers.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Politically motivated violence re-
 mained common place in 1993. The civil war, which formally concluded in June 1990
 with the demobilization of the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN), left Nicaraguan society
 both politically polarized and heavily armed. Armed groups continued to operate in
 various areas of the country, mainly in the north. Their activities were principally
 criminal but often had political overtones. They included kidnapings for ransom by
 former members of the EPS and killings of Sandinista cooperative members by re-
 armed members of the RN known as recontras. In February, March, and April,
 there were several brutal murders of Sandinista peasants in northern Nicaragua.
 These included the murder of Juan Davila and his two young daughters near
 Waslala by fellow members of their Sandinista farm cooperative; the torture and
 murder of three members of the Wenseslao Espinoza family near El Guaylo, again
 by fellow members of their Sandinista farm cooperative; the torture and murder of
 five peasants near Wilikito by recontra bandits; and the torture and beheading of
 four peasants by recontra bandits at El Jicaro.
 There were credible reports that the police, army, or Sandinistamilitants killed
 demobilized RN combatants during the year. According to OAS/CIAV, the National
 Police or active or demobilized EPS members killed 9 former combatants in 1993;
 FSLN militants or Sandinista farm cooperative members killed an additional 3; and
 unknown assailants killed 18. Rearmed EPS veterans (known as recompas) killed
 8 and recontras or other ex-RN members killed 12. This number of 50 deaths
 brought to 215 the number of ex-RN members who died under violent circumstances
 since the beginning of the Chamorro administration. OAS/CIAV provided details of
 these human rights abuses to the Government.
 To address the issue of ex-RN deaths, many of which were politically motivated,
 President Chamorro established a Tripartite Commission composed of the civilian
 Government, the Catholic Church, and OAS/CIAV in late 1992. In February the
 Commission sent its first report, covering 10 murder cases, to the President. It rec-
 ommended prosecutions or sanctions against 12 police officers and 10 members of
 the EPS for participating in or covering up the deaths. A military court convicted
 two policemen of killing one of the victims and sentenced them to 15 years in prison,
 but their actual incarceration could not be confirmed. The EPS took no action
 against any of the EPS members named.
 Many incidents of political and extrajudicial killing dating from 1990 had not been
 resolved by the end of 1993. In November 1991, a special presidential commission
 charged with investigating the February 16, 1991, assassination of former RN com-
 mander Enrique Bermudez was dissolved after it claimed there was a lack of evi-
 dence. Since then, no progress in investigating the murder was reported. At the re-
 quest of the Government and the Tripartite Commission, a British police team re-
 viewed the procedures used in the Nicaraguan police investigation, but it did not
 uncover any new evidence.
 
 
 505
 The military courts have not yet prosecuted those accused in the 1990 killing of
 high school student Jean Paul Genie, despite the fact that a criminal court con-
 cluded in July 1992 that EPS Commanding General Humberto Ortega covered up
 the murder of Genie by Ortega's bodyguards and ruled that only the military courts
 could try them. In December 1993, the Su reme Court remanded the case to the
 military justice system, denying an appealto try the case in civilian court. The
 Inter-American Commission ongHuman Rights has referred the case to the Inter-
 American Court of Human Rights, but the Government maintains that since the
 killing took place prior to Nicaragua'sadherence to the Court, the Court does not
 have jurisdiction.
 There were no arrests in the November 23, 1992, assassination of Dr. Arges
 Sequeira Mange. A terrorist group, the self-styled'punitive forces of the left," pub-
 licly took credit for the murder. The EPS claimed that all of Sequeira's killers had
 recently retired from its ranks, but the father of one publicly stated that his son
 was still on active duty. The leader of the group, Lt. Colonel Frank Ibarra (the
 former EPS intelligencechief in Leon), and two henchmen (both former intelligence
 officers) were tried in absentia in July 1993; the trial was suspended when the jury
 failed to reach a verdict. In September, at the request of the President, the National
 Assembly passed an amnesty law covering political crimes" and related common
 crimes committed by rearmed groups. (The UNO opposition was boycotting the As-
 sembly at the time.) Although the President publicly maintained that Sequeira's
 killers were not included in the amnesty, the intent of the legislators was clearly
 to benefit Ibarra and his group. Ibarra had well publicized contacts with the Gov-
 ernment's special disarmament brigade in mid-1993, but that organization did not
 attempt to arrest him. When the suspended trial resumed in November another
 jury convicted Ibarra but acquitted the two other defendants. Two weeks later, the
 trial judge dismissed all charges against Ibarra, ruling that he cannot be punished
 because he is covered by the amnesty. On November 29, the public prosecutor asked
 the Leon court of appeals to overturn the decision of the trial judge.
 Local human rights monitors charged that security forces continued to be staffed
 by many former members of the disbanded General State Security Directorate
 (DGSE), cited for repeated human rights violations under the Sandinista Govern-
 ment. On September 2, President Chamorro announced the removal of the Defense
 Information Directorate (DID-the successor to the DGSE) from EPS control, its
 transfer to the Presidency, and the future appointment of a civilian to replace its
 chief, Colonel Lenin Cerna, who was responsible for human rights violations while
 he headed the DGSE. On October 15, President Chamorro issued a decree creating
 the Directorate of Intelligence Affairs (DAI) attached to the Presidency, under the
 direction of a civilian andthree vice directors (one appointed by the Ministry of Gov-
 ernment one by the Police, and one by the EPS).Simultaneously the EPS named
 Colonel hugo Torres, a Sandinista Comandante who headed the EPS political direc-
 torate, to replace Cerna as head of the DID and announced it would appoint Torres
 as the EPS representative on the new DAI. Cerna was temporarily transferred to
 the post of Inspector General of the EPS, a move strongly criticized by local human
 rights groups.
 All three local human rights groups and a number of foreign ones denounced the
 September 1993 amnesty for political crimes and related common crimes. The Gov-
 ernment's avowed purpose for the first amnesty was to promote reconciliation fol-
 lowing Nicaragua's civil war; for the second and third amnesties, to accomplish the
 disarmament and disbanding of rearmed combatants involved in rural violence. In
 general, the Chamorro Governmenthas not been able or willing to try, convict, and
 punish offenders. Many of them continue in the ranks of the police and the EPS
 and can only be tried by the military court system, which continues to protect its
 own. Convictions by the militarycourts are rare and actual punishment uncertain.
 Although the civilian Government has recommended that the police enforce admin-
 istrative sanctions against a few officers, the police took only weak action against
 some and cleared others.
 b. Disappearance.--Official forces are not known to have been responsible for dis-
 appearances during the year, and there are no reliable accounts of other groups hav-
 ing been responsible for such actions.
 In August a government negotiating delegation including two prominent Sandi-
 nista members of the National Assembly were taken hostage in northern Nicaragua
 by a recontra grup, the "380 Northern Front." The group demanded the firing of
 EPS Commanding General Humberto Ortega and other governmental changes. Soon
 thereafter, a group of masked former Sandinista army officers, styling themselves
 the "National Dignity and Sovereignty Command," took hostage in Managua the top
 leadership of the UNO coalition, including the Vice President of Nicaragua. The Ma-
 nagua group demanded the release of the hostages in the north. After 5 days of ne-
 
 
 rotiation with special commissions appointed by the Government, both groups re-
 eased their hostages. The Government amnestied both groups.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were numerous credible reports during the year of beatings and other phys-
 ical mistreatment of persons detained by the police, often to obtain confessions from
 detainees. According to the Permanent Human Rights Commission (CDPH), a
 prominent human rights group, the use of torture as an investiative tool is "sys-
 tematic" in the national police, especially in the departments a Leon, Boaco, and
 Chontales. Police offenders enjoy almost complete impunity; only the worst cases are
 sent by the civil inspection unit to the military courts for action, and those accused
 are normally absolved. The CPDH charged that the Government has no policy to
 eliminate physical maltreatment of prisoners.
 There were reports in February that EPS members targeted women for rape dur-
 ing field operations in the Central Zelaya region, particularly mothers, sisters, and
 wives of former RN members. However, it was not possible to obtain independent
 verification of these complaints.
 Conditions in the prison system threatened the life and the health of the pris-
 oners. The Civil Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Government is responsible for
 checking prison conditions, which are also independently monitored by local human
 rights groups. The CPDH attributes the conditions to the Government s "inexcusable
 indifference" and its failure to allocate adequate funds.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention by the po-
 lice were common. The Police Functions Law establishes procedures for the arrest
 of criminal suspects, which require police to obtain a warrant from a police official
 prior to detaining a suspect. After detention, police are required by the aw to notify
 amily members of the detainee's whereabouts, but in practice this is rarely done.
 Detainees do not have the right to an attorney until they have been formally
 charged with a crime. Local human rights groups criticized the law for providing
 inadequate judicial oversight of police arrests.
 The Constitution declares that all detained persons have the right to be broulht
 before a judge within 72 hours, but in practice this right is ignored. The Police
 Functions Law permits a suspect to be detained for up to 9 days before being
 brought before a judge; if released sooner, the police are not required to justify the
 detention. Although the National Assembly specified the 3-day deadline in the re-
 form Law of Penal Procedures, passed in 1991 it did not amend the Police Func-
 tions Law. Local human rights groups reported that detainees routinely continued
 to be held indefinitely.
 The Civil Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Government, established in 1991, con-
 tinues to monitor and correct police wrongdoing, including illegal detention. Al-
 though the Constitution provides that detainees are to receive access to legal coun-
 sel once they have been charged with a crime, in practice police do not act to protect
 this right. The Reform Law of Penal Procedures provides for the release on bail of
 persons accused of certain crimes. Previously, detainees were permitted to remain
 at liberty prior to trial only for compelling personal reasons, such as ill health.
 The CPDH estimated the number of arbitrary detentions in 1993 in the hundreds;
 it noted that arbitrary arrest is commonly used by Sandinista police officials in the
 provinces to harass political opponents, principally members of the UNO coalition
 parties and former members of the Nicaraguan Resistance.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7Trial.-The judicial system comprises both civilian and
 military courts and is headed by the Supreme Court of Justice.
 The Supreme Court consists of at least seven judges. They are appointed by the
 National Assembly from lists of nominees selected by the President and serve for
 6-year terms. During 1993 the Court consisted of nine judges: five holdovers ap-
 pointed during the Sandinista Government and four judges appointed by President
 Chamorro. On December 13, the National Assembly accepted the nominations of
 four Supreme Court replacements, giving the Court a non-Sandinista majority for
 the first time since President Chamorro took office. This has potentially positive im-
 plications for human rights because the Supreme Court appoints appeals court and
 lower court judges. Non-Sandinista appointees are widely considered by Nica-
 ragans to be more impartial than their Sandinista counterparts.
 The military courts are responsible for investigating, prosecuting, and trying
 crimes committed by or against members of the armed forces or police. These courts
 can thus under certain circumstances try civilians; in a controversial 1993 ruling
 a military court extended its jurisdiction to convict a former member of the EPS.
 Military courts often fail to investigate or try cases against members of the military;
 sanctions against soldiers are frequently light or the sentences are not enforced. The
 Supreme Court's decision in December, on the last day of the terms of four Supreme
 
 
 507
 Court justices, to remand the Jean Paul Genie case (Section L.a.) to the military
 court will therefore be a test of the military court systems integrity.
 In all criminal cases, the accused has the right to legal counsel, and defendants
 are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Publicly funded attorneys to represent
 indigent defendants do not exist. Obtaining justice is a slow process, and many per-
 sons are arrested and held without bail for months before they appear in court. Ac-
 cording to one report by the Nicaraguan Human Rights Center (CENIDH), based
 on information from the chief of the national prison system, 52 percent of the prison
 population is awaiting trial. The CPDH estimates that nearly half of all those incar-
 cerated in the prison system have been awaiting trial for between 6 months and 2
 years.
 The 1991 Reform Law of Penal Procedures reestablished trial by jury and allowed
 individual citizens to denounce criminal activities directly to a judge. Previously all
 accusations of criminal wrongdoing were processed first by the police, who deter-
 mined whether the case merited further action. However, the jury system has not
 proved effective so far. Many prospective jurors seek to evade jury duty, thereby de-
 laying trials. Jurors are also generally regarded as excessively susceptible to argu-
 mentation based on emotion.
 The civilian Government does not punish political activity, and there were no
 known politicalprisoners in Nicaragua in 1993.
 f. Arbitray Interference with Privacy. Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution establishes that all persons have the right to privacy of their family
 and to the inviolability of their home, correspondence, and communications. It also
 requires warrants for searches of private homes and excludes from legal proceedings
 illegally seized letters, documents, and private papers. Local human rights groups
 claimed that officers from the Defense Information Directorate continue to operate
 as they had under the DGSE, operating wiretaps and other electronic surveillance,
 intercepting mail, and searching private homes and offices without judicial author-
 ization. During 1993, there were credible reports that the EPS and police officials
 illegally entered homes and businesses.
 In May President Chamorro, in connection with military operations against re-
 armed groups in northern Nicaragua, issued a presidential decree partially suspend-
 ing for 30 days constitutional guarantees in 14 counties in the departments of
 Nueva Segovia, Madriz, Esteli, Matagalpa, and Jinotega. The rights suspended were
 inviolability of the home, freedom from arbitrary detention, freedom from arrest
 without warrant, the right to be immediately informed of charges, the right to an
 appearance before a judge within 72 hours, and the right to legal action against au-
 thorities for an illegal detention.
 This suspension was the Government's largely symbolic attempt to crack down on
 crime in the countryside, principally by organized bands of recontras and recompas.
 Human rights monitors registered no complaints concerning the violations of these
 rights in the areas affected. Some human rights monitors suggested that the police
 and the military, who routinely ignore constitutional guarantees in the countryside,
 became more scrupulous than usual about respecting them because of the inter-
 national criticism generated by the suspension decree.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-There was considerable armed conflict in northern Nicaragua between the
 EPS and the recontra and recompa rearmed groups. In July some 500 EPS troops
 attacked one recompa group (the Peasant Worer Revolutionary Front) of 150 men
 that had occupied portions of the city of Esteli. Credible reports indicate that 8 civil-
 ians, including 2 children, were killed in the attack, and 68 civilians were wounded,
 of whom 18 were children. By most reports, the EPS used heavy machine guns,
 rocket-propelled grenades, and rifle-propelled grenades during its operations. Nica-
 ragua is so polarized that few can age on the facts, much less the interpretation
 of the facts. Initial reports were that dozens were massacred. A CENIDH report con-
 demned the EPS for disproportionate and irrational use of force" and declared that
 an EPS assault on Esteli'sflavila Bolanos hospital "flagrantly violated the norms
 of humanitarian law." U.S. Embassy officers visited Esteli after the event and con-
 firmed that some fighting had taken place there, but they could confirm the deaths
 of only two combatants.
 On October 18, shortly after the EPS began a major offensive against a recontra
 group in northern Nicaragua, four EPS helicopters fired rockets into the hills sur-
 rounding the village of El Guanito. Although no one was injured in the 90-minute
 attack, some 300 terrified villagers fled across the border into Honduras. On Decem-
 ber 22, reacting to an editorial criticizing such attacks as "genocide," EPS General
 Humberto Ortega filed a criminal libel suit against the editor of La Prensa. The
 suit, which alleged that the newspaper had damaged the honor of the army, itself
 drew widespread criticism and was withdrawn 6 days later.
 
 
 508
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-These freedoms are provided for in the Con-
 stitution, which declares that "Nicaraguans have the right freely to express their
 beliefs in public or private, individually or collectively, in oral, written, and any
 other form." In practice, during 1993 diverse viewpoints were freely and openly dis-
 cussed in public discourse, in the privately owned print media, in the broadcast
 media, andin academic circles. Freedomof the press is qualified, however, by several
 constitutional provisions. The Constitution also stipulates that Nicaraguans have
 the right to "accurate information," thereby providing an exception by which the
 freedom to publish information the Government deems inaccurate could be abridged.
 Although the right to information cannot be subject to censorship, there is retro-
 active liability established by law defined as a "social responsibility," implying sanc-
 tions against irresponsibility by the press. Finally, "the mass media are at the serv-
 ice of the national interests," implying that the Government may suppress media
 activity it decides is not in the national interest.
 The most important medium for news distribution is radio. Listeners can receive
 a wide variety of political viewpoints, particularly in Managua. In August Sandi-
 nista terrorists attacked the studios of two center-right Managua stations, Radio
 Corporacion and Radio Minuto, causing some $50,000 in damages and silencing the
 stations for 1 and 3 weeks, respectively. In September, amidst antigovernment riot-
 ing over a proposed vehicle tax, terrorists attacked Radio Corporacion's transmitter,
 knocking the station off the air for 1 week. The attacks were the fourth and fifth
 against the outspokenly anti-Sandinista and antigovernment Radio Corporacion in
 the past 4 years. Radio Catolica, the Church-owned station, complained that a
 March 31 power cutoff to the station and earlier electrical problems were punish-
 ment for commentaries critical of the Government.
 There are seven television stations, four of which carry news programming with
 marked political overtones. One state-owned station (confiscated by the Sandinista
 Government) was restored to its original owners in July; its news is produced by
 COSEP, the Higher Council of Private Enterprise.
 There is no official state censorship in Nicaragua, nor is self-censorship practiced.
 Fears that the broad language of a new antisodomy law, which penalized any person
 who "induces, promotes or practices in a scandalous manner sexual intercourse be-
 tween people of the same sex," might be used to curtail freedom of speech and bar
 the dissemination of health and sex information did not materialize. However, some
 governmental actions did pose threats to freedom of expression: In May a criminal
 court's application of Chapter VII of the Penal Code, which deals with libel and
 slander, had a chilling effect on freedom of the press. Despite provisions in the Code
 protecting criticism of the performance of public officials, a La Prensa journalist and
 the newspaper's director were convicted of libel for reporting charges of mismanage-
 ment against a former health minister, now an FSLN deputy in the National As-
 sembly. They were fined $1,600 by a Sandinista criminal court judge.
 In June policemen beat two El Nuevo Diario (a pro-Sandinista newspaper) jour-
 nalists attempting to cover a clash between police and striking customs workers in
 Man agu a. No action was taken against the policemen responsible.
 Academic freedom in higher education is recognized by the Constitution and was
 respected in practice by the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution recognizes
 the right to peaceful assembly without prior permission. It also recognizes the right
 to public assembly, demonstration, and mobilization "in conformity with the law."
 Demonstrators must obtain permission for a march after registering its planned size
 and location with police. This permission is routinely granted.
 Numerous marc es and demonstrations were held throughout the year by groups
 representing a range of political views. However, in April the Government, vaguely
 citing "security" reasons and possible antigovernment "provocations," revoked per-
 mission for the National Opposition Union to hold a march in La Concepcion to cele-
 brate the third anniversary of its electoral victory over the Sandinistas. In Septem-
 ber the Government refused permission for an independence day celebration by San-
 dinista teachers and students in Managua, on the grounds that the event would
 have conflicted with an official celebration promoted by the Education Ministry at
 another location. The unofficial event was held anyway, without government inter-
 ference. In June police used rubber bullets, tear gas, and clubs to break up a peace-
 ful but unauthorized protest march by 150 military veterans in Managna; 11 per-
 sons were injured and some 30 arrested.
 The Constitution provides for the right to organize or affiliate with political par-
 ties. Opposition and independent associations of all sorts coexisted in Nicaragua
 throu ghout 1993. Private associations of any kind may be formed without restric-
 tions but do not have legal status until they receive this designation from the Na-
 
 
 509
 tional Assembly. Such legal recognition is routinely conferred. Nevertheless, ap-
 proval of the legal status of the Nicaraguan Resistance Party was delayed for 2
 years- it was finally granted in 1993.
 c. kreedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and
 this is respected in practice. There are no constitutional or legal restrictions on any
 religious groups or foreign clergy. Although at least 75 percent of Nicaraguans are
 Roman Catholic, other religious groups practice without hindrance. There are no
 constitutional or legal restrictions on places of worship, training of the clergy, reli-
 gious publishing, religious education, or conversion. Churches legally operate radio
 stations, and one of the television stations broadcasts exclusively Protestant evan-
 gelical programming.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right to travel and reside anywhere
 in Nicaragua and to freely enter and exit the country. There are no government re-
 strictions on movement within the country. The right of citizens to return to Nica-
 ragua is not established in the Constitution, but, in practice, there was no restric-
 tion on their return under the Chamorro Government. During the past 3 years, tens
 of thousands of refugees and expatriated members of the Nicaraguan Resistance
 and their families returned from Honduras, Costa Rica, the United States, and
 other countries, without restriction or legal disability.
 The Constitution offers asylum "to those persecuted for their struggle for democ-
 racy, peace, justice, and human rights," and political refugees expelled from Nica-
 ragua cannot be sent back to the country persecuting them. However, in May the
 Government summarily expelled to Spain three members of a Basque terrorist
 group (the ETA) who had been given asylum and Nicaraguan citizenship in 1990
 by the former Sandinista Government. Their citizenship was administratively an-
 nulled without a hearing. CENIDH, foreign human rights groups, and some officials
 of the National Police charged that the expulsions were illegal and unconstitutional.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised their right peacefully to change their government in the first
 election under the 1987 Constitution, which took place in February 1990. It was
 contested by the 14-party UNO coalition, the FSLN, and several smaller parties,
 and was declared free and fair by international observers. The Constitution centers
 political power in the executive branch, which consists of the President Vice Presi-
 ent, and a Cabinet appointed by the President. The President is both Igead of State
 and Head of Government, as well as Commander in Chief of the defense and secu-
 rity forces, while the Vice President has no constitutionally mandated duties or pow-
 ers. Both are elected for 6-year terms by direct popular vote.
 Legislative power is vested in the National Assembly. Its members also serve 6-
 year terms. Ninety members are elected under a proportional representation system
 from nine departments or regions- defeated presidential candidates are also allo-
 cated seats in the Assembly, provided they received a minimum percentage of votes
 in the previous presidentialelection.
 Throughout 1993, UNO boycotted National Assembly votes after the January 9
 elections to the Assembly directorate gave the majority seats on the directorate to
 the Sandinistas and a group of "Centrists" (defecting UNO deputies). In February
 the Assembly agreed to fire the Comptroller General following his charges that the
 Government had bribed some of the Centrist deputies to support its legislative pro-
 gram. The Government depended on the majority coalition of FSLN and Centrist
 deputies to pass its legislation, while the UNO coalition demanded that the Govern-
 ment act to restore the legislative majority given UNO by the voters in the 1990
 elections. Three member parties of UNO decided late in 1993 to return to the As-
 sembly, which led to their expulsion from UNO. At year's end, UNO intended to
 participate in ordinary sessions and perhaps vote on constitutional reform towards
 the latter stages of the reform process.
 In theory the rights of citizens to change their government remains limited by Ar-
 ticle 5 of the 1987 Constitution. That article guarantees the existence of political
 pluralism "without ideological restrictions, except for those who seek a return to the
 past or advocate the establishment of a political system similar to it." There have
 yet to be cases which would define this exception in practical terms. However, in
 June El Nuevo Diario, citing this article, advocated the withdrawal of legal status
 from the Independent Liberal Party and the Liberal Constitutionalist Party, which
 it accused of forming a political alliance with the followers of the late President
 Somoza and former members of the defunct National Guard.
 Elections are administered by an independent branch of government, the Supreme
 Electoral Council. All elections are by secret ballot, with all citizens aged 16 and
 
 
 510
 over having the right to vote. There are no restrictions in law or practice against
 women, in igenous people, or other minorities voting or participating in politics.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government generally permitted local and international human rights mon-
 itors to operate freely in Nicaragua in 1993. Nevertheless, its attitude regarding
 international and nongovernmental investigations of alleged violations of human
 rights was mixed. The Government invited international investigations of limited
 scope in a few specific, well-publicized cases, but it generally ignored complaints of
 less notorious abuses brought by local human rights groups. Civilian authorities co-
 operated with local human rights groups in the presentation of human rights semi-
 nars for school children and for the police. However, police and prison officials fre-
 quently refused to allow access to jails and prisons by human rights monitors, even
 when permission had been granted by the Ministry of Government. The military re-
 fused to cooperate with investigations by human rights monitors.
 There are three active local human rights organizations: the Nicaraguan Center
 for Human Rights (CENIDH), the Permanent Commission for Human Rights
 (CPDH), and the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH). There were
 no reports of repression against human rights observers by the civilian authorities
 in 1993. However, the CPDH was the target of mail tampering and telephone tap-
 ping, presumably by the Defense Intelligence Directorate. In March CENIDH
 uman rights activist and justice of the peace Leonel Gonzalez was shot to death
 in rural Chontales department by three unidentified men dressed in military uni-
 forms; the murder remains unsolved. In April Alberto Blandon, a representative of
 the Catholic Church on the Tripartite Commission, was threatened with death by
 members of a recompa band, and his farmhouse was looted. In June ANPDH activ-
 ist and local UNO leader Salvador Icaza fled Nicaragua after repeated police harass-
 ment and death threats. The CPDH reported that its local collaborator in Boaco was
 beaten by police and that shots were fired at her vehicle.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of "birth, nationality, politi-
 cal belief, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, national origin, economic condi-
 tion or social condition."
 Women.-While there is no de jure discrimination against women, they continued
 to suffer de facto discrimination in the male- dominated culture prevalent in much
 of society. Women occupied some senior positions in government, the trade union
 movement, and social organizations, but were underrepresented in management po-
 sitions in the private sector and formed the majority of workers in the traditionally
 low-paid education, textile, and health service sectors.
 Local human rights organizations continued to monitor violence against women,
 including rape and wife beating. Because victims often are reluctant to publicize
 their charges, it is likely that such abuse is significantly underreported. Local
 human rights groups report that police sometimes intervene to prevent injury in
 cases of domestic violence but that the perpetrators are rarely charged or tried for
 their acts. The lxchen centers and the Luisa Amanda Association of Nicaraguan
 Women, a Sandinista mass organization, provided medical and psychological coun-
 seling to women, as well as legal advice in divorce cases and to victims of rape and
 other violence.
 Children.-The Government is publicly committed to children's human rights and
 welfare, but funding levels for programs for children are inadequate. There were a
 number of newspaper reports in 1993 detailing the existence of child prostitution
 in Managua, Corinto, and Bluefields. Child prostitutes were said to number some
 500 in Managua alone. The press attributed the practice to extreme poverty and
 homelessness. There was no suggestion that such prostitution is organized. Prostitu-
 tion itself is not penalized under Nicaraguan law. Although the Government created
 a National Commission for the Protection of Children in 1992, it had no program
 directed at child prostitution, which, one of its officials observed, "does not exist
 from a legal point of view."
 Indigenous Peopie.--The indigenous people of Nicaragua are concentrated in four
 major areas. On the Atlantic Coast and in the Eastern Highlands are the Miskito
 (numbering 160,000), the Sumu, the Rama, and the Black Carib (these last three
 exist in very small numbers). These peoples are considered identifiable tribes by the
 Govern ment.
 The Miskito tribe is the largest ethnic group in the North Atlantic autonomous
 region (the Raan, one of two such regions created in 1987 from the former depart-
 
 
 511
 ment of Zelaya). The indigenous people of the Raan (the Miskito and the Sumu)
 have their own political party, the Yatama with strong representation in regional
 and municipal councils. Two members of the National Assembly are Miskitos. As
 in previous years, there were complaints that the indigenous peoples of the Atlantic
 Coast were excluded from meaningful participation in decisions affecting their
 lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources. According to
 some human rights monitors, the central Government has granted business conces-
 sions in the autonomous regions without consulting the two relevant regional gov-
 ernments.
 National /Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-Most Nicaraguans are of mixed mestizo
 background, and skin color does not appear to be a barrier to political or economic
 success. The Government has been criticized for its failure to expend resources in
 support of the Atlantic coat population, which is composed largely of ethnic, racial,
 and religious minorities articularly, members of the Moravian church). Successive
 central governments in Managua have traditionally neglected the minorities on the
 Atlantic coast. This has often taken the form of making decisions on exploitation
 of resources in the region without adequate consultation.
 People with Disabilities.-The Government has not legislated or otherwise man-
 dated accessibility for the disabled. Despite the visible presence of many disabled
 veterans of the civil war, there was no attempt to assist the disabled, nor public
 calls to do so, in 1993.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution guarantees the right of workers to
 organize voluntarily in unions "in conformity with the law." Legally, all public and
 private sector workers, except the military and the police, are entitled to form and
 join unions of their own choosing, and they exercise this right extensively. New
 unions must register with the Ministry of Labor and be granted legal status before
 they may engage in collective bargaining; some labor groups report occasional delays
 in obtaining this status. Nearly half of Nicaragua's work force, including agricul-
 tural workers, is unionized, according to labor leaders.
 Nicaragua's unions are independent of the Government. Affiliation to or activity
 in political parties or associations is grounds for dissolution of a trade union under
 the existing Labor Code; however, the Government does not enforce this provision.
 Many unions and federations are affiliated with political parties, most notably the
 FSLN, the Nicaraguan Socialist Party, the Christian Democratic Union, and, until
 1992, the Nicaraguan Communist Party.
 The Constitution recognizes the right to strike. The Labor Code requires a 60-per-
 cent majority of all the workers in an enterprise to call a strike. It also restricts
 strikes in rural occupations where produce may be damaged. Workers may strike
 legally only after they have exhausted other methods of dispute resolution, including
 mediation by the Ministry of Labor and compulsory arbitration. In practice, unions
 regard these lengthy procedures as too expensive and time consuming and fre-
 quently ignore them when initiating a strike. There were numerous strikes in 1993,
 but most were declared illegal.
 The Labor Code prohibits retribution against strikers and union leaders for legal
 strikes. However, this protection may be withdrawn in the case of an illegal strike.
 In the last months of 1992 and the first months of 1993, the Education Ministry
 fired more than 50 teachers who had participated in a series of brief, extralegal
 strikes organized by the National Association of Nicaraguan Educators (ANDEN),
 the Sandinista teachers federation; later in the year it refused to recognize the legal
 status of the ANDEN leadership or to negotiate a new collective bargain with
 ANDEN. In June the Nicaraguan customs agency fired some 150 members of the
 Sandinista-affiliated customs workers federation, including the union leadership,
 during a strike declared illegal by the Labor Ministry.
 In March the national plice violently evicted striking sugar workers occupying
 the San Antonio sugar mill and arrested 63 persons. One policeman and five work-
 ers were injured in the clash, and one worker, Francisco Picado, was found dead
 in circumstances that were never clarified. The International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions noted that rural workers were subjected to abductions, intimidations,
 and detentions in 1992 in connections with land privatization and evictions.
 In May the International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee on Freedom of
 Association (CFA) issued a report critical of the Government for failing adequately
 to investigate and punish acts of violence allegedl committed by the police against
 striking workers in 1990 and 1991. In 1993 the C FA also investigated a complaint
 alleging unfair dismissal of ANDEN leaders excessive registration procedures, and
 prohibition of the trade union check-off. Te ILO's Committee of Experts (COE)
 noted that the draft text of the new Labor Code did not remove restrictions on the
 
 
 512
 right to strike of rural workers, grant the right to associate of public servants, nor
 reduce the number of workers in an enterprise required to call a strike to a simple
 majority. The draft legislation was not enacted in 1993. Unions freely form or join
 federations or confederations and affiliate with and participate in international bod-
 ies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to bargain collectively. The Chamorro Government's labor negotiations
 ontinued 'primarily to be ad hoc efforts to resolve pressing labor conflicts, usually
 in the public sector. Despite unfavorable economic conditions and unfamiliarity with
 the practice, following 10 years of central planning, collective bargaining is becom-
 ing more common in the private sector.
 In 1992 the ILO's COE maintained that the labor law provision which subjects
 collective agreements to the prior approval of the Ministry of Labor before they can
 come into force violates the Convention on the Right to Organize and Collective Bar-
 gaining ratified by Nicaragua in 1967. The Government took no action to modify
 this provision in 1993.
 During 1993 8 firms, employing some 2,000 workers, operated in the 1 export
 processing zone. Although the zone's firms receive tax concessions, Nicaraguan law
 does not exempt them from compliance with any of its labor provisions. Neverthe-
 less,there was no functioning trade union with a certified collective contract in the
 export processing zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there is no evidence that it is practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits child
 labor that can affect normal childhood development or interfere with the obligatory
 school year. Education is compulsory to age 12, and children under the age of 14
 legally are not permitted to work. Nevertheless, because of the prevailing economic
 conditions, more than 100,000 children reportedly work up to 12 hours a day. Many
 are employed on family farms. Many children aged 10 or older work for less than
 $1.00 per day on the same cotton farms, banana plantations, and coffee plantations
 where their parents are employed. In a form of indentured service, some 13-year-
 olds work in auto repair shops for little pay in exchange for auto mechanical train-
 ing. Many small children work in the busy streets of Managua hawking merchan-
 dise, cleaning automobile windows, and begging. Although the Ministry of Labor
 rarely enforces it, the Child Labor Law is generally observed in the small modern
 sector of the economy.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Over the objections of the labor representa-
 tives, a commission made up of representatives from government, labor, and the pri-
 vate sector set sectoral minimum wages in mid-1991. The labor groups argued that
 the monthly minimum wage rates (ranging from $30 in the agiltural sector,
 through $39 for central government employees, to $50 in the banking sector) were
 inadequate given the high cost of living. According to a 1991 estimate by the Gov-
 ernment's National Commission on the Standard of Living, the minimum wage did
 not provide a family of four with the income to meet its basic needs. In January
 1993, the Government devalued the official exchange rate without raising the mini-
 mum wage rates. Enforcement of the minimum wage is lax, and some workers are
 reportedly paid less, particularly in the agricultural sector. However, Ministry of
 Labor surveys indicated that some 86 percent of urban area workers earned more
 than the minimum wage.
 The Constitution guarantees an 8-hour workday with weekly rest and establishes
 the right to a safe and healthy workplace. The standard legal workweek is a maxi-
 mum of 48 hours, with 1 day of rest. The Ministry of Labor's Office of Hygiene and
 Occupational Security is responsible for verifying compliance with health and safety
 standards. Although extensive, these standards are not strictly enforced due to an
 insufficient number of inspectors. Workers have no specific right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
