NICARAGUA
The 1988 report on Nicaragua is more balanced and factual than those of the past several years, all of which were laden with rhetorical excess, half-truths and outright lies. With the demise of the contras as a ñghting force, and a corresponding diminished urgency in convincing Congress and the U.S. public to support military assistance, political pressures to slant the State Departments's reporting have weakened. Nonetheless, the 1988 report on Nicaragua is far below the standard of other reports. It still suffers from the State Department's inability to divorce its analysis of the human rights situation from the perceived need to maintain an endlessly hostile posture toward the Sandinistas.
In describing positive human rights developments, such as the lifting of the state of emergency, the dismantling of the special courts {Tribunales Populares Antisomocistas, or TPAs) and the restoration of the right to strike, the report nonetheless offers criticism: "However, the Government maintained effective control of opposition activity through a combination of legal and extralegal tactics." There is no explanation for this sweeping, unsupported condemnation. We believe those improvements should have been welcomed for what they are. While there is no question that their actual implementation, particularly in the first few weeks, left ample room for improvement — they did not automatically restore labor rights or due process, for example ~ they still constituted a signiñcant advance.
In the section on political killings, the report cites the Permanent Committee for Human Rights (CPDH) to the effect that opposition political acti\ists were killed for political reasons, while noting that the Nicaraguan government attributes the killings to common criminals. The report then goes on to say that "there has been no conclusive evidence in these cases." It would have been more appropriate to say that neither CPDH nor any other group brought forward evidence to support the assertion that there was a political motive in these cases.
123
Critique
Moreover, the report is wrong in asserting that "there is no record of prosecution of EPS [People's Sandinista Army] soldiers for these alleged political killings." The report gives ñve examples of such supposedly unpunished killings. In at least one of them — the killing of two Communist labor activists in Matagalpa ~ Americas Watch reported in August 1988 that a prosecution was taking place ("Hiunan Rights in Nicaragua: August 1987 to August 1988," pp. 16-18). The military courts later convicted and sentenced the perpetrators. In another case, the murder of Walter Antonio Morales Silva, which was also included in the August 1988Americas Watch report (pp. 91-92), the State Department fails to mention that the killer. Lieutenant Victor Julio Ríos Zamora, was arrested. Although we have no information on the other three examples cited, the State Department's failure to include available information on two of the five cases casts doubt on the credibility of the report's conclusions on Nicaragua.
Americas Watch has e?q>ressed concern at a pattern of extrajudicial killings of persons suspected of supporting the contras in certain areas of Matagalpa and Jinotega. These killings seem to have begun in late 1987 and have continued through the early months of 1989. We are still awaiting information from the Nicaraguan government about what, if any, investigative or prosecutorial steps it has taken in the many such cases we have documented. We are convinced, however, on the basis of our research to this point, that these killings are by far the most troubling development in Nicaragua in recent years. The country report makes no mention of these killings.
In reporting on disappearances, the State Department misstates the problem by including references to matters that have nothing to do with the accepted definition of a disappearance as an unacknowledged arrest, made with the intent of concealing the detainee from family, lawyers and judges. The report includes references to detentions pwsuant to the draft, and to transfers of prisoners between prisons. Depending on the circumstances, these detentions may violate domeñe law and even international standards, but they do not constitute a disappearance, since the government does not deny the fact of the detention. (Insofar as the State Department's definition of a disappearance contained in Appendix A of the Country Reports encompasses these cases, it is overbroad.)
124
Nicaragua
The report states that, as of August 1988, CPDH had received 56 reports of disappearances. It does not explain whether any of those cases were later resolved, nor whether they include cases like the ones described above, which are not disappearances as the term is generally understood. The report also fails to reveal that CPDH rarely foUov^ up on reports of disappearances to determine whether the status of the disappeared person has been clarified.
The references to the use of torture are a great improvement in comparison with previous reports. In the past, the State Department asserted that torture was frequently applied to detainees during interrogation. This year, k states only that "detainees have been subjected to various forms of physical and psychological torture...." (Emphasis added.) If this statement means that some of the prisoners are subjected to the forms of pressure and abuse described (food and water deprivation, mock executions, being beaten while manacled and hanging by their hands), we agree with it. Instances of such mistreatment have occurred in Nicaragua.
The report correctly states that, unlike national penitentiaries, pretrial detention facilities run by state security, the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE), are not open to \isits by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). While occasional visits by others cannot replace the regular and private interviev^ ordinarily conducted by the ICRC, the report should have noted that, be^nning in December 1987, the DGSE center of El Chipote, in Managua, has been visited on several isolated occasions by Americas W^ch, Amnesty International, the ICRC and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States.
The report is wrong and overly critical of the situation in the prisons. Prisoners have been beaten, but beatings are by no means "common." And without explaining the distinction, the report calls the conditions in the Nicaraguan prisons "harsh" while describing conditions in the detention areas used by the Resistance (the name given to the contra movement) as "Spartan."
The report also describes breaches of due process guarantees, such as the requirement that prisoners be brought before a judge within 12 hours. Detentions in violation of this requirement continued in 1988, even after the state of emergency was lifted.
125
Critique
The State Department's assertion that "persons suspected of views critical of the Government often are detained and charged with common crimes" has been made before, mostly by some in the Nicaraguan opposition, but to the best of our knowledge it has never been properly substantiated.
The other major improvement of the 1988 report is in the thorny matter of the number of prisoners held by the Nicaraguan government for politically motivated offenses. This year the report no longer makes the unsustainable claim that more than 9,000 sudi prisoners are held, although it cites CPDH's claim of8,200. In doing so, the report should have stated that CPDH has never been able to substantiate the figure in any reasonable fashion. The report acknowledges that the ICRC's figure for the number of prisoners in the national penitentiaries is the same as that of the Nicaraguan government. It is true that it is impossible to verify the number of prisoners in DGSE facilities at any given moment, both because the ICRC has no access to them and because there is a large turnover of many of the prisoners held there. But even in 1986 and 1987 when the estimates of prisoners held there were the largest, those estimates were insufficient to bridge the gap between the ICRC figures and the bloated numbers given by CPDH and the State Department. Moreover, this section of the reiK>rt ends with the following assertion: "It is clear, however, that official government figures do not include a significant number of political prisoners." There is simply no basis in fact for such a statement.
The references to freedom of expression and association minimize the significant progress achieved in those areas since the lifting of the state of emergency. It is true that serious infringements of those freedoms continued after the state of emergency ended. But the report fails to acknowledge that, even with these serious ongoing problems, there was a considerable expansion of the exercise of those freedoms in 1988 in comparison with previous years. The most significant attack on these freedoms was the arrest of leaders and demonstrators in the Nandaime incident in July, but the report errs in saying that "most" of those arrested were released in November and December: all of them were set free.
The report characterizes CPDH as "the only independent human rights group in Nicaragua." This is wrong: there are at least three other human rights
126
Nicaragua
organizations working in Nicars^^ua that can be rightfully called "independent," both in their structure and in their approach to human rights investigation: the Office of Legal Assistance for Ethnic Minorities of the Atlantic Coast, the Office of Legal Assistance of CEPAD (Evangelical Assistance Agency), and the Bufete Popular (legal aid office) of the Central American University. Moreover, CPDH's acceptance of frmds from the U.S. government at a time when the U.S. is intent on overthrowing the Nicaraguan government seriously jeopardizes CPDH's claim to independence.
127
Irít'MiiáHM 0í^ fmMMC-ii €fi«« üjr At pMÉaüwii im H rti ■><■1 «nfcugfár

»HMftit nUwedeef j^Aae*» haU t&créw
bw 1ÍMM1I9 t7t>ii iu4 ilïQ'^^l^lMrcittcm' Nkmover^. t ^^ nwyoit mwSl .the {ättomnog «Mcftioa: » liowcvtt*,'
'Cbor« k IM» bm i» {«CA fi^ iiicè ft at^^
fBMay. ft II crw llM «crio« leini^fen^^
oí	caded 8m che íNM^
mioM «iÍIIBS illWbm
ÍA IIH^ MifldMCSbt HKI^MMM BÌ
i» Novmter «nd
ibM*mmt aHofcheaweve

irotip tt NkwegMa." TWí k moof^ tbert tre
