 NICARAGUA
 In January 1985, the Junta of National Reconstruction (which
 had run the Nicaraguan Government since the 1979 revolution
 that overthrew the Somoza dictatorship) was terminated with
 the inauguration of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra and Vice
 President Sergio Ramirez and the swearing-in of a 96-member
 National Assembly. Real political power nevertheless
 continued to be wielded by the National Directorate of the
 Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), the Front's nine
 Marxist leaders who conceive and implement policies through an
 interlocking party-government structure. Intimidation and the
 restriction of basic human rights were significant factors in
 the largely successful consolidation of power by the
 Sandinista Front over the preceding five years. Though
 elections were held on November 4, 1984, important sectors of
 the political opposition declined to participate because of
 the Government's failure to establish the conditions necessary
 for a fair and free campaign.
 During 1985, the Sandinistas increased markedly their
 intimidation of the Church and the civic opposition and their
 control of the society. The basic instruments of internal
 control, the police and state security organizations, fall
 .'under the control of the Ministry of the Interior. Using
 these agencies, the Sandinistas are able to enforce adherence
 to the standards of political conformity imposed by the FSLN
 through the power of arbitrary arrest, interrogation, and
 imprisonment.
 The Nicaraguan economy is heavily agricultural. Its small
 industrial sector, weakened during the 1978-79 revolution,
 continues to deteriorate under Sandinista economic policies.
 The Government controls the distribution of foodstuffs, and
 even basic staples are subject to rationing.
 Politically-motivated expropriations, the increasingly
 state-managed economy, heavy military expenditures (accounting
 for an estimated 60 percent of the budget), and often
 capricious implementation of agrarian reform have
 substantially decreased living standards in the country.
 The civil war continued throughout 1985, with heavy combat in
 the northern region causing casualties to civilians and
 extensive damage to economic infrastructure. Human rights
 organizations charged both sides with serious human rights
 abuses. Government security forces reportedly tortured and
 executed persons suspected of assisting the guerrillas, while
 the Government accused the guerrillas of killing, torturing,
 and kidnapping civilians. The Sandinista Army continued
 military impressment, conducting sweeps of public facilities
 and forcibly removing youths as young as twelve. Although the
 Government claims that conscientious objection to military
 service is permitted, it is not provided for in the law. On
 October 15, the Government reinstated and broadened the 1982
 State of Emergency restrictions on civil rights and liberties
 originally provided in 1979 by the National Junta of
 Reconstruction in "The Statute of Rights and Guarantees of
 Nicaraguan Citizens." Under the new decree many rights
 concerning arrest, trial, detention, speech, assembly, privacy
 and association were abolished. In effect, however, the
 latest suspension of civil liberties merely legalized various
 government activities that in practice had already been
 underway.
 
 
 617
 NICARAGUA
 Beginning in mid-1985, government officials and entities began
 to increase and personalize public attacks on business,
 church, professional and opposition political leaders.
 Intimidating interrogations of such leaders, searches of
 houses and the confiscation of offices and publications
 occurred in the late fall. The Government continued to use an
 array of control techniques: political tribunals established
 outside the judicial system to try cases of suspected
 subversives, mass organizations controlled by the Sandinistas
 to help implement their policies and to instill loyalty and
 sanction opponents, and prior censorship of the print and
 electronic media to silence opposition.
 The two domestic human rights organizations in Nicaragua which
 are independent of the Government were subject to constant
 harassment by the Sandinistas during 1985.
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Ample evidence exists of a number of politically-motivated
 killings during 1985. The independent Permanent Human Rights
 Commission (Spanish acronym CPDH) received thirteen
 substantiated cases during the year of political killings
 committed by government authorities, and several more
 complaints in which government involvement was suspected. In
 one of the cases reported to CPDH in 1985, a Sandinista
 soldier took a Social Democratic Party member from his house.
 As soon as the family reported him as missing to CPDH, the
 Ministry of Defense issued a communique stating that a
 resistance leader by the same name had been killed in combat
 in November. The Social Christian Party called for, but did
 not receive, an official explanation for the death of a
 17-year-old member whose decomposing corpse was discovered a
 few days after he was taken into police custody, apparently
 during a Government conscription round-up. In another case
 reported to CPDH, a Cuban military advisor indiscriminately
 opened fire on a group of Nicaraguans attending a party,
 killing three and injuring others. The Cuban was not
 prosecuted and Ministry of Interior officials reportedly
 attempted to bribe witnesses not to report the incident.
 Local newspapers announced that several Sandinista soldiers
 had been court-martialed for abuses in the field, but neither
 the trials nor the sentencing in such cases are open to public
 review. In one case, CPDH states that it has proof that the
 person convicted was sent to Bulgaria for study rather than
 serving out his term.
 CPDH further alleges that, out of fear of reprisals, the
 majority of government political killings go unreported. In a
 May 12, 1984, letter to the Organization of American States
 (OAS) Inter-American Human Rights Commission (IAHRC), CPDH
 maintained it had evidence of an increase in the number of
 unexplained deaths. From 1981 to 1984, CPDH received 97
 complaints of deaths attributable to identified civil and
 military authorities. In each case, after brief detention,
 the prisoners reportedly died "during attempts to escape," "in
 combat with army troops," "from heart attack," or under other
 circumstances CPDH found suspicious. CPDH brought all 97
 cases to the attention of the Nicaraguan Government, but no
 investigations are known to have been conducted nor official
 explanations offered. In some cases, the families of the
 
 
 618
 NICARAGUA
 victims have themselves received death threats from government
 officials for making inquiries. CPDH findings of governmental
 involvement in political killings have been confirmed by a
 number of sources, among them former employees of the
 government-sponsored human rights commission and the Ministry
 of Interior.
 One defector, Lt. Alvaro Baldizon, served as Chief
 Investigator of the Special Investigations Commission of the
 Ministry of Interior, established by the Ministry in early
 1983 in response to mounting inquiries from international
 human rights organizations concerning reported government
 abuses. In 1985, Baldizon revealed that the Sandinista
 Government had systematically used state-sanctioned political
 assassinations, called "special measures" by Ministry of
 Interior authorities, against political opponents during
 1983. According to Baldizon's own investigation, Ministry of
 Interior State Security forces summarily executed more than
 300 farmers suspected of collaborating with the armed
 resistance in the Cua, Pantasma, Waslala and Rio Blanco
 areas. Relatives had reported many of these assassinations to
 CPDH and IAHRC, which published lists of the names of the
 missing persons. Baldizon's investigations in late 1984
 turned up clandestine cemeteries in mountain communities of
 Matagalpa and Jinotega Departments where government
 investigators themselves believed victims of "special
 measures" had been buried. Baldizon charged that, in total,
 hundreds of assassinations and subsequent cover-ups were
 ordered by ranking Sandinista leaders--Interior Minister Tomas
 Borge and Vice Minister Luis Carrion.
 In his October 1985 address to the United Nations, President
 Daniel Ortega claimed that insurgent forces, so-called
 "counterrevolutionaries," had killed 11,000 Nicaraguans,
 injured 5,000, kidnapped 5,000, and caused the displacement of
 250,000 in six years of war between government and insurgent
 forces; he did not distinguish between Sandinista Army
 combatants and civilian casualties. CPDH and the 1985
 independent Smith-Rygg human rights report claim that many
 civilian casualties have resulted from government use of heavy
 artillery near population centers in newly declared free-fire
 zones.
 The Government has charged the insurgents with torturing and
 summarily executing civilians and prisoners of war. Americas
 Watch has accused both sides, holding the insurgent forces
 more culpable of violating international laws of war
 applicable to ordinary war conditions. There is evidence that
 many Nicaraguan civilians have been killed in crossfire. Some
 have died in insurgent ambushes of government military
 vehicles carrying civilian passengers. The Government has
 also distributed arms to persons engaged in civilian
 activities: in December, for example, it was announced that
 over one-half of the 10,000 coffee harvesters had received
 military training and would carry rifles in a defense
 capacity. The insurgents deny that they target civilians and
 in 1985 the newly-formed umbrella resistance group, the United
 Nicaraguan Opposition (UNO), announced that it would hold
 itself bound to the Geneva Conventions.
 Although CPDH has received few reports of insurgent
 atrocities, some Nicaraguan government-sponsored international
 human rights researchers have produced extensive testimonies
 from alleged witnesses to political killings. Former
 
 
 619
 NICARAGUA
 Sandinista government employees who served in the area of
 human rights have charged that the Government controlled these
 groups' access to information. The Smith-Rygg report, based
 on interviews with Nicaraguan refugees in Costa Rica and
 Honduras and displaced persons inside Nicaragua, on the other
 hand, found no evidence of any systematic abuses conducted by
 counterrevolutionaries, in the form of intentional killings,
 torture, or rape.
 b. Disappearances
 Most reported disappearance cases result from what CPDH has
 labeled "a deliberate policy" by government security forces to
 hold suspected insurgents or political critics incommunicado
 indefinitely without notifying family members. The
 Government's October 15, 1985, suspension of legal guarantees
 for political detainees--habeas corpus, arrest warrants, and
 time limit on investigations--legalized this practice.
 In its May 1984 communique to the IAHRC, CPDH claimed that
 from 1981 to 1983, 433 cases of disappearance had been
 reported to its offices. As of that date, 142 of those cases
 had not been resolved and, in total for all years recorded,
 CPDH maintained it had 342 cases of prisoners who had
 disappeared. In the first six months of 1985, CPDH received
 31 reports of disappearances. Of these, 16 persons had been
 located alive, with 14 of them detained in prisons. Three
 people had been found dead; 12 cases remained unresolved.
 CPDH found the Government implicated in 30 of the 31 reported
 disappearance cases.
 The Government, for its part, has claimed that the insurgents
 have routinely kidnapped civilians. Insurgent forces have
 admitted to holding civilians captive temporarily in war
 zones. On January 26, 1985, Dr. Gustavo Sequeira Pena and a
 small medical team were taken captive by insurgents during
 battle on Rama Key, in the Bay of Bluefields. On April 29,
 the insurgents released the team, two members of which opted
 to remain with the Nicaraguan Democratic Forces (FDN). Nine
 members of the Sandinista "Fiftieth Anniversary
 Brigade"--volunteers who provide basic education in rural
 areas--were taken captive in 1984 and 1985. By the end of
 1985, one continued to be held prisoner by the FDN, which was
 seeking the cooperation of the International Committee of the
 Red Cross (ICRC) in arranging her release; one was working as
 a volunteer with the FDN; and one had returned to Nicaragua.
 The FDN reported to the ICRC that it did not have information
 concerning the remaining six persons. Seven members of other
 Sandinista brigades previously reported as missing were
 discovered to have joined the resistance forces. A number of
 international workers have been temporarily held by
 insurgents; two reported that they had been raped.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 CPDH holds that the Sandinista Government, particularly in
 State Security interrogation centers and clandestine prisons,
 has condoned the intentional infliction of severe physical and
 psychological suffering for the purpose of extracting
 information or confession, of punishing the detainee for an
 actual or suspected crime, or of intimidating the detainee and
 others. For example, CPDH estimates that almost all the
 political prisoners convicted by special Sandinista tribunals
 
 
 620
 NICARAGUA
 (called "TPA's,") were convicted by confessions which were
 extracted by torture or abusive treatment that might fall
 technically short of torture. CPDH further maintains that
 cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment of prisoners in the
 national penitentiary system is pervasive and a detainee could
 be investigated indefinitely, tortured, or submitted to cruel
 treatment without any legal mechanism available to stop the
 abuses.
 Nine known Ministry of Interior security interrogation prisons
 and several clandestine prisons function in the country. The
 Government has denied repeated requests by international human
 rights monitors to inspect these facilities, and it does not
 permit the ICRC to provide assistance to prisoners in State
 Security prisons. In 1985, both Americas Watch and the
 Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights repeated
 previous requests to the Government to eliminate the practice
 of incommunicado detention and to permit inspection of the
 State Security prison facilities from which they had received
 persistent reports of cruel treatment of detainees. Concerned
 that international human rights organizations had not been
 able adequately to address abuses occurring in Nicaraguan
 jails, CPDH published a special report, "The Prison
 Situation--Nicaragua 1985." The report summarizes testimonies
 collected from CPDH's current case files of serious abuses of
 prisoners' human rights.
 In the most notorious of the State Security interrogation
 centers, "El Chipote," located in the downtown area of the
 capital city of Managua, many detainees are held incommunicado
 sometimes for months, in dark subterranean cells in which they
 can only stand or sit. Air reaches cells through a tube and
 no toilet facilities are provided. ("El Chipote" was also
 used during the Somoza dictatorship as an interrogation and
 torture center.) State Security interrogators, some of them
 reportedly non-Nicaraguan, routinely deprive detainees of
 food, water and sleep for lengthy periods of time. CPDH
 received several complaints concerning detaineees who were
 made to dig their own graves, subjected to mock executions, or
 had had empty pistols triggered at their temples. Others were
 beaten by interrogators, sometimes with rubber instruments
 that do not leave marks. One mother reported to CPDH that her
 son's face had been disfigured by repeated beatings. In the
 colder mountainous areas of Esteli, in the La Barranca Prison,
 and in the La Perrera Prison of Matagalpa, detainees have been
 forced to stand in barrels of cold water for periods of two to
 three days or until they made desired declarations or agreed
 to become informants.
 In 1984 and early 1985, several women detainees in "El
 Chipote" reported they had been raped repeatedly by their
 guards, one woman after she had been drugged for an
 interrogation session. Women prisoners, without regard to
 age, have been forced to assume humiliating positions naked in
 front of male guards who insult and hit or kick them, in some
 cases only because their husbands or sons are accused of
 crimes against the state.
 President Daniel Ortega himself, before international
 journalists during a televised press conference, admitted to
 and justified the detention at "El Chipote" of the president
 of a Catholic school parents' association. Commander Lenin
 Cerna, head of State Security forces, personally tortured the
 victim. The 60-year-old, who was not politically active, was
 
 
 621
 NICARAGUA
 detained because of his religiously-based criticisms of the
 government-enforced program of Marxist-Leninist patriotic
 education. Cerna and his agents reportedly beat the victim
 and Cerna himself put a pistol to the victim's head, saying he
 was going to kill him that night and the rest of his family
 later. At the behest of a visiting foreign delegation, a high
 Nicaraguan official intervened, after which the victim was
 released in the middle of the night completely naked, without
 his eyeglasses, on a main Managua thoroughfare. State
 Security agents had told him he was being driven to a location
 to be executed.
 CPDH also has on file cases in which, during prolonged and
 intense interrogations, detainees have been made to listen to
 recordings of pleading voices and cries of loved ones. They
 were sometimes led to believe that relatives had been
 imprisoned and were being mistreated because of the detainees'
 recalcitrance to confess or to implicate others. In a number
 of cases, particularly those which involved government
 officials who had defected to other countries, family members
 have been detained and reportedly subjected to cruel treatment
 and torture in an effort to force the defector to return or to
 intimidate him into refraining from criticizing the Government.
 Complaints filed with CPDH by the relatives of prisoners and
 some released prisoners indicate that the prisons of the
 national penitentiary system are characterized by severe
 overcrowding, inadequate food and medical treatment, and
 unhygienic conditions that are intentionally imposed by prison
 authorities. CPDH believes that prison conditions have
 deteriorated within the last year and alleges that prisoners'
 families fear reprisals if they request reviews of cases or
 conditions. CPDH has evidence that prison authorities have
 also used exceptionally cruel forms of punishment that include
 sealed cells or cars placed in direct sunlight, where the
 prisoners are placed until they dehydrate. Indiscriminate
 beatings and unexplained transfers also occur. CPDH has
 provided to the Government the names of abusive prison
 officials and the charges against them, but it has no evidence
 that investigations have been undertaken.
 The Government admits that it uses forced prison labor to
 harvest crops in war-zones. Two known hunger strikes were
 known to have taken place in Managua prisons in 1985, during
 which prisoners protested the use of forced labor and poor
 prison conditions. Approximately 100 of the strikers were
 transferred to the El Chipote complex for incommunicado
 detention and special punishment.
 According to its own statistics, the International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) is presently permitted by the
 government to provide medical and nutritional assistance to
 approximately 3,700, or 50 percent of the known political
 prisoners. A special agreement with the Government provides
 that the ICRC may not make public reports on conditions within
 the prison system. The ICRC also maintains an effective
 program of assistance to prisoner's families.
 The Government human rights commission (CNPPDH) has developed
 a limited rehabilitation program within the penitentiary
 system for those prisoners who, according to CNPPDH officials,
 have come to accept the goals of the Sandinista revolutionary
 society. The program's most visible aspect is a system of
 open farm prisons. In those facilities, prisoners work during
 
 
 622
 NICARAGUA
 the day and have recreational programs, continuous visits by
 family members, and furloughs. While agreeing that such open
 prison facilities exist, CPDH and former CNPPDH employees
 maintain that they are few in number, and that they are used
 by the Government primarily for staged representations to
 international human rights monitors and visiting delegations.
 CPDH argues that the open farm prisons are populated by
 lower-ranking former Somoza National Guardsmen whose sentences
 are almost completed and who have agreed to cooperate with the
 Government as informants,
 According to Catholic and Protestant church officials, priests
 and ministers are denied visitation rights or access to the
 prisoners. It has been reported to international human rights
 monitors that prison authorities have confiscated religious
 papers and books and broken up meetings of prisoners engaged
 in religious activity.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 States of Emergency decreed in 1985 suspended various legal
 guarantees and civil rights relating to arrest and detention.
 As of November, emergency decrees had deprived persons accused
 of non-political offenses of the right to have a hearing
 within 24 hours of detention, to request a "personal
 exhibition" before a judge, to obtain damages for false
 imprisonment, and not to be removed from the jurisdiction of a
 competent judge. Also, those accused of non-political
 offenses no longer enjoyed the guarantee against arrest
 without a warrant. Persons accused of subversive political
 actitivies were denied all of the above rights and guarantees
 as well as the guarantee of habeas corpus. Thus, any
 Nicaraguan citizen is subject to arbitrary arrest at any time
 and may be detained for an indefinite period "for
 investigation" of what are deemed political offenses without
 being formally charged or being accorded any other kind of due
 process.
 In practice, arbitrary arrest and prolonged incommunicado
 detentions by state security forces and Sandinista police have
 been common for years. Numerous international human rights
 monitors, including the Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission, Americas Watch, Amnesty International and the
 Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights have made detailed and
 longstanding protests of these abuses. In its April 1985
 report, "Nicaragua-Revolutionary Justice," the Lawyers'
 Committee stated that during its investigation government
 officials openly admitted to incommunicado detentions of up to
 30 days, and the Committee found cases in which persons had
 been detained incommunicado for substantial periods ranging
 from five weeks to two and one-half months. In one case, the
 Lawyer's Committee found that an individual had been detained
 for 15 months without being charged.
 Thousands of Nicaraguan citizens--political opposition
 leaders, businessmen, religious officials and lay workers,
 journalists, and private citizens who were actual or suspected
 dissenters from governmental policies--were arbitrarily
 arrested in 1985 and subjected to incommunicado detention
 generally ranging from six hours to more than ten days in
 State Security prisons or police headquarters. During the
 incommunicado detentions, State Security agents, and in a few
 cases policemen, tried during intense interrogation sessions
 to extract statements to support accusations of subversive or
 
 
 623
 NICARAGUA
 "counterrevolutionary" activity on the part of detainees.
 Generally the detainees would receive orders to appear at a
 State Security prison or police headquarters at a certain
 time. On several occasions State Security agents arrested
 persons at their homes or work places, sometimes in the middle
 of the night. CPDH believes peasants in the rural areas are
 subject to more frequent arbitrary arrests and more lengthy
 periods of incommunicado detention. In its 1984 letter to the
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, CPDH claimed that
 "arbitrary detention, without trial, without legal charges,
 without possibility of defense, has been established as a
 system for intimidating citizens. After several months of
 illegal detention, they are freed without ever having been
 through any court and without being given any opportunity to
 defend oneself. Some of the prisoners have died in jails.
 Others, after several years in prison, are declared innocent,
 but their families have been destroyed, their property has
 been confiscated, they have lost their jobs."
 In 1984 and 1985, CPDH received several complaints of mass
 arrests of the citizenry of small villages in war zones for
 supposed collaboration with resistance forces, or mass
 roundups of youths believed to be evading compulsory military
 service. In La Trinidad, 39 peasants, who were arrested and
 accused of circulating a letter stating that they had not
 voted in the 1984 elections, were held incommunicado for five
 days in the Esteli State Security prison, La Barranca. There
 they were reportedly deprived of food for several days,
 isolated in dark cells, and made to stand in barrels of cold
 water until they confessed, before being transferred into the
 regular penitentiary system in Managua to await trial in the
 TPA.
 Prisoners detained for TPA trials normally face additional
 long (usually five to six months, but sometimes longer)
 incommunicado confinement pending investigation by the
 Interior Ministry. Investigation can be extended indefinitely
 and family members and counsel, who are not notified of the
 arrest or generally permitted visits, have no evidence upon
 which to file allegations of either physical or psychological
 abuse. Writs of habeas corpus, available until October 1985,
 only served as notice from a government official, who
 reportedly had seen the prisoner, that a given detainee was
 being held in the State Security prison, El Chipote.
 The Government does not usually exile dissidents, but in the
 spring of 1985 the Government forbade airlines to bring
 opposition leader Arturo Cruz into Managua. Also, many
 opposition leaders and critics of the Government have fled
 after receiving threats from government officials against
 their lives and those of their families and/or after their
 sources of livelihood had been destroyed by the Government
 through property confiscation or deprivation of employment.
 In early 1985, the Government extended and broadened the terms
 of an amnesty, granted previously only to Miskito Indians and
 certain other exiles and "counterrevolutionaries," to include
 all Nicaraguans. According to government reports, over 2,000
 people had received amnesty under that decree by November
 1985. There were no known cases of later detentions for acts
 committed prior to amnesty.
 Prohibitions on the use of compulsory or forced labor are
 among the rights and guarantees of Nicaraguan citizens. The
 
 
 624
 NICARAGUA
 October 15 suspension of political and civil liberties did not
 affect those provisions of the law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The state of emergency decreed in 1985 suspended various legal
 guarantees and civil rights relating to judicial processes.
 As of November, emergency decrees had deprived persons accused
 of non-political offenses of the following rights: to be
 informed of charges, to have a public trial before a competent
 judge, to participate personally in all proceedings from the
 start, and to challenge evidence. Such persons no longer
 enjoyed the following legal guarantees: against imprisonment
 without all requirements of law having been fulfilled, against
 double jeopardy, and against conviction for an act which was
 not a crime when committed. Persons accused of subversive
 political activities were denied the above rights and
 guarantees, as well as the right of appeal within the judicial
 branch. Within the severe restrictions imposed by the
 foregoing suspensions of rights and guarantees, the criminal
 courts showed some independence from political manipulation.
 Two kinds of special tribunals outside the judicial branch,
 however, had nearly discretionary powers to try economic,
 political, and security crimes--the Peoples Anti-Somocista
 Tribunals (TPA's) and the Sandinista police courts. The TPA's
 are entities within the executive branch (Interior Ministry).
 The TPA process theoretically functions as follows: once a
 complaint is filed, the detainee has two days in which to file
 a response. This initial period is followed by an
 investigative period of at least eight days, but the
 investigation may be extended indefinitely. Following the
 conclusion of the investigation the TPA has 3 days (or 10 if
 the defendant is not incarcerated), to pronounce sentence.
 There is a right of appeal only to the TPA Court of Appeals,
 composed of judges drawn from the same pool of people who
 staff the TPA. Sentences range from 3 to 30 years. Thus, the
 tribunals operate outside the conventional judicial system,
 and the defendant has no right to appeal to the regular
 judiciary. The members of the tribunals are selected on the
 basis of their leadership roles in Sandinista organizations
 and only one member of the three-judge panel is required to be
 a lawyer. Persons tried in these tribunals technically have
 the right to counsel and to introduce evidence, but highly
 expedited procedures and the use of flexible evidentiary
 standards severely diminish the exercise of these rights. The
 proceedings of the TPA's are in theory open to the public, but
 in most cases attendance is restricted. Trials have
 reportedly been scheduled with little or no advance notice,
 limiting opportunities for the accused to prepare his
 defense. Legal counsel to TPA defendants are frequently not
 advised of their clients' appearances before the court.
 Prisoners often spend further months "under investigation,"
 even though they may have confessed, before being brought
 suddenly to trial. Since all special tribunal cases are tried
 in one court in Managua, it is often impossible for witnesses
 who live in other areas of the country to attend trials on
 time.
 The TPA's became increasingly active in 1985 and according to
 government figures, as of October 31, 995 defendants had been
 processed through the tribunals since the TPA's were incepted
 on June 6, 1983. CPDH maintains that the number of TPA cases
 is much higher, with hundreds of cases remaining in pending
 status. The conviction rate of the TPA's is 90 percent, and
 
 
 625
 NICARAGUA
 these tribunals are known for arbitrary actions. In one case
 a prisoner was sentenced to seven years, and upon appealing to
 another tribunal, was sentenced to an additional eight years,
 reportedly for having made recourse to the services of CPDH.
 Although the TPA's were established to try subversives and
 counterrevolutionaries, one case sent to the TPA in 1985
 involved two young Social Democratic Party members, Luis Mora
 Sanchez and Mauricio Membreno Gaitan, who were arrested
 because they participated in welcoming activities for the
 return to Nicaragua of newly-invested Cardinal Obando y
 Bravo. Arrested on June 15, the two were investigated during
 detention (which was incommunicado for Membreno) for over a
 month before being tried in late July. As of early December,
 they remained incarcerated, but had not been sentenced.
 According to the 1985 Lawyers' Committee for International
 Human Rights study of Nicaragua's judicial system, "both the
 formal structure and mode of the operation of these tribunals
 undermine the basic due process rights of Nicaraguan citizens.'
 The Sandinista police courts also fall under the jurisdiction
 of the Ministry of Interior, and so work within the confines
 of a military, not judicial, bureaucracy. Court procedures,
 which are not always adhered to, provide that police courts
 have seven days following arrest in which to conclude their
 proceedings. Within 24 hours of arrest, the police must make
 a probable cause determination, upon which the defendant will
 be set free or provisionally detained pending investigation.
 Investigation should not take more than five days. At the end
 of the investigation, the police have 24 hours either to remit
 the detainee to the civilian courts or to impose sentence for
 an offense that falls within "police tribunal jurisdiction,"
 which can include "insulting authority," "cultivation,
 possession or distribution of marijuana," and undefined
 "economic crimes," such as violations of price controls, and
 black marketeering. The judges (Sandinista police officers)
 enjoy wide latitude: at the end of their investigations they
 may, at their discretion, remit detainees to the civilian
 courts or sentence them to up to two years in jail. Thus, a
 person who is brought before a police tribunal may, within a
 few days, be sentenced to two years without right to appeal.
 The Lawyers' Committee for International Human Rights
 condemned the 1900 Law of Judicial Functions of the Sandinista
 police as "a particularly disturbing assault on the right to
 be tried by an independent tribunal." CPDH maintains that
 police courts have condemned several opposition leaders on
 trumped-up charges for purely political reasons.
 The Government claims it has no political prisoners, though it
 admits to holding about 5,000 prisoners, including some 2,000
 former National Guardsmen, plus other people convicted of
 counterrevolutionary subversive activities. CPDH
 conservatively estimates that the political prisoner total,
 including National Guardsmen who were convicted without due
 process, is between 7,500 and 10,000, with approximately 700
 to 1,000 of that number being held at any one time for
 investigation in State Security prisons. The ICRC estimate of
 numbers of political prisoners falls within this range of
 7,500-10,000.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 On October 15, the Government suspended Article 18 of the
 Statute of Rights and Guarantees of Nicarauahs, which states
 
 
 626
 NICARAGUA
 that "no person will be subject to arbitrary or illegal
 interference affecting his private life, his family, his home,
 his correspondence or his communications." Thus, with no
 legal requirement for a search warrant, police and state
 security officials regularly enter and search private
 residences, particularly those belonging to political
 opposition figures. The Government opens private mail and
 intercepts both incoming and outgoing international mail, taps
 telephone lines, and inspects the baggage and personal effects
 of both arriving and departing international travelers to
 confiscate items of literature including newspapers, films or
 tape recordings alleged to be subversive, as well as some
 religious materials that originate abroad.
 The Government has developed an elaborate and effective
 security and intelligence network, employing both the security
 forces and Sandinista party organizations, particularly the
 "Sandinista Defense Committees (CDS's)," to ferret out
 dissidents and suspected subversives. The CDS's, based on
 Cuban model block committees, are organized in most
 neighborhoods throughout the country. The CDS central office
 serves as headquarters for a network of informers and as an
 instrument of pervasive political control and
 intimidation--they are self-described as the "eyes and ears of
 the revolution." Participation in the CDS is supposed to be
 voluntary, but they employ many methods to entice or pressure
 individuals into joining, including committee control over the
 distribution of ration cards for the purchase of basic
 products such as rice, beans, and soap. In 1985, access to
 public health care, public records, and the right to
 employment often depended upon a letter of recommendation from
 a local CDS. While many people who do not participate in
 Sandinista party activities suffer no ill effects, others are
 disdained as politically suspect or are denounced by
 Sandinista activists as subversives--for example, if they
 refuse to perform CDS neighborhood night guard duty known as
 "revolutionary vigilance." People who criticize the
 "revolutionary process" or its leadership may be subjected to
 pressure ranging from public ridicule and defacement of their
 homes to loss of employment and even detention.
 CPDH has credible reports that under-age Nicaraguan males have
 been impressed into military service, including boys as young
 as twelve years old. A riot broke out in the small town of
 Nagarote in January 1985 as the citizenry resisted mass
 round-ups of youths by government troops, who forced their way
 into homes and public places.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government intensified its policy of prior censorship and
 practice of harassment against the private and electronic
 media in 1985. Since 1982, the only independent newspaper, La
 Prensa, has suffered widespread censorship of new materials
 and editorials. The two other newspapers, both supported by
 the Government, at times publish the same items that have been
 censored from La Prensa. The distribution of newsprint to all
 three newspapers is controlled by the Government, which limits
 the number of pages per week they may publish. Many small
 publications not aligned directly with the Government were
 forced to coase publication because of their inability to
 obtain newsprint. Though a July 19, 1984, decree proclaimed
 
 
 627
 NICARAGUA
 that censorship would affect only matters of national
 security, censorship in fact continued on internal political
 matters, economic problems, Church affairs, human rights and
 many other non-security issues. Censorship of La Prensa
 continued to be capricious and increased sharply by the end of
 the year. La Prensa editors estimated that in 1985, before
 the October 15 decree, 40 percent of the news coverage was
 censored; after the decree, the share regularly censored
 increased to approximately 80 percent. The paper had failed
 to publish eight times as of December 5, 1985. The Government
 also banned private and internal publications not for sale to
 the general public of organizations which had not first
 received permission to publish nor agreed to submit to prior
 censorship.
 In early October, the Government told the Church that its
 planned newspaper, La Iglesia, would have to be registered
 with the Ministry of Interior's Directorate of Media
 Communications. The Church feared the request was a prelude
 to prior censorship, which the Church has consistently
 resisted. On October 12, the first issue of La Iglesia was
 printed. A delivery truck carrying copies to various churches
 was stopped by police and the driver forced to retrace his
 route, picking up already distributed copies of the
 newspaper. Later, armed men went to the Church's office and
 confiscated the remaining copies and printing equipment. When
 the Church attempted to register La Iglesia, the request to
 publish was denied.
 On October 22, the Ministry of Interior issued a notice that
 all communications media and printing facilities must register
 with the Ministry of Interior. A literary magazine was
 confiscated prior to that date, and an opposition political
 party was told the party could no longer print and distribute
 its monthly newsletter without prior censorship. Several La
 Prensa journalists and most of the people involved with the
 publication of the Catholic paper were detained in El Chipote
 for interrogation, during which they were charged with
 involvement in "subversive" activities: one of La Iglesia's
 staff members, a foreign-born resident, was deported.
 Government security agents also harassed La Prensa
 distributors in areas outside of Managua, forcing a number to
 cease operations. In September, a small private publishing
 house was occupied by State Security forces and its owner
 jailed, reportedly for agreeing to print a private sector
 pamphlet. In November, the Ministry of Interior informed the
 independent human rights commission, CPDH, that all its
 publications, communiques and letters would be subject to
 prior censorship.
 The Government owns two-thirds of the radio stations in the
 country. Production and broadcast of news programs are
 tightly controlled. Since 1982, 21 independent radio news
 programs have gone off the air because of excessive
 censorship. All radio programming, including commentary,
 names of music selections, and sponsors, must be submitted to
 the censors in advance. In the case of the two independent
 religious radio stations, one Protestant and one Catholic, the
 censors have, for example, found verses from the Bible and
 messages from the Pope and other religious leaders
 objectionable. Live transmissions on radio or television of
 Masses are prohibited, and the Government repeatedly
 threatened to close the "Radio Catolica" station and to
 confiscate its offices and equipment if the station failed to
 
 
 628
 NICARAGUA
 follow censorship orders. In 1982, the Ministry of Interior
 closed the station for 15 days for failure to abide by its
 censorship orders. In 1985, the Ministry of Interior twice
 raided the station to terminate transmission of Cardinal
 Obando's Masses, on one occasion despite previous assurances
 from Minister of Interior Tomas Borge that the Mass could be
 broadcast. On October 30, the station was closed for 48 hours
 as punishment for the broadcast of an unapproved homily by the
 Cardinal. On January 1, 1986 the Government announced that
 the station had been closed down by the Ministry of Interior
 because it had failed to join a national radio network in
 broadcasting President Daniel Ortega's end-of-year message.
 Both public statements by Government officials and the wording
 of the official announcement, which referred to the closure
 rather than suspension of Radio Catolica suggest that the
 shut-down may be permanent.
 Both existing television channels are state-owned and managed
 by the "Sandinista System" (SSTV). Their daily news programs,
 "Sandinista News," are identical, and the content of the
 programming is indisputably partisan.
 The Government also has stymied individual freedom of
 expression through selective persecution--the case of the
 torture of the Catholic Parents Association president for
 criticizing the state-enforced Sandinista patriotic education
 curriculum in religious schools is only one example.
 Non-programmed, critical questions or comments at government
 town meetings may subject the speaker to imprisonment or
 worse, according to cases on file with CPDH. There were
 detentions in retaliation for verbal expressions of private
 views or participation in public events and for the purpose of
 interrogation and intimidation on political
 subjects--political party and church links, contacts with
 foreign embassies, views expressed by priests, employment by
 foreign missions, support from foreign labor political groups,
 and so forth.
 While there is no censorship of domestic or imported books,
 few books from the West are on sale in Nicaraguan book
 stores. Most books are subsidized and book stores are stocked
 largely with publications from Communist countries. The
 Government's imposition of "curriculum rationalization and
 coordination" on the two Nicaraguan universities has limited
 their autonomy in developing their curricula and has further
 circumscribed academic freedom. The Ministry of Education has
 imposed curricula with a strong ideological content on primary
 and secondary schools as well. Also, the Sandinista Youth
 organization is a pervasive influence in the public education
 system; it has reportedly paid for some members' tuition in
 private schools in order to have the organization represented
 there. Sandinista Youth members allegedly have denounced
 teachers for not supporting the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 On October 15, 1985, an official decree suspended many legal
 rights and guarantees including the right to "associate
 oneself freely with others for legal purposes;" the right to
 "found and promote regular, commercial, rural, etc.,
 organizations and labor or professional organizations;" the
 right of unions to form federations and national
 confederations; and the right of these to form international
 union organizations or to affiliate with them. The right to
 
 
 629
 NICARAGUA
 strike was suspended simultaneously.
 Before the October 15 decree, rights to associate and to
 establish organizations existed in theory but were limited in
 two ways: by a government requirement that all organizations
 have approved legal status (personeria juridica), and by
 government refusal to grant such status to organizations which
 it disdained. At .least one professional organization, one
 political party, and a Protestant ministers' association
 applied for such status, but were refused. The application of
 an independent labor union has been pending for several
 years. These organizations therefore remain technically
 illegal, as do all their activities.
 Prior to the October 15 decree, the right to assemble
 physically in one place existed in theory and was often
 respected. The Government sometimes made it impossible to
 assemble in desired locations, however, by refusing to rent
 space for private sector gatherings and to religious groups;
 by refusing permits for peaceful marches, reportedly by asking
 private theater owners not to rent to certain groups for
 specific meetings; and by ordering bus companies not to
 transport attendees. On May 1, police forcibly halted
 Confederation of Labor Unification members who planned to walk
 from a church where they had attended Mass to the site of Luis
 Medrano's assassination by the National Guard. Government
 officials publicly interpreted the October 15 suspension of
 the right to associate physically as a ban only on outdoor
 gatherings for which permits had not been granted. In one
 case, a dozen members of a committee which organized the
 celebration of Mass by the Cardinal in Chinandega in November
 were arrested because an unauthorized outdoor procession
 occurred there prior to the Mass. In September, the
 organizers of a private celebration were summoned and warned
 to cancel the festivities, and were held under house arrest on
 the day of the event. In December, five hundred persons
 invited to attend a graduation of private development trainees
 were also turned away by the police. Large outdoor assemblies
 by government-sponsored or favored groups, however, are
 routine during national holidays, Sandinista and Communist
 party anniversaries, and so forth.
 Seven major labor confederations operate in Nicaragua. The
 two largest are linked directly to the FSLN: the Sandinista
 Workers Central (CST) and the Rural Workers Association
 (ATC). Three others are Marxist organizations with ties to
 Nicaragua's various Communist parties (the Independent General
 Confederation of Workers, with approximately 1600 members; the
 Confederation of Labor Action and Unity, with approximately
 2600 members; and the Workers' Front, a marginal organization
 the membership of which is unknown.) Of the remaining two
 independent confederations, one is affiliated with the
 Christian Social Party (the Nicaraguan Workers' Central with
 approximately 3200 members) and the other,
 democratically-oriented, has no party affiliation. The CST is
 the FSLN's umbrella confederation for mostly non-agricultural
 workers, and with over 45,000 members is the country's largest
 labor confederation. The ATC is a farm labor confederation
 with over 35,000 members. According to ATC officials,
 however, the figure does not include more than 100,000
 seasonal workers.
 In addition to the large labor confederations, the Sandinistas
 also control most of the smaller labor unions representing
 
 
 630
 NICARAGUA
 various worker groups, such as teachers, health workers,
 journalists, and government employees. As is the case with
 the confederations, however, these labor organizations
 represent the interests of the Government, rather than those
 of the workers. Union officials thus act to ensure compliance
 with various Government decrees and regulations, encouraging
 strict labor discipline, inhibiting the normal demands for
 wage and benefit improvements, and discouraging strikes.
 Despite these efforts, the worsening economic situation in
 1985 led to increasing labor dissatisfaction among both the
 FSLN-affiliated and independent labor organizations. This
 unrest most often was expressed in short-lived wildcat
 strikes, which in every instance were put down through the use
 of the police and generally brief arrests of activists and
 leaders. While prior to the October 15 decree the right to
 strike existed in theory, in practice strikes were not
 tolerated. In June of 1985, for example, workers in the
 Ernesto Chamorro Soap Factory in Granada called a wildcat
 strike when the Government suspended payment in kind (the
 augmentation of workers' salaries by providing them with goods
 produced). The Government's reaction to the strike was first
 to ask the workers to return to their jobs, because it was the
 duty of all workers to support the revolution, especially
 while the country was at war. When the workers refused to
 comply, police were used to break up the strike and force the
 workers back to the job. Several workers were detained
 briefly.
 Some arrests, however, involved much longer detention.
 Alejandro Solorzano, International Affairs Secretary of the
 Independent General Confederation of Workers, was arrested on
 October 15 and remains imprisoned. Solorzano has been
 charged, according to Interior Minister Tomas Borge, with
 "actions contrary to the methods used in a revolutionary
 country." Other actions against the independent union
 organizations included an armed raid of Independent
 Confederation of Workers of Nicaragua headquarters, in which
 State Security agents confiscated all union papers and
 documents and arrested Board members Augustin Rodriguez,
 Sergio Roa, and Eugenio Membreno. The three men were released
 following six hours of interrogation.
 There have been no reported strikes since the State of
 Emergency was decreed in October.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 An estimated 80 percent of the Nicaraguan population is
 Catholic, and Catholicism and other religions are legal.
 Throughout most of the year, church services were not
 interfered with, but Catholic Radio and Radio Waves of Light
 (an evangelical station) were required to tape and transcribe
 Masses, sermons and religious services to be broadcast and to
 submit them for prior censorship.
 Relations between the Government and the Catholic hierarchy
 and some Protestant churches have been strained for the past
 several years, but a new deterioration in relations between
 the Catholic Church and the Government began in the early
 summer of 1985 with the elevation of Archbishop Obando y Bravo
 to Cardinal. Hundreds of thousands of Nicaraguans poured into
 the streets to welcome the Cardinal in June when he returned
 from Rome. Two events marred the ceremonies. Police applied
 a water cannon to a group of faithful trying to enter the
 
 
 631
 NICARAGUA
 -airport grounds to greet the Cardinal as he stepped off the
 airplane. Because of their participation in the welcoming
 ceremonies, eight young men were subsequently detained. Six
 were released after a few days, including one young man who
 admitted that he had shouted "Nine Get Out," a reference to
 the Sandinista National Directorate of nine comandantes; two
 were still detained as of December and were tried by the TPA
 for crimes against the state. Tensions diminished slightly
 between June and August, but in September the Government
 stepped up pressure on the Church. On September 12 and 25,
 Interior Ministry agents raided the Catholic Radio station,
 terminating transmissions of the Cardinal's homilies. The
 Ministry of Interior's response to the Church's protests of
 the incidents was to reiterate the necessity for submitting
 taped and transcribed homilies for prior censorship. The
 Government's position was underscored on October 30, when
 Catholic Radio was closed by official order for 48 hours for
 broadcast of an unapproved homily. On January 1, 1986, the
 Ministry of Interior closed the station again.
 The Government also violated an informal agreement with the
 Church exempting seminarians from military service; during the
 month of September six seminarians from Granada and five from
 the Chontales area had been conscripted. Church efforts to
 secure their release have not been successful. Fifteen
 foreign priests working in the Rivas-Granada area involved in
 protesting the conscriptions were called before immigration
 authorities on October 1 and warned that if they did not
 desist from "political activities" they would be deported.
 The Church protested those threats, but again there was no
 response from the Government.
 On October 15, security officials forced their way into the
 Church's Social Services offices, threatening, photographing,
 and eventually expelling the workers from the premises. State
 Security agents declared the office "officially occupied" and
 denied entry to all Church officials, including the Cardinal.
 In November, the Ministry of Interior notified Cardinal Obando
 y Bravo that he must obtain the permission of the Government
 before traveling outside Managua to celebrate mass. The
 Cardinal's popular outdoor masses have been banned, and
 worshippers were prevented from entering some towns where he
 was holding services.
 Government pressure on evangelicals was also stepped up during
 1985. In early May, Oklahoma-based evangelist Larry Jones
 accepted an invitation to come to Managua, participate in a
 crusade, and distribute food through his "Feed the Children"
 campaign. Although Jones obtained personal assurances from
 President Daniel Ortega that he could hold his crusade and
 distribute six truck-loads of food through participating
 churches, the Government confiscated the food during the
 customs process. After lengthy negotiations, the Government
 returned four of the six loads, keeping two for its own use.
 The Government told Jones the confiscated food would be used
 to feed persons relocated under the government's resettlement
 plan, but it provided no evidence that the food was actually
 used for that purpose. On September 29, activities sponsored
 by a number of evangelical churches were disrupted by
 Sandinista mobs (turbas divinas). On October 30, State
 Security began rounding up leaders and youth activists from
 such groups as Campus Crusade for Christ, the First
 Evangelical Church of Central America, the National Council of
 
 
 632
 NICARAGUA
 Nicaraguan Evangelical Pastors, the Alliance for Children, and
 the Nicaraguan Bible Society. These men and women were
 subjected to abusive treatment. Some were forced to strip and
 wait for long periods in dark, cold cells, before
 interrogation. All were released from detention after periods
 ranging from one to ten days. One of the evangelicals, the
 Rev. Boanerges Mendoza, was rearrested and held for ten days
 because he discussed his first detention. Another
 evangelical, Dr. Jimmy Hassan, chose to leave Nicaragua for
 exile because of the threats made against him and his family.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The October 15, 1985 state of emergency decree suspended
 freedom of travel throughout the country. The new restriction
 has, so far, been used against several thousand Catholic
 worshipers, who were prevented from attending two special
 masses given by the Nicaraguan Cardinal and against some
 opponents of the regime. It has not greatly affected routine
 travel, although security checkpoints are now numerous in all
 regions except the Pacific. The Government requires exit
 visas for departure from Nicaragua for both Nicaraguan
 citizens and resident foreigners. Opposition leaders still
 experience difficulty in obtaining exit visas. In August of
 1985, the Government responded to the flight of medical
 doctors by requiring them to obtain permission from Ministry
 of Health regional directors before applying for exit visas.
 Other Nicaraguans with specialized skills, such as some
 refinery workers, must also obtain prior permission.
 Draft-age males cannot obtain exit visas without proof that
 they have registered for military service. Foreign travel
 remains difficult for most Nicaraguans because the Government
 controls access to hard currency and limits to US$1,000 the
 amount that may be taken out. Nicaraguans wishing to drive
 their cars out of the country also must post bonds which equal
 half the current value of the cars. The Government continues
 to confiscate the property of Nicaraguans who remain out of
 the country for periods of six months or more.
 During 1985, thousands more Nicaraguans left the country. The
 Governments of Honduras and Costa Rica estimate the number of
 Nicaraguans in those countries at around 200,000, with another
 200,000-250,000 in the United States, Mexico, and other Latin
 American countries, although the number granted refugee status
 is considerably smaller. Continued fighting and conscription,
 military induction of men up to age 40 for reserve units, and
 deteriorating economic and political conditions generate large
 outflows to neighboring countries. Nicaraguans who have fled
 the country and then choose to return appear not to face
 penalties. The UN reports that 750 people have been
 repatriated since January of 1985; the Government claims over
 1,500.
 In late 1981 and early 1982, the Government forcibly relocated
 about 10,000 Miskito Indians from their homelands to distant
 resettlement camps. In 1983, group political executions of
 East Coast Miskito Indians by the Sandinista military and
 security forces were condemned by the International League for
 Human Rights, and in reports made to the U.S. Congress, the
 OAS and the Indian Law Resource Center by Miskito Indian
 expert, Berkeley Professor Bernard Nietschman. The New York
 Times has estimated that approximately 800 Indian civilians
 were killed by the Sandinista Government. In an effort to
 
 
 633
 NICARAGUA
 mend relations with the Miskito Indians and to appease
 outraged international human rights organizations, the
 Sandinista government in 1985 publicly acknowledged its "past
 errors" and is now attempting to return Miskitos, earlier
 forcibly moved to relocation camps, to their homelands near
 the Rio Coco. A government program to resettle Miskitos who
 had fled to Honduras has brought back another 5,000 persons to
 the Rio Coco area.
 On March 10, 1985, President Daniel Ortega announced that the
 Government would begin new forced evacuation of thousands of
 peasants from the northern countryside. He then stated that
 7,000 families would be affected. The head of the government
 social service agency later estimated that 50,000 people would
 be moved in 1985, as part of a program that could affect
 200,000-250,000 people. According to Sandinista officials,
 the purpose of the program was twofold: to deprive resistance
 forces of local support by removing from war zones relatives
 and neighbors sympathetic to them, and to create "free-fire
 zones," where the Sandinista People's Army could operate
 freely. CPDH believes another objective of the forced
 relocations is to create new dependence on the Government --
 resettlement camps in which the inhabitants must accept
 government indoctrination and policies in order to survive.
 The Government describes those relocated as "displaced peasant
 families" who mobilized themselves in response to resistance
 forces attacks, seeking Sandinista government protection.
 Many peasants, nonetheless, report that Sandinista troops
 arrived in their towns and ordered the inhabitants to leave
 within 24 hours or less. In the northern town of Limay,
 evacuees and relief officers reported that homes of peasants
 were burned and animals killed to prevent people from
 returning. One evacuation official claimed that some people
 had been evacuated only because they had relatives with the
 resistance forces and that others had been ordered to leave
 because the Government had told them that they wanted to bomb
 their area.
 Nicaragua has received more than 20,000 displaced persons
 since 1979, most of them from El Salvador. This figure also
 includes Colombians, Uruguayans, Chileans and Argentines. The
 UNHCR gave material assistance to displaced persons in
 Nicaragua, most of whom are Salvadorans. The Nicaraguan
 Government works closely with the UNHCR to integrate these
 people into society, and many no longer receive assistance.
 Of the 1,532 persons aided by the UNHCR in 1985, about 500 had
 been integrated, and assistance to them ceased by year's end.
 As of September 1985, 14 Argentines, 430 Salvadorans, 18
 Chileans, 10 Colombians, and 52 Uruguayans had been
 repatriated. No displaced persons have been forcibly
 repatriated, although a number of Iranians attempting to enter
 Nicaragua from Costa Rica were deported back to their point of
 departure in Europe.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 A fundamental ideological conflict exists between the right of
 Nicaraguans generally to effect political change and the
 Sandinista Front's asserted right to rule, derived from its
 self-defined Marxist-Leninist role as the "vanguard party" of
 the people. From 1979 to 1984, the Front's National
 Directorate ruled through a junta of government, a council of
 state, and cabinet ministries. The Sandinistas always had a
 
 
 634
 NICARAGUA
 monopoly of force, and with that they increasingly dominated
 both executive and legislative functions. The November 1984
 election of president, vice president, and National Assembly
 did not diminish their domination. It merely permitted a
 small minority composed of other parties to have formal, if
 ineffectual, roles in the legislative process. The Sandinista
 Directorate controls the Assembly through its majority of
 seats and its president, who is a member of the Front's
 National Directorate.
 The Sandinistas have been even more jealous of power in the
 executive branch. All major appointments are of Sandinistas
 or their collaborators, and all policy decisions are made by
 Sandinistas. The statutes adopted by the National Assembly in
 April 1985 recognize that major decision-making authority lies
 with the executive. The National Assembly, which serves as a
 legislative body and the constitutional drafting institution,
 has no authority to involve itself in foreign policy,
 international agreements, or the budget. Moreover, during a
 state of emergency, the statutes provide that all legislative
 functions accrue to the President. That provision, however,
 has never been implemented.
 Thirteen political parties exist in Nicaragua. There are a
 few small ones which do not normally criticize the
 Sandinistas. Government treatment of the others in 1985
 reflected the Sandinistas' Marxist-Leninist assertion of the
 right to rule and extreme sensitivity to those who dispute
 it. In 1985 there were detentions of opposition activists of
 the Independent Liberal, Social Democratic, Liberal
 Constitutionalist, Social Christian, and Conservative (PCN)
 Parties; a complete prohibition on opposition demonstrations
 and parades; censorship of mass media to prevent even the
 mention of certain opposition parties; newly-imposed prior
 censorship of all written material distributed by all parties;
 interference with some parties' attempts to rent meeting
 halls; and personal intimidation of some party leaders at
 homes and offices.
 The foregoing forms of repression, along with uncertainties
 created by a general suspension of civil and political rights
 in October, were clearly designed to dampen the desires of
 opponents to maintain viable independent parties. The
 suspension of rights left no citizen with legal freedom to
 travel in the country, communicate in writing, organize
 groups, assemble peacefully, or be free from disruptions to
 home, family, correspondence and other communications. Though
 prevented from striking back publicly in any effective way,
 all opposition parties issued statements condemning the
 suspension of rights. Even those parties in the National
 Assembly, other than the FSLN, voted against or walked out on
 the Sandinistas' proposal for ratification of the decree
 abolishing rights.
 In addition to acquiring political party and governmental
 power, the Sandinistas have attempted to displace or frustrate
 independent civic and political pressure groups in order to
 achieve a monopoly of those also. Virtually every independent
 labor, professional, civic, commercial, and agricultural
 pressure group has its Sandinista-created counterpart, which
 is reportedly government-funded and always promoted publicly
 by the pro-Sandinista mass media. Formation of Sandinista
 parallel organizations for traditional groups appears to be
 the other side of a strategy of limiting the influence of
 
 
 635
 NICARAGUA
 independent groups by restricting their rights. Creation of
 competing organizations indirectly reduces the power of
 citizens to effect changes in government policies. In
 addition, the creation of Sandinista Defense Committees in
 urban areas at the neighborhood and block levels has tended to
 preempt or discourage the formation of community-based
 pressure groups, Would-be organizers of such groups are
 accused of anti-revolutionary sentiments and ostracized for
 trying to bypass the Sandinista Defense Committees, the ruling
 party's chosen instrument for grass-roots social change.
 The small number of elected officials in Nicaragua also limits
 citizens' access to those who might be responsive to pressures
 for change in Government or government policies. There are no
 elected municipal, departmental, or regional officials. There
 are less than 100 elected officials in the Government.
 Municipal elections have been discussed publicly by government
 officials, but none was scheduled as of late 1985.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has not been forthcoming on investigations of
 alleged violations of human rights which were to be carried
 out independently of the Government. The independent human
 rights organization, the Permanent Commission on Human Rights
 (CPDH), an organization founded in 1977 to focus the world's
 attention on human rights violations by the Somoza regime, has
 been consistently frustrated in its efforts to do its job. In
 the most serious attempt to bring CPDH activities under state
 control, in November the Ministry of Interior ordered that all
 documents prepared by the organization be submitted to the
 Ministry for prior censorship.
 Although a few non-governmental organizations have been
 allowed to enter the country to observe human rights
 conditions, these visits have been closely structured by the
 Government to expose the groups only to information and
 situations beneficial to the Government. This strategy of
 deception has been detailed by Alvaro Baldizon, who related
 that the efforts made to disinform include the careful
 preparation of places intended for visits. Such preparation
 includes the seclusion and even arrest of persons whose views
 toward the Government are known or suspected to be negative,
 and the placement of others--usually members of the Ministry
 of Interior--to act as "local residents" for the benefit of
 the visitors. According to Baldizon, security agents
 pretending to be journalists, photographers, or relatives of
 actual local residents frequently join the visiting group and
 act to steer the groups to particular places or persons, and
 to assist in the development of an itinerary. Such agents
 constitute what the Ministry terms "casual encounter" teams.
 Not only does the control of access to the public ensure the
 promotion of a positive image of the Government's policies and
 actions, it also provides a channel through which false
 information can be disseminated concerning alleged brutalities
 by the armed resistance.
 The offices of Peace and Justice, the newly-formed human
 rights investigatory arm of the Catholic Church, have been
 occupied by security forces.
 The umbrella group for the armed resistance, the United
 Nicaraguan Opposition (UNO), has formed its own human rights
 
 
 636
 NICARAGUA
 organization which is charged with the education of troops on
 their obligations under the Geneva Conventions, the American
 Human Rights Convention, and UNO's own Code of Conduct; the
 maintenance of records on abuses by its own forces and those
 of the Sandinistas; and the prosecution of UNO troops accused
 of abuses. According to UNO records, 21 individuals were so
 prosecuted between May and November, of whom 19 were found
 guilty and sentenced, and two were acquitted. The offenses
 involved theft, espionage, drug use, rape, and murder.
 Amnesty International Report 1985, which covers events in
 1984, expressed concern over detention of prisoners of
 conscience, primarily trade union and political party
 activists; unfair trials of political prisoners; and
 incommunicado detention before political prisoners were
 brought before the courts. Freedom House rates Nicaragua
 "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Nicaragua had a population growth rate of about 3.0 percent in
 1985. The present population of the country is 3.23 million
 people. Per capita gross income dropped sharply in 1984 and
 1985, as a result of inflation and a fall in the value of the
 cordoba.
 The Nicaraguan economy experienced negative growth in 1984 and
 indications are that 1985 was worse. Inflation rose to an
 annual rate of over 200 percent. Private investment in the
 economy has virtually ceased, and government investment has
 been restricted to projects related to the war effort. Export
 values dropped in 1984 to US$393 million and to US$300 million
 or less for 1985. Import values were maintained at high
 levels as the Government continued to rely heavily on imported
 raw materials. Trade sanctions imposed by the U.S. in May
 1985 have had an impact on the economy, but have affected
 private industry more than the government-controlled sectors;
 the Government had already begun a shift away from the United
 States to other, more friendly markets for its exports. Hard
 currency shortages have restricted imports, and the Government
 has begun to rely on donations of insecticides, fertilizers,
 and other vital inputs. Since May 1985, that trend has
 accelerated.
 Serious economic mismanagement, trade difficulties, and armed
 opposition activity all contributed to Nicaragua's economic
 woes in 1985. Although the private sector accounts for
 roughly 60 percent of gross domestic product, it is closely
 controlled by government regulation of all sales,
 distribution, prices, bank credits, and foreign trade. The
 Government has responded to economic problems by increasing,
 rather than decreasing, its degree of control over production
 and marketing processes--a solution that has further stifled
 private investment and initiative, and perpetuated
 bureaucratic inefficiencies. Despite the Government's
 proclaimed intention to foster a mixed economy, it has
 proceeded with confiscations of private property. In many
 cases, the lands and facilities seized have been taken for
 blatantly political reasons. One of the most productive
 coffee farms in Central America was expropriated for
 "inefficiency" in April 1985. The owner is actively involved
 in the civic opposition. Seven leading cotton growers lost
 their lands and production facilities when the Government
 declared them to be "too big" and asserted the right of
 
 
 637
 NICARAGUA
 workers to farm corn and beans on land of their own. The
 properties given to peasant families and cooperatives come
 mainly from confiscations. Some are given titles legalizing
 possession of land (usually in the mountains) already held and
 farmed by a family, sometimes for generations. Land titles
 distributed under the Agarian Reform Program grant the holder
 the rights outlined in the 1981 Agrarian Reform Act. The law
 specifically grants right to use only; holders of title cannot
 sell the land or divide it into parcels. Their children may
 inherit it, but only as an indivisible unit. In many cases,
 possession is contingent upon participation in a cooperative,
 or upon cultivation of a particular crop.
 In a June meeting with the country's doctors and health
 professionals, President Daniel Ortega conceded that the
 people of the country were not receiving the kind of medical
 attention they should expect, and he acknowledged that the
 national health care situation was truly critical. Most
 public hospitals, though free, are poorly maintained, staffed,
 and lack equipment. Foreign exchange shortages and war effort
 priorities in the budget have caused extreme shortages in
 medicines. East bloc countries have provided and staffed
 several new health centers and hospitals. The infant
 mortality rate in 1985 was 69.0 deaths per 1,000 live births.
 According to government figures, about 91 percent of the urban
 population and 10 percent of the rural population have access
 to safe water, but severe water shortages experienced in
 1984-85 may have decreased these percentages. The Government
 reported that 10 percent of the population was on social
 security rolls in 1984 and the literacy rate had reached 88
 percent. Unemployment stayed at about 20 percent, although
 the character of the work force changed somewhat. Skilled
 laborers, technicians, and professionals continued to leave
 Nicaragua, and in many cases there was no one to replace
 them. Fifty percent of those unemployed in 1984 were
 agricultural workers, many of whom have left the land to seek
 greater income in the capital. At the same time, the
 agricultural sector experienced a serious labor shortage in
 1984. Students, office workers, and international volunteers
 were mobilized to pick coffee and cotton, both vital export
 crops.
 Children under the age of 14 are not permitted to work
 legally. Ministry of Labor officials, however, admit that the
 prohibition on child labor is often disregarded in the
 countryside, where entire families often labor for wages,
 particularly at harvest time. Under the National
 Organizational System for Work and Salaries (SNOTS), minimum
 and maximum salaries have been established for all of
 Nicaragua's salaried employees working in the public and
 private sectors. Agricultural workers have not been
 incorporated into SNOTS, and most are paid on the basis of
 productivity (e.g., the amount of coffee or cotton picked).
 For those who labor in the fields daily, however, a minimum
 wage of 138 cordobas per task (a task is defined as a three to
 four hour period) plus a daily food allowance of 40 cordobas
 have been established. Farm laborers may elect to perform two
 tasks daily, thereby raising their daily wage to 278
 cordobas. Workers paid under the SNOTS system also receive an
 extra month's vacation per annum. Workers may elect, however,
 to take all or part of their vacation days as salary. As the
 SNOTS system established maximum as well as minimum wages,
 collective bargaining was eliminated. However, employers or
 workers can apply to the Ministry of Labor for permission to
 
 
 NICARAGUA
 pay or receive either a one-time or annual bonus.
 Women are not subject to any special restrictive measures by
 the Government, and are active at all levels of society and
 government, other than the highest policy-making bodies.
 women serve as officials in both the Sandinista and
 independent political parties, and a woman serves as the
 president of one of the Conservative Democratic Party
 factions. A large number of seats on the Council of States
 are also filled by women. Participation of women in the
 military is voluntary.
 Conditions for the Miskitos remain poor. Whole villages,
 infrastructure and crops, previously razed by Sandinistas,
 have not been restored. Food shortages and malnutrition
 reportedly continue to exist, and a number of restrictions on
 movement and ownership have been established. Weather,
 military activity, and economic restraints have reportedly
 hampered the government's current project to return the
 Miskitos to their ancestral homelands, according to local
 press accounts.
 
 
 639
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NICARAGUA
 1983     1984     1985
 ...............   -- ----....-----.. . . . . . . ---- ............... --
 I.ECDN. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.1      0.0
 A.AIO ...................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ......,........   0.0      0.1     0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.1     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......         0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         0.0      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.1      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL .........   31.3      0.8      0.0    735.2
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0    231.1
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      9.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     60.0
 iOB               30.7      0.0      0.0    405.4
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.6      0.5      0.0     23.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.3      0.0      5.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 640
