 NICARAGUA
 The Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), which came to
 power following the overthrow of the Somoza regime in 1979,
 completely dominates the Government of Nicaragua. Sandinista
 control over the governmental apparatus reflects the FSLN's
 success in transforming a popular uprising against a brutal
 dictator into rule by a small revolutionary elite. A new
 Constitution was promulgated on January 9, 1987, but a number
 of its provisions concerning individual rights were suspended
 by a presidential decree of a state of emergency the same day.
 The Constitution institutionalized Sandinista control through
 a monolithic executive, party control over the country's
 military and security forces, and central direction of the
 national economy. The Constitution recognizes the Popular
 Anti-Somocista Tribunals (TPA's), which exist outside the
 national judiciary and are used to try persons suspected of
 counterrevolutionary activity. Using the executive's control
 over the government security apparatus--and the broad powers
 conferred upon the security forces by the Constitution and the
 state of emergency--the FSLN engaged in a constant campaign of
 harassment against the civic opposition in 1987 by means of
 infiltration, intimidation, and the imprisonment of opposition
 members. The FSLN also employed the State's security and
 military forces in a massive campaign of repression in rural
 areas designed to destroy the "potential social base" of the
 armed resistance.
 The Guatemala accords, signed on August 7 by the five Central
 American Presidents, require that the Nicaraguan Government
 promote -national reconciliation and'initiate a process of
 democratization, including respect for human rights. In
 response to the accords, the Government has taken certain
 positive actions such as allowing the reopening of the
 independent newspaper La Prensa and Radio Catolica radio
 station, and creating a'National Commission of Reconciliation.
 By year's end, however, the Government had'not decreed a
 general amnesty, -lifted the state of emergency, begun direct
 talks with the Nicaraguan Resistance concerning a cease-fire,
 nor ended its harassment of the opposition. Moreover, the
 steps that have been taken can be reversed at any time, since
 the legal framework for repression has been suspended but not
 repealed. On December 13, President Daniel Ortega stated to a
 labor group that the Sandinistas would not cede effective
 political power even if they were defeated in a free election.
 There continue to be significant human rights abuses in
 Nicaragua, exacerbated by the ongoing war between the
 Government and the armed Resistance. Sandinista human rights
 abuses in 1987 continue to include large-scale arrests,
 particularly of peasants in isolated areas, on vague charges
 of counterrevolutionary activities; the torture and abuse of
 prisoners; disappearances; and civilian deaths resulting from
 the Sandinista Peoples' Army's (EPS) indiscriminate use of
 artillery and aerial bombardment. Although La Prensa and
 Radio Catolica have now been reopened, Nicaragua had no
 meaningful independent media outlet through the first 9 months
 of the year, and serious restrictions on a free press remain
 in place.
 The Government continued to obstruct efforts by the political
 opposition to proselytize and hold outdoor assemblies. An
 unprovoked August 15 confrontation between the Sandinista
 police and the Nicaraguan Democratic. Coordinator at the
 inauguration of the group's headquarters led to the arrests of
 
 
 549
 NICARAGUA,-
 the president .of the Independent Nicaraguan Bar Association
 and the director of the Permanent Commission on Human Rights
 (CPDH). Likewise, 1987 saw the reemergence of the "turbas,"
 party-controlled Sandinista mobs used to attack and intimidate
 the political opposition.
 The Government of Nicaragua has prosecuted Sandinista soldiers
 for abuses-of authority, according to pro-Sandinista daily El
 Nuevo Diaro. In the first 11 months of 1987, according to the
 newspaper, 3,470 Sandinista military personnel were convicted
 by military courts for committing either civil or military
 crimes. It is unknown what percentage Mere convicted for
 violations of military law--i.e., insubordination or cowardice
 --and what percentage for violatibns of the civil criminal
 code.
 The Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) and the
 Nicaraguan Resistance military prosecgtor's office (Fiscalia)
 worked'to increase-the Resistance's observence of human
 rights. The ANPDH, which is independent of the Resistance
 movement and receives U.S. funding, trained'nearly 105 human
 rights observers within the Nicaraguan'Resistance.
 Approximately 65 observers were deployed with Resistance
 combatants or as members of the regional command staff. The
 observers' primary functions.are. to record-allegations,
 conduct investigations, and train combatants in the observance
 of human rights. So far, the ANPDH has-,instructed about 1,500
 persons in some-33 courses and seminars fgr commanders, troops,
 and observers. Courses are based on the Nicaraguan Resistance
 military code of conduct and the protocols additional to the
 Geneva Conventions, with emphasis on protection of the civilian
 population, proper treatment of prisoners, prohibitions against
 torture and indiscriminate use of weapons (including. mines),
 and elimination of forced recruitment. Additionally, the ANPDH
 forwarded to the Nicaraguan Resistance military prosecutor's
 office moarethan .70 reports of suspected human rights
 violations by Resistance fighters alleged to have occurred
 between 1984 to 1987.
 In July the Resistance's military prosecutor's-office was
 strengthened, and. restructured. The military prosecutor's
 office has tried 13 human rights and 18 other cases. Tep
 preliminary investigations of alleged human rights abuses have
 been completed and are being referred to trial.. Twenty-four
 instances of alleged abuses are under investigation.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section L. Respect for-the Integrity Qf.the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 In 1987-,.21 killings apparently on political grounds were
 attributed to the .Sandinista security forces, based on
 informatidn provided by the CPDH. Many of these deaths
 involved persons who had been-taken into custody by government
 security forces for investigation, particularly in rural
 areas, or-persons being-held in-the Sandinista prison system.
 Several examples of political killings that have been
 attributed to the regime are:
 --Pedro Jose Gonzalez, .Jose A- Picardo, and Mario C.
 Garcia were arrested by the Government in March and killed,
 
 
 550
 NICARAGUA
 allegedly while trying to escape, by Ministry of the Interior
 (MINT) officials on April 22.
 --Francisco Augustin Sanchez Gutierrez, a political
 prisoner serving a 9-year sentence in the "model prison" in
 Tipitapa, was reported in El Nuevo Diario (END) as having been
 killed on June 20 in'a,scuffle with another political
 prisoner. Although END said Sanchez's killer was a political
 prisoner, CPDH reports he was in fact an ex-member of the
 EPS.
 --Leopoldo Palacio Gonzalez, a security guard for a
 cotton cooperative in Leon who also worked at the Leon
 airport, was reportedly beaten by state security DGSE
 officials on the night of January 15 and later died of his
 injuries on February 6.
 --Pablo Antonio Manzanarez Lopez, a 12-year-old boy from
 Matagalpa department, was taken into custody by DGSE officials
 on September 16 for investigation. The following day his
 sister, Ilma Manzanarez Lopez, discovered the decapitated body
 and head of her brother not far from their home.
 --Santiago Nardo Arguello Montiel, 20-year-old farmer
 from Nueva Guinea, was taken from his home on March 9 by
 government security forces. Arguello's mother was later told
 by a DGSE officer that her son had been killed and buried by
 the security forces. Subsequent efforts to locate his corpse
 have been unsuccessful.
 The Resistance has been accused of political killings by
 representatives of the international press and by human rights
 organizations as well as the Sandinista regime. Several
 examples-are:
 --In May, the Resistance was reported to have stopped a
 truck filled with civilians and killed an ex-soldier; Julian
 Flores Amador, who was among the group.
 --Family members accused the Resistance of killing two
 brothers, Jose and Porfirio Telles Garcia, 14 and 20 years of
 age, in July.
 --The townspeople of San Marcot, Jinotega accused the
 Resistance of killing an off-duty lieutenant, a Sandinista
 teacher, and a civilian in front of about 20 children. Two of
 the three were allegedly unarmed at the time.
 --In March the Resistance was accused of executing two
 health workers in Matagalpa for possibly belonging to the DGSE.
 b. Disappearance
 Reported disappearances usually involve persons who have been
 detained by the Government's security forces, but whose
 families have not been notified of their whereabouts or whose
 detention has been denied by the Government. The cases also
 reflect the Sandinista military's recruitment practices, which
 often entail simply rounding up youths of military age for
 military service. Youths inducted in this manner are given no
 chance to notify their families concerning their location,
 especially in rural areas. CPDH reported that it received
 complaints of 140 cases of disappearances for which the
 Government was responsible in 1987.. Most cases are resolved,
 
 
 551
 NICARAGUA.
 but the CPDH still had a backlog of 280 cases under
 investigation as of October 1987.  ,
 As in 1986, the Nicaraguan Government charged the armed
 Resistance with a deliberate policy of kidnaping, civilians,
 with the Government's human riqhtsbQdy claiming that 880
 persons had been kidnaped through Septeiber. 1987..: Three of
 the more celebrated kidnaping cases were those of Father
 Enrique B1Landon and Pastor Gustavo Tiffer, captured by the
 Resistanc.-fores on October 10 and released-October 22, and
 Witness for Paaqe member Paul Fisher, _detained by the
 Resistance on October.17 and released October.30.
 The Resistanceleadership, assisted the ANPDH.in-its
 investfgatiQntof bhe alleged kidnap of-four female school
 teache s4"n May,. . )o young women -were returned to their
 villages through the efforts of the ANPDH.. Two chose to
 remain with the Resistance. The Resistance's military
 prosecutor's office sentenced a Resistance leader to.6 months
 in detention for his role in this case.
 At least some.,allegations of kidnap by the Resistance must be
 viewed with scepticism, howeveK, as demonstrated by the case
 of 11 youths -captured.by the Resistance inJune.- The Il were,
 characteriged .qki-nap victims in the .Sandinista press,
 despite theCaet all of them were SandinistA.soldiers. on
 actiyQ.duty.,when they,were taken prisoner., The Resistance's_
 military:,prQsecutor's offide found Ampinio Palacios, an Indian
 Resistaoce;fighter, guiltyof recruiting-35 Sumo Indians by. -
 force. _4wpinioPalacos.and two of his fighters were reported
 .to have@jillpd Torbes.Kramer, a-17-year-old,.a 15-year-old
 named "Geronimo," and an unnamed 16-year-old. Eighteen of th
 Sumos escaped while 14 remain with YATAMA, the Atlantic Coast
 IndiaiorganizatiQn. Amppinio;glacios and the.other two
 combataDtg iv0lyed reGeiveda dishonorable .discharge and were
 sent.nced.tQ -years  nd 8months' in detention. The three
 remain at!large after having escaped-H'nduran army-custody.
 c-..Jortuxe and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 TX9qtment or Punishment
 Nicaragua has three types of prisons--state security (DGSE)
 facilities, national penitentiary prisons, and the open
 farms. The f-irst two systems are where most of Nicaragua's
 prisoners arp held and'where;most abuses-occur.
 Interrogatipn.of detainees is'normally conducted in DGSE"
 prisons. During interrogatiop',.detainees are subjected
 to various fEoms of physicaland psychological torture,
 including f99dand water-deprivation, mock egecutions, and .-
 beatings. Prisoners are kicked, punched, an& beaten with ..
 rifle butts-while their hands are manacled behind their backs,
 or while they are hung by their hands. Prisoners are often
 placed naked in barrels of cold water for up to 2 or 3 days,
 and forced to stand at attention in freezing ,rooms for as long
 as 20,,,"ip8.i. CP.DH .repor.ts that physical torture is more
 commonly usad against peasants,-while psychological methods
 are utili,ed-,against members, of civic, political, and labor
 organizations*. Death-threats against Prisoners and their.
 family members are also common.
 The DGSE prisons are not open to inspection by any
 international human rights group, including the International
 Committee of the Red-Cross (ICRC). Prisoners in DGSE jails
 are customarily kept in the  dark.-in isolation cells. Food -is
 
 
 552
 NICARAGUA
 scanty and at El Chipote, the most notorious DGSE facility,
 often consists of only a spoonful of rice and beans three
 times a day.
 The systematic use of these interrogation techniques by the
 DGSE reflects a deliberate government policy targeted at
 political prisoners in DGSE prisons or its secret jails.
 Torture is not often used in the national penitentiary system,
 but conditions are harsh and beatings of political prisoners
 are common. Persons who refuse to work or participate in
 reeducation programs are punished by isolation and reduction
 of their already meager food ration to one-half cup of rice
 and beans or grains and vegetables. In August, 10 political
 prisoners in the Tipitapa prison who had been particularly
 active in protesting abuses were reportedly beaten with metal
 bars and shocked with'cattle prods.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The Government detained hundreds of persons, generally
 peasants, on the vague charge of being "engaged in counter-
 revolutionary activities." Such a charge normally means that a
 person is accused of aiding the Resistance forces or of
 supplying them with food. CPDH reports that many peasants
 detained on these charges have, in fact, come under suspicion
 for their refusal to join one of the FSLN's mass organizations,
 such as the Association of Agricultural Workers (ATC) or the
 National Union of Farmers and Cattlemen (UNAG). As detailed
 in Section l.f., the neighborhood Committees for the Defense
 of Sandinismo are active in providing information to the DGSE
 on opposition activities.
 The DGSE also commonly intimidates political, labor, and civic
 activists by detaining them for short periods of time before
 releasing them without charge. One example of such a detention
 was the Sandinista police's January 22 detention of Social
 Christian Party (PSC) President Erick Ramirez and five other
 PSC leaders following an organizational meeting of the January
 22 Mothers of Political Prisoners movement. The PSC leaders
 were detained for 2 1/2 hours, during which three of them were
 beaten.
 Individuals charged with counterrevolutionary activity are
 generally detained at night by the DGSE and interrogated.
 Detainees are normally kept until they agree to confess their
 guilt or implicate others in counterrevolutionary activities.
 In rare instances, they are released without charge.
 Throughout the detention period the prisoner has no right to
 legal assistance or representation by counsel. The state of
 emergency did not permit political prisoners any legal
 recourse. Political prisoners are often denied family visits
 as a form of punishment.
 Following a confession, the detainee is held until his case
 appears before one of the TPA's. The average detention period
 is 8 months. However, the Government's human rights body, the
 National Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human
 Rights (CNPPDH), reported the case of one person, Felipe Luna
 Orozco, who spent 5 years and 7 months in prison without
 trial. According to CNPPDH, 38 percent of Nicaragua's prison
 population has never been sentenced by a court.
 In June Minister of the Interior Tomas Borge said that there
 are.4,605 political prisoners in Nicaragua, consisting of
 
 
 558
 NICARAGUA
 2,110 Guardsmen and 2,095 armed resistance fighters. The-
 total number of poritical prisoners- currently being held.in
 Nicaragua is estimated.by CPDH-to be 6,200, including those
 who have been sentenced and those Who are.-awaiting trial. In-
 addition ho these, CPDH"calculates that approximately 2*,000
 National Guirdsmen remain in prison, for an overall figure of
 roughly'81200pri'ohers after the September release of 986
 prisonerd-under the amnesty provision of the. Guatemala
 accords. Given the secrecy maintained by the Government on
 this question and its unwillingness to allow full access to
 prisondtby international'organiz ations, there is no way to
 verify these-rfmbers. Other sources inside Nicaragua estimate
 that,  including common criminals,_ there may be up to 20,000
 prisode'rs i nVthe country.
 In 1987 no Nicaraguans were'expelled, although several
 thousand fled as refugees for both political and economic
 reasons* -Some refugees also returned to Nicaragua.
 The CPDH estimates that'50 percent of the prisoners in the
 model prison,'and iri the zdna Franca facility are required to
 work. Work'constitutes the first -step in the Government's
 reeducatioz'program, with prisoners -who -have worked -
 satisf~dftrily being sent to "study-circles ,"to-discuss the
 latest wxitings-and tpedched of-the Sandinista leaders.
 Prisoners who- show "sufffcient "pidgress" ,are-asked to be
 informants, aid those - hd, acceet this-offer,-are eventually
 transferrd:to 6den-farms, -where they, are given better food..-
 and privilege�.- Refusal-to-work results in-the'denial of  .-
 visits, a serious-@unishmenb because-food supplied by visitors
 is an important pupplement-'to prison fare.,      -.
 The Resistance held fewer than 100 Sandinista prisoners before
 theirlielease under the-amhesty-provision of the Guatemala
 accords. The ANPDH visited the prisoners and reported no
 serious abuses or torture. In September in compliance with
 the Guateibdla accoids, the Resistance released 80 prisoners,
 at least 6016f whom opted to remain in Costa Rica rather than
 return t6&Nicaiagua.     -
 e. Denial of Fair'Public Trial "
 Nicaragua hasthtee'court systems, the-civil and-criminal
 courts of the-Ministry of JustIe-p the Sandinista polibe
 court,'of, the Mihist:'of Interioi; and the TPA's. While all
 three court systbms'arestaffed primarily by Sandinista
 supporters the TPA's, Whibh exist outside the .regular
 Nicaraguan jdic-al'tystem and are administered directly by
 the executive'brandh, are the most heavily politicized. The
 TPA's were created in 1983 to try persons accused of counter-
 revolutionary activities. The judge and jury in a TPA case
 consist of two"aymen selectedby the Committees for'the
 Defense of Sandinismo (CDS), and a president, who is a member
 of the Sandihista'Assbciation of Lawyers and normally a former
 Ministry of- Justi'ce 'dmplbyee. All three are members of the
 Sandinistb'People's'Nilitia, an armed body directed by the
 Ministry'of Dfene.        -     "
 TPA trials are id theory open to the public, but defendants'
 families ate required to have prior approval to attend the
 proceedings. Authorization is normally-given-for only a
 5-minute' visit with the-defendant. Defense attorneys- are
 named yhen the defendant appears before the TPA. The short
 preparation time and evi*entiary limitations imposed by the'
 TPA generally ptevent defense attorneys' from preparing a- .
 
 
 554
 NICARAGUA
 credible defense. The CPDH estimates that 85 percent of TPA
 convictions are based on confessions extracted in DGSE
 interrogation facilities. The TPA convictions may only be
 appealed to the TPA appellate court, since the Nicaraguan
 Supreme Court lacks jurisdiction over the special tribunals.
 Through October 1987, the Managua TPA trial court handed down
 456 convictions and 42 acquittals, a conviction rate of over
 90 percent. The TPA's have also begun to function in Matagalpa
 and Juigalpa.
 Independent Nicaraguan daily La Prensa reported on October 21
 that a pamphlet had appeared in several criminal courts
 complaining of Sandinista police excesses, political pressures
 on the judiciary, poor preparation and training of police, and
 lack of legal counsel for detainees. Forty criminal and civil
 court judges allegedly supported these complaints.
 On December 15, La Prensa published the resignation letter of
 three members of the Nicaraguan Supreme Court: Heraldo Zuniga
 Montenegro, Santiago Rivas Haslan, and Rodolfo Robelo Herrera.
 In the letter, the three explained that they were resigning
 due to the executive branch's repeated refusal to comply with
 judicial orders and the executive branch's disrespect for the
 court. The three justices cited the La Verona case--in which
 Agricultural Minister Jaime Wheelock refused to abide by the
 high court's order that a confiscated farm be returned to its
 owner--as the latest example of the Sandinista regime's
 disregard for the court. According to La Prensa, the three
 justices had been the most active in hearing appeals and
 rendering decisions. The Sandinistas maintain that the
 resignations were merely part of the normal replacement
 process provided for by the Constitution.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government interference and intrusion into the privacy and
 homes of citizens is extensive. Opposition activists are
 subject to surveillance, telephone taps, and examination of
 their mail. Surveillance of opposition figures is carried out
 nationwide through a system of DGSE informants. The CDS
 constitutes another form of control and interference in the
 privacy of citizens. The CDS, organized at a neighborhood
 level, provides information on the activities of opposition
 members and others of interest to the DGSE. The inviolability
 of homes is not recognized under the state of emergency.
 Religious workers and other private citizens in Jinotega and
 Esteli have reported that the EPS frequently carries out
 house-to-house searches for draft age males throughout
 Nicaragua.
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts
 Human rights groups charge that in its counterinsurgency
 campaign, the Sandinista military has committed numerous human
 rights violations, including the killing of civilians both
 through indiscriminate aerial bombardments and fire by ground
 troops. Members of the Resistance have alleged summary
 execution of prisoners, but there have been no documented
 cases. Verification is difficult, as the abuses occur in
 conflictive zones that are not readily accessible to
 independent observers. Examples of the abuses reported are:
 --Maria Eutracia Leon Estrada, a housewife, was killed in
 Comarca Campana, Villa Sandino, Chontales Department on
 
 
 555
 NICARAGUA
 September 4 when a group of Sandinista military earching for
 membersof, thp.eResistance .surrounded and machine-gunned the
 woman's house.
 --Nemesio Obando, a 15-year-old farmer from the Comarca
 Kuskuas, Santo Domingo jurisdiction, Chontales department, was
 killed when a Sandinista army patrol surrounded his home,
 ordered him aqd his family to come out, and then opened fire
 as they-4lked out the door. Obando, who was wounded in the
 chest and~stomach in the initial volley, was then bayoneted
 and shot in the head by a patrol member. Three weeks before,
 the attack, Obando had been interrogated for several hours by
 the DGSE.
 The Redistance has also been accused of attacks on
 noncombatants, forced recruitment, kidnaping of civilians,
 indiscriminate use of mines, and summary execution of
 prisoners. ThrougS~ eptebe 1987; 'the..Government's CNPPDH
 charged&that the Resistance forces had been responsible for
 the deaths of.4,5,60 civilians, but have not provided evidence
 to substantiate this charge. Some of the more prqminent
 charges made by:CNPPDH are: .
 --Thirteen people-died, including three children and nine
 militiamen, when the Resistance attacked San Jose de Bocay,
 Jinotega,.department-on July 16.
 --Eleven civilians were.killed and five-were wounded when
 the Resistance ambushed a passenger ,bus on its way toNueva
 Guinea, Zelayafrom the Cooperative Jaunto Bera on July 3.
 --Eight people were killed on February 15 in Abisinia,
 Jinotega when Ibe tractor on which they were riding detonated
 an antitank mine and-was destroyed.
 --T hree individuals were killed, including 3-year-old
 Roberto Hernandez Lopez. and two militiamen,.apd five civilians..
 were wounded,,when-the Resistance attacked the San Andreas.
 Cooperative near Rio Blanco, Zelaya on May 15.
 Civilians have bpen killed -during Resistance attacks on
 cooperatives defended by Sandinista militia or army soldiers.
 The Resistance maintains that-the presence of military and
 militia personnel:makes thelcooperatives a legitimate target
 and that the civilians are being used as "shields." For
 example, a March.attack on the Quisilala cooperitive resulted
 in the deaths of five civilians, including-two children under
 5, and thexwounding of 3 Civilians. The Resistance's military
 prosecutor's -officp tried this cage,,and-testimony indicated
 that the cooperative was defended:by. at least 30 well-armed
 Sandinista soldiers and that during the attack, the armed
 Resistance used light weaponry. In addition, 15 AK-47 rifles,
 30,000 rounds-of ammunition and 60 RPK projectiles were
 captured inside the cooperative. The Resistance military
 court determinedthat the coopexative was a legitimate
 military tArget 'nd found the commander of the Resistance unit"
 not guilty of an indiscriminate attack against a civilian
 target.
 On April 28, American citizen Benjamin Linder was killed in a
 battle between Spndipista and Resistance fighters near El
 Cua. The Resistanc-military prosecutor's:office.and the
 ANPDH found evidence that) at the-time of-his death, Mr.
 Linder was wearing a military uniform and carried an AK-47
 rifle. Testimony given to the ANPDH indicated that Mr. Linder
 
 
 556
 NICARAGUA
 died during a firefight between the armed, uniformed group of
 Sandinistas he was with and a Resistance unit. The Government
 of Nicaragua has yet to respond to the ANPDH's request to
 inspect the site of the attack, take depositions from
 witnesses, and have impartial pathologists verify the autopsy
 results.
 As with the charges made against the Sandinista military,
 independent confirmation of human rights violations allegedly
 committed during battle and attributed to the Resistance is
 difficult to obtain.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press is extremely limited in
 Nicaragua. Government or pro-Sandinista ownership
 characterize most of the mass media, and the regime maintains
 strict controls over the few independent radio and press
 outlets. In October, however, following the Government's
 signing of the Guatemala accords, which require "complete
 freedom for television, radio, and the press," the Government
 allowed the reopening of La Prensa and Radio Catolica.
 Despite these steps, the legal restraints on free speech and
 press remain in place. According to La Prensa, the Inter-
 American Press Association condemned the Government of
 Nicaragua for having violated freedom of expression in 1987.
 As explained by Minister of the Interior Tomas Borge on
 September 23, prior censorship has been suspended, but the
 state of emergency and the provisional law on communications
 continued in effect. Hence, the Ministry retained the legal
 authority to reinstitute prior censorship at any time.
 Similarly, Decrees 511 and 512, which regulate the publication
 of information about internal security, national defense, and
 economic issues, remain in force. The Government has warned
 La Prensa on several occasions against publishing statements
 by Resistance leaders.
 The Government used its extensive powers over the media on
 October 19 to prohibit Radio Catolica from broadcasting news,
 claiming that the radio station had not submitted a written
 request to the Ministry of Interior for the necessary news
 permit. Radio Catolica's "Iglesia" news program finally made
 its debut on December 2. The Government also failed to act on
 requests for permits by seven new radio news programs, the
 first of which was filed by Radio Corporacion on August 17.
 According to La Prensa, there are 22 fewer radio stations
 since the Sandinista regime rose to power.
 In addition to these legal restrictions, the Ministry of the
 Interior accused seven Nicaraguan journalists and one lawyer
 of working for a "CIA news network." Several of the
 journalists were briefly detained and interrogated by the
 DGSE. This incident occurred in late August following the
 signing of the Guatemala accords.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Nicaragua's new Constitution provides for the rights of
 association, assembly, and peaceful demonstration and the
 right to strike. The state of emergency, reimposed by
 President Ortega on the same day he.signed into force the new
 Constitution, January 9, 1987, suspended the rights to
 
 
 557
 NICARAGUA-
 peaceful demonstration and to strike and severely curtailed
 the rights to free assembly and association.
 The constitutional-provision of peaceful demonstration
 requires no prior approval. However, current laws require
 police approval before any, outdoor march or public
 demonstration may take place. Opposition groups say that
 their requests for permits are sometimes ignored.
 Although indooz activities are not restricted formally, the
 Government, has occasionally used the police or Sandinista-
 inspired mobs called "turbas" to inhibit opposition activity.
 On June 19, a spontaneous, peaceful demonstration occurred in
 the degartmental capital of Boaco-when a Sandinista army- truck
 delivered the body of a militiaman, who had been killed  -
 accidentally. The deMonstrators" who reportedly numbered'.
 between 800 and L,00G, took over the local-national, Red.Cross
 office, demanding a full-report on the militiaman's death, as -
 well as assuxances regarding the safety of their own" family
 members undergoing military training nearby., Sandinista
 authorities responded-by shutting off electrical power to-'the
 town and sending-armed "turbas" to break up the demonstration.
 Violenc was- -averted -when the dem6nstrators started'up. the " -
 building's auxi~liary glherator, returning -light ta the  .
 immediate area. Sandinista state security agents arrested
 five opposition organizers and interrogated-them in El   -
 Chipote. One organizer was held only briefly, while three
 were detained unti7l November.- The.status: of the- fifth -
 individual remakns-unknowni Family members state that none of
 those arrested was -cnneuted in any-waywith the demonstration.
 On AugustlY5, the January 22 Movement of Mothers of Political
 Prisoners attempted torhbld -a peaceful meeting and march.
 Twenty tothrty. pd-licemen blocked-the meetingplace's only
 exit, threatening fa-arrest,any-person. who 1eft the building.
 The meeting was .attended" almost z-en.ti-raly -by peasant women,
 many accompani-ed :by:theii young children; After. several
 hours, Sodiaj Ghristian Par-ty!(PSC) leaders-managed to
 negotiate amodified poli-de withdrawal, allowing thd women-to
 leave peacefully. Although a demonstrationpermit had-.beea -
 sought by the PSC -leaders, it-was never formally granted.
 Sandinista police authorities were said to have granted -verbal
 permission, but later prohibited the march when no written
 permitcould be produced to police and state security officers .
 at the scene.,       . -         ""
 Sandinista pressure against this same organization continued
 on October 22 and-26.:.Members of the movement had organized
 vigils at the offices of CPDH and a downtown church on Mondays
 and Thursdays, respectively. On October 22, Sandinista
 "turbas" attacked a-group of some 20 women participating in a
 vigil at the El Calvario church ih Managua. Initial shouting
 of threats turned to violence when members of the Sandinista
 "Mothers of Heroes and Martyrs" group chased the women into
 the church"and physically'attacked several.of them.
 Sandinista,'police did not protect the women until a male
 bystander-fired shots into the crowd of "turbas", who-
 reportedly had attacked his son. The man was not associated
 with the Mothers-Movement and was the only'person arrested in
 the incident.
 In January Nicaragua lost its beneficiary status under the
 U.S. Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) program because
 the Government did not comply with the GSP statute regarding
 
 
 558
 NICARAGUA
 "Internationally Recognized Worker Rights." The decision
 followed allegations of practices denying freedom of
 association. Articles 82 through 88 of the new Constitution
 contain a number of labor rights, including the right to
 strike, freedom to organize, and the right to negotiate
 individual or collective bargaining agreements with employers.
 Nicaraguan workers, however, do not enjoy these rights in
 practice. Under the state of emergency regulations, strikes
 are prohibited, as they have been for most of the period since
 1979. Restrictions on opposition union organizing activity
 are mostly extraofficial and indirect. Union activists are
 subject to state-backed intimidation by Sandinista militants.
 Independent union headquarters have been occupied, and the
 Sandinistas ensure that important workplace elections do not
 result in changes of affiliation from the Sandinista workers'
 organization to one of the opposition confederations. Since
 the Government sets salaries through the National System for
 Ordering Work and Salaries (SNOTS), unions are severely
 restricted in their ability to make collective bargaining
 agreements. The SNOTS wage scales do not reflect Nicaragua's
 rapid inflation and thus have constituted a government-
 administered reduction of real wages. All such agreements
 must be approved by the Ministry of Labor and are rejected if
 they grant pay increases in excess of the SNOTS limits.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Eighty-five percent of the Nicaraguan people are Roman
 Catholics. The remainder belong to some 95 recognized
 Protestant, Evangelical, or Pentecostal denominations. During
 1987 there was little overt repression of religious activities,
 but, as noted in the case of Radio Catolica, political activity
 by church groups has been inhibited. There have been
 complaints of intimidation of Catholic priests and lay members.
 Agents of the DGSE have taped priests' sermons and later
 reprimanded them over use of "improper" words or phrases. For
 example, one priest suggested in a sermon that as swords
 should be beaten into plowshares, tanks should be converted
 into tractors. The priest was later officially castigated for
 having preached about military matters. At times, unknown
 individuals have appeared at church services to photograph
 members of the congregation.
 A Curia spokesman reported that Sandinista army troops had, on
 several occasions, comandeered Catholic churches in the
 Jinotega, Madriz, and Nueva Segovia departments for use as
 barracks. Although only used for this purpose for short
 periods, the churches were left in shambles and, in some
 cases, desecrated.
 There were few reports of harassment of the Protestant and
 Evangelical sects in 1987. A Baptist minister, who said his
 church has had legal status for more than 20 years, said the
 Government refused to allow his church to bring in religious
 materials donated by a U.S. church. Instead, the minister was
 told he would have to work through CEPAD (Evangelical Committee
 for Development Aid), an organization which the Sandinistas
 use to coordinate evangelical activities. One of CEPAD's
 directors holds an FSLN seat in Nicaragua's National Assembly.
 The Nicaraguan National Council of Evangelical Pastors (CNPEN)
 remained unsuccessful during 1987 in its 5-year effort to
 receive legal status. To date, no action has been taken on
 CNPEN's petition although, since 1982, many other religious
 
 
 559
 NICARAGUA
 organizations have been successful. CNPEN has received no
 responses to its request to government and FSLN leaders,
 including president Daniel Ortega, Interior Minister Tomas
 Borge and National Assembly President Carlos Nunez.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government imposes restrictions on foreign travel through
 use of, the passport and exit visa requirements. The regime
 limits some opposition figures to single-exit visas, while it
 often~denies both passports and exit visas toyoung men of
 draft age, professionals with skills needed by the regime, and
 political opponents whose views it does not wish to see
 expresied overseas. Sandinista soldiers pursued a group of 29
 Nicaraguans who attempted to flee to Honduras in July,
 according to two Honduran press reports. The-reports said
 that the soldiers killed 14 of the group. On-September 26,
 several thousand Nicaraguans converged at Las Manos on the
 Honduran border to visit family members living across the -
 frontier; at least three persons were seized by-Sandinista
 officials and beaten. And contrary to its earlier commitment
 to allow Nicaraguans to meet their family members living in
 Costa Rica at a special border post, the Nicaraguan Government
 closedo'the crossing at.Penas Blancas on October 24 after over
 600 NicarguLans requested refugee status from-the Government
 of Costa Rica. Nicaragua has begun granting 72-hour exit
 visas to citizens wishing to visit El Salvador, although
 clandestine entries continue.
 The Sandinista regime continues to relocate peasants forcibly
 as an integral-part of its counterinsurgency campaign. Jaime
 Wheelock, Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, stated
 May 25 that-in the last 7 years "the Government has been forced
 to displace ,?0,000 people from conflictive zones." In 1987
 the largest single forced relocation of peasants occurred in
 Nueva Guinea, where the regime moved some 6,000 persons to
 Sandinista resettlement camps. According to CPDH, many
 peasants were given only 24 hours' notice of the relocation.
 Conditions in the camps are reported to be. bleak, with people
 living in plastic tents and limited to 1 pound of beans per
 person per week. The peasants are not allowed to leave the
 camps, nor receive outside visitors without authorization. In
 addition, the peasants.are-pressured to form Sandinista
 agricultural cooperatives and to arm themselves for "self-,
 defense" as Sandinista militiamen.
 There were no reports of.;efugees forcibly repatriated from
 Nicaragua in,1987, and, in general, the Government's treatment
 of refugees has een good. The United Nations High
 Commissioner"on Refugees' (UNHCR) representative in Managua
 reports that through September 30 of this year, 123 Salvadorans
 were voluntarily repatriated.
 Section 3. Respect for-Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 According to-the Constitution, Nicaragua is a multiparty
 democracy 3qitba unicame~al legislature and a strong executive.
 In actual fact, a nine-Member FSLN National Directorate runs
 the country in consultation with the 103-member FSLN Assembly
 (not to.be-confused-with the National Assembly). The
 Sandinist  regime claikms it was democratically elected in 1984;
 some members of the opposition say they were not permitted to
 campaign freely).resulting in several parties boycotting the
 
 
 560
 NICARAGUA
 elections. Restriction of political pluralism has resulted in
 the emigration of members of the political opposition and in
 large numbers of citizens taking up arms in the belief that it
 is not possible to exercise their rights to change the
 Government through free elections.
 Fourteen political parties exist, most of which oppose the
 Sandinistas, and seven have representation in the National
 Assembly. Elections for the National Assembly and the
 presidency were held in 1984, with the next general elections
 scheduled for 1990. Municipal and Central American
 parliamentary elections are scheduled for 1988, although dates
 have not been set for either. Since the 1979 revolution,
 power has been highly centralized; municipal officials have
 little effective power.
 Political power in the country is concentrated in the hands of
 the FSLN. A Marxist-Leninist party that describes itself as
 the country's "vanguard," the FSLN is committed to the
 "socialist transformation" of the country's socioeconomic
 structure. The FSLN is all-pervasive in the Government, and
 the party seeks diligently to identify the party and the State
 as one. Membership in the FSLN and nomination to key
 government posts is determined by loyalty to Sandinista goals
 and ideology. Party penetration of the governmental apparatus
 is particularly visible in the Sandinista Peoples Army, where
 a political directorate, controlled by an FSLN militant,
 directs the political indoctrination of officers and
 conscripts down to the company level.
 Power within the FSLN is organized vertically, with the
 party's nine-person national directorate making all major
 decisions. The responsibility for implementing the
 directorate's orders flows downward through the Sandinista
 party assembly, the various FSLN organizational departments,
 and the regional party cadres. The Sandinista mass
 organizations play a supportive role, functioning primarily as
 instruments for political control and indoctrination.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has not allowed the key international human
 rights organizations to have complete access to prisons or to
 move freely in the country. It has, however, responded to
 inquiries from the United Nations Human Rights Commission and
 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. The Government
 has allowed some human rights organizations to visit the
 country on a restricted basis. In September, reversing its
 prior policy, the Government also gave permission for the
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to visit the country
 from January 18-22, 1988.
 In 1980 the Government established a progovernment human
 rights body called the National Commission for the Promotion
 and Protection of Human Rights (CNPPDH). The CNPPDH functions
 as an arm of the Foreign Ministry, devoting itself to the
 investigation of alleged Resistance human rights abuses and
 the defense of the regime's human rights record.
 The CPDH, the only independent human rights group in Nicaragua,
 faces a continuing campaign of government harassment. The CPDH
 is denied access to the regime's prisons and is not allowed to
 seek information from Ministry of Interior personnel.
 
 
 561
 NICARAGUA
 Prisoners and their families have been warned not to report
 abuses to the CPDH, and the organization's employees have been
 subjected-to threats, physical attacks, and defamation
 campaigns in the government press.- An example of the harsh
 treatment given to-CPD{ employees by the regime took place
 April 14 when Gloria Cespedes, a legal advisor to the group,.
 was detained by the DGSE and interrorated at El Chipote
 prison. Held for 4 hours, Ms. Cespedes was questioned about
 her work with ZPDH'and was accused of being "the defender of
 the Somocista Gdard~men-and the contras."
 The ICRC'vLsits prisons that belong to the national �
 penitentiary -ystem, but, as is the case-with all other human
 rights 6~anizatons, is denied abcess to the DGSE prisons.
 Section'5 - Discrimination Based on Race,' Sex, Religion, .
 Languge-,-:or Social Status
 Nicaragua's minorities, numbering some80/000 Indians and.
 26,000 English-speaking blacks, live primarily on the Atlantic
 Coast. Sandinista efforts after 1979 to integrate politically
 the Atlantic Coast with the rest of Nicaragua alienated many
 of the coast peoples, especially the Miskito Indians, who
 constitute the largest indigenous group, and led to mass
 flights of Indians to Honduras. Numerous Sandinista human
 rights abuses were reported during the period 1981-1986 as the
 Government tried to consolidate its authority on the Atlantic
 Coast through a campaign of force and repression.
 In 1984 the Government started a process to draft an autonomy
 plan for the peoples of the Atlantic Coast. This procedure
 culminated in the promulgation of an autonomy statute in
 September 1987. The autonomy plan purports to establish a
 democratic and responsive scheme for meeting the special needs
 of the Caribbean coast minorities, but it fails to address the
 major issue of national resource use and control, long the
 most fundamental concern of the area's indigenous groups.
 Moreover, the administrative powers which the plan gives to
 the regional governing units--the statute divides Zelaya
 department into two regional councils--are circumscribed by
 the national Government by various means. It appears doubtful
 the autonomy plan will overcome the historical legacy of
 distrust that exists between the indigenous peoples and the
 majority Ladino population.
 The Government also established procedures to facilitate the
 return of Miskito refugees from Honduras, initiating a
 repatriation program involving weekly flights from Puerto
 Lempira, Honduras, to Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, and reopening
 the Leymus border crossing. The UNHCR representative in
 Managua has reported that 2,304 had returned through UNHCR
 programs through the end of October.
 Women are not subject to any special restrictive measures by
 the Government and are to be found participating actively in
 most levels of government and society. However, the
 revolution has not succeeded in significantly altering the
 cultural constraints imposed upon women in Nicaraguan society.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Children under the age of 14 are not legally permitted to
 work. Due to the lack of enforcement, however, the
 prohibition on child labor is often disregarded in the
 countryside, particularly during the harvest seasons.
 
 
 562
 NICARAGUA
 The Government has attempted to mitigate the impact of
 inflation and low wages on the workers by rationing numerous
 basic necessities. In practice,-however, access to rationed
 goods is limited to state employees and members of Sandinista
 mass organizations. Even for them, there are frequent
 shortages, attributed, for the most part, to government
 economic mismanagement.
 Independent labor unions of both democratic and Marxist
 orientations have continued to protest the Government's
 amendment of Article 22 of the labor code which eliminated
 labor-management collective bargaining and replaced it with
 the SNOTS system. The unions' major complaints are the
 imposition of government criteria for wages and salaries and
 the abolition of the right to strike. According to Nicaragua's
 Confederation of Labor Unification, 26 unions have requested
 but not yet received legal status from the Government of
 Nicaragua. Substandard occupational health and safety
 measures showed no improvement in 1987.
 
 
 563
