 NICARAGUA
 The National Directorate of the Sandinista National Liberation
 Front (FSLN), a group of nine Marxist revolutionary leaders who
 took control in July 1979, holds political power in Nicaragua.
 A three-man junta, composed of one member of the National
 Directorate and two civilians, serves as head of the Government
 of National Reconstruction. When it came to power with broad
 popular support, the Government promised to replace the
 discredited Somoza dictatorship with new social, political, and
 economic systems based on the principles of pluralism, free
 elections, a mixed economy, and observance of human rights. In
 the succeeding four years, the Govhrnment has not held
 elections but instead has consolidated its power and restricted
 civil liberties. Many original supporters of the Government
 have joined the armed opposition. Throughout 1983, armed
 anti-Government organizations conducted military operations on
 three fronts near the border areas and deep in the interior of
 the country.
 The Nicaraguan economy is heavily agricultural; a modern
 sector, which produces a few basic export commodities such as
 cotton, coffee, sugar, and bananas exists beside a large
 traditional sector which produces for internal consumption and
 for export in the region. However, the latter sector is
 depressed due to economic difficulties throughout the region
 and is currently producing at about 50 percent of capacity.
 The economy is in a process of transition to a still undefined
 "mixed" economy in which the state will play a dominant role.
 Pervasive state controls on prices, credit, imports, and
 exports, combined with an often capricious implementation of
 agrarian reform through expropriation, have substantially
 affected the middle and upper income property holding groups.
 Many expropriations have had a purely political basis.
 Nicaraguan society is divided into a large working class,
 composed basically of urban laborers and rural peasants, a
 small but important urban and rural middle class, and a minute
 upper class. The working class, particularly in rural areas,
 has historically lacked access to educational facilities. The
 Government has significantly reduced illiteracy and has
 improved health care for many Nicaraguans.
 Respect for human rights, which deteriorated in 1982 with the
 imposition of the State of Emergency, continued to decline in
 1983. The state of emergency declared in March 1982 remained
 in effect, continuing the suspension of many civil liberties
 guaranteed in the 1979 Statute of Rights and Guarantees. The
 Permanent Commission for Human Rights reported that the
 security forces, particularly the Directorate General of State
 Security, detained hundreds of suspected "counterrevolution-
 aries" (a term used loosely by the Government for anti-
 Government guerrillas, suspected guerrilla sympathizers, and
 subversives) and held many of them incommunicado indefinitely
 without formal charges. There are credible reports of torture
 and killing of detained persons by security forces.
 The Government established Special Tribunals outside the
 judicial system to try the cases of suspected
 counterrevolutionaries, thus denying them such legal protection
 as the regular courts provide. Using both the powers of the
 Government and the capacity for intimidation of Sandinista
 organizations, the Government continued to harass opposition
 political parties, independent labor confederations, the
 
 (633)
 
 
 634
 private sector, the Catholic Church, and the independent
 media. The Government continued the prior censorship of print
 and electronic media. The various Sandinista organizations,
 particularly the ubiquitous Sandinista Defense Committees,
 sought out dissidents and coerced people into participating in
 Sandinista-sponsored activities. Through both legal and extra
 legal means, the Government seized the private property of
 several prominent citizens; it warned that neutrality in the
 struggle against armed opposition forces might be punishable by
 confiscation. The 10,000 Miskito Indians resettled from their
 Atlantic coast homelands in 1982 were prohibited from returning
 there. The Government forcibly evacuated additional
 inhabitants from the border areas of the country. About 1200
 Miskito Indians fled to Honduras in December 1983. There are
 credible reports that Government security forces have killed
 and tortured Miskito Indians and have confiscated their food
 and property.
 At the end of 1983 the Government declared an amnesty for most
 Miskitos, relaxed censorship of the only independent newspaper,
 and announced it would hold elections elections in 1985.
 Critics of the Government charged that these actions were only
 cosmetic changes that did not indicate genuine willingness to
 respect political pluralism.
 Two domestic human rights organizations operate in Nicaragua.
 The Permanent Commission on Human Rights is an independent
 agency established in 1977; it played a key role in exposing
 the Somoza Goverment's human rights violations. After the
 Sandinistas came to power in 1979, it publicized human rights
 abuses committed under the new Government. The Government
 founded the National Commission for the Promotion and
 Protection of Human Rights in 1980. It claims to be
 independent, but the-Government picks its members and funds its
 budget. It is the only organization permitted by the
 Government to file applications for pardon or to request the
 review of cases on human rights grounds. It is also charged
 with reporting instances of human rights abuses to the proper
 authorities and promoting the observance of human rights within
 the Government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There is credible evidence that military and security forces
 were responsible for the deaths of a number of detained persons
 in 1983. The Permanent Commission on Human Rights documented
 the cases of 12 persons who died while in the custody of
 Government authorities. The Government has responded that some
 of these were "killed while attempting to escape" or "killed
 while resisting arrest" while others were guerrillas killed in
 combat. In October, five prisoners escaped from El Modelo
 Prison in Tipitapa, two of whom were subsequently reported by
 the Government to have been killed after shooting at security
 forces. Family members claimed that at least one of the men
 had been captured alive. There were further reports from
 unofficial sources that other prisoners within the prison were
 
 
 635
 killed after the escape attempt. There were recurring reports
 from displaced persons that military and security forces
 operating in remote areas summarily executed suspected anti-
 Government guerrillas and their sympathizers.
 According to the Government, guerrillas killed some 300
 soldiers and 346 civilians in 1983. There is no confirmation
 that guerrilla groups have deliberately killed civilians, but
 some civilians, including foreigners, have died in the fighting
 between the Government and the guerrillas.
 The Government also charged the guerrillas with torturing and
 summarily executing prisoners. On at least two occasions,
 leaders of the Revolutionary Democratic Alliance, an
 anti-Government guerrilla group, claimed to have executed one
 or more prisoners. In September, a guerrilla recanted an
 earlier public denial and confessed to participation in the
 kidnaping and murder of a Nicaraguan couple. There is no
 confirmation that guerrillas have tortured prisoners.
 b. Disappearance
 The security forces often hold suspected guerrillas and
 subversives incommunicado indefinitely without notifying family
 members. The Permanent Commission on Human Rights documented
 167 unresolved cases of disappearance in which it said security
 forces were implicated but in which the Government has not
 acknowledged involvement. The Government claimed that
 guerrillas kidnapped 514 Nicaraguans. It is widely believed
 that many of these alleged kidnappings may have been voluntary
 desertions to the guerrillas.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 During 1983, the Permanent Commission on Human Rights compiled
 data on 102 instances of physical abuse and torture. For
 example, prisoners reportedly were kept in cramped dark cells
 and fed meals at irregular intervals in order to disorient
 them, ordered to use only their prison number and not their
 name, and subjected to threats. One detained Nicaraguan stated
 that security forces kept him naked in a cold cell with a
 ceiling so low that he could not stand upright. He said he was
 pressured into signing a document obliging him to inform on his
 friends and neighbors. Reportedly, security forces physically
 abused and threatened alleged guerrillas, subversives, and
 political suspects. Nicaraguans who fled to Costa Rica and
 Honduras reported incidents of rape, torture, and the murder of
 children by the Army and security forces. Interior Minister
 Tomas Borge stated that many cases of physical abuse and a few
 cases of killing of detained persons by security forces
 occurred, and that the Government was working to resolve the
 problem. According to morge, police had beaten persons at the
 Palo Alto detention center, which Borge had mentioned in
 October 1980 as the scene of police beatings of detainees.
 In general, Nicaraguan prisons suffer from severe
 overcrowding. The Government allows family members to visit
 prisoners and provide them food to supplement their prison
 diet. In 1983, the Government imposed progressively stricter
 limitations on the frequency of visits, the number of visitors,
 and the quantity of food which visitors could provide inmates.
 
 
 636
 By the end of the year, prisoners considered to be dangerous
 were permitted only one visitor and a gift of 20 pounds of food
 every four months. The Permanent Commission for Human Rights
 reported in December that prisoners in the "model prison"
 suffered from dehydration and were threatened during nightly
 searches. In a few prison farms in the Managua area,
 conditions are considerably better.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) made
 periodic visits to the prisons, providing medical and
 nutritional assistance, and seeing all prisoners at least once
 every three months. This program was interrupted in August
 when the Government imposed new conditions on the visits which
 were unacceptable to the ICRC. Following negotiations with the
 Government, the ICRC said visits would resume in January 1984.
 The ICRC has not been given access to those detained in special
 State Security facilities separate from the prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 According to the Government, there were approximately 5,000
 persons in jail, including about 2,000 ex-National Guardsmen or
 persons accused of being close to former President Somoza, and
 about 300 persons convicted of subversive activities. The
 Permanent Commission for Human Rights estimates that the
 Government is holding an additional 1,400 persons In
 detention.
 The 1982 State of Emergency suspended those provisions of the
 Fundamental Statute promulgated by the Government in 1979 which
 granted detained persons the right not to be held more than
 seven days without arraignment. Habeas corpus was also
 suspended in security-related cases. As anti-Government
 activities mounted in 1983, so too did the number of persons
 detained as guerrillas and their supporters. The security
 forces arrested hundreds of suspects under the Law of
 Maintenance of Order and Public Security. Open expression of
 dissent often resulted in arrest. Suspected guerrillas and
 subversives were held in special detention facilities with no
 access to legal counsel or to domestic or international
 humanitarian organizations. Some were released after the
 completion of an investigation, others were remanded to the
 special tribunals, and many simply remained detained. The
 Permanent Commission on Human Rights compiled information on
 965 such cases in 1983. The Government declared that because
 of the security situation, some former National Guard members
 had to remain in custody even though their sentences, handed
 down by special tribunals in 1979 and 1980, had been
 completed. Others held on security charges also remained
 incarcerated after they had been exonerated or had served their
 sentence.
 In one case, 46 Miskito Indians were acquitted by a judge, but
 remained in custody. They were not released until they
 received a special Government pardon one month later. Among
 the Miskito prisoners released by the Government in 1983 were
 10 pastors of the Moravian Church, who had been held without
 trial for periods ranging from several months to two years. In
 its 1982-83 report, the Inter-American Commission on Human
 Rights of the Organization of American States commented that
 the State of Emergency and laws that conferred discretionary
 authority on the Government "gave rise to abuses in regard to
 
 
 637
 political dissidents, many of whom were arbitrarily arrested,
 held incommunicado, and imprisoned for periods in excess of the
 time allowed under the laws covering the subject." In its
 prepared statement submitted to the Subcommittee on Human
 Rights and International organization of the United States
 House of Representatives on September 15, 1982, Amnesty
 International said it was, "concerned at what appears to be a
 pattern of harassment and intimidation through short-term, but
 arbitrary imprisonment of supporters of lawful opposition,
 trade union and other groups."
 In December, the Government decreed amnesty for Miskitos from
 northern Nicaragua who had left Nicaragua or who had been
 sentenced by the Government after December 31, 1981. The
 Government released 306 Miskitos under the amnesty on
 December 1, and another 46 Miskitos later that month. Later in
 December, about 1,200 Miekitos fled from the town of Francia
 Sirpe'to Honduras. It appears that few Miskitos have taken
 advantage of the amnesty. In December, the Government also
 announced that it would grant safe conduct to certain exiles
 who returned by February 21, 1984. Not eligible for the safe
 conduct are National Guard officers not yet tried for alleged
 pre-1979 crimes; guerrillas who had been convicted and not been
 pardoned; guerrilla leaders who had reqested foreign funds or
 foreign intervention against Nicaragua; and guerrillas who had
 planned or carried out acts against the Nicaraguan people or
 economy.
 The Government does not specifically exile dissidents. Many
 opposition leaders and activists have fled on their own,
 however, fearing that they would be apprehended if they
 returned.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Under the Fundameatal Statute, the judiciary was to be an
 autonomous branch of government. This independence has been
 generally exercised in ordinary criminal cases. In cases where
 the accused was charged with "counterrevolutionary" or
 subversive activity, however, judges have routinely decided in
 favor of the prosecution. Nevertheless, some judges, such as
 the one who found the 46 Miskitos innocent, have continued to
 exercise some independence. In another case, the Supreme Court
 determined that the convictions of hundreds of Miskito Indians
 were improper because of both the lack of evidence and the
 failure to provide translation services. It ruled that new
 trials should be held or the Miskitos released.
 In April, the Government established special "Popular
 Anti-Somocista Tribunals" to handle the rapidly growing cases
 of accused guerrillas and subversives. These tribunals operate
 outside the conventional judicial system, and there is no
 appeal from them to the Supreme Court. The members of the
 tribunals were selected from the ranks of the Sandinista Front
 organizations, and only the president of each tribunal was
 required to be a lawyer. Persons tried in these courts had the
 right to counsel and to introduce evidence, but the tribunals
 were granted great discretionary powers in determining whether
 evidence was admissible and whether it was sufficient for
 conviction. The proceedings of the tribunals were declared to
 be open to the public, but in practice, journalists have been
 denied access to some sessions. Trials reportedly are
 
 
 638
 scheduled with little advance notice, limiting opportunities
 for the accused to prepare a defense. This is particularly
 difficult for cases involving witnesses who live in other areas
 of the country, as all special tribunals cases are tried in
 Managua.
 According to the Permanent Commission on Human Rights, by
 December the tribunals had adjudicated the cases of
 approximately 269 prisoners, of whom all but 10 to 15 were
 convicted and received prison sentences of up to 30 years, the
 maximum penalty under Nicaraguan law. Over 100 additional
 cases were being tried, and another 250 cases were pending
 approximately 269 prisoners, of whom all but 10 to 15 were
 convicted and received prison sentences of up to 30 years, the
 maximum penalty under Nicaraguan law. Over 100 additional
 cases were being tried, and another 250 cases were pending
 trial. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
 criticized the establishment of these tribunals, stating that
 "the Anti-Somoza courts are tainted from the very start by the
 undisguisable prefix 'anti', which conveys or conditions their
 lack of impartiality, independence and autonomy. Far from
 being judicial courts, they are administrative tribunals that
 are subject to the Ministry of Justice and are composed of
 members of the militia, reservists, and militants or supporters
 of the FSLN, in other words the political enemies of the
 accused. As a result, their impartiality, fairness and
 independence of judgment are seriously compromised."
 f.   Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 The Government has developed an elaborate and effective
 security/intelligence network employing both Government
 agencies, such as the security forces, and Sandinista
 organizations, particularly the Sandinista Defense Committees,
 to ferret out dissidents and real or alleged subversives.
 These organizations tolerate everyday grumbling about
 inflation, commodity scarcities, and non-sensitive government
 policies. However, individuals who criticize the
 "revolutionary process" or its leadership are frequently
 subjected to pressure ranging from public ridicule and
 defacement of their homes by Sandinista mobs to loss of
 employment and even detention. The Sandinista Defense
 Committees, organized in most neighborhoods throughout the
 country, serve as a network of informers and as an instrument
 of political intimidation. Members are exhorted to be alert
 for signs of subversive ideas and to seek out dissidents in
 order to convert them into Sandinista supporters.
 Participation is supposed to be voluntary in the Defense
 Committees and in Committee activities such as political
 education meetings and "Revolutionary Vigilance," a program in
 which Committee members stand watch over their neighborhood
 during hours of darkness. However, the Sandinistas employ many
 methods to entice or pressure individuals into joining the
 Defense Committees, including Committee control over the
 distribution of ration cards for the purchase of subsidized
 basic products such as rice, beans, and soap. While many who
 do not participate in Sandinista activities suffer no ill
 effects, others are branded as politically suspect or are
 denounced by Sandinista activists as subversives. There have
 been some reports that teachers in public schools have asked
 children to spy on their parents and report suspicious activity.
 
 
 639
 As the activities of anti-Government forces escalated during
 the year, the Sandinistas made it increasingly difficult for
 individuals to remain neutral. Linked to the Defense
 Committees are the "turbas divinas" (literally, "divine
 mobs"). Sometime "turbas" composed of scores of Sandinista
 supporters demonstrated in front of the homes or offices of
 opposition figures, chanting slogans and threats and defacing
 buildings with pro-Government graffiti. The mobs rarely
 resorted to violence against persons, but in some instances
 scuffles occurred and minor injuries resulted. Such mobs
 heighten the climate of fear in which critics of the regime
 live. While the Government takes no responsibility for the
 actions of the mobs, it regards them as "legitimate expressions
 of the popular will" and does not interfere to protect the
 rights of those against whom they are demonstrating. There is
 little doubt that the Government targets those persons against
 whom it wants the mobs to demonstrate.
 In its allocation of financial credit, the Government
 discriminates against sections of the Nicaraguan business
 community. The Government uses its media to portray some large
 and medium size businesses as anti-Sandinista and as exploiters
 of the working class. Business leaders have been subject to
 official harassment, confiscations, and interrogations during
 1983.
 The State of Emergency suspended the legal requirement for a
 search warrant. Police and State Security officials regularly
 enter and search private residences. The Government opens
 private mail, and officials meticulously inspect the baggage
 and personal effects of both arriving and departing inter-
 national travelers and confiscate any items or literature,
 including newspapers from neighboring countries, alleged to be
 subversive.
 In late 1981 and early 1982, the Government forcibly relocated
 about 10,000 Miskito Indians from their homelands to distant
 resettlement camps. During 1983, the Government continued to
 resettle forcibly Miskitos from the Atlantic coast, as well as
 non-Miskito Nicaraguans from north central and southern
 Nicaragua, including at least 500 families who lived near the
 Costa Rican border. While the relocated Miskitos were not
 legally confined to the resettlement camps, the Government's
 prohibition against returning to their homes and the lack of
 resources forced them to remain. Relocation camp residents are
 allowed to fish and hunt but are prohibited from using
 firearms. Residents are paid for agricultural work with food
 rather than money. There are credible reports of lack of food
 and malnutrition in the resettlement camps.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Government continued to affirm its commitment to a
 free press and free speech, it maintained rigorous prior
 censorship of both the printed and electronic media in 1983.
 The only independent source of news in the country is the
 newspaper La Prensa. Since 1979, 20 independent news programs
 have gone off the air as a result of Government censorship.
 
 
 640
 Currently, all radio news programs, both television channels,
 and the two daily morning newspapers all are controlled by or
 support the Government.
 Censorship of La Prensa was capricious. During 1983, the
 Government censored articles about an attack on the house of a
 former Government junta member, a letter from the Catholic
 Bishops criticizing the proposed military draft law, a letter
 to the Government from twelve U.S. congressmen, and items on
 Afghanistan, Managua firemen, and street repairs. The editors
 claim that between January and October 1983 the Government
 censored over 50 percent of their stories on current national
 and international events. By Government order or in protest
 against heavy censorship, the paper did not appear on at least
 six occasions during 1983. Although the Government began to
 censor fewer La Prensa stories in November, it did not indicate
 that it would end prior censorship requirements.
 The Government also suspended the pro-Government weekly Semana
 Comica twice in 1983. The Government refused for several
 months in late 1983 to allow La Prensa to purchase foreign
 exhange for the importation of newsprint; La Prensa received
 permission in November. The Government distributes almost all
 of its important paid advertising to the Sandinista Front
 newspaper Barricada and the pro-Government newspaper El Nuevo
 Diario. La Prensa has charged that the Government has harassed
 its distributors outside Managua. In October, unidentified
 attackers fired on La Prensa's printing plant. The Inter-
 American Human Rights Commission said in its 1982-83 report
 that "one of the most serious cases of restriction... is
 occurring in Nicaragua. Prior censorship, particularly of the
 daily La Prensa, exercised thus far partially and unfairly, has
 repeatedly held that paper from circulation due to obstacles
 placed in the way by the Government .... This arbitrary behavior
 by the Government and the restrictions it also imposes on radio
 broadcasts, especially on newscasts and programs involving
 opinion which express a view different from the Government's
 policies, go beyond the limits a government can reach even in a
 state of emergency." The International Human Rights Group said
 in a March 1983 report that "restrictions on freedom of the
 press, before and during the State of Emergency, have gone
 beyond the boundaries set by international human rights law,
 even conceding the exigencies confronting the Government."
 In April, the Minister of Interior sent letters to all
 independent radio stations warning them that all programing had
 to be approved in advance by Government censors and that the
 censorship regulations would be strictly enforced. The censors
 insisted that even the sermons of Archbishop Obando y Bravo be
 submitted to them prior to live radio broadcast. The Church
 refused, and his sermons are no longer heard live, although
 they are printed in La Prensa, the only independent newspaper,
 and subsequently broadcast. In November, the Government
 censored several biblical citations in a sermon. The
 requirement for prior censorship of radio materials led to the
 cessation of all independent news broadcasts. In June, the
 Government ordered the private radio station Radio Mundial to
 cease transmitting Voice of America and Radio Tirana (Albania)
 programs. In October, the Government confiscated a transmitter
 from Radio Mundial and stated that the station's license was
 out of order.
 
 
 641
 Under the State of Emergency, it has been very difficult for
 the opposition to express its views publicly, although the
 censors began in November to permit more articles reflecting
 opposition viewpoints. In pro-Government papers there has been
 some criticism of lower ranking bureaucrats but very little of
 Government leaders or policies. In its 1982-83 report on
 Nicaragua, the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights said
 that "there is no atmosphere of respect and tolerance for
 persons who profess other than official beliefs and ideologies."
 While there is no censorship of domestic or imported books, the
 foreign exchange crisis has allowed few books to be imported
 from the West, although Marxist literature circulates freely.
 The Government's imposition of "curriculum rationalization and
 coordination" on the National Autonomous University and the
 Central American University has limited their autonomy in
 developing their curricula and has further '2ircumscribed
 academic freedom. Moreover, the choice of textbooks remains
 limited, and, in the social sciences, texts with a high
 ideological content have begun to be used. Nevertheless, the
 universities retain a significant degree of independence in
 appointing their faculties.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The 1982 State of Emergency suspended the right of assembly,
 but the Government allowed opposition groups to hold regular
 meetings. During 1983, a number of opposition political
 parties and one of the independent labor confederations held
 national congresses which were well attended. The Government
 also allowed small demonstrations, such as the one which
 protested Sandinista mobs' harassment of the Pope during his
 March visit to Managua. The Government did not, however,
 permit any large opposition political rallies. This
 restriction did not apply to pro-Government organizations,
 which held rallies frequently throughout the year.
 The Government has attempted to weaken independent labor
 movements while creating alternative labor movements controlled
 by the Sandinista Front. It has succeeded in establishing
 control over most of organized labor. Roughly 20 to 30 percent
 of the total workforce is organized. The Sandinista Front's
 two principal confederations, the Sandinista Workers' Central
 and the Association of Rural Workers, have over 120,000
 members, and dwarf the non-Sandinista organizations, which
 account for about 40,000 members. In theory the Sandinista
 unions serve as a conduit for workers' desires and grievances
 to the Government. In fact, these confederations consistently
 support Government policies such as strict labor discipline and
 worker participation in defense activities. Independent unions
 suffer from discriminatory treatment by the Labor Ministry,
 such as slow inscription of new unions when compared with the
 treatment afforded Sandinista organizations.
 A number of Government policies continue to affect the
 independent unions adversely. Strikes are prohibited. The
 Government requires that the Labor Ministry participate in
 collective bargaining and approve any labor-management
 contract. The Government also utilizes pressure, including
 detention, mob action, and loss of employment, to inhibit the
 organizing activities of independent unions. The independent
 Nicaraguan Workers' Central reported that about 30 of its
 
 
 642
 members were imprisoned as of December 1983. To prevent the
 Stevedores Union in the Pacific port of Corinto from switching
 its affiliation in June from the Sandinista Workers' Central to
 the Confederation for Labor Unification, the Government
 arrested several Stevedores leaders, fired nearly two dozen
 union activists, and sent hundreds of non union members to vote
 in a Stevedores union meeting. In response, the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) called upon the Government to honor
 its commitments under multilateral labor conventions. On June
 30, the World Congress of the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions adopted a resolution demanding the immediate
 release of the jailed labor leaders and insisting that the
 Government observe human and trade union rights. The jailed
 unionists were freed in August. In June, the 1983 Conference
 of the ILO discussed allegations of Nicaraguan violations of
 freedom of association. After losing a vote to postpone ILO
 consideration of the case, the Nicaraguan Government
 representative formally requested the visit of an ILO Direct
 Contacts Mission, whose report will be discussed during the
 1984 Conference of the ILO.
 The major confederations maintained their ties with recognized
 international labor bodies. The Sandinista Workers Central is
 a member of the Soviet-aligned World Federation of Trade
 Unions. The Christian Democratic-oriented Nicaraguan Workers
 Central is affiliated with the Latin American Confederation of
 Workers. The Confederation for Labor Unification is a member
 of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions as well
 as of several regional organizations.
 The Sandinista-controlled Association of Rural Workers
 represented Nicaraguan labor at the 1983 ILO Conference in
 Geneva. A leading member of the Superior Council of Private
 Enterprise, the umbrella private sector organization and a
 well-known critic of the Sandinistas represented employers at
 the insistence of the Government. Shortly after the opening of
 the Conference, State Security officials arrested the
 delegate's son on charges of "counterrevolutionary" activity.
 The delegate then started to return to Nicaragua, but while he
 was enroute the Government confiscated two of his businesses,
 and he refused to return.
 There are two confederations of professionals in Nicaragua.
 The first, a component of the umbrella private sector
 organizations, existed long before the Sandinistas gained
 power, while the second was formed afterwards in support of the
 Government. Both use the name CONAPRO.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Catholicism is practiced by more than 85 percent of the
 population. Although a number of other churches are legal and
 are permitted to operate freely, the Government has harassed
 some such as the Seventh-Day Adventists, Mennonites, Jehovah's
 Witnesses, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, and
 the Moravian Church.
 Like many other elements of Nicaraguan society, the Catholic
 Church is divided. The predominant group, led by Managua
 Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo and the Church hierarchy,
 wishes to remain independent of the Government and has at times
 been sharply critical of it. A second and smaller group,
 
 
 643
 termed the "Popular Church," is strongly pro-Sandinista. This
 division is partially based on theological issues but also
 reflects an ongoing political struggle between the Church and
 the Government. The Government has harassed the Church
 repeatedly, and the Archbishop is regularly attacked in the
 Government and pro-Government press. The Government, which had
 banned Obando y Bravo's television masses in 1981, further
 muzzled the Church in 1983 by prohibiting the live broacast of
 Easter services over Radio Catolica, the Church's radio
 station. The Government has censored the publication of
 letters of the Catholic Church's Episcopal Conference critical
 of its actions. Sandinista mobs harassed persons attending
 some Church events and on one occasion demonstrated at the
 Archbishop's office. During Pope John Paul II's mass in
 Managua in March, Sandinista supporters heckled the Pontiff and
 disrupted the services as the Pope was calling for unity in the
 Church. In October, Sandinista mobs marched on 20 Catholic
 churches in Managua, interrupting religious services and
 breaking windows. The mobs occupied at least three churches,
 vandalized the property of several parishioners, and struck at
 least one priest. The Government denied that it was
 responsible for the mobs' actions, although some observers
 reported that several uniformed soldiers were in the mobs. The
 Government then expelled two foreign Catholic priests for
 allegedly preaching that Nicaraguan youths shoud be allowed the
 right of conscientious objection to the new military draft.
 The Government had expelled another foreign Catholic priest in
 May for allegedly supporting subversives.
 Some small churches continued to be persecuted for spreading
 subversive ideas and for collaborating with "counterrevolution-
 aries." Several properties that Sandinista mobs had seized
 from the Seventh Day Adventists, the Church of Jesus Christ of
 Latter-Day Saints, the Mennonites, and Jehovah's Witnesses in
 1982 remained under Government control throughout 1983,
 although others were returned. According to Christian Century
 magazine, Government security officials attended the February
 triennal synod of the Moravian Church and warned delegates
 against electing certain pastors to the church's Provincial
 Board. Ten Moravian pastors who had been detained without
 trial for periods up to two years were released in 1983. The
 Moravian Biblical Institute in Bluefields, which the Government
 had closed in 1982, had not reopened as of December 1983.
 The 1978-79 insurrection and Government policies since 1979 led
 virtually all of the approximately 50 members of the Jewish
 community to leave the country. According to a report from a
 member of the Jewish community in Nicaragua, five Sandinista
 guerrillas attempted to set fire to the main door of the
 Managua synagogue in 1978. Since 1979, the Government has
 expropriated the Managua synagogue and the property of many
 prominent Jews. In 1980, the Government allowed a Sandinista
 organization to use the synagogue building as its headquarters.
 Prominent Jewish organizations such as the Anti-Defamation
 League of the B'nai B'rith charged in 1983 that the Nicaraguan
 Government was guilty of anti-Semitism. Following adverse
 international publicity, the Government recently offered to
 return the synagogue, but the few remaining Jews have stated
 that they do not have the resources to maintain it properly.
 The Government has not offered to reconsider the expropriation
 of property owned by Jews. The Sandinista Front had close ties
 with the Palestine Liberation Organization before its rise to
 
 
 644
 power, and the new Government continued those relations, and
 adopted a strong anti-Israeli and anti-Zionist position.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no permanent restrictions on travel within the
 Pacific coast and central provinces of Nicaragua. However, the
 military and security forces operate numerous checkpoints,
 particularly in the northwestern areas of the country, and
 access to certain areas is restricted temporarily because of
 military activity. The Atlantic coast region remains a
 restricted military area, and Interior Ministry permission is
 required to travel there. It is particularly difficult for
 foreigners to obtain authorization to visit the northern
 Atlantic coast area (North Zelaya), and even residents of the
 region sometimes find it difficult to return once they have
 left.
 The Government requires exit visas for all Nicaraguan citizens
 and residents who desire to leave the country. On occasion, it
 has prevented opposition political leaders and suspected
 subversives from departing. Government officials and doctors
 require special permission to leave the country.
 The Government continued in 1983 to confiscate the property of
 Nicaraguans who remained out of the country for periods of six
 months. The Government has not permanently blocked the return
 of Nicaraguan citizens, but on occasion has held up the entry
 of opposition political figures The Government took no action
 against individuals returned to Nicaragua from other
 countries. The Government has not revoked the citizenship of
 opposition leaders in exile.
 During 1983, thousands of Nicaraguans left the country, joining
 the tens of thousands who had abandoned the country since
 1979. Several thousand Miskitos crossed into Honduras,
 including 1,200 who fled the town of Francia Sirpe in
 December. The flow of displaced persons from the north central
 departments rose rapidly as fighting intensified in that
 region. Following the large increase of fighting in the south
 in May, thousands also began to move into Costa Rica.
 Violent border encounters involving Nicaraguan Government
 forces, inside Honduran territory increased in early 1983.
 Guerrillas trained in Cuba and Nicaragua infiltrated from
 Nicaragua into Honduras, and there have been reports of
 Nicaraguan Government forces crossing into Honduran settlements
 populated by Nicaraguan refugees.
 Nicaragua has received over 20,000 displaced persons since
 1979, nearly all from El Salvador. The Government works
 closely with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 to provide food, clothing, and shelter for these people and
 attempts to integrate them into society. It does not forcibly
 repatriate displaced persons.
 Section 3     Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens to Change Their Government
 The Sandinista Front declares that it is a "vanguard party"
 with a historic right to rule. Its nine-man National
 
 
 645
 Directorate rules Nicaragua through the Junta of Government,
 the Cabinet Ministers, and the Council of State, the
 quasi-legislative body. In all three bodies, the Sandinistas
 have a decisive majority. For example, the Junta is comprised
 of Sandinista Directorate member Daniel Ortega, Sandinista
 member Sergio Ramirez, and Democratic Conservative Party member
 Rafael Cordova Rivas. Daniel Ortega's brother Humberto, a
 fellow member of the Sandinista National Directorate, is
 Minister of Defense and Commander in Chief of the Sandinista
 Popular Army. Of the other seven Sandinista National
 Directorate members, three head the Ministries of Interior
 (including the security forces), Planning, and Agriculture.
 Another member is President of the Council of State; another is
 Vice-Mirister of Interior. All major appointments in the
 Government are made by the Sandinista National Directorate,
 acting through the Junta of Government. In May 1980, the
 Sandinista National Directorate enlarged the composition of the
 Council of State to increase its control by the Sandinistas and
 their allies. Three opposition political parties and several
 other opposition groups are represented on the Council of
 State.
 Ten political parties exist in Nicaragua. The Government
 routinely harasses the opposition parties through the detention
 of party members and activists, mob action against party
 headquarters, threats, prohibition of large rallies, and
 censorship. All opposition parties had a number of activists
 detained during 1983 on politically motivated grounds. The
 largest opposition party, the Democratic Conservative Party,
 had approximately 300 members in 1983, 200 of whom were still
 in confinement in late October. In December, the Government
 released the last two of the six members of the Social
 Christian party detained for alleged subversive activity,
 following strong international interest in their cases. A
 Conservative party representative withdrew from the Council for
 several months when, in reaction to a statement he had made
 during a council session, he was detained in violation of his
 special immunity, and his house and its belongings were seized
 by the Government after being surrounded by a Sandinista mob.
 The Government has used censorship to restrict the opposition
 parties' ability to communicate with the population at large
 through the media. Some of the parties, however, published
 uncensored newsletters and bulletins in order to convey their
 positions to their party members.
 The Government enacted a Political Parties Law in 1983 which
 defined the rights and responsibilities of parties. The Law
 specifically prohibited any party that advocates the policies
 of the Somoza regime. It required all parties to support the
 revolution and to be "anti-imperialist." It also required
 parties to "respect the public order." It established a
 National Council of Political Parties which will supervise the
 day-to-day activities of the parties and will have the power to
 suspend or abolish any party that transgresses these
 requirements. The mechanics for selecting the members of the
 Council ensure that the Sandinista Front will control it, and
 through it, dominate the political system.
 No elections have taken place since the Sandinista Front
 assumed power in 1979. The Government had promised upon taking
 power to hold democratic elections, and claimed in 1983 that it
 
 
 646
 was moving toward this objective. The Government has announced
 that elections will be held in 1985, and that the electoral
 campaign will begin on January 31, 1984. The Government stated
 it would announce the timing of the elections on February 21,
 1984. Important issues such as the access of political parties
 to the media, and censorship have not yet been clarified.
 During 1983, one top Sandinista leader declared that "neither
 bullets nor ballots" would defeat the FSLN, while another
 asserted that elections would be held in 1985 merely to
 reaffirm the position of the Sandinista Front.
 Section 4     Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The Government undertook a commitment to the Organization of
 American States in July 1979 to observe human rights, as well
 as to respect pluralism and to hold free elections. Nicaragua
 is a party to the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights,
 international covenants on human rights, and to the United
 Nations Convention and Protocol on the Status of Refugees. It
 supported the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of
 Discrimination against Women. Nicaragua site on the United
 Nations Human Rights Commission, and in 1983 submitted a
 detailed report on the status of human rights in Nicaragua to
 the Human Rights Committee under the United Nations Convention
 on Civil and Political Rights. The Government professes to be
 proud of its human rights record and officially welcomes the
 scrutiny of the international community. During 1983, a team
 from the Inter-American Human Rights Commission of the
 Organization of American States visited Nicaragua to conduct a
 follow up investigation on the treatment of Miskito Indians in
 the Atlantic coast region. The Government contested charges of
 abuses lodged by other members of the United Nations Human
 Rights Commission, Amnesty International, and the International
 Labor Organization.
 Despite continuing harassment by the Government, such as the
 detention of its workers and interference with the distribution
 of its reports, the Permanent Commission on Human Rights
 continues to collect data and publish detailed reports on human
 rights abuses. The Government refuses to deal directly with
 the Commission or to acknowledge complaints submitted through
 it. At times, the Government has taken action on such matters
 without responding to the Commission. Members of the
 Commission are not permitted to travel to the Atlantic coast
 region to investigate the situation of the Miskito Indians, and
 frequently lawyers acting on behalf of the Commission are
 denied access to prisoners.
 The Government-funded National Commission for the Promotion and
 Protection of Human Rights (established in 1980) continues to
 be the only organization recognized by the Government as
 competent to file applications for pardons or to request the
 review of cases on human rights grounds. During 1983, it
 effected the release of several dozen Miskito Indians.
 
 
 647
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Nicaragua had a population of 3,014,834 people in 1983.
 According to the World Bank, its per capita Gross National
 Product in 1981 was $860 and its population growth rate was 3.9
 percent (1970-81), although the Government reports a population
 growth rate of 3.3 percent. Nicaraguans have a life expectancy
 at birth of 56.4 years. There are serious economic constraints
 on the Government's goals of greater access to public services,
 particularly in education and health. Lack of foreign exchange
 has caused shortages of many basic items.
 Zero or negative economic growth was expected in 1983. In
 1982, exports were about $410 million, compared to the pre-1979
 level of $650 million. Foreign assistance decreased in 1983.
 Inflation for 1982 was about 25-30 because of a large central
 government deficit and higher demand for credit, and it was
 expected to rise slightly in 1983. About 20 percent of the
 work force was unemployed.
 Drought, foreign exchange shortages, and guerrilla activity
 contributed to Nicaragua's economic problems in 1983. The lack
 of political stability and investor confidence has also
 contributed to the stagnation of the economy. The Nicaraguan
 private sector accounts for approximately 60 percent of Gross
 Domestic Product. Although Government leaders have reiterated
 their intention to foster a mixed economy, arbitrary property
 confiscations and the Government's Marxist rhetoric have
 discouraged private investment. There were several instances
 of arbitrary confiscation of land for political reasons.
 Women are active at all levels of society and at all but the
 highest levels of the Government and the Sandinista Front.
 There is one woman on the Supreme Court and one woman cabinet
 minister. Women serve as national coordinators of one of the
 opposition parties as well as of the Permanent Commission on
 Human Rights. The Vice President of the Council of State is a
 woman, and nearly half of the seats on the Council are filled
 by women. Participation of women in the military is
 voluntary. The Government has enacted a law that obligates the
 male breadwinner in a family to support his spouse and other
 dependents.
 The Government made efforts to improve health service.
 Campaigns in 1983 provided vaccinations for several common
 diseases, reportedly resulting in the elimination of polio and
 in an 80 percent decrease in malaria cases. Medicine provided
 in hospitals and health centers is free, dlthough foreign
 exchange shortages have resulted in a reduced supply. New
 health centers and regional hospitals were constructed.
 Medical visits increased 172 percent over prerevolutionary
 levels. The leading prerevolutionary cause of infant
 mortaility, diarrhea, fell to sixth among causes of infant
 deaths. The infant mortality rate was reduced to 90.4 deaths
 per 1,000 live births in 1983. According to Government
 figures, about 95 percent of Nicaragua's urban population and
 12 percent of its rural population had access to safe water.
 World Bank statistics from 1976 stated that 70 percent of the
 population had access to safe water.
 The Government doubled the number of workers participating in
 the social security system to nearly 250,000 in 1983. The
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 42
 
 
 648
 pension program reportedly has expanded ten times since 1978,
 with over 27,000 retired workers receiving pensions in 1983.
 The Government claims to have reduced illiteracy to 12 percent
 through the 1980 literacy campaign. In 1983, 161,000
 Nicaraguans were enrolled in adult education classes. Since
 1979, the Government claims to have created 2,639 new teaching
 posts and to have doubled school enrollment to over 1,000,000.
 The adjusted primary school enrollment ratio in 1983 was 73
 percent. According to 1978 World Bank figures, 85.0 percent of
 schoolage children were enrolled in primary schools.
 
 
 649
 U.S.OvERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NICARAGUA
 1981     1982    1983
 ........... ............ ...............................  .
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ............ ..
 GRANTS .............
 A.AID .. ...............
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.) ...
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS.............
 kE'AY. th S-LOANS...
 PAY. IN  FOR. CURR .....
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 PEACE CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER ............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....
 C.INTL  MIL.EO.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........
 III.TOTAL  ECON. &  MIL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 
 59.8
 48.0
 11.8
 58.4
 48.0
 10.4
 56.6
 1.2
 0.0
 1.2
 9:.9
 0.0
 0.0
 1.2
 0.6
 0.6
 0.2
 0.0
 0.2
 0.1
 0.0
 0.1
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 59.8
 48.0
 11.8
 
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................      0.0
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983
 TOTAL ..........  117.9  .51.3    30.7
 IBRD              33.7    16.0      0.0
 IFC               0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA               5.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB               75.0    34.4     30.7
 AD8                0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP               3.5     0.9      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.7     0.0      0.0
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 6.3
 0.0
 6.3
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0,0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 .. ........
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 1946-83
 73311
 231.1
 9.5
 6010
 404.8
 0.0
 0.0
 22.3
 5.4
 0.0
 
 
