 NICARAGUA
 During 1981 the human rights performance of the Government
 of National Reconstruction (GRN) deteriorated, especially
 with respect to civil and political liberties. The Sandin-
 ista National Liberation Front (FSLN) maintained its
 dominant role in the political process and in the government.
 Independent political parties, private sector organizations
 and the non-Sandinista media, which are determined to
 pursue a pluralistic society and a mixed economy, continued
 to exist, but the GRN increasingly restricted their acti-
 vities. The government declared a state of economic
 and social emergency in September 1981, thereby strengthening
 its control of most aspects of the country's life. The
 continued imprisonment of approximately 4,500 political
 prisoners convicted under dubious standards of justice,
 the use of mobs and restrictive decrees against independent
 media, arbitrary property seizures and reported torture,
 disappearances and abuse of prisoners cast doubts on
 the GRN's stated commitment to respect the human rights
 of all its citizens.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There were credible reports of physical abuse of prisoners
 during interrogation and assertions that torture is practiced
 in the El Chipote state security detention center. There
 were also credible reports of secret prisons throughout
 Nicaragua, where prisoners are tortured. In the past,
 government officials have admitted that cases of torture
 by individuals occur (although they denied that this
 is official policy) and promised to punish those responsible.
 Government officials urged groups or individuals concerned
 about reports of torture to cite specific cases for investi-
 gation and punishment of the responsible officials.
 Sources, however, are naturally reluctant to expose them-
 selves to possible retaliation. Reports of torture continue,
 but there is no evidence that a single prison official
 was sanctioned in 1981.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The GRN currently holds approximately 7,000 persons in
 its prisons. About 4,500 of these can be classed as
 political (mostly ex-members of the National Guard who
 were convicted by special tribunals). Although the prison
 population has dropped from the previous year, overcrowding
 remains a serious problem. The government acknowledges
 the substandard conditions of the prisons and attributes
 them to its limited resources. 'The International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued in 1981 to make periodic
 visits to most places of detention. In the first half
 of the year ICRC delegates saw some 4,000 detainees,
 National Guardsmen captured at the end of the hostilities
 and civilians arrested after the change of government
 in 1979. However, Nicaraguan authorities did not grant
 the ICRCa repeated requests to see detainees under interro-
 gation in places controlled by the state security service.
 At the ICRC's suggestion, 15 aged or ill detainees were
 released in March and six in May. Although the ICRC
 had to cease its bulk food program in the prisons in
 March, due to lack of funds, it continued to supply monthly
 individual food parcels to detainees and to the families
 
 (485)
 
 
 486
 of some 700 detainees. The ICRC also supplied medicaments
 and medical material to prison dispensaries.
 In 1981 many credible reports of prisoner abuse were
 received. Prisoners within all centers of the penitentiary
 system are said to be subjected at times to psychological
 harassment, such as the use of alarms and lights to keep
 them awake at night, and some have been awakened in the
 early morning and forced to stand nude in columns.
 While visitation rights in Nicaraguan prisons have been
 standardized, and family and conjugal visits are permitted,
 these rights have been suspended several times as a form
 of group punishment for minor disciplinary infractions.
 Relatives are permitted to supplement the diet of detainees,
 and government authorities have encouraged this to lower
 their own costs. Instances of appropriation of parcels
 by prison authorities are reportedly greater than during
 1980.
 There have been a few cases in 1981 of prisoners "shot
 while attempting to escape." The instance in which the
 official version is under the most serious doubt is the
 June 1981 Zona Franca prison uprising in which 16 prisoners,
 but no guards, were killed. Government authorities claim
 the deaths occurred when they tried to foil an attempted
 prison break by armed prisoners, but substantial evidence
 indicates that some of the prisoners had been tortured
 and beaten to death after the incident was brought under
 control.
 c. Disappearances
 During 1981 Nicaragua's independent, private human rights
 commission documented 30 cases of disappearances under
 circumstances that indicated security force elements
 were involved. In half the cases, disappeared persons
 reappeared after periods of detention or investigation
 by authorities. In August groups of Matagalpa campesinos
 were ordered to report to GRN officials. Some disappeared,
 and later their bodies were discovered.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Government security forces continue to detain persons,
 including foreigners, on charges of "counter-revolutionary
 activity." In February the Nicaraguan government jailed
 the director of the independent human rights commission,
 Jose Esteban Gonzalez, on charges of defaming the revolution
 abroad. The arrest drew considerable international criti-
 cism, and Gonzalez was found innocent after he "clarified"
 his statements. In February the government also arrested
 several east coast Indian leaders on charges of "counter-
 revolutionary activity." Steadman Fagoth, head of the
 Misurasata Indian association, was among them. The Indians
 were subsequently released and have since gone into exile.
 As a security precaution before the July 19 second anniver-
 sary of the revolution, police arrested persons whose
 names were on lists as potential security threats. Independ-
 ent labor union leaders also have been briefly imprisoned
 for organizing activites.
 In September the government declared a one-year state
 of social and economic emergency and declared a number
 of broadly-defined acts to be crimes. Judicial review
 
 
 487
 of arrests for such crimes is specifically prohibited.
 These include arrest for "inciting" foreign governments
 or international organizations to take decisions which
 damage the economy, and for purposefully spreading "false*
 economic news. In October the government arrested four
 business leaders and a number of communist union leaders
 under provisions of the September decree declaring the
 state of emergency. The communists and three private
 sector leaders remain in jail. The businessmen had criticized
 Sandinista economic management and Marxist-Leninist influence
 in the government.
 Slowness of investigation, lack of clear lines of jurisdic-
 tion and authority and delays in the judicial system
 often contribute to prolonged periods of detention without
 trial.
 a. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 When it came to power in July 1979, the GRN began establish-
 ing an entirely new judicial system and created a body
 of laws which guarantees all Nicaraguans an internation-
 ally-recognized standard of justice. The original govern-
 ment program, fundamental governing statute of August
 1979 and documents guaranteeing fundamental rights are
 still referred to by GRN officials, but in practice those
 rights have often been curtailed. The government has
 enacted numerous decrees establishing legal mechanisms
 that can, and are, used against political opponents of
 the FSLN.
 On July 19, the government decreed a retroactive law
 that confiscated the property of people who had been
 absent from Nicaragua for more than six months without
 a satisfactory explanation. The appeal process has proved
 effective for some. The government also decreed the
 confiscation of the property of "counter-revolutionaries,"
 a label which was frequently and broadly applied by GRN
 officials to their political opponents. Another decree
 in July broadened the definition of Idecapitalization"
 (under-utilization of private business or agricultural
 resources) and made it punishable by confiscation, heighten-
 ing fears of future arbitrary seizures of private property.
 The confiscations of the La Perfecta dairy and the Prego
 soap factory are the best known examples of property
 takeovers by the government in 1981 under this decree.
 Although the government promised to pay compensation
 to some property owners, virtually no payments have been
 made.
 The special tribunals established to try ex-National
 Guard prisoners from the Somoza regime were closed down
 at the beginning of 1981. However, almost all of those
 who were convicted by the special tribunals, under judicial
 procedures that do not conform to international standards,
 remain in jail.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The government has pledged itself to respect the sanctity
 of the home and emphasizes respect for citizens in the
 training of police. However, officials of the department
 of state security are not subject to the same judicial
 procedures in searching homes as are the Sandinista police.
 There have been credible reports of unlawful entry of
 homes, searches and the detention of individuals without
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 32
 
 
 488
 notifying their families. Electronic surveillance of
 private citizens, primarily through wiretaps, is thought
 to be common, and senior government officials have admitted
 its use.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The GRN formally guaranteed these basic freedoms in its
 government program issued July 1979 in San Jose, Costa
 Rica, in the fundamental governing statute, and in the
 statute on rights and guarantees governing Nicaraguans.
 Although senior GRN officials frequently reaffirm these
 guarantees, the government has not fully complied with
 the assurances. The government has imposed restrictions
 on reporting by the press and on the activities of independent
 political parties and trade unions.
 There is no censorship of domestic or imported books,
 but a government commission for political classification
 of films exists. The traditional autonomy of the national
 universities and the independence of the Catholic Church-
 associated Central American University have been circum-
 scribed by a superior education council. This council,
 composed of university, government and FSLN officials,
 is intended to rationalize and coordinate higher education
 to meet development needs, but it also reflects the ideolo-
 gical orientation of the FSLN in the university curricula.
 In 1980 the government enacted decrees requiring the
 news media to clear in advance news reports in certain
 categories which the government claimed could affect
 internal security. The scope of these decrees was broadened
 to include news on scarcities, labor and popular unrest,
 counter-revolutionary activities, armed attacks on the
 government and reporting on electioneering. Under these
 decrees the government suspended the independent newspaper
 "La Prensa" five times in 1981. While "La Prensa" has
 adjusted its news reporting to comply with the decrees,
 it continues to exercise considerable independence, publish-
 ing a broad range of news and opinion on domestic and
 international events. The GRN has also sanctioned government-
 controlled media for violations of one or more of the
 decrees.
 The FSLN controls the country's two television stations,
 but a number of radio stations that provide independent
 news service are privately owned. In 1981 the government
 was petitioned for permission to begin privately owned
 television stations, but it has repeatedly turned down
 the requests.
 The threat of Sandinista-mobilized mob action, coupled
 with GRN decrees, also limits freedom of expression in
 Nicaragua. Two of the three independent radio stations
 were vandalized by pro-Sandinista mobs in March, but
 have since returned to the air. At the same time, mobs
 threatened "La Prensa," which voluntarily suspended pub-
 lication for two days at the suggestion of the interior
 minister to avoid problems. In September 1981 the government
 issued additional decrees that inhibit liberty of press
 and free expression. Declaring a state of social and
 economic emergency, the government made it a crime (1)
 to "incite" foreign governments and international organiza-
 tions to take decisions which damage the economy and
 
 
 489
 (2) purposefully to spread "false* news that causes altera-
 tions in prices.
 In 1981 the FSLN continued its efforts to incorporate
 all trade union organizations into a Sandinista-run con-
 federation. The FSLN applied heavy pressure against
 two traditional trade union groups, the Nicaragua Workers
 Central (CTN) and the Confederation of Labor Unification
 (CUS), which have both resisted affiliation and remain
 independent. Some independent trade union leaders were
 arrested temporarily and their organizing activities
 constantly harassed. CTN leaders were beaten by groups
 organized by the Sandinista Workers Central, and the
 FSLN mounted media campaigns against the unions, represent-
 ing the CUS as a "tool of imperialism" manipulated by
 the Central Intelligence Agency through the American
 Institute for Free Labor Development. Labor ministry
 officials, who exercise considerable authority in labor
 disputes, side with the workers in most controversies.
 However, in reviewing worker firings, they have often
 discriminated against members of independent unions.
 labor ministry officials in charge of legal recognition
 of unions often delayed processing applications submitted
 by the independent confederations.
 The GRN has circumscribed free labor organization in
 several other ways. Labor relations basically are governed
 by the labor code enacted by the previous regime, but
 the GRN has enacted piecemeal reforms to strengthen the
 government considerably in collective bargaining. By
 law, the Labor ministry participates in all collective
 bargaining negotiations and must approve final agreements.
 Present government policy seeks to limit wage increases
 because of the country's strained economic circumstances.
 The government's declaration of the state of social and
 economic emergency made strikes, factory and land takeovers
 and work stoppages illegal.
 The GRN and FSLN constantly interfered in the activi-
 ties of non-Sandinista political parties. In January 1981
 the Conservative Democratic Party (PCD) held a rally
 in Chontales which was harassed by police. In March
 the government granted a rally permit to the Nicaraguan
 Democratic Movement (MDN), but Sandinista mass organization
 cadres mobilized mobs which attacked the homes of MDN
 supporters, burned one to the ground and blocked access
 to Nandaime, the scheduled rally point. The MDN called
 off the rally to prevent further violence. In August
 the Social Democratic Party (PSD) scheduled a small gathering
 in Diriomo. Sandinista cadre-organized mobs intimidated
 Diriomo residents for three days before the PSD meeting,
 which was held in spite of mob threats.
 Throughout 1981 the independent political parties held
 small seminars and political meetings in their headquarters
 and private homes, sometimes without incident, but pro-
 Sandinista mobs often harassed and disrupted the meetings.
 Before the scheduled MDN rally in Nandaime in March,
 pro-Sandinista mobs sacked MDN party headquarters and
 carried MDN files to state security offices. The head-
 quarters of the Social Christian Party and of the PSD
 were vandalized and painted with Sandinista slogans several
 times in 1981. In October Sandinista mobs attacked the
 home of MDN leader Alfonso Robelo. He was temporarily
 prevented from leaving the country by the FSLN.
 
 
 490
 Ninety percent of Nicaraguans profess Catholicism, and
 the government has taken no direct legal action to limit
 freedom of religion. However, the FSLN media has attacked
 Managua Archbishop Obando, the head of the Nicaraguan
 Church who is often critical of GRN and FSLN policies,
 accusing him of opposing the revolution, representing
 only the bourgeosie and subverting the "true" church
 as represented by the Sandinista priests. In July the
 GRN prohibited the weekly telecasting of the archbishop's
 Sunday mass. Members of some minority denominations,
 mostly Protestant, experienced harassment, and, in one
 case, deportation of their leader. The government often
 claimed that these minority sects are counter-revolutionary
 front organizations.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 In 1981 approximately 2,000 persons, the majority Indians,
 left Nicaragua for Honduras after their leaders were
 arrested. The government says it will not prosecute
 those who wish to return, but there have been credible
 reports of returnees having been jailed.
 Nicaragua has received approximately 20,000 refugees
 from the civil strife in El Salvador. These form several
 small refugee camps, but most have been integrated into
 the Nicaraguan economy, and refugees enjoy the same rights
 as Nicaraguans. The government has been generous (particu-
 larly in light of its limited resources) with the refugees,
 whom they welcome as opponents of the Salvadoran government.
 The GRN has continued the Somoza regime's requirement
 that Nicaraguan citizens and foreign residents obtain
 an exit permit in order to leave the country. Applicants
 must present letters from their Sandinista neighborhood
 committee, but no major restrictions on granting such
 permits are currently observed. However, opposition
 figures have experienced delays in the processing of
 their passports and exit permits. Some have been stopped
 temporarily at the airport and forced to miss scheduled
 flights, but none have been permanently banned from travel.
 There are reports that in 1981 three persons had their
 passports taken away for political reasons.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Nicaragua's political system permits opposition political
 parties, but the political life of the country and its
 institutions are dominated by the FSLN. The FSLN claims
 that it enjoys massive popular support from the Nicaraguan
 people and that it has a mandate to govern the country
 by virtue of its vanguard role in the military victory
 over the Somoza regime. The nine-member FSLN national
 directorate is the principal source of policy for the
 GRN Junta and makes decisions in all critical areas,
 especially military and internal security policy.
 The GRN has not changed its decision, made in 1980, to
 postpone elections until 1985. The prohibition against
 electioneering continues, and in 1981 several senior
 FSLN officials reiterated that any elections will be
 to ratify the FSLN's power, not to choose new leaders.
 This creates serious doubt that the GRN will keep its
 commitment to an open political process.
 
 
 491
 The Nicaraguan business community is well organized and
 committed to cooperate with the government in the economic
 reconstruction of the country. However, the business
 community feels the government used discriminatory credit
 policies against it and confiscated property arbitrarily.
 The FSLN constantly used its media to portray the business
 community as traitors, counter-revolutionaries and ex-
 ploiters who protect their own interests at the expense
 of the Nicaraguan working Imasses.* Despite strained
 relations between the government and the private sector,
 the private sector vigorously pursued a pluralistic society
 and the preservation of a mixed economy. The GRN and
 FSLN held discussions with the private sector on these
 matters, and Sandinista officials made verbal commitments
 which were rarely kept.
 Women play an active role within the GRN/FSLN, mostly
 at the lower levels. A female commander during the war,
 Dora Maria Tellez, is vice-president of the council of
 state, and women serve in the cabinet, on the supreme
 court, in the Nicaraguan foreign service, in many mid-
 level government positions and in the FSLN secretariat.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The GRN has welcomed the interest of the international
 community in human rights observance in Nicaragua. In
 1981 there were no visits from international organizations,
 but during the previous year the government received
 visits from the International Commission of Jurists,
 Amnesty International and the Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission. The government has also extended an invitation
 to the United Nations Human Rights Commission to visit
 Nicaragua.
 The Independent Permanent Commission on Human Rights
 (CPDH), which has been monitoring human rights observances
 in Nicaragua since 1977, played a significant role in
 exposing human rights violations committed by the Somoza
 regime and continues to expose excesses by the Sandinista
 government. Despite pressure, which includes the temporary
 jailing this year of its national coordinator, Jose Esteban
 Gonzalez, and the temporary occupation of its offices
 by government security forces, the CPDH maintains careful
 records of human rights violations. It presents cases
 to the government and to international organizations
 and vigorously seeks to foster improved human rights
 observance. The GRN, like the Somoza regime, has criticized
 the CPDH as politically motivated and has been hostile
 to its presentations. The GRN has mounted a systematic
 international campaign, concentrated in Europe, to lower
 the prestige of the CPDH as a valid human rights organization.
 In 1980 the government created an official commission
 for the protection and promotion of human rights, with
 a membership composed of government officials and private
 citizens (some of whom in 1981 decided not to participate
 further). This commission, with the cooperation of the
 GRN, pursued a program of monitoring human rights.
 Nicaragua is a signatory to the American Convention on
 Human Rights (which it has ratified), the United Nations
 statute and protocol on refugees and the United Nations
 declaration on the elimination of discrimination against
 
 
 492
 women.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 When the GRN came to power in July 1979, Nicaragua faced
 virtual bankruptcy. The war destroyed buildings, equipment
 and inventories and caused significant permanent capital
 flight. The GRN made reactivation of the economy its
 immediate goal and a prerequiste to the effective redistri-
 bution of wealth promised by the revolution. In 1981
 the recovery faltered and stalled at a level still well
 below pre-revolutionary levels. 1981 exports failed
 to exceed $500 million (compared to prewar $650 million
 levels). Nicaragua's economic outlook is not hopeful,
 despite generous assistance from several Western nations,
 Soviet bloc countries and Libya. Inflation, which in
 1980 was reduced to 25-30 percent from 80 percent in
 the previous year, increased in 1981 to about 50 percent,
 due to a large central government deficit and higher
 demand for credit. Unemployment in 1981 is on the rise,
 up to about 25 percent, and labor productivity remains
 below prewar levels. The legacy of the Somoza regime,
 the war and current low international commodity prices
 all contributed to Nicaragua's 1981 economic woes, but
 a climate of stability and confidence is also lacking.
 The Nicaraguan public sector acounts for approximately
 40 percent of gross domestic product, and, although govern-
 ment leaders have reiterated their intention to foster
 a mixed economy, arbitrary and unpredictable property
 confiscations and Marxist rhetoric by FSLN leaders discourage
 private investment. Restrictions on internal credit
 and a severe shortage of foreign exchange have further
 complicated economic recovery.
 There are serious economic constraints on the government's
 ambitious development goals of providing the disadvantaged
 with greater access to basic public services and, in
 particular, to education, health services, better housing
 and better food. Foreign exchange shortages apparently
 have caused drug and medical supply shortages. In September
 the government, citing economic problems, reduced some
 basic consumer subsidies. Meeting Nicaragua's social
 service needs would be difficult under any conditions,
 given the public services infrastructure.
 The magnitude of the task before the government can be
 seen in 1979 statistics, which reflect Somoza regime
 performance. Nicaraguans have a life expectancy at birth
 of 56 years and high infant mortality at 122 deaths per
 1,000 live births. Some 40 percent of the population
 (urban 21 percent and rural 19 percent) lives below the
 absolute poverty level. 1979 GNP per capita was $660,
 the population growth rate was 3.3 percent and the total
 fertility rate was 6.3 percent. All of Nicaragua's urban
 population and 34 percent of thi rural population have
 access to safe water. Adjusted primary school enrollment
 ratio was 85 percent, and the ratio of calorie supply
 available for consumption relative to nutritional require-
 ments was 109.0. The government has made efforts to
 live up to its revolutionary commitments to the disadvantaged.
 Throughout most of 1981 major subsidies were given to
 basic grains, oil, eggs and milk, and to mass transportation.
 Primary education is free and obligatory, and education
 services were expanded at all levels, particulary primary
 and adult education in rural areas. Many schools were
 built. The government has an ongoing campaign to maintain
 
 
 493
 the gains of the 1980 national literacy campaign, which
 increased literacy (defined very liberally) to approximately
 88 percent.
 Throughout 1981 the government initiated vaccination
 and public health campaigns, modeled on the national
 literacy campaign, to improve maternal and child health
 and environmental sanitation, particularly in the rural
 areas. Matriculation in Nicaragua's medical school in-
 creased 400 percent. Medical services in hospitals and
 health centers and medicines are free. New health centers
 and four regional hospitals are being built. Medical
 visits have increased 90 percent over traditional levels,
 and the leading pre-revolutionary cause of infant mortality,
 diarrhea, has fallen to sixth among causes of infant
 deaths.
 
 
 494
 U.S.OVEKSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.F1SCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NICARAGUA
 1979     1980      1981
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TorAL...         18.5     38.7     5q.8
 LOANS...............   .    2.6     30.0     48.0
 GRANTS..............        15.9      8.7     11.8
 A.AID ..............  .   .   9.7     19.4     58.4
 LOANS............. .0.0              15.0     48.0
 GRANTS ..............       9.7      4.4     10.4
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...          8.0      1.1     56.6
 8.FOOO FOR PEACE.......          7.0     18.0      1.2
 LOANS..............         2.6     15.0      0.0
 GRANFS.............. .      4.4      3.0      1.2
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         2.6     15.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....          2.6     15.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .   ..-.4                  3.0      1.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.          4.4      2.6      0.6
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         0.0      0.4      0.6
 C.OTHER EC(N. ASSIST...          1.8      1.3      0.2
 LOANS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS...............       1.8      1.3      0.'2
 PEACE CORPS,.....          0.2      0.1      0.1
 NARCUTICS.......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............       1.6       1.2      0.1
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.10
 LOANS...............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS.......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FMS....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EU.TRNG....          0.0      0.0       0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 Il1 .TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        18.5     38.7     59.8
 LOANS .................     2.6     30.0     48.0
 GRAN7S.............     ... 15.9      8.7     11.8
 01HER US LUANS......             0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............O....   0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCk FROM INTERNATIUNAL AGENCIES
 1979     1980     1981      1946-81
 TOFAL ........ 3   .0     5.3     117.9    653.3
 ISRD               0.0      20.0     33.7    215.0
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      9.5
 IDA                0.0     32.0       5.0     60.0
 IDB               36.8       0.0     75.0    342.0
 ADS                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP                1.7      3.3      3.5     21.4
 OTHEK-UN           ().5      0.0      0.7      5.4
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
