NICARAGUA
The 1989 report on Nicaragua states that "[b]ecause of serious continuing abuses, the general human rights situation in Nicaragua remained poor . . . Considering events during 1989, this negative assessment seems unwarranted. Though there remain areas of serious concern, there were significant achievements on a variety of fronts in Nicaragua during 1989 which should be welcomed, but are instead either not included or are minimized in the report.
In general, the report fails to set forth the political context, both domestic and regional, during 1989. In particular, the report provides little discussion of the regional Central American peace process and the domestic detente achieved by the government and the opposition parties during the year. Appropriate credit should be given to the contributions of such events to the improvements in human rights witnessed during 1989. For instance, the report does not address the impact of the Costa del Sol Declaration or the Tela Agreement signed by the five presidents of El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica on February 14 and August 7, respectively. The impact of these regional agreements on the human rights situation in Nicaragua was significant.
The Costa del Sol Declaration, for instance, reflected the Nicaraguan government's commitment to accelerate elections to February 1990; to create a Supreme Electoral Council; to reform its restrictive media laws; and to release political prisoners in accordance with recommendations by the Inter-American Human Rights Commission.
In addition, the report does not sufficiently discuss the agreement reached in early August between the government and 22 opposition groups (the Political Agreement). The Political Agreement committed the government to instituting several significant legislative reforms, including, among other things, the repeal of the Law on the Maintenance of Order and Public Security (Decree 10-40); reform of the Public Media and Social Communication Law to transfer responsibilities for regulating the media from the Interior Ministry to the Supreme Electoral Council; and amendment of the Law on Jurisdictional Duties of the Sandinista Police (Police Powers Law).
The 1989 report is again colored by the politics and ideology which often dominated reports issued during the years of the Reagan Administration. Accordingly, the 1989 report tends to minimize
153
Nicaragua
significant progress on the human rights front by the Nicaraguan government.
The influence of politics is evident throughout the report, but is most blatant in the introduction. The report opens with the nonsensical statement that the FSLN, a political party, is a "one-party communist dictatorship." The Nicaraguan economy under the Sandinistas has for the most part remained in private hands and more than 10 opposition political parties have continued to operate. The State Department in fact contradicts itself in closing the lead paragraph by mentioning the existence of an "internal civic opposition." The State Department also accuses the Sandinistas of being "openly hostile to private initiative," and of "maintain[ing] an extensive and repressive internal security apparatus" that has "developed a tight internal control system which engages in surveillance and infiltration of the legal political opposition . . . ." These rhetorical refrains are not supported by any particular references or facts. Instead, they appear to serve as a necessary preface to casting doubt on the significant achievements during 1989 in the protection of human rights.
While the report acknowledges that the government "committed itself to take actions which could have an important impact on the human rights situation," it repeatedly casts positive developments in a negative light. For instance, while acknowledging more "formal" freedoms for opposition parties and media, the State Department asserts that "[wjhether this new 'political space' was simply a tactical move by the Sandinistas and will not last beyond the internationally monitored February 1990 election was a major human rights concern at year's end." We believe the report should focus on the progress in human rights, rather than casting suspicions on the durability of, and political motives underlying, such progress, especially when such doubts are not supported by specific events.
In support of its "poor" rating for human rights in Nicaragua, the report cites three areas in which there were purportedly "serious continuing abuses."
First, the report correctly states that political and extrajudicial killings are "still being reported." Extrajudicial killings of civilians by armed forces of both the government and the contras in the rural areas in which there is contra activity continued to be an area of special concern. The report gives an inaccurate impression, however, when it states that reports of government killings continued
154
Nicaragua
"throughout 1989." Though Americas Watch reported a "pattern of killings of contra supporters and contra collaborators" from 1987 through the early part of 1989, the group also reported that despite initial delays, "[i]n 1989, . . . the Nicaraguan government has responded vigorously, launching a substantial number of investigations" and that "the prosecutorial response . . . has reduced sharply the number of new abuses that have been reported . . . ." Though the State Department's report notes the change in the government's investigative and prosecutorial response, it omits the chilling effect this has had on abuses by the army and security forces. Gains in this area should be acknowledged and welcomed.
Second, the report claims that the political opposition still suffers considerable harassment and intimidation. Again, this statement is true, but ignores the government's commitment under regional agreements and the Political Agreement to legislative reforms which created a significantly more liberal political atmosphere by the end of 1989. The terms of these legislative reforms are not discussed; nor is the positive impact of such reforms upon human rights acknowledged. Instead, the report remains skeptical about the implementation of these reforms or minimizes the importance of the changes.
Third, the report cites the continued holding of political prisoners as support for its "poor" rating of Nicaraguan human rights during 1989. We believe the release of political prisoners represents one of the most positive developments in Nicaragua in 1989. In addition, the commitment of the Sandinistas to repeal Decree 10-40, the law under which most political prisoners were convicted, is very encouraging.
Though there were still political prisoners being held by the government at year's end (most political prisoners were released prior to the February 1990 election), there was significant improvement in this area which is not given appropriate credit in the report. Past delays in the release of political prisoners can be attributed to the government's insistence on tying such releases to demobilization of the contra forces. By the end of 1989, the government appeared to have dropped this condition.
In March, 1,894 ex-National Guardsmen were released by the government. (The 39 guardsmen not released at that time were eventually released in February, 1990.) In addition, the government committed itself under the Political Agreement to release all political
155
Nicaragua
prisoners under a general amnesty. As part of this commitment, the government had released a number of prisoners by year's end.
The report criticizes the release of political prisoners on the grounds that "[t]he charges against these persons have not been dropped, nor their sentences pardoned; they could be returned to custody at any time." This description of the releases is inaccurate and the characterization of the release as "provisional freedom" is unsupported.
The report also questions the accuracy of the International Committee of the Red Cross's census of political prisoners, because the group was not given access in its 1989 inspections to the state security and detention facilities. What the report excludes are the results, published in November 1989 by Americas Watch, of a survey of such state security and detention facilities. Americas Watch concluded that "the total number of prisoners held for politically motivated offenses is not significantly greater than the 1306 counted by the ICRC" and that claims by the Department of State and opposition groups in Nicaragua that there were four or five times that many political prisoners are "patently false." Accordingly, the State Department report's assertion that the number of political prisoners remains a "contentious" issue is overstated.
In reporting on "disappearances," the State Department continues to misstate the problem, as it has in past years' reports, by including references to matters that have nothing to do with the accepted definition of a "disappearance" as unacknowledged arrest, made with the intent of concealing the detainee from family, lawyers and judges. The report continues to focus on persons "detained . . . on charges of draft evasion or collaborating with the [resistance]." These detentions do not constitute "disappearances," because the government does not deny the fact of detention. We are not aware of any support for the report's assertion that "[s]ome who resist conscription have disappeared permanently."
In regard to torture, the report correctly notes that there are reports of psychological torture and ill-treatment. In particular, the report's reference to the ill-treatment of the hunger strikers is well-documented. It is correct that the government has used chiquitas, closet-like isolation cells. The report fails to state, however, that Amnesty International renewed its protests to the government in 1989 regarding the use of chiquitas, and that the government appears to have responded to such protests by ending their use. The report's
156
Nicaragua
claim that "[t]he systematic use of [physical and psychological torture] . . . reflects a deliberate policy which targets political prisoners in DGSE prisons or its secret jails" is misleading. Amnesty International reports that it has received "few well-documented reports or personal testimonies of the use of physical torture in DGSE detention centres."
In regard to freedom of religion, there is no basis for the sweeping statement that "the regime has a generally hostile attitude toward the Catholic Church . . . ." Catholics remained prominent within the Sandinista front and government throughout 1989. The State Department errs in not distinguishing between the Catholic hierarchy, some of whom remained firmly identified with contra forces, and Catholics in general. This characterization also ignores a significant thawing during 1989 of church-state relations, including the government's decision to permit the return of exiled foreign priests and the renewed broadcast of Radio Católico.
The report is correct in highlighting that some prominent opposition leaders, including ones who had joined the contras, returned to Nicaragua during the last year and did not encounter any "special harassment." It seems that the return of former members of the contra directorate — Azucena Ferry, Roberto Ferry, Alfredo Cesar and Alfonso Robelo -- and other prominent figures such as Pedro Joaquin Chamorro Barrios and Edén Pastora — should have received more attention in the report. Repatriation of prominent opposition figures illustrates a significantly altered domestic political climate and increased respect for human rights. Of course, such illustrations may be problematic, because they are contrary to the report's "poor" rating of Nicaragua.
In regard to the right of citizens to change their government, the Department of State's views are colored by politics and ideology. That, as staled in the report, "the right of citizens to peacefully change their government has not been tested" is incorrect. Elections were held in 1984 and declared to be fair by international monitors from such bodies as the Latin American Studies Association, the British House of Commons and Lords, the Irish Parliament, the Dutch government and the Socialist International. The consensus of these observer groups was that the 1984 contest was clear, meaningful and competitive. That the government's commitment to holding fair elections and to turning over power if they lose is "viewed with skepticism by many observers" is also inaccurate. Several monitoring groups, including those of the United Nations, the Organization of American States and former President Carter, were on the whole very
157
Nicaragua
optimistic about the fairness of the election process. If the State Department is skeptical, it should say so clearly and not attribute such doubts to unidentified observers.
The report's claim that the government "has shown itself to be sensitive to attempts to probe too deeply into its human rights practices" is not supported by the facts. During 1989, the government opened its prisons to inspections by Americas Watch and ICRC. In addition, the government has been increasingly responsive to inquiries by human rights organizations regarding reports of extrajudicial killings and "disappearances." For instance. Amnesty International, in regard to an invitation to visit the Nicaraguan prison and detention facilities, again welcomed the Nicaraguan Government's "openness to international human rights organizations . . . ." In addition, the government's commitment to repeal Decree 10-40 and to reform the Police Powers Law appears responsive to concerns raised by Amnesty International in a report released in July.
It is also important to note that the newly emerging responsiveness of the government was not matched by the contras. Americas Watch notes that it was not given access to the detention centers located in contra camps in Honduras and that inquiries submitted to the contra leadership regarding killings and kidnappings attributed to their troops have been met with no response.
Finally, there are two criticisms of the report which apply to a variety of categories. First, it contains several references to events which occurred prior to 1989. The report loses credibility when its conclusions are supported only by references to pre-1989 events.
Second, the report generally gives little attention to contra abuses and applies different standards to contra human rights violations. For instance, the report states that the contra movement "has also been accused of engaging in summary executions, usually of suspected informers or Sandinista spies." This choice of words gives the impression that extrajudicial killings by the resistance are somehow mitigated, if not justified. Apart from how this evaluation is framed, the substance of the statement is not consistent with the findings of other reputable observers, which is not noted in the report. For example. Amnesty International concluded that "[a] pattern has emerged which suggests that community leaders, local trade union officials, lay-preachers and young professionals engaged in government-sponsored development and political work in rural areas have been singled out for attacks by anti-government forces as
158
Nicaragua
part of a deliberate policy to discourage collaboration with government agencies."
159
