 NICARAGUA
 The Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), a
 Marxist-Leninist group, exercises complete control of the
 Government of Nicaragua. The national election of November
 1984 was won handily by the Sandinistas but boycotted by much
 of the opposition due to seriously flawed electoral
 practices. A new Constitution, promulgated in January 1987,
 provides the legal framework for the perpetuation of FSLN
 control. The opposition during 1986 came under increased
 official'pressure, through intimidation, imprisonment, and
 other forms of harassment. Repression affected both organized
 opposition entities and, more broadly, sectors of the
 population viewed as hostile to the regime or sympathetic to
 the armed resistance. This repression is the result of the
 FSLN's control of the Army, the state security apparatus, the
 police, and the various militia and paramilitary forces as
 well as of the judiciary and legislative organs.
 The General Directorate for State Security (DGSE) and the
 Popular Sandinista Army (EPS) are key elements in the
 increasingly sophisticated internal control network. With the
 involvement of Soviet bloc and Cuban advisers, the DGSE has
 become increasingly efficient and sophisticated.
 The Government expanded its drive to immobilize the opposition
 during 1986 with official attacks on political parties
 previously spared more threatening forms of intimidation, such
 as detention or arrest. It increasingly circumscribed the
 legal activities of political, labor, private sector, and
 religious organizations. Officials of these organizations
 also charge that their operations are disrupted by FSLN
 infiltrators. The FSLN generally has been careful in dealing
 with well-known opposition leaders, but mid- and lower-level
 opposition activists, unprotected by international
 recognition, have been interrogated, imprisoned, and, in
 several cases, assassinated.
 Major human rights abuses in 1986 included mass arrests of
 civilians on vague charges of counterrevolutionary activity;
 torture and abuse of prisoners; disappearances; summary
 executions of civilians and prisoners of war; the continuing
 involuntary relocation of rural residents; civilian deaths
 resulting from the Sandinista military's indiscriminate use of
 artillery and 'air bombardment; the closure of the opposition
 newspaper La Prensa and Radio Catolica, operated by the
 Catholic Archdiocese of Managua--the last vestiges of the
 independent, nongovernment-controlled mass media; and the
 forced exile of a leading bishop, the Curia's spokesman, and a
 priest.
 There were also continuing unconfirmed claims of the murder of
 civilians in the Atlantic coast region during 1986. These
 reports came from refugees entering Costa Rican camps who
 allege that the Sandinistas have begun using "death squads"
 for the execution of rural inhabitants, mostly young males,
 considered sympathetic to the resistance.
 The armed resistance similarly has been charged with numerous
 violations of human rights, including forced recruitment, use
 of pressure-sensitive mines, summary executions of prisoners
 and regime officials, torture, kidnapings of noncombatants,
 and attacks on civilians. As with most of the reports
 concerning the massacre of civilians in remote areas by the
 Sandinista authorities, it has proven extremely difficult to
 obtain objective independent verification of these charges.
 
 
 570
 NICARAGUA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were reports that 32 persons were killed by Sandinista
 authorities for apparently political motives during the past
 12 months, with unconfirmed claims of as many as 500 civilians
 killed by government troops in the Government's counter-
 insurgency efforts. In addition, 15 to 20 prisoners
 reportedly were killed with automatic weapons fire in one of
 Nicaragua's largest "model prisons" when authorities broke up
 a hunger strike involving several hundred prisoners.
 Victims of political killing included:
 --Salomon Telleria, a member of the Social Christian
 Party (PSC), died on February 14 of internal injuries after
 being severely beaten in a DGSE prison in Leon.
 --Eduardo Jose Trejos, a Ministry of Interior (MINT)
 official convicted of espionage, was reported by the
 Government on June 4 to have hanged himself with a sheet in
 his cell in El Chipote prison. Former prisoners report that
 cells in that facility are not provided with sheets. A
 request by the Trejos family for an autopsy was denied by the
 authorities. They also forbade the family to open Mr. Trejos'
 casket prior to interment.
 --Daniel Gonzalez, a campesino activist of the PSC
 Revolutionary Youth, was shot to death by Sandinista soldiers
 Eugenio Laguna Silva and Pablo Urrutia Aviles on January 20;
 Gonzalez had been badly beaten by the two soldiers on November
 22, 1985.
 --Tomas Reyes Gutierrez died while in the custody of the
 DGSE. In January the Permanent Commission on Human Rights
 (CPDH), Nicaragua's only independent human rights group,
 received a complaint concerning his murder, following his
 detention on suspicion of having links with the resistance.
 Reyes had been shot several times and his body showed evidence
 of torture and mutilation.
 --Juan Pablo Pineda, an evangelical minister, was killed
 while under arrest by a two-man patrol in November 1985,
 although the case was not made public by the Government until
 January 1986. One of the perpetrators was arrested, according
 to authorities, while the other escaped.
 --A farmer and his wife in Nueva Guinea were reported by
 neighbors to have been killed by an army patrol in October
 after admitting to having given food to the armed opposition.
 --Two members of the military were shot "while trying to
 escape," one after being arrested for desertion and the other
 after shooting Belgian agricultural adviser Paul Dessers.
 Although Dessers was killed at a spot identified by local
 residents as a routine Army checkpoint, the Government
 publicly claimed he had been shot by a soldier "recently"
 discovered to have ties to mercenaries.
 In addition to the above persons, 23 others were reported to
 have been summarily executed by military or security forces.
 
 
 571
 NICARAGUA
 There also were numerous unconfirmed reports of murders of
 civilians in isolated rural areas by the Sandinista military.
 Although names, places, and in many cases dates of death and
 names of the perpetrators are available, it has not been
 possible to verify the allegations.
 The Government has been accused of summarily executing
 prisoners taken during combat. An example was a wounded
 resistance combatant who was sprayed with machine gun fire by
 Sandinista militia following an attack on the military
 headquarters at El Nispero.
 In the 5 years of civil war, only 600 to 650 resistance
 combatants have been identified as coming to trial before the
 Popular Anti-Somocista Tribunals (TPA's), special courts
 created to try political crimes. This figure compares to the
 Government's claimed total for resistance combat deaths of
 16,000 as of July 1986, with 4,000 allegedly killed in 1986
 alone. While it is not possible to determine the numbers of
 resistance prisoners being held by the Sandinistas (or the
 actual number of resistance combatants killed in fighting),
 allegations have been made by refugees and defectors that
 resistance prisoners are being held without the formality of a
 TPA trial or have been executed without trial while in
 Sandinista custody.
 According to the Government, about 1,000 civilians were killed
 by the resistance in 1986. Independent verification of the
 combatant status of victims, of the number of civilian deaths
 attributable to the resistance, and of the number that
 constituted deliberate as opposed to inadvertent killings is
 virtually impossible since the Government controls access to
 sites of alleged killings and the dissemination of pertinent
 information.
 Determining the number of civilian casualties is complicated
 by the Government's practice of tasking persons engaged
 primarily in civilian occupations with additional defense
 responsibilities. The Government consistently withholds
 information on the military or paramilitary functions of
 victims, publicizing only their alleged civilian status.
 Charges against the resistance during 1986 included the
 following incidents:
 --On July 3, the official Nicaragua press reported that a
 civilian truck had struck a mine placed by the resistance,
 killing 32 civilians. Resistance headquarters was
 simultaneously informed that a grenade thrown by a Sandinista
 unit at resistance fighters had struck a passing truck, causing
 an explosion that resulted in the deaths of 31 civilians.
 There is no evidence available to confirm either version of
 the event.
 --On July 28, the Sandinista media reported the deaths of
 five persons in a "contra" ambush of two official vehicles.
 Two victims were reported as Nicaraguan Sandinista Party
 militants and three as "internationalists." Documents
 recovered from the bodies indicated that at least four and
 probably all five were Europeans. Three carried Ministry of
 Interior permits for AK-47 assault rifles and pistols; one
 carried a document identifying him as a Sandinista official
 and a photo in which he wore a Sandinista military uniform.
 
 
 572
 NICARAGUA
 --On May 17, eight West Germans were taken prisoner by
 the resistance after an attack on an agricultural cooperative.
 They were captured in a military barracks attached to the
 project. Some, according to the resistance unit, were
 uniformed and armed. Despite intensive efforts by the West
 German Government and the Nicaraguan Democratic Forces (FDN),
 the main armed resistance group, to reach an agreement with
 the Sandinistas for their safe release, their captivity
 continued for 25 days. The Sandinistas objected to various
 conditions, including handing over the prisoners to an
 independent third party. During that period, the Sandinista
 army pursued the group closely, repeatedly opening fire. The
 prisoners were released June 10 into the custody of a local
 Moravian Church. In their statements to the press, the
 released captives complained that they had to sleep on the
 ground and walk long distances, and that their captors fired
 rifles into the air or near them to keep them on the move.,
 --Sandinista authorities reported that the resistance
 attacked a bus October 14, killing 2 civilians and wounding
 32. Witnesses, including a journalist, reported that a
 Sandinista soldier had opened fire on a resistance combatant
 who had stopped the bus looking for Sandinista military,
 setting off a panicked barrage of return fire by the unit.
 --On October 20, a vehicle reportedly struck a mine in
 northern Nicaragua that the Government claimed was placed by
 the resistance. Five or six civilians were said to have been
 killed. There is no independent information to confirm the
 Government's allegation.
 --On November 11, a resistance unit attacked a militia
 command post at El Nispero, in southern Nicaragua. The
 Government blamed the resistance for the death of seven
 civilians and the wounding of six, portraying the action as a
 brutal attack on civilians. A report by a foreign journalist
 indicated that all but one of the deaths were inadvertent
 casualties. The resistance unit denied the reporter's claim
 that it had slit the throat of a 1-year-old child. In a
 detailed account of the engagement, they stated that the child
 and its mother had been killed by blind fire while they hid in
 a small hut attached to the command post. The mother was the
 sister of one of the resistance combatants.
 --On November 20, the Government reported that "contras"
 had attacked a "caravan of civilian vehicles" from the Ministry
 of Construction, killing three civilians and kidnapping seven,
 including a Swedish aid worker. Subsequent inquiries from the
 foreign press revealed that three Ministry of Interior
 soldiers had been killed in the ambush, no kidnapings had
 occurred, and no foreign aid workers were involved. The
 Ministry of Defense attributed the original report to
 "confusion."
 --Government authorities alleged that the "contras" had
 ambushed a civilian vehicle November 13, killing five
 civilians, including the vice president of the Sandinista
 Cattlemen's Union (UNAG). The group reportedly was traveling
 in a military vehicle; victims included both civilians and
 soldiers, and all passengers were armed with assault rifles
 and pistols.
 In many cases, civilian casualties are sustained in the course
 of combat. In every instance, the Government declares such
 casualties a result of resistance fire. The likelihood of
 
 
 573
 NICARAGUA
 unnecessary civilian deaths is significantly increased by the
 Government's deliberate policy of transporting civilians, in
 military convoys, which are key targets for resistance units,
 and of arming persons in civilian occupations and tasking them
 with military responsibilities. The Government announced, for
 example, that half of the 10,000 coffee pickers in Military
 Region VI had been armed and had received military training.
 Armed harvesters included members of the Sandinista Youth
 described as occupying the "second defensive echelon... after
 the irregular warfare troops.. .the permanent territorial
 troops, and the territorial militia." Newspapers also have
 printed photographs of uniformed and partially uniformed
 members of "harvest brigades" who are virtually
 indistinguishable from regular army troops. On January 11,
 Daniel Ortega distributed land titles and rifles to communal
 farmers. The Manuel Escobar Shock Brigade, which will be sent
 to build bridges and roads in northern Zelaya, consists of
 youths described as members of the Army reserve, militarily
 experienced, and "ready to work with a rifle at their
 shoulder." Brigade members shown in a photo accompanying the
 press announcement of its formation were uniformed, and the 61
 members were said to be prepared to act as "soldiers" if
 necessary.
 The same ambiguity characterizes the agricultural cooperatives
 frequently targeted by the resistance. Although the
 Sandinistas internationally publicize these settlements as
 strictly civilian enterprises, the claim is demonstrably
 false. The agricultural cooperatives in combat regions were
 conceived and developed as "links in the system of territorial
 defense." The units are guarded by militia or regular
 military personnel. The civilian workers also carry out
 military functions and receive routine military training by
 the Army. The system was publicly announced as a strategy for
 replacing individual farmers in combat areas--many of whom
 were proresistance--with armed pro-Sandinista cooperatives in
 order to deny a base of popular support to the resistance.
 Such cooperatives generally have both civilian and military
 functions.
 Other deaths charged to the resistance by the Government are
 allegedly caused by mines. Although Sandinista Defense
 Minister Humberto Ortega publicly stated that the Government
 has placed thousands of mines in border areas, the Government
 has consistently attributed deaths of civilians caused by
 mines to the resistance.
 b. Disappearance
 As in previous years, many disappearances reported in
 Nicaragua are a result of the Government's policy of holding
 prisoners in jails distant from their homes, concealing or
 denying their arrests, and failing to notify family members of
 arrest. Other persons disappear and are not seen alive
 again. CPDH reported 22 cases of unresolved disappearances
 attributed to the Government by the end of October 1986.
 The Government in 1986 charged the resistance with several
 hundred kidnapings, not including the 11,000 Indians said by
 the Sandinistas to have been "kidnaped" in March 1986 by a few
 hundred Indian resistance fighters. This raises the total of
 such "kidnapings" attributed to the resistance since 1979 to
 688. While it is certain that the resistance has taken
 civilian prisoners, the exact number is not known. The main
 armed resistance group, the FDN, has published a list of
 
 
 574
 NICARAGUA
 approximately 70 prisoners. FDN leaders have sought to
 release prisoners to the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC), but no agreement has been reached on a prisoner
 release. The Government press routinely publicizes cases of
 .mass amnesties" of persons who publicly claim to have been
 with the resistance under force and to have escaped or to have
 been "liberated" by the Sandinista military.
 Resistance commanders claim to have instituted a system of
 choice for persons taken prisoner, under which they may remain
 as a prisoner, fight with the resistance, or return to their
 homes. According to unit leaders, most opt to return home.
 In order to prevent false charges of execution of prisoners,
 resistance units try to release their prisoners only to third
 parties who are able to provide transportation out of combat
 areas for those who are freed. In practice, this appears to
 mean stopping passing motorists to request their assistance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Reports of the beating of political prisoners and intense
 "psychological torture" by government authorities are common,
 and conditions in prisons not open to public inspection are
 consistently reported to be dehumanizing. The Government
 appears to have a deliberate policy of degrading political
 prisoners and undermining their will to resist. Reports by
 former political prisoners and three letters smuggled out of
 prisons during 1986 commonly include references to such
 violations as mock executions; death threats against
 themselves and their families; false reports by interrogators
 of the torture and death of prisoners' families; deprivation
 of food, water, and sleep; immersion in barrels of cold water
 for days at a time; other forms of sometimes severe physical
 abuse; and sexual molestation. At the DGSE prison in Esteli,
 prisoners are reportedly hung by their thumbs and beaten.
 In at least the Zona Franca prison, inmates are reported to be
 punished by being placed in the "sucker," an old truck body
 sealed and exposed to the sun.  Prisoners thus confined for
 more than a few hours suffer extreme dehydration. There are
 also recurring reports of underground prison cells for
 isolation of prisoners. Both defectors and ex-prisoners have
 also reported the use of dogs for terrorization of prisoners
 during interrogation. Canine teams reportedly were brought
 originally from Cuba to Nicaragua; dogs are now bred there and
 trained for use by the Ministry of Interior.
 Prisons are said by former inmates to be severely overcrowded
 and filthy. In DGSE prisons, allegedly the worst in
 Nicaragua's prison system, as many as 20 people may be kept in
 a cell designed for 4. A single bucket or a hole in the
 ground generally is the only sanitary facility. Bathing is
 rarely permitted, and even drinking water is severely
 rationed. In some cases, prisoners are prohibited from
 speaking with their cellmates on threat of punishment. Cells
 are ventilated only by a tiny shaft, and prisoners are
 disoriented by the manipulation of light. Food is limited to
 inadequate quantities of rice and beans, often contaminated by
 dirt and insects. Prisoners and detainees are interrogated
 while hooded or while seated on the floor with their heads
 between their legs. Recalcitrant prisoners are beaten by
 guards or, sometimes, by other fellow prisoners employed for
 that purpose. Prisoners also have reported beatings, denial
 
 
 575
 NICARAGUA
 of food or visits, removal to DGSE prisons, and exposure to
 homosexual rape as so-called disciplinary measures.
 Prisoners' families are also abused by the system. Visits are
 brief and infrequent--generally no more than once every
 3 months--and denial of prisoners' visitation rights is a
 commonly used punishment in the penitentiary system. Prison
 authorities have also been reported to demand sexual favors
 from family members in exchange for visiting privileges.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Nicaraguan Government continues to arrest and detain
 thousands of citizens on vague charges of counterrevolutionary
 involvement. With the denial of the right to habeas corpus to
 those charged with "political" crimes, mass arrests of
 suspected resistance supporters or sympathizers have become
 increasingly common. Suspects are often held for several
 months without charge and without access to counsel.
 Arbitrary short-term arrest and interrogation is a key element
 in the Government's harassment of the civilian opposition.
 As of September 1986, the Government had announced the
 detention of over 3,000 people on suspicion of involvement in
 "counterrevolution." It is unknown how many of those detained
 remain in Sandinista custody. Another 2,300 people were
 detained and then released and granted amnesty for similar
 crimes. In early 1986, over 200 Catholic "Delegates of the
 Word" were arrested in the Nueva Guinea area. Almost 100
 members of the Autonomous Nicaraguan Workers Confederation
 (CTN-A) were arrested at the same time. In the largest single
 operation announced by the Government, 1,500 persons were
 reported arrested during a 2-week period in March in the Rio
 Coco de Matagalpa area. The Government press reported 518
 people arrested in February, 250 arrested in the Rama-Nueva
 Guinea area in March, and another 328 detained in May. On at
 least one occasion, in March in El Jicote, the entire male
 population of a village was detained on suspicion of
 counterrevolutionary involvement.
 Even though accused of being "couriers" or "collaborators"
 with the resistance, few of those detained are officially
 charged. For example, of the 49 CTN-A labor activists still
 imprisoned, only I has been formally charged. Based on
 reports from persons released from Sandinista prisons,
 detainees often are held for 3 or 4 months for interrogation,
 and then are either released, granted amnesty, or remanded to
 the TPA's for trial as a counterrevolutionary. At any given
 time, between 1,500 and 3,000 persons are being held in this
 fashion without charge or trial.
 Harassing detentions of shorter duration are also common.
 These detentions, invariably of persons active in or known to
 be sympathetic to the opposition, may last from a few hours to
 a few weeks. The common view of those subjected to this
 treatment is that the aim is to create generalized fear of the
 Government's powers of retribution and its ability to discover
 details of both private and public activity. Among opposition
 members detained were: Ricardo Martinez of the Nicaraguan
 Workers Confederation (CTN); PSC Revolutionary Youth leader
 Fanor Avendano; Humberto Urbina of the PSC; and Bayardo
 Guzman, Vice President of the Liberal Independent Party (PLI).
 The total prison population (prisoners and detainees) in
 Nicaragua has been estimated by ex-prisoners and former prison
 
 
 576
 NICARAGUA
 officials to be as high as 20,000. A more common estimate,
 however, is around 15,000. This figure includes common
 criminals and political prisoners, including former National
 Guardsmen. Government figures show an increase of 50 percent
 in the prison population in the last 2 years, and there has
 been a fourfold expansion in prison space since the
 Sandinistas came to power. It is estimated that there are
 from 8,000 to 10,000 political prisoners and detainees.
 Formal exile has not been commonly used by the Sandinista
 Government, although members of the business community have
 reported death threats against themselves and their families,
 which they believe are indirect attempts to force them into
 "voluntary" exile. In 1986, however, the Government exiled
 two leading opponents. On June 28, Father Bismarck Carballo,
 a Catholic priest and spokesman for the Nicaraguan Church, was
 prevented from returning to Nicaragua. Carballo was a
 frequent target of Sandinista media attacks and other forms of
 abuse. The Government justified the exile as retaliation for
 Carballo's alleged "lobbying" in Washington for U.S. support
 for the armed opposition.
 By contrast, DGSE agents forcibly removed the Bishop of
 Juigalpa, Pablo Antonio Vega, from his residence, flying him
 to the Honduran border where he was released to Honduran
 authorities. Vega's exile capped several weeks of tension
 brought on by his criticism of the Sandinistas' domestic
 policies. The Nicaraguan Government announced that Vega was
 exiled for his support of the "contras.
 Prohibitions on the use of compulsory or forced labor are
 among the rights and guarantees of Nicaraguan citizens.
 Although there were recurring rumors during 1986 of the use of
 involuntary prisoner labor, none of those charges has been
 confirmed. The Government does, however, exert pressures on
 students and government employees to "volunteer" labor for
 such tasks as coffee harvesting. There have been numerous
 credible reports that failure to participate in such
 ostensibly voluntary labor results in expulsion from schools
 and other forms of reprisal.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Nicaragua has three court systems: the civil and criminal
 courts of the Ministry of Justice; the Sandinista Police
 Courts of the Ministry of Interior; and the TPA's. While
 Sandinista adherents dominate each of these systems, the TPA
 is the most clearly politicized. The TPA is reserved for
 trial of political and armed opponents of the regime and lacks
 basic elements of due process. Defense lawyers are seriously
 restricted in access to their clients and are largely blocked
 by procedural impediments from presenting a meaningful
 defense. Trials as a rule are conducted in secret, and the
 admissibility of evidence is heavily weighted in favor of the
 prosecution. Reportedly, most convictions are based on
 "confessions" obtained in secret interrogations, during which
 torture and psychological abuse are commonly used. The
 decision of the TPA can be appealed only in its own appellate
 court--the Nicaraguan Supreme Court cannot intervene. The
 combined judge and jury generally consists of two Sandinista
 militants, generally without legal expertise, and a third
 member who usually is a former judge or a former employee of
 the Ministry of Justice. As of July 1986, 376 prisoners had
 been convicted by the TPA's. Government figures and estimates
 from human rights organizations show that at least 1,371
 
 
 577
 NICARAGUA
 persons have been tried by the TPA's since their inception.
 Only 90 defendants have been found innocent, for a conviction
 rate of over 90 percent.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Sandinista Government does not recognize the right to
 privacy and the inviolability of the home and correspondence,
 the suspension of which was reaffirmed in the October 1985
 declaration of a state of emergency. The telephones of most
 opposition activists or those who maintain contact with the
 diplomatic community are tapped, and correspondence,
 especially from abroad, is examined. Surveillance of
 Government opponents at all levels is routine. The DGSE has
 established networks of informers in every town and
 neighborhood, using agents from Sandinista mass organizations
 and, when possible, former detainees who provide it
 information under duress. "Revolutionary vigilance," the
 special task of the Sandinista Defense Committees (CDS's),
 involves monitoring the population for indications of
 anti-Sandinista sentiment; they report the activities,
 statements, and visitors of persons identified by DGSE as
 opponents.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and of the press are severely restricted in
 Nicaragua. Government or pro-Sandinista ownership of most of
 the mass media and strict censorship of the few remaining
 private radio stations ensure that unauthorized opinions do
 not reach Nicaraguans through these media. A few independent
 publications of limited distribution still exist, such as the
 monthly reports of the CPDH and the newsletters of some
 opposition parties and business organizations. Efforts to
 publish more have been met with threats to confiscate printing
 presses. The political point of view of any form of mass
 communication continues to be the criterion by which the
 Government judges its permissibility.
 In 1986 there were three major cases of the violation of
 freedom of speech and press. They were the closure of Radio
 Catolica on January 2, allegedly for failure to broadcast the
 first half of President Ortega's New Year's Day speech; the
 banning of the opposition daily, La Prensa, in June; and the
 conviction of seven journalists for writing "counter-
 revolutionary articles" for.Honduran newspapers. The 7 were
 convicted by the TPA's and sentenced to 10 years each in
 prison, a sentence upheld by the TPA appellate division in
 July.
 Both La Prensa and Radio Catolica had been subjected to severe
 and arbitrary censorship pr-ior to their closure The
 democratic opposition and the Catholic Church now have no
 means of mass communication.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Sandinistas limit the freedom of assembly and association
 to FSLN or government-approved organizations. Groups not
 affiliated in some way with the State or the ruling party
 usually find efforts to carry out meetings of any size
 routinely frustrated. Smaller meetings are more often
 
 
 578
 NICARAGUA
 tolerated. All groups and organizations must register and
 receive government recognition in order to function as a legal
 entity. All outdoor public assemblies must receive prior
 authorization from the police. In what was later dismissed as
 an error by the FSLN, a meeting of the officially recognized
 faction of the Conservative Party to discuss the draft
 constitution was broken up by the police in January.
 The freedom not to associate is also being violated. The
 Sandinistas have created various FSLN-affiliated mass
 organizations, membership in which, while ostensibly
 voluntary, is frequently a prerequisite for access to basic
 goods and services. Everyone is expected to belong to a CDS,
 which exercises control over access to subsidized food stores,
 often the only source of affordable staples for the average
 Nicaraguan. The CDS also issues letters of recommendation for
 those seeking government jobs, without which such employment
 is often difficult to obtain, and controls access to medical
 care, housing, and education. Those refusing to participate
 in CDS functions are often denied these scarce commodities or
 services. Membership in Sandinista unions and student
 organizations is also more obligatory than voluntary. Failure
 to join such organizations often results in some form of
 retribution such as expulsion from school, loss of employment,
 and, on occasion, harassment and detention.
 The three independent labor confederations continued to face
 strong pressure from the Sandinistas in 1986. Many members
 have been harassed and others arrested or threatened with
 death because of their membership. There have also been
 reports of DGSE intimidation aimed at obtaining members'
 cooperation as informants. Members of independent
 agricultural unions in Ocotal in April reported receiving
 threats from Sandinista authorities to evict them from their
 land because of their refusal to leave the Confederation of
 Labor Unity (CUS), an organization affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU).
 Over 200 members of the CUS, the Nicaraguan Workers
 Confederation (affiliated with the Latin American Labor
 Central, CLAT), and the CTN-A were arrested in 1986. Some of
 those arrested were released within a few days, others after
 several months, and some remain imprisoned. Most were
 arrested on charges of counterrevolutionary activity, although
 one group of 14 was arrested on charges of theft. In many
 cases, no charges have been made known, either to the public
 or to the detainees. The Chichigalpa headquarters of the CUS
 were seized in April by members of the. Sandinista Youth
 Organization, led by Ministry of Interior officers. The
 house, badly vandalized, was returned several months later as
 a result of strong international pressure. In March the DGSE
 also carried out a raid on CUS offices at the San Antonio
 sugar mill. CUS members who had formed their own agricultural
 cooperative were denied supplies and materials from the state
 agricultural store, ostensibly open to all, and had their
 crops destroyed when Sandinista officials drove tractors over
 planted fields.
 Under the state of emergency, Nicaraguan workers enjoy neither
 the right to strike nor the right to organize. All activities
 of independent labor organizations thus can be treated as
 illegal by the authorities, who can move against them
 virtually at will. Members of independent unions risk loss of
 employment and denial of access to scarce goods and services,
 as well as face harsher forms of punishment. Nevertheless,
 
 
 579
 NICARAGUA
 labor recruitment by the independent trade unions has been
 aided by the declining economic situation, the failure of the
 Government to pay state workers a living wage, and the
 ineffectiveness of government-controlled unions to represent
 worker interests. Even among official labor organizations,
 however, there have been demonstrations of discontent with
 government policies. Several wildcat strikes by members of
 government unions at government-owned plants in 1986 were
 suppressed and strikers fired and jailed. One such incident
 occurred at a state-owned clothing factory, another at the
 state-owned brewery, and a third in the state airline,
 Aeronica.
 Private and professional organizations still exist in
 Nicaragua, but they are increasingly demoralized as a result
 of continuing harassment and pressure from the authorities.
 They have further suffered from the flight of professionals
 and businessmen from the country. The Confederation of
 Professional Associations of Nicaragua, a private professional
 organization umbrella group, has opted to abandon political
 confrontation as membership has fallen, and restrictions on
 activities have increased. The Superior Council for Private
 Enterprise, the umbrella business organization, has also
 experienced organizational and morale problems.
 Among the most intensely targeted of the private sector
 organizations in 1986 have been the private cattlemen's
 groups. This sector of the business community reported
 throughout 1986 fairly consistent pressure from the
 Government, including surveillance of members and officers,
 threats to life, threatened and actual confiscation of
 property, and imprisonment. One member of the Managua
 Cattlemen's Association abruptly departed Nicaragua because of
 the intensity of the threats against him and his family.
 Another cattlemen's association in August reported that 150
 members had been arrested since November 1985, none of whom
 had been released.
 Along with repression of opposition activities, the
 Sandinistas have established state-controlled organizations
 paralleling those in the private sector. Sandinista-
 affiliated entities enjoy significant advantages over their
 private counterparts, including ready access to scarce
 resources, to the media, to officially funded travel abroad
 for representational purposes, and to visiting groups
 sponsored by proregime solidarity organizations. The
 expanding circle of FSLN fronts includes labor, religious,
 cultural, and even "private enterprise" associations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Eighty-five percent of the Nicaraguan people are Roman
 Catholics. The remainder belong to various Protestant
 denominations, including Moravians, Anglicans, Baptists, and
 Evangelicals. There were no reports received in 1986 of the
 disruption of church services, although broadcasts by
 religious radio stations were subject to prior censorship. In
 general, government retribution against the religious faithful
 is reserved for those who are vocal opponents of government
 policies. Catholic Charismatics and Protestant Evangelicals
 appear to be at particular risk.
 The Catholic Church, as the most influential defender of the
 rights of Nicaraguans, sustained a steady assault on its
 institutions during the first half of 1986, although attacks
 
 
 580
 NICARAGUA
 on religious believers were less severe than in November and
 December 1985 when numerous reports were received of
 interrogation, short-term detention, and longer-term
 imprisonment of Catholic lay workers. One Catholic activist,
 Juan Torrente, was arrested in Nueva Guinea in late December
 1985 and died in February of complications from beatings he
 received while in detention. Catholic priests were also
 victims of Government harassment: dozens were summoned for
 interrogation where they were photographed and fingerprinted.
 Several of the priests also reported physical abuse.
 Throughout the year the Catholic Church was on warning that
 foreign priests working in Nicaragua would be deported if they
 continued to engage in activities perceived by the Government
 to be "political." The threat was sharpened on January 14
 when Minister of Interior Tomas Borge announced in an
 interview in Mexico's El Dia that no new foreign priests would
 be permitted entry into Nicaragua to fill vacancies created by
 expulsions of priests already in the country. Even those
 tangentially affiliated with the Church were subject to
 deportation.
 The DGSE arrested an administrator of the social services
 agency, along with a director of a Church Parochial Board, in
 November 1985. The same month, the religion editor of La
 Prensa, Norman Talavera, was arrested and held 5 days for
 interrogation concerning his involvement with the Catholic
 Church and his relations with Cardinal Miguel Obando Bravo.
 The Cardinal was twice denied permission by the Government to
 celebrate mass, once at a local health clinic and once for
 Managua's market women on Mothers Day. In January the
 Catholic Church radio facilities were permanently closed in an
 armed raid by the DGSE; in April all copies of a church
 bulletin were ordered turned over to the DGSE. The same month
 the Ministry of Justice issued a decree declaring the Managua
 Archdiocesan Commission for Social Promotion (COPROSA) an
 illicit organization.
 These substantive attacks on the Church were accompanied by a
 harsh campaign against the'Church hierarchy in the government-
 controlled and pro-Sandinista media. Father Carballo and
 Bishop Vega were denied the right to reside in Nicaragua. In
 September anl American priest with 12 years' pastoral work in
 Nicaragua was denied reentry to the country after a visit to
 the United States. His residence permit was confiscated.
 After interventions from various Church authorities, the
 priest was allowed to return to Nicaragua. In December a
 Salvadoran priest and longtime resident of Nicaragua, Father
 Gregorio Landaverde Flores, was denied reentry after returning
 from studies in Colombia.
 Attacks on Evangelicals and other Protestant denominations
 continued during 1986. In August an Assembly of God church
 under construction in Managua was stormed by a mob led by FSLN
 and CDS officials and completely destroyed. The mob had been
 recruited from another neighborhood and arrived wielding axes,
 shovels, and crowbars. During the destruction, a 16-year old
 boy was struck in the head with a rock, leaving him in
 critical condition. Despite initial promises from the FSLN
 that the damage would be paid for and the guilty parties
 punished, church officials were later summoned to the DGSE and
 warned that they were prohibited indefinitely from conducting
 religious services.
 
 
 581
 NICARAGUA
 In August Moravian Church ministers in Puerto Cabezas reported
 that they had been placed under town arrest by Sandinista
 authorities, and that a meeting of church ministers, scheduled
 for late August on Corn Island, was canceled on government
 orders. It has not been possible to confirm these allegations
 because of the Government's strict control of travel to the
 Atlantic Coast. Several hundred Evangelicals were reported in
 the government press to have been detained in May in the
 Matagalpa region of Nicaragua, and another 100 were detained
 in the Zelaya region in February. All were rounded up in the
 Government's counterinsurgency campaign.
 Neither Nicaraguan law nor the n-w Constitution provide for
 exemption from military conscription on the ground of
 conscientious objection. There has been no further
 conscription of seminarians since 1985, and Catholic priests
 have never been conscripted, reportedly due to a concordat
 with the Vatican. However, in a November speech, President
 Ortega stated that seminarians "have to do their military
 service." He singled out only bishops as specifically exempt
 from military service, leaving in question the status of
 ordinary priests. The Government has not exempted clergy of
 other faiths from conscription, and the conscription law is
 applied to conscientious objectors.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is restricted. Travel out of Nicaragua
 now requires a passport and exit visa. The Government limits
 some opposition leaders to single-exit visas only. Both
 passports and visas are now frequently denied to draft-age
 males, professionals whose skills the Government wishes to
 retain, and political opponents whose travels are considered
 inimical to government interests. The Government has
 announced several times that the CDS would be charged with
 preventing people from moving into Managua from other areas,
 and there have been several incidents where a local CDS has
 destroyed partially constructed houses before owners could
 establish residence.
 Forced resettlement is a key element in the Government's
 counterinsurgency strategy, as suggested in a government
 publication which refers to resettlement camps as "part of a
 defensive chain that contributes to the strategic defeat of
 the FDN." The purpose of the camps is to deny the resistance
 a base of popular support in rural Nicaragua and to protect
 those loyal to the FSLN. The Government admits to having
 relocated 204,057 people, but the number of resettled persons
 may be as high as 300,000. There have been reports of
 brutality used against persons who have refused to leave their
 homes, and crops reportedly have been destroyed as the
 population is moved out. Relocated Nicaraguans are placed in
 cooperatives where their economic activity comes under
 government control.
 There were no reports of refugees forcibly repatriated from
 Nicaragua in 1986. According to the United Nations High
 Commissioner on Refugees, 800 Salvadorans were repatriated
 during the year. Many chose to leave because of deteriorating
 conditions in the country, but in general the treatment of
 refugees in Nicaragua has been good.
 
 
 582
 NICARAGUA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Thirteen political parties coexist with the FSLN in Nicaragua,
 most of which are opposed to the Government. Nevertheless,
 the FSLN dominates Nicaraguan political life and has moved
 rapidly to expand and consolidate its control of the country's
 political structure. The FSLN openly describes itself as
 Nicaragua's "vanguard," committed to the "socialist
 transformation" of the country's socioeconomic foundation.
 The FSLN permeates the Government: it has total control over
 official resources from the national level down to the
 village, and it has moved increasingly to expand party-state
 control over privately owned resources as well. Political
 power in Nicaragua is concentrated in the nine-man FSLN
 National Directorate. As in other Marxist-Leninist parties,
 power flows from this small group downward to lower party
 structures: the Sandinista Party Assembly, the various FSLN
 organizational departments, and the regional party cadres.
 The FSLN essentially formulates national policy, which is
 implemented by the Government. Membership in the party and
 nomination to key government positions is determined by the
 degree of demonstrated loyalty to Sandinista ideology and
 goals, and increasingly there is a pattern of interlocking
 FSLN-Government authority. Although the government
 bureaucracy in general continues to be staffed by persons who
 are not members of the FSLN, real power is closely held by the
 Sandinista militants. The various mass organizations
 affiliated with the FSLN function chiefly as instruments for
 public control and indoctrination.
 Opposition groups in Nicaragua that have refused to come to an
 accommodation with the FSLN are the focus of a continuing
 campaign of repression aimed at limiting their membership,
 weakening their internal cohesion, and isolating them from
 external support. Members of the opposition are routinely
 threatened, denied access to goods and services, interrogated,
 detained, arrested, and harassed by other means. The
 government strategy of identifying the civil opposition from
 all sectors as internal fronts for the armed resistance is a
 constant theme of the government-controlled press and media.
 Opposition leaders also report taunts from the DGSE that their
 names are on a list of those to be imprisoned or killed at
 some unspecified point in the future. The Government uses the
 armed opposition as a rationale for further actions to
 suppress domestic dissent, thereby accelerating a process the
 opposition considers inevitable.
 All genuine political opposition activity is a target for
 repression, but those organizations engaged in activities
 focused on mobilization of grass-roots support are the chief
 victims. The Social Christian Party and the Independent
 Liberal Party (PLI) have suffered the most from the punitive
 measures of State Security. The PSC has come in for the most
 violent abuse: three of its members were killed by Sandinista
 authorities in 1986. Thirty-five PLI activists were arrested
 in May on charges of conspiracy in an "internal front," and in
 September, Party Vice President Bayardo Guzman was arrested
 and held incommunicado for 2 weeks.
 A member of the National Assembly, Conservative Felix Pedro
 Espinosa, was punished for his outspoken opposition to the
 Government from the Assembly floor and in his public
 statements. He was charged by the Government with arson for
 the burning of his own property. Although the arrest warrant
 
 
 583
 NICARAGUA
 for the alleged arsonists was dated the day prior to the
 crime, and the Conservatives charged that a confession was
 obtained by torture, Assembly President Carlos Nunez dismissed
 the objections, stripped Espinosa of his legislative immunity,
 and ordered him to stand trial. In mid-July Espinosa took
 refuge in the Venezuelan Embassy, where he remains.
 One of the most common tactics used by the Government in
 undermining opposition strength is its use of agents to
 infiltrate organizations for the purpose of reporting internal
 developments and stimulating frictions and factionalism. DGSE
 approaches to various opposition members for this purpose,
 using threats or inducements, have been reported in virtually
 every opposition organization.
 A somewhat different approach was taken with the Social
 Democrats. The FSLN not only infiltrated the party--one
 high-ranking PSD leader confessed his role to party leaders in
 1986--but sought to discredit the PSD leadership. For
 instance, a DGSE agent delivered to party headquarters
 "secret" documents, "found on a bus," indicating that Luis
 Rivas Leiva, party president, was a Sandinista agent; Rivas
 Leiva was abroad at the time.  A few days later, several
 uniformed DGSE officials called to demand the return of the
 documents, saying that they had been misdelivered.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Nicaragua has allowed a number of
 international human rights organizations to visit the country
 and has responded to inquiries from the United Nations Human
 Rights Commission and the Inter-American Commission on Human
 Rights. It has not, however, allowed the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights to visit. That organization, in
 its most recent report, cited-the "lack of cooperation" of the
 Government of Nicaragua and expressed its "deep frustration."
 In general the Government approaches human rights
 investigations as potential instruments of propaganda. Its
 treatment of independent investigations depends largely on how
 useful they are perceived to be. Some independent groups have
 worked closely with the Government, accepting government
 assistance and reportedly deliberately ignoring information on
 government human rights abuses. Others have adopted largely
 uncritical attitudes toward government-disseminated reporting,
 despite firsthand information from key government defectors on
 the Sandinistas' routine use of falsification and deception to
 deflect human rights inquiries from international
 organizations. The CPDH, the only independent human rights
 group in Nicaragua, suffers from continuous harassment and is
 protected from closure and arrest of its personnel only by
 international interest. The Government has attempted to
 censor CPDH monthly reports and refuses to answer CPDH
 inquiries into alleged government abuses. The ICRC visits
 some prisons in Nicaragua, but along with all other human
 rights organizations or investigative bodies, it is denied
 access to any DGSE prison.
 Until October 1985, the Archdiocese of Managua had its own
 organization for monitoring human rights affairs as well as
 for providing certain social welfare services. COPROSA was
 closed at that time, and all its functions declared illegal in
 April 1986. The Nicaraguan branch of the Catholic Church's
 human rights organization, Peace and Justice, which shared the
 
 
 584
 NICARAGUA
 COPROSA premises, was never reestablished after the October
 raid.
 The International League for Human Rights, in its July 1986
 report, "Human Rights Defenders in Nicaragua", roundly
 criticized the Government of Nicaragua for its harsh
 restrictions on and outright closing of nongovernment human
 rights organizations.
 Until July, when it was disbanded, the United Nicaraguan
 Opposition's Human Rights Commission (UNO/CDH) was tasked with
 investigations into charges against the resistance. Impeded
 by its inability to gain access to sites of alleged abuses, to
 evidence, and to witnesses, UNO/CDH was unsuccessful in
 establishing an objective basis for confirmation or rebuttal
 of the charges disseminated by the Nicaraguan Government. In
 most cases, the organization was able only to interrogate.
 persons who had participated in combat in which violations
 were said to have occurred. UNO/CDH generally was able to
 carry out satisfactory investigations only of incidents
 relating to abuses committed within the resistance itself.
 Persons found guilty were punished with imprisonment and/or
 expulsion from the forces.
 In November a new human rights monitoring organization
 commenced operation. This organization, the Nicaraguan
 Association for Human Rights (NAHR), is independent of
 UNO/CDH, although funded by the U.S. Government. The basic
 objectives of the NAHR are the prevention and investigation of
 human rights violations by the Nicaraguan armed resistance.
 It will also interview Nicaraguan refugees to gain information
 on Sandinista abuses.
 NAHR is responsible for a comprehensive human rights
 instruction program for resistance combatants. NAHR staff
 have visited prisoners of the FDN and are actively seeking an
 international organization to assist in returning them to
 Nicaragua or to other nations willing to accept them. The
 NAHR will investigate complaints of abuses and report on their
 findings. The NAHR has reported that the armed resistance has
 been cooperative and receptive to NAHR's inquiries and
 programs.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Nicaragua's minorities, mostly Indians and blacks, are
 concentrated on the country's Atlantic Coast. The largest of
 the Indian tribes, the Miskito, and others such as the Sumo
 and Rama, have suffered from violent attempts by the
 Sandinistas to force the indigenous population into conformity
 with the ideals of the State. The official policy of
 repression and violence against the Indians, which became
 apparent in early 1981, has led to the exodus of more than
 one-third of the Indian population of Nicaragua. The
 officially registered Indian refugee population in the
 Honduran Mosquitia alone was approximately 20,000 by the end
 of the year. Despite the Government's current effort to
 project a conciliatory image, the use of force against Miskito
 civilians continued during 1986. The most conspicuous
 violation of Indian rights occurred in March when elements of
 the EPS opened fire on villages along the Rio Coco, panicking
 11,000 to 12,000 Indians into flight to the Honduran
 Mosquitia. Several thousand of the Indian refugees in
 
 
 585
 NICARAGUA
 Honduras, however, reportedly have since returned to their
 homes.
 Women are not subject to any special restrictive measures by
 the Government and are to be found participating actively in
 most levels of government and of society. However, the
 revolution has not succeeded in significantly changing the
 cultural constraints faced by women in Nicaraguan society.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Children under the age of 14 are not legally permitted to
 work. However, Ministry cf Labor officials admit that, due to
 problems of enforcement, the prohibition on child labor is
 often disregarded in the countryside. The AFL-CIO in November
 reported that child labor is "widespread" in the country. In
 that same report, the AFL-CIO also criticized the inadequate
 health and safety measures in place in Nicaragua for the
 protection of workers.
 Under the National Organizational System for Work and Salaries
 (SNOTS), minimum and maximum salaries have been established
 for all of Nicaragua's salaried employees working in the
 public and private sectors. Agricultural workers have not
 been incorporated into SNOTS, and most are paid on a piecework
 basis (e.g., the amount of coffee or cotton picked). For
 those who labor in the fields daily, however, a minimum wage
 per task plus a daily food allowance have been established.
 Although those rates were raised in 1986, the increases did
 not offset the country's serious inflation, and the standard
 of living for the average Nicaraguan worker continued its
 decline.
 Independent labor unions have protested the Government's
 amendment of Article 22 of the Labor Code which eliminates
 labor-management collective bargaining and replaces it with
 the SNOTS system. The unions' major complaints are the
 imposition of government criteria for wages and salaries, the
 discontinuation of medical benefits, and the reduction of
 Christmas bonuses.
 
 
 586
 U.S.OV9RSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OP DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NICARAGUA
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1      0.0      0.0
 A.AIO ....................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SECSUPP.ASSST),...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TIILE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0!
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..          0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS. ..............     0.1      0.0      0.0
 PEA:E CORPS ......        0.3      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ...... ,;       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............  ... ...1      0.0      0.0
 Il.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......   .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 S.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 :.INTL MIL.EDTRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & 41L...         0.1     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.11     0.0      0.0
 OT4ER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EK-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1934     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........     0.8      0.3      0.0    735.5
 I8D               0.0      0.0      0.0    231.1
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      9.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     60.0
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0    405.4
 AD3                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.5      0,3      0.0     23.8
 OTHER-UN           0.3      0.'0     0.0      5.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 587
