NICARAGUA
The 1986 Country Reports devote more pages to Nicaragua, a nation of fewer than 3 million people, than to any other country. Of the twenty-three pages of fine print dedicated to the topic, only three paragraphs refer to abuses attributable to the insurgents; those paragraphs purport to exculpate them. The result is the most blatant attempt yet by the Reagan Administration to use the Country Reports for political purposes.
The Report on Nicaragua relies on questionable sources, quotes selectively from more responsible sources, reports cases of human rights violations that are not substantiated, and attempts to dismiss all contrary information as propaganda by the government of Nicaragua. To dramatize its accusations, the Report frequently refers to events prior to 1985, whereas in countries considered friendly to the United States, episodes occurring in the last few days of 1984 or in the first few days of 1986, are ignored. The few facts that are reported accurately are so encumbered by distortions and half-truths, that the Report does a disservice to the promotion and protection of human rights in Nicaragua.
It will come as no surprise to anyone that the Department of State is intent on portraying the human rights situation in Nicaragua in as grim a light as possible. In fact, during the latter part of 1985, the human rights situation did deteriorate significantly. Without exaggerating, the State Department could have painted a picture of severe repression and increased interference with freedom of expression, harassment of the churches and the unions, punitive detentions of opposition political activists, denial of due process of law, mistreatment of detainees and large scale forcible relocation, on very short notice. Unfortunately, the Department was not content with accurately representing a bad human rights situation; it has
66
tried to portray matters as far worse than they are. Perhaps it has done this in the Country Reports so that what it says here is consistent with everything else the Administration says about Nicaragua. Even so, the effect of publishing exaggerated and distorted information in this context is to damage the Country Reports which should come to be regarded as the U.S. government's most authoritative, reliable and unbiased assessment of the human rights situation worldwide.
In the opening paragraphs, the Report insists on the Reagan Administration's claim that the 1984 Nicaraguan elections were invalid and meaningless. If those elections were to be discussed, the Report might at least have mentioned the many reports of independent observers that presented a different view. Also in the opening, the section refers to the "civil war" in Nicaragua, without acknowledging the active participation of the United States government in that conflict.
The Report claims that the Comision Permanente de Derechos Humanos (CPDH) "received thirteen substantiated cases during the year of political killings committed by government authorities in 1985." Americas Watch has examined CPDH material on those cases. In four of them the murders are attributed to security agents but the motivation is unrelated to political activity: these include a case described in the Report in which a drunken agent shot indiscriminately into a dancehall; in others, the witnesses report that there was personal enmity between the victims and the assailants. There are five cases in which the deaths occurred in combat with the contras: the relatives complain that the Army took their children to fight unprepared, or that they did not receive adequate information about the circumstances of the deaths. In five cases there is evidence of an arrest by security forces, presumably for investigation of contra activity, and the bodies have been found, although in two of them there is only a marginal notation by CPDH staff saying "found dead." In the case of Zacarias Martinez Coronado, the 17-year-old member of the Partido Social Cristiano, mentioned in the report, contrary to the report's assertions, nine members of the police were
67
prosecuted. In February 1986, they were acquitted on the claim that Martinez Coronado had died trying to escape. Americas Watch is still investigating the case.
The Report casts doubt on assertions that the government of Nicaragua investigates and prosecutes cases of human rights violations, by saying that neither "the trials nor the sentencing in such cases are open to public review." This is misleading as most Latin American legal systems do not provide public trials of the sort known in the United States. Even so, although not all cases are aggressively investigated and prosecuted, it is possible to obtain independent verification of those trials by examining court records and by visiting the perpetrators in custody. Americas Watch has done it, and we know of others who have done so as well.
With respect to disappearances, it is obvious that the Report is hard put to make the case that a deliberate officially-sanctioned pattern prevails in Nicaragua. To buttress its effort to prove such a pattern, the Report quotes a 1984 communication from CPDH to the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights. Even using that dated information, the Report quotes CPDH as saying that between 1981 and 1983 it received 433 complaints, of which 142 were unresolved as of May 1984. About half of these unresolved cases refer to disappearances of Miskitos in mid-1982. It is unclear why the Report chooses to use CPDH figures for only the first half of 1985 (31 reported, 12 unresolved). Americas Watch examined all CPDH cases for 1985 that it considered unresolved as of January 1986: there were 28 cases, of which 15 had occurred in 1985, two in early 1986 and 11 in previous years (including two in July 1979). The term "disappearances" is used more loosely than is customary in human rights reports. Of the 15 cases for 1985, two involved prisoners serving terms who were transferred from their prison and the relatives said they did not know where they were. In one case, the complaint was filed seven weeks after the transfer; in the other, three days after. Also among the fifteen: in one case the authorities had already acknowledged the arrest; in another, there was no information about any arrest by security forces; in another, the cause
68
for the arrest was a common crime offense (rape). In two cases it appeared the persons had been inducted into the draft. In six cases, the complaint had been filed with CPDH between 7 and 15 days after the arrest; in two cases, more than two months had elapsed. There was no indication as to whether any of these persons had been subsequently found, nor whether CPDH had made any effort to update their status. In all the 1985 cases the alleged arrests had taken place in remote areas in different departments (except for the prisoner transfers).
The Report is particularly mendacious when it refers to the conduct of the contras. It says that "the Government has charged the insurgents with torturing and summarily executing civilians and prisoners of war." Then it refers to the Americas Watch reports on violations of the laws of war by both sides, but immediately makes apologies for the contras: first, it says that the laws of war we apply are "applicable to ordinary war conditions." Then it says "there is evidence that many Nicaraguan civilians have been killed in crossfire" or in "ambushes of government military vehicles carrying civilian passengers." Then it goes on to say that the government distributed arms to persons engaged in civilian activities.
In the first place, the laws of war that Americas Watch applied in the two 1985 reports are precisely applicable to the type of conflict in Nicaragua, and not to "ordinary war conditions." Under any conditions, combatants are forbidden by international law to execute prisoners placed hors de combat, to attack civilians, to inflict outrages against personal dignity of prisoners or of civilians, or to violate the neutrality of medical or relief personnel, all of which the contras do extensively. Secondly, the Americas Watch reports did not cite as violations of the laws of war any deaths of civilians in crossfires, nor any deaths in which a legitimate military objective had been targeted. Americas Watch's reports specify that we consider that civilians who are armed are legitimate targets. None of the situations described in the State Department report, therefore, explains away the many instances of clear-cut violations of the laws of armed conflict that Americas Watch and others have reported.
69
The Report says that "CPDH has received few reports of insurgent atrocities." This is disingenuous. The State Department fails to note that, by and large, CPDH does not monitor contra abuses.
The State Department refers to reports of contra abuses saying that "some Nicaraguan government-sponsored international human rights researchers have produced extensive testimonies from alleged witnesses to political killings." In the first place, in only one case was a report prepared with limited logistical assistance from the Nicaraguan government; other reports, including those produced by Americas Watch and Amnesty International were done without any assistance from the Nicaraguan government. The State Department attempts to discredit these reports by citing vague statements by defectors that the Government controlled these groups' access to information. To exculpate the contras the State Department cites a "Smith-Rygg report" that found no evidence of systematic abuses by the contras That report, produced by two Brigham Young University students, was presented to the public in Washington by a group supporting the Nicaraguan rebels. Smith and Rygg, who have never done any other human rights reporting, are given more credence by the Department of State than Amnesty International and Americas Watch.
When referring to torture, the Report again shields itself behind CPDH and attributes to it the position that the Sandinista Government "has condoned" torture. Subsequently, the Report acknowledges that some of the treatment reported "might fall technically short of torture." In fact security interrogators hold prisoners in dark and small cells, deprive them of sleep during interrogation, and use threats and disorientation to make them confess; this should be condemned, but it should be labelled as torture only if that term is used generally to describe such practices. There are no known cases in Nicaragua of electric shock, intentional suffocation under water or with hoods, and other techinques commonly associated with the word "torture."
The State Department, again quoting CPDH, maintains that "cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners in the national
70
penitentiary system is pervasive." No examples nor details are given. Such an assertion could be valid if applied to the pre-trial detention system. It is an overstatement as applied to the penitentiaries where the Report should have focused on the harsh treatment of those who refuse to accept rehabilitation programs — roughly forty percent of security-related offenders.
The Report also cites CPDH in saying that "a detainee could be investigated indefinitely, tortured, or submitted to cruel treatment without any legal mechanism available to stop the abuses." This apparently refers to the suspension of habeas corpus relief for security-related detainees. Though the suspension of habeas corpus is certainly objectionable, it is not customary in the Country Reports to discuss "could be" violations. Reports on other countries discuss verified abuses, or abuses that are believed to have taken place because of credible evidence.
The Report makes the sensational charge that "several clandestine prisons function in the country" and then confuses the issue by saying that international human rights organizations have been denied repeated requests to visit them. In the first place, the allegation that clandestine prisons exist in Nicaragua has never been substantiated. Secondly, Americas Watch has most often and most publicly insisted on obtaining access to pre-trial detention centers. These are not "clandestine" facilities; they are similar to short term detention and investigation facilities in many countries. There are nine in Nicaragua, one in each region. We have sought to visit them (until now without success), and have called for a regular program of visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
In regard to prison conditions, and particularly as to the number of political prisoners, the Report seriously misrepresents the position of the International Committee of the Red Cross. It says that, "according to its own statistics," the ICRC assists approximately 3700, "or 50 percent of the known political prisoners." There is no basis for this assertion. To the best of our knowledge, the ICRC has access to all those held in the penitentiaries for politically motivated
71
offenses. It lacks access to pre-trial detention facilities, but these facilities can hold at most a few hundred detainees.
ICRC clients are defined in a much broader way that most Americans would associate with the words "political prisoner." They include more than 2,000 former members of Somoza's National Guard, as well as all prisoners convicted of participation in the contra war, including combatants. The Report is also misleading in asserting that: "a special agreement with the Government provides that the ICRC may not make public reports on conditions within the prison system." In fact, this agreement is ICRC's standard practice throughout the world. ICRC never makes public reports on prison conditions in any country. For the same reasons, a statement a few pages later is also misleading in attempting to give the ICRC's imprimatur to highly inflated figures for "political prisoners." The passage states: "CPDH conservatively estimates that the political prisoner total, including National Guardsmen who were convicted without due process, is between 7,500 and 10,000, with approximately 700 to 1,000 of that number being held at any one time for investigation in State Security prisons. The ICRC estimate of numbers of political prisoners falls within this range of 7,500-10,000. (emphasis added). In fact, the ICRC has made no such estimate. In any event, the figures are preposterous. The lower figure — 7,500 — is approximately the population of all the known prisons and includes the former guardsmen, captured contra combatants, all common prisoners, and former Sandinista soldiers and police serving prison sentences. To justify such figures, the State Department and its purported source, CPDH, would have to believe thousands are held in clandestine prisons. Yet no list of missing persons has been produced that might account for a significant population in clandestine prisons.
Everyone agrees that the number of former National Guardsmen still serving sentences imposed in 1979 and 1980 is 2,000 or more. Americas Watch and Amnesty International estimate the number of security-related offenders apprehended since then and held in facilities of the national penitentiary system at about 1,500.
72
Additionally, there are about 300 to 600 prisoners held at any given time in the different facilities used by the Dirección General de Seguridad del Estado (DGSE) for pre-trial investigation and detention. These estimates are based on information gathered in Nicaragua from a variety of independent sources.
We have little disagreement with the discussion on the Tribunales Populares Antisomocistas (TPAs). It is also appropriate to criticize the Nicaraguan law that gives police chiefs power to impose sentences of up to 2 years in prison, without judicial review, for petty offenses, including drug traffic and cattle rustling. Neither CPDH nor any one else has provided examples of the abuse of those powers in the period covered by this report to detain political opponents on trumped-up charges; the State Department Report makes the claim, but offers no examples.
The Report asserts that TPA defendants are "usually" held in incommunicado detention for "five to six months, but sometimes longer." In fact, some 25 % of all security detainees are either charged or released within one month of detention; some 50 % are released or charged between one month and three months of their arrest, and the remaining 25 % spend up to four months in pre-trial detention before being charged or released. In 1985 there were no cases reported in which prisoners spent longer periods in pre-trial detention. Such lengthy detention is unjustifiable even under the state of emergency, but the State Department does not help matters by exaggerating and distorting the facts.
The references to freedom of expression are generally correct, reflecting a deterioration in this area since October 1985. There are, however, exaggerations in this area as well. In regard to the confiscation of the first issue of Iglesia, the Report is generally accurate; but it is not true that "several La Prensa journalists and most of the people involved with the publication of the Catholic paper were detained in El Chipote for interrogation, during which they were charged with involvement in 'subversive* activities." Americas Watch interviewed the only person arrested in connection with Iglesia, Norman Talavera, who also works for La Prensa-, he
73
was held for four days, and the interrogation had to do with his contacts at the American Embassy. The Director of the office of COPROSA, the Catholic social action office that was to publish Iglesia was summoned to the DGSE, interrogated for a few hours, and released later the same day.
The section on political rights is accurate, reflecting the trend, particularly since mid-October, to make legitimate political dissent more and more difficult. It would have been fair to say, however, that the detentions of members of the opposition parties were short-term; for the most part, activists received summonses to come to DGSE offices, where they were hectored, photographed, fingerprinted and warned against ill-defined illegal activities; most were allowed to leave the same day; a few spent some days in detention.
The Report is highly misleading in the section dealing with Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights. Instead of commenting on this subject, the section seems designed to cast doubt on every report by independent groups that fails to support the dark picture of Nicaragua that the Administration promotes. It is not true that visits by nongovernmental organizations "have been closely structured by the Government to expose the groups only to information and situations beneficial to the Government." Americas Watch, for one, organizes its own visits to Nicaragua, and relies on governmental assistance only to obtain interviews with government officials. Other organizations do the same. The Report chooses to quote in this regard, one of Nicaraguan defector Alvaro Baldizon's more ludicrous claims: that Ministry of Interior personnel pose as common citizens as part of "casual encounter" contingents to tell visitors what the Nicaraguan government wants them to hear.
As to the contras, the Report repeats assertions by the Administration that the Union Nicaraguense de Oposicion (UNO) has formed its own human rights commission (UNO-CDH), but it does not say that, until now, UNO-CDH has been most active in
74
denouncing the Sandinistas rather than as a watchdog monitoring the conduct of the insurgent troops. The Sate Department has made much of the fact that the FDN (not UNO) claims to have prosecuted 21 members of their ranks, convicting 19. A closer scrutiny of the information available in those cases, reveals that the majority were cases in which other contras were victims; five others were punished for "disobeying orders." Only four of those cases involve abuse of Nicaraguan civilians: three cases of theft, and one involving the rape of three women. Neither UNO-CDH, nor the FDN prosecutors, have acted on the dozens of cases detailed in the three reports by Americas Watch that deal with selective or indiscriminate killings or the execution of prisoners, nor in the other reports on this subject published in the United States.
Finally, it is important to comment on the sources used in the Report on Nicaragua. It relies most heavily on CPDH, but it ignores the fact that CPDH obtained funds from a U.S. government financed and established agency, the National Endowment for Democracy, through a U.S. citizens group called PRODEMCA that publishes advertisements supporting military assistance to the contras. The Report does not even acknowledge the existence, since 1984, of the Association of Jurists of the Atlantic Coast, sponsored by the Moravian Church, that collects very valuable information about the human rights situation of the ethnic minorities in Zelaya province. In our experience, this is a highly reliable source of information. The only possible explanation for ignoring it is that it is reliable. That is, though it does not understate abuses, nor does it exaggerate them.
The Report also relies on statements by defector Alvaro Baldizon, though it ignores some of his most outrageous remarks that have seriously diminished his credibility (except for his comments on the way the Nicaraguan government attempts to dupe foreign visitors). We note that Baldizon has been supported by the State Department; his testimony has been published and distributed by a State Department propaganda office (Office of Public Diplomacy on Central America and the Caribbean), and the only way to contact Mr. Baldizon is through the State Department. It is also less than
75
candid in calling the "Smith-Rygg report" "independent," when it was sponsored by a group lobbying for the contras; it is all the more disingenuous to try to pass it as an independent source when one of its authors, Wesley Smith, has recently authored a report on Nicara-guan prisons for the State Department.
76
