 NICARAGUA
 A three-man junta--composed of one member of the Sandinista
 National Directorate, another high-ranking Sandinista member,
 and one pro-Sandinista Democratic Conservative Party
 member--served as nominal head of the Government of National
 Reconstruction throughout 1984. The Junta was formally
 terminated following the January 1985 inauguration of
 President Daniel Ortega and Vice President Sergio Ramirez,
 both former Junta members. Real political power continued to
 be wielded by the National Directorate of the Sandinista
 National Liberation Front, a group of nine Marxist
 revolutionary leaders who took control in July 1979. This
 body--of which the President is a member--controls
 policy-making in the Government, and to a large degree,
 implementation of policy through a parallel party-government
 structure.
 The Sandinistas seized power in 1979, forming a coalition
 Government with broad popular support and promising to replace
 the discredited Somoza dictatorship with new social, political
 and economic systems based on the principles of pluralism,
 free elections, a mixed economy, and observance of human
 rights. In the ensuing five years, however, the Government
 has not fulfilled these promises. It has used intimidation
 and the restriction of basic human rights to consolidate the
 power of the Sandinista Front. Though elections were held on
 November 4, 1984, important sectors of the political
 opposition declined to participate because of the Government's
 failure to ensure conditions for a fair and free campaign.
 Repression and intimidation by government forces against the
 opposition political parties that did participate in the brief
 campaign further underscored the unfair nature of the
 elections..
 The Nicaraguan economy is heavily agricultural. Its
 industrial sector (food processing and some light
 manufacturing) suffered heavily during the 1978-79 overthrow
 of Somoza and has yet to recover. Basic foodstuffs widely
 available in the past are increasingly scarce and subject to
 rationing. The Government has carried out a number of
 expropriations which have had a purely political objective.
 The increasingly state-managed economy, with pervasive
 controls on prices, credit, imports and exports, and sales of
 foodstuffs, combined with heavy military expenditures and an
 often capricious implementation of agrarian reform through
 expropriation, has negatively affected the middle and upper
 income groups while producing a decrease in living standards
 for the poor.
 Nicaraguan society is divided into a large working class,
 composed basically of urban laborers and rural peasants, a
 small but important middle class, and a minute upper class.
 The population is overwhelmingly-Catholic and the Church is a
 vigorous institution which serves as one of  he country's most
 influential advocates of human rights. The Government has
 sought to reduce wide-spread illiteracy and has improved
 preventive health care for many Nicaraguans, though curative
 medicine has deteriorated.
 The Government continued in 1984 to support terrorist groups
 in other countries of the region, notably in El Salvador.
 Honduras and Costa Rica protested Nicaraguan Army incursions
 and shellings of their territory. Throughout 1984, the
 Sandinista Government increasingly found itself fighting a
 
 
 609
 NICARAGUA
 civil war against anti-Sandinista guerrillas, which the
 Government called 'counter-revoluntionaries' or 'contras'
 (terms used loosely by the Government to refer to guerrillas
 and anyone else it chooses to consider *subversive*).
 Government security forces reportedly tortured and executed
 persons suspected of assisting the guerrillas, while the
 Government accused the guerrillas of killing and kidnapping
 civilians. The Sandinista Army continued arbitrary and
 sometimes forced military conscription, prompting widespread
 dissatisfaction and several public protests by Nicaraguan
 mothers.
 During 1984 the Government continued to tighten Sandinista
 control over Nicaraguan society and to intimidate the
 remaining opposition. The State of Emergency declared in 1982
 remained in effect throughout 1984, although some provisions
 were modified. The Government continued to use Special
 Tribunals established outside the judicial system to try cases
 ot suspected subversives. This denies the accused the better,
 though still flawed, legal protection provided by the regular
 courts. The Sandinistas continued to rely on organizations
 controlled by the Sandinista National Liberation Front, such
 as the ubiquitous 'block committees,' to help implement their
 policies at the local level and to exert control, instill
 loyalty and to identify and implement sanctions against
 suspected opponents. Using both its own powers and
 intimidation by Sandinista organizations, the Government
 systematically harassed opposition political parties,
 independent labor confederations, the private sector, the
 Catholic Church, and the independent media. The Government
 continued prior censorship of the print and electronic media,
 and cracked down with new vigor in this area after some
 relaxation during the 1984 campaign period. Sandinista block
 committees and other organizations frequently disrupted
 campaign rallies held by opposition political parties,
 contravening guarantees in the electoral law. The police
 often did not intervene to prevent such harassment or
 violence. Through both legal and extra-legal means, the
 Government continued to seize private property. The 10,000
 Niskito Indians forcibly resettled from their Rio Coco
 homelands in 1982 continued to be prohibited from returning
 there. About 2,000 more Miskitos fled en masse to Honduras in
 April and May. There are continuing credible reports that the
 security forces have tortured and killed Miskito Indians and
 have confiscated or destroyed their food supply and property.
 Two domestic human rights organizations operate in Nicaragua.
 The Permanent Human Rights Commission (CPDH) is an independent
 agency established in 1977. It played a key role in exposing
 human rights violations committed under the Somoza regime.
 After the Sandinistas came to power in 1979, the CPDH also
 publicized human rights abuses committed under the new
 Government. Since 1981, the CPDH has been subject to constant
 harassment by the Sandinista National Liberation Front,
 impeding its work but not silencing its voice. The Government
 founded the National Commission for the Promotion and
 Protection of Human Rights in 1980. The National Commission
 claims to be independent, but the Government appoints its
 members and funds its budget. It is the only organization
 permitted by the Government to file applications for pardon or
 to request the review of cases on human rights grounds. It is
 also charged with reporting incidents of human rights abuses
 to the proper authorities and promoting the observance of
 human rights within the Government.
 
 
 610
 NICARAGUA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There is credible evidence that the military and security
 forces were responsible for the deaths of a number of detained
 persons in 1984. The CPDH documented six such cases, and it
 estimated that many more went unreported. The Government
 responded to these accusations by claiming some were 'killed
 while attempting to escape* or "killed while resisting
 arrest,* while others were allegedly guerrillas killed in
 combat. The CPDH also reported that military and police
 officials arbitrarily shot a number of suspected subversives.
 In one case three officials reportedly shot a mentally
 handicapped farmer who they claimed was a dangerous suspect,
 though they had no warrant and did not present any charges to
 the family. Displaced persons reported that military and
 security forces operating in remote areas summarily executed
 local peasants whom they suspected were anti-government
 guerrillas or their sympathizers, sometimes after physically
 mutilating them. In the section On Nicaragua of its 1984
 annual report, the Inter-American Human Rights Commission of
 the Organization of American States stated, *Concerning the
 right to live, human rights organizations have continued to
 denounce violations, especially in the forms of forced
 disappearances and as a result of the abuse of power by
 members of the security forces. The Commission has been able
 to verify that a large number of the denunciations referred to
 events that took place in the zones of conflict.'
 The Government claimed that guerrillas killed around 1,000
 civilians in 1984. Some civilians have died in the fighting
 between the Government and the guerillas, although no reliable
 information is available on their number. Some reportedly
 died in guerrilla ambushes of government military vehicles
 carrying civilian passengers. The Government has charged the
 guerrillas with torturing and summarily executing prisoners.
 The guerrillas have denied that they target civilians and have
 asserted that the security forces' indiscriminate use of heavy
 artillery near population centers has caused civilian
 casualties.
 On January 11, 1984, a Nicaraguan Army patrol crossed into
 Honduras and killed eleven Nicaraguan Miskito
 Indians--including three children--at Kiwastara. Honduras
 protested this and other Nicaraguan Army violations of
 Honduran territory, as well as Nicaraguan involvement in the
 infiltration into Honduras of Cuban-trained guerrillas in July
 1984. Costa Rica protested several Nicaraguan violations of
 its territory, including Nicaraguan Army mortar attacks.
 There is credible evidence that substantial Nicaraguan support
 for the guerrillas in El Salvador continued to flow during
 1984. El Salvador protested continued Nicaraguan material
 support for the Salvadoran guerrillas, documenting its charges
 in an August 1984 brief filed with the International Court of
 Justice.
 b. Disappearance
 The security forces often hold suspected guerrillas and
 subversives incommunicado indefinitely without notifying
 
 
 611
 NICARAGUA
 family members. In 1984 the CPDH documented 60 cases of
 disappearances in which security forces were implicated, but
 in which the Government would not acknowledge involvement. In
 some of those cases, though repotted in 1984, the individuals
 had actually disappeared in earlier years. The Government for
 its part claimed the guerrillas kidnapped many civilians. It
 is widely believed that many of these alleged kidnappings may
 have been voluntary desertions to the guerrillas.
 Anti-Sandinista guerrilla forces took captive three Sandinista
 Pront members, including Sandinista National Assembly
 candidate Ray Hooker, on September 5. The guerrillas released
 all three on October 30 in exchange for three prisoners held
 by the Government. During 1984, one guerrilla group turned
 over 54 captured soldiers to the Costa Rican Red Cross.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In 1984 the CPDH continued to collect evidence of systematic
 physical and psychological abuse and torture. Prisoners were
 reportedly kept in cramped, dark cells and fed meals at
 irregular intervals in order to disorient them, ordered to use
 only their prison numbers and not their names, and subjected
 to physical abuse and to threats against their family. One
 prisoner claimed that food and medical attention were almost
 nonexistent, and that whatever supplemental foodstuffs were
 brought in through relatives were stolen by the guards.
 Another reported that he was kept naked in a cold cell with a
 ceiling so low he could not stand upright. Other reports
 alleged prisoners were suspended from the ceiling by their
 hands during interrogation. Prisoners also reported being
 beaten with chains, fists and gun butts. It was alleged that,
 as a form of punishment, one prisoner was placed in a cell
 with several tuberculoid prisoners. Cases of psychological
 torture were also frequently reported. Prisoners were forced
 to listen to the screams of those being tortured, then were
 told by security officials that the screams came from members
 of their families. One prisoner was told, falsely, that his
 family had been arrested by security officials, who forced the
 spouse to don prison garb. She and her husband were then
 allowed to see each other but not to converse. Reportedly,
 security officials physically abused and threatened alleged
 "subversives* and political suspects. Nicaraguans who fled to
 Costa Rica reported incidents of rape, torture and murder of
 children by security and military forces. In the case of
 Prudencio Baltadano, soldiers tied him to a tree and cut off
 his ears. Interior Minister Thomas Borge admitted that some
 cases of physical abuse and killings of detained persons by
 security forces had occurred, but claimed the Government was
 working to resolve the problem. The National Human Rights
 Commission also stated that occasional individual abuses of
 authority had occurred, but insisted that those guilty had
 been found and punished.
 On May 30, 1984, Amnesty International reported in a press
 release that it had 'confirmed that some prisoners have been
 tortured or ill-treated in Nicaragua.' Protests of
 ill-treatment from individual prisoners or domestic and
 international organizations have been followed by internal
 military and police disciplinary hearings, as well as public
 hearings by criminal courts and courts-martial against police
 and military personnel alleged responsible. Recent cases
 include a civil court trial of police officers of the City of
 
 
 612
 NICARAGUA
 Leon, for mistreatment of prisoners. In March a public
 hearing was held to consider a range of charges against a
 local military commander and 41 subordinates in the northern
 department of Jinotega. Sentences of up to the maximum 30
 years' imprisonment were handed down in the cases of the
 commander and 12 others after conviction on a series of
 charges for abuses, including torture and murder, carried out
 during counterinsurgency operations in the area in November
 and December 1983.
 In general, Nicaraguan prisons suffer from severe
 overcrowding. The Government allows the prisoners one visitor
 every two months and recently announced that those prisoners
 serving sentences of longer than 10 years would be allowed one
 visitor every three months. The visitors are allowed to bring
 food to the prisoners, but no food may be left with the
 prisoner after the visit. Although conditions are reportedly
 better in a few prison farms in the Managua area, the CPDH
 says that these prison farms are used for propaganda purposes
 and that the only prisoners allowed in them are those whose
 sentences are almost completed or who have collaborated with
 the authorities. The CPDH believes that prison conditions in
 general deteriorated during 1984 and alleges that prisoners'
 families feared reprisals if they requested reviews of cases
 or conditions. The CPDH also said that in 1984 it became more
 difficult to pursue appeals and other legal recourses. The
 International Committee of the Red Cross made periodic visits
 to the prisons, providing medical and nutritional assistance
 and seeing all the prisoners at least once every three
 months. During 1983 these visits were interrupted, but they
 resumed in early 1984. However, the Red Cross has not been
 given access to those detained in special state security
 facilities separate from the regular prisons. According to
 Catholic Church officials, priests are denied access to most
 prison facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention or Exile
 According to the Government, there were approximately 5,000
 persons in jail, including about 2,000 ex-National Guardsmen
 or persons accused of cooperation with former President
 Somoza. The CPDH estimated 900 prisoners had been convicted
 for *subversive* activities and an additional 500 were being
 held pending charges.
 The 1982 State of Emergency suspended those provisions of the
 Fundamental Statute promulgated by the Government in 1979
 which granted detained persons the right to beheld for no
 more than seven days without arraignment. Habeas corpus was
 also suspended in security-related cases. Both of these
 rights were partially restored on August 6, 1984. As
 anti-government activities increased in 1984, the security
 forces arrested hundreds of suspects under the Law of
 Maintenance of Order and Public Security. Open expression of
 dissent on occasion resulted in harassment or detention.
 Suspected guerrillas and 'subversives' continued to be held in
 special holding facilities with no access to legal counsel or
 to domestic or international humanitarian organizations. Some
 were released after the completion of an investigation lasting
 from three to six months on the average, others were remanded
 to the special tribunals, and many simply remained in
 detention. In 1983 the Government declared that because of
 the security situation, some former National Guard members had
 to remain in custody even though they had completed- their
 
 
 613
 NICARAGUA
 sentences and this practice continued in 1984. Others held on
 security charges also remained incarcerated after they had
 been exonerated or had served their sentences. Former
 Minister of Defense Bernardino Larios, charged in 1981 with
 plotting the assassination of Sandinista leaders, was held for
 three years until the Supreme Court overturned his conviction
 and ordered his release. Larios was held an additional 40
 days before the Government finally honored the release order,
 and after his release, he was refused permission to leave the
 country and was subjected to other government-inspired
 harassment. The Inter-American Human Rights Commission's 1984
 annual report called attention to, 'numerous detainees holding
 release orders issued by a competent judge, but who are kept
 in prison for prolonged periods, with no reason given for the
 detention. Situations such as the above represent a violation
 of the right to personal freedom and to due process, and they
 must be remedied promptly to lend substance to the Nicaraguan
 Government's statements concerning the independence and
 authority of the country's judiciary. The Commission repeats,
 with respect to the right to a trial and to due process, that
 the remedy of habeas corpus or amparo may not be suspended as
 it has been in Nicaragua.*
 In 1984 the Government extended indefinitely the amnesty
 originally granted in December 1983 to Miskito Indians from
 northern Nicaragua and certain exiles and
 "counterrevolutionaries.' Nevertheless, the CPDH documented
 the cases of 60 Miskito Indians who remained jailed in 1984.
 Notwithstanding the CPDH's repeated inquiries, the Government
 gave it only partial responses in 17 of the cases. In one
 case tne Government claimed the prisoner had been released,
 but prison officials told relatives the prisoner had merely
 been transferred to another facility. Moravian Church
 officials claimed to know of an additional 24 Atlantic Coast
 residents being held in Nicaraguan prisons on political
 charges. In late 1984, the Government began talks with
 leaders of one of the Miskito Indian guerrilla groups.
 The Government does not specifically exile dissidents. Many
 opposition leaders and activists have fled on their own,
 however, and fear they would be imprisoned if they returned.
 In a May 30, 1984 press release, Amnesty International
 reiterated its longstanding concern about the 'detention of
 prisoners of conscience, deficiencies ih trial proceedings,
 and limitations on the right of appeal to sentences handed
 down by Special Tribunals created to try some categories of
 prisoners.' In its 1984 annual report, Amnesty International
 stated that, *Many supporters of legal political parties,
 trade union organizations, and other bodies opposing
 government policies were detained for questioning for periods
 ranging from several hours to over one month of incommunicado
 detention, before being released without charge. Amnesty
 International believed that a pattern of harassment emerged
 from the detention of trade union members and other suspected
 opponents of the government for short periods of questioning.
 Many such detainees subsequently reported being threatened
 that they would be detained again for prolonged periods under
 the Public Order Law if they did not assist the security
 forces or resign from certain lawful organizations.*
 The CPDH believes that the disappearances, noted in section lb
 in which security forces were implicated, involve "a
 deliberate policy of keeping prisoners incommunicado and at
 the mercy of their captors, undergoing all sorts of physical
 and psychological abuse.'
 
 
 614
 NICARAGUA
 e. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 Under the 1979 Fundamental Statute, the judiciary was to be an
 autonomous branch of government, an independence generally
 exercised in ordinary criminal cases. In cases where the
 accused was charged with *counterrevolutionary* or
 "subversive' activity, however, judges have routinely decided
 in favor of the prosecution. Nevertheless, some judges have
 continued to exercise limited independence. For example, the
 Supreme Court ruled in January that the conviction of former
 Defense Minister Bernardino Larios was improper, due to an
 absence of convincing evidence, and ordered that the prisoner
 ne freed.
 In April 1983 the Government established special 'Popular
 Anti-Somocista Tribunals' to handle the rapidly growing number
 of cases of accused guerillas and subversives." These
 tribunals, which became increasingly active in 1984, operate
 outside the conventional judicial system, and their decisions
 cannot be appealed to the regular court system. The members
 of the tribunals are selected from the ranks of Sandinista
 organizations, and only the president of each tribunal is
 required to be a lawyer. Persons tried in these courts have
 the right to counsel and to introduce evidence, but the
 tribunals are granted great discretionary powers in
 determining whether evidence is admissible and whether it is
 sufficient for conviction. The proceedings of the tribunals
 are declared to be open to the public, but in some cases
 attendance is restricted. Trials have reportedly been
 scheduled with little advance notice, limiting opportunities
 for the accused to prepare his defense. Often the prisoners,
 even after "confessing' to state security officials, have been
 held under investigation for three to six months before being
 suddenly brought to trial. Since all Special Tribunal cases
 are tried in Managua, witnesses who live in other areas of the
 country are hard-pressed to attend trials on time. In its
 1984 annual report, the Inter-American Human Rights Commission
 wrote that, 'The procedures followed by the Anti-Somoza Courts
 give rise to serious doubts with respect to observance of the
 norms that guarantee due process." According to the CPDH,
 during the first ten months of 1984 the tribunals had
 adjudicated the cases of approximately 620 prisoners, of whom
 about 90 percent were found guilty and sentenced to up to the
 maximum penalty of 30 years in prison. In one case a prisoner
 was sentenced to seven years, and upon appealing to another
 tribunal was sentenced to an additional eight years,
 reportedly for having made recourse to the services of the
 CPDH.
 In 1984, as in past years, the Government made use of national
 television and radio to accuse suspected Isubversives." In
 April, state security officials used this method to accuse a
 priest, a doctor and several members of an independent union.
 of arms trafficking and sabotage.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family Home, and
 Correspondence
 The Government has developed an elaborate and effective*
 security and intelligence network employing both government
 agencies, such as the security forces, and Sandinista party
 organizations, particularly the "Sandinista Defense
 Committees,* to ferret out dissidents and suspected
 "subversives." The Sandinista Defense Committees, organized
 
 
 615
 NICARAGUA
 in most neighborhoods throughout the country, serve as a
 network of informers and as an instrument of pervasive
 political control and intimidation--they are self-described as
 the 'eyes and ears of the Revolution.' Participation in the
 Defense Committees is supposed to be voluntary. However, the
 Sandinistas employ many methods to entice or pressure
 individuals into joining, including Committee control over the
 distribution of ration cards for the purchase of basic
 products such as rice, beans, and soap. While many who do not
 participate in Sandinista activities suffer no ill effects,
 others are arbitrarily branded as politically suspect or are
 denounced by Sandinista activists as subversives. People who
 criticize the "revolutionary process' or its leadership may be
 subjected to pressure ranging from public ridicule and
 defacement of their homes by Sandinista mobs to loss of
 employment and even detention. There have been reports that
 members of the Sandinista youth group have denounced teachers
 for their political views, whereupon the teachers have been
 fired.
 As the November elections approached, the Government made it
 increasingly difficult for citizens to remain neutral. Mobs
 composed of scores of Sandinista Front supporters demonstrated
 at the homes and offices of opposition figures, chanting
 slogans and threats, and defacing buildings with
 pro-Goyernment graffiti. The mobs sometimes resorted to
 violence, vandalizing nearby cars, beating people, and
 disrupting opposition political rallies during the electoral
 campaign. Such mobs heightened the climate of fear in which
 critics of the regime lived and worked. The Government took
 no responsibility for these actions. It stated that it
 regarded them as 'legitimate expressions of the popular will'
 and did not interfere to protect the rights of those
 victimized by them. In September, government agents closed
 several technical schools in Leon, transported the students to
 Chinandega, where they were directed against high school
 students, mostly female, who were marching in protest against
 the draft. A number of the girls were badly beaten. The
 Government also showed on occasion that it could stop such
 activity when it wished to do so. When several days of
 intense mob activity in September aimed at disrupting
 political rallies by opposition candidate Arturo Cruz focused
 wide international attention on the Government's use of such
 techniques, a subsequent opposition party rally took place
 with no interference whatsoever.
 There are credible reports that under-age Nicaraguan males
 have been impressed into military services, including, in some
 cases, boys younger than 15. The Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission concluded in its 1984 annual report that, 'On many
 occasions, young people who are ineligible under the very
 terms of that law that created the service have been drafted
 into it. Furthermore, it has been pointed out that this
 recruitment takes place not only for reasons of national
 defense but also as a means of political indoctrination of
 those drafted into the ranks of the army.* In November in the
 town of Chinandega, an estimated 3,000 young men were forcibly
 taken from their homes in handcuffs, during a massive forced
 conscription effort.
 On December 24, 1984, government agents forcibly entered the
 Costa Rican Embassy and removed a Nicaraguan youth who had
 sought asylum there. Costa Rica vigorously protested this
 action.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 40
 
 
 616
 NICARAGUA
 The State of Emergency suspended the legal requirement for a
 search warrant. Police and state security officials regularly
 enter and search private residences. The Government opens
 private mail and intercepts both incoming and outgoing
 international mail. Officials inspect the baggage and
 personal effects of both arriving and departing international
 travelers and confiscate items of literature, including
 newspapers from neighboring countries alleged to be subversive.
 In late 1981 and early 1982 the Government forcibly relocated.
 about 10,000 Miskito Indians from their homelands to distant
 resettlement camps. During 1984 the Government refrained from
 further relocations but refused to permit those Indians
 already displaced to return to their homelands. Relocation
 camp residents are allowed to fish and hunt but are prohibited
 from using firearms unless they belong to the Sandinista
 militia. They reportedly cannot go more than two kilometers
 from their camps without government permission.  Even their
 canoes, upon which they rely for their livelihood and
 transportation, must be registered with the Government.
 Residents are paid for agricultural work with food rather than
 money. There continued to be crediole reports of food
 shortages and malnutrition in the resettlement camps during
 1984. In its July 1984 "Report on the Situation of Human
 Rights of a Segment of the Nicaraguan Population of Miskito
 Origin," the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
 concluded that, "hundreds of Miskitos have been arbitrarily
 detained without any formalities and under vague accusations
 of carrying out 'counterrevolutionary activities;' many of
 tnese detentions have been followed by prolonged periods of
 incommunicado imprisonment and in some cases the Commission
 has verified that illegal torture and abuse took place.* The
 Commission also stated that, 'With respect to the destruction
 of the homes, crops, livestock and other belongings of the
 Miskitos at the time of the relocation, Government officials
 themselves have recognized that these acts took place.'
 Section 2   Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Tne Government continued to maintain prior censorship of both
 the printed and electronic media throughout 1984. The only
 independent source of news in the country is the newspaper La
 Prensa. Since 1979, 20 independent radio news programs have
 gone off the air as a result of government censorship.
 Currently, all radio news programs, the two television
 channels, and two of the three daily newspapers either support
 or are controlled by the Government. The Government expelled
 a correspondent from the Spanish news agency EFE in March
 1984. While there is no censorship of domestic or imported
 books, few books from the West are on sale in Nicaraguan book
 stores, which are stocked almost entirely with publications
 from Communist countries. Censorship of La Prensa in 1984
 continued to be capricious and increased sharply by the end of
 the year. Government censors cut articles ranging from
 reports on democratic leaders, the expulsion of 10 foreign
 priests, a conversation with government guest Jesse Jackson
 and Costa Rican visas. Though a July 19 government decree
 proclaimed that censorship would continue only on matters of
 national security, censorship in fact continued on internal
 political matters, economic problems, human rights, and many
 other non-security related issues. Shortly after this decree
 
 
 617
 NICARAGUA
 was issued, the Government informed private rhdio station
 owners that all radio news remained subject to prior
 censorship.
 La Prensa editors estimate that between January and October
 1984 the Government censored 20 percent of their stories on-
 current national and international events. The paper did not
 appear on at least 14 occasions in 1984 in response to heavy
 censorship. Following the elections, the Government doubled
 its censorship of La Prensa, with an average of ten censored
 articles per day in November. A La Prensa photographer and a
 journalist were detained for several months for alleged
 'subversive" acts.  La Prensa charged that the Government also
 continued to harass its distributors outside Managua.
 The Government continued to insist that the sermons of Managua
 Archbishop Obando y Bravo be submitted to censors at the
 Ministry of Interior prior to live radio broadcast. The
 Church has refused to do this, and the Archbishop's sermons
 are no longer heard live on the radio, although they are
 printed in La Prensa and subsequently rebroadcast. In July
 the censors threatened to shut down Radio Catolica (the
 Catholic Church radio station) because it deviated from
 scheduled programming to play religious music as a tribute to
 10 priests expelled by the Government.
 The Government's imposition of 'curriculum rationalization and
 coordination' on the two Nicaraguan universities has limited
 their autonomy in developing their curricula and has further
 circumscribed academic freedom. The Ministry of Education has
 imposed on primary and secondary schools as well curricula
 with a strong ideological content. The Sandinista youth
 organization is a pervasive influence in the public education
 system, and has reportedly paid for some members' tuition in
 private schools in order to have the organization represented
 there. Sandinista youth members allegedly have denounced
 teachers for not supporting the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The 1982 State of Emergency Decree suspended the right of
 assembly, but the Government allowed opposition groups to hold
 indoor meetings. Small demonstrations, including one
 commemorating the anniversary of the death of former La Prensa
 editor Joaquin Chamorro, were also allowed. However, in July
 the Government reacted to a Catholic Church-organized march in
 support of a priest accused of 'counterrevolutionary
 activities' by expelling ten foreign Catholic priests. On
 July 19, the fifth anniversary of the Nicaraguan Revolution,
 Junta Coordinator Daniel Ortega announced that the right of
 free assembly would be restored to those opposition political
 parties that registered for the November elections.
 Nevertheless, registered political party rallies and marches
 were subjected to frequent and often violent interruption by
 Sandinista mobs.
 When students in Chinandega marched in August to protest
 against military conscription, the Government reportedly made
 teachers personally responsible to ensure their students did
 not participate in future demonstrations. At least one of the
 schools from which these students came has since been
 threatened with closure. Political meetings held indoors by
 non-registered political parties were also subjected to mob
 attacks. None of the restrictions applied to pro-government
 organizations, which held frequent open-air rallies throughout
 the year. Students in public schools were released from
 
 
 618
 NICARAGUA
 school early and obliged to participate in some Sandinista
 rallies, as were government workers and members of the armed
 forces.
 The Government has attempted to weaken the independent labor
 movement while creating alternative labor bodies controlled by
 the Sandinista Front. It controls most of the 20 to 30
 percent of the total workforce which is organized. The
 Sandinista FronV-s two principal confederations, the
 Sandinista Workers' Central (CST) and the Association of Rural
 WorKers (ATC), have over 120,000 members and dwarf the
 non-Sandinista organizations, which have about 40,000. In
 theory, the Sandinista unions serve as a conduit for workers'
 desires and grievances to the Government. In fact, these
 confederations consistently support government policies such
 as strict labor discipline and worker participation in defense
 activities.
 Approximately 60 members of the independent Nicaraguan
 Workers' Central (CTN) were detained during the year, some for
 as long as four months. At least six CTN members formerly
 convicted of "subversive' activity were pardoned by the
 Council of State in 1984. Twelve members remained in detenion
 at year's end. Police entered and searched the Managua
 headquarters of the CTN on May 24, taking with them several
 documents, and returned later and arrested several members of
 the union. The independent Confederation for Labor
 Unification (CUS) was subject to similar government harassment.
 On May 1, a Sandinista mob entered a CUS school and damaged
 some of its equipment. In September, two CUS members who
 reportedly received logistical support from the Government
 occupied the CUS headquarters and called for its withdrawal
 from the Coordinadora, a coalition of groups opposing the
 Government. When Confederation leaders attempted to hold a
 meeting to discuss the issue, pro-government mobs interrupted
 the proceedings. In the resulting melee several injuries
 occurred. The police then occupied the headquarters briefly
 before returning the building to the CUS.
 The Government requires that the Labor Ministry participate in
 collective bargaining and approve any labor-management
 contract; until August, strikes were illegal. On August 6 the
 Government restored the right to strike. Shortly thereafter,
 a Sandinista union called a strike. Further labor unrest was
 cut short by government warnings--supported by the Sandinista
 Workers' Central--that strikes or work stoppages were threats
 to national security and would not be tolerated. In a
 September 8 speech, Sandinista Front National Directorate
 member Victor Tirado declared that, 'The strike as a weapon,
 as a political instrument of the working class, has already
 passed into history.'
 Tne major labor confederations maintained ties with recognized
 international labor bodies. The CST is a member of the
 Soviet-aligned World Federation of Trade Unions. The
 Christian Democrat-oriented CTN is affiliated with the Latin
 American Confederation of Workers. The CUS is a member of the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions as well as a
 member of several regional organizations. The Government
 designated the ATC to represent Nicaraguan labor at the 1984
 International Labor Organization Conference in Geneva.
 
 
 619
 NICARAGUA
 C. Freedom of Religion
 Catholicism is practiced by about 80 percent of the
 population. Although a number of other faiths are legal and
 operate freely, the Government has harassed and expropriated
 property from certain faiths, such as the Seventh-Day
 Adventists, Mennonites, Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons, Jews,
 and the Moravian Church.
 Initially highly supportive of Sandinista, the Catholic Church
 has become increasingly disenchanted with Sandinista
 policies. Most of the clergy, led by Managua Archbishop
 Miguel Obando y Bravo, wish to remain independent of the
 Government and are increasingly critical of it. At the same
 time, a minority faction which terms itself the *Popular
 Church* is strongly pro-Sandinista. The division between this
 faction and the rest of the Church is based partly on
 theological issues, but also reflects the ongoing struggle
 between the Church and the Sandinista Government over the
 direction of post-Somoza Nicaragua. The Government has
 harassed the Church repeatedly, and the bishops are regularly
 attacked in the government and pro-government press. The
 Church has resisted government efforts to assert greater
 control over Catholic schools. The Government, which had
 banned Obando Y Bravo's televised masses in 1981, continued to
 prohibit the live broadcast over radio of his Sunday sermons
 during 1984. In April the Government delayed the publication
 of a pastoral letter of the Catholic Church's Espiscopal
 Conference calling for national reconciliation, and conducted
 a bitter campaign against the Church hierarchy in the
 government media. Sandinista mobs harassed persons attending
 some Catholic Church events, and on one occasion set fire to
 weeds surrounding a church and hung a Sandinista union flag
 from the steeple. In late June the Government accused a
 priest of subversive activity and restricted him to a local
 seminary. When priests in Managua undertook a brief protest
 march in support of the accused priest, Interior Ministry
 officials responded by expelling ten foreign
 priests--including some who had not taken part in the
 march--and canceling their residence permits. The Government
 also refused to grant residence permits to some foreign
 priests and nuns working in Nicaragua. On several occasions,
 the Government refused to honor visas issued to priests and
 denied them entrance into the country. The Government has
 also on at least two occasions attempted to place priests in
 sexually embarassing situations which could be manipulated to
 discredit the church hierarchy. In 1982 such an attempt was
 made against Church spokesman Monsignor Bismarck Carballo, and
 in 1984 against a visiting Venezuelan bishop and two other
 priests. The Inter-American Human Rights Commission found
 that, "Although it is true that much of the friction between
 the Government and the churches arises from positions that are
 directly or indirectly linked to the political situation of
 the country, it is also true that statements by high
 government officials, official press statements, and the
 actions of groups under the control of the Government have
 gone beyond the limits within which political discussion
 should take place and have become obstacles to certain
 specifically religious activities."
 Some smaller denominations continued to be persecuted for
 spreading allegedly subversive ideas and for collaborating
 with "counterrevolutionaries." Several properties that
 Sandinista mobs had seized in 1982 from the Seventh Day
 
 
 620
 NICARAGUA
 Adventists, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints,
 the Mennonites and Jehovah's Witnesses remained under
 government control throughout 1984. Two members of the
 Jehovah's Witnesses were detained in August, and others
 requested protection from the courts because of harassment by
 Interior Ministry officials.
 Tne 1978-79 insurrection and government policies since 1979
 led virtually all of the approximately 50 members of the
 Jewish community to leave the country. In 1984 the Government
 maintained its 1983 offer to restore the Managua
 synagogue--which the Government had earlier confiscated--to
 the Jewish community, in response to repeated efforts by the
 Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith. The Government
 also agreed in principle to review one case of a member of the
 Jewish community whose property had been confiscated, but thus
 far has refused to restore the property or to offer
 compensation. The Government continues to maintain close ties
 with the Palestine Liberation Organization and maintains
 strong anti-Israel and anti-Zionist positions in international
 organizations.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Immigration and Repatriation
 On July 19, 1984, the Government announced it would guarantee
 freedom of travel throughout the country as part of its
 electoral campaign program. However, military and security
 forces in 1984 continued to operate numerous checkpoints,
 particularly in the northwestern areas of the country, and
 access to some areas was often temporarily restricted because
 of military activity. For example, the entire Atlantic Coast
 region remained a restricted military area, and individuals
 continue to require Interior Ministry permission to travel
 there.
 The Government requires exit visas for all Nicaraguan citizens
 and residents who desire to leave the country. After the
 elections in late 1984, it blocked the departure from the
 country of at least 22 opposition leaders and members.
 Following intense international criticism, it subsequently
 authorized some of these people to travel abroad. In January
 1985, the Government announced that tickets for foreign travel
 must be purchased in U.S. dollars. Since the sale of foreign
 currency is strictly controlled by the Government--and is
 usually unavailable to the general public--the result may be
 to curtail opposition travel abroad.
 The Government continued in 1984 to confiscate the property of
 Nicaraguans who remained out of the country for periods of six
 months or more. It has not, however, permanently blocked the
 return of Nicaraguan citizens, nor has it taken action against
 non-Nicaraguans returning to Nicaragua from other countries.
 Neither has it revoked toe citizenship of opposition leaders
 in exile, though it did begin criminal proceedings against a
 number of leaders of the armed opposition. The Government
 has, however, denied entry to several foreign priests,
 nutwithstanding their possession of valid Nicaraguan visas.
 It also canceled the residence permits of 10 foreign priests
 in June and has refused to grant resident status to other
 foreign priests working in Nicaragua.
 During 1984 thousands of Nicaraguans left the country, joining
 the tens of thousands who have abandoned the country since
 
 
 621
 NICARAGUA
 1979. Between January and May 1984 an estimated 1,500 youths
 between 17 and 25 fled Nicaragua to avoid military
 conscription. Several thousand Miskitos crossed into Honduras
 during the year, including 2,000 who fled en masse in April
 and May. The flow of displaced persons from the north central
 departments continued due to heavy fighting. Many also left
 for Costa Rica as fighting continued in the south.
 Nicaragua has received over 20,000 displaced persons since
 1979, nearly all from El Salvador. The Government works
 closely with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 to provide food, clothing, and shelter for these people and
 attempts to integrate them into society. It does not forcibly
 repatriate displaced persons.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Sandinista Front declares that it is a "vanguard party"
 with a historic right to rule. Its nine-man National
 Directorate has ruled Nicaragua through the Junta of
 Government, the cabinet ministries, and the Council of State,
 a quasi-legislative body. In all three bodies the Sandinistas
 have a decisive majority. For example, the Junta was composed
 of Sandinista Directorate member Daniel Ortega (the new
 President), Sandinista member Sergio Ramirez (the new
 Vice-President), and Democratic Conservative Party member
 Rafael Cordova Rivas. Daniel Ortega's brother Humberto, a
 fellow member of the Sandinista National Directorate, is
 Minister of Defense and Commander-in-Chief of the Sandinista
 Popular Army. Of the other seven Sandinista National
 Directorate members, three head the Ministries of Interior
 (including the security forces), Planning, and Agriculture.
 Another is President of the Council of State; yet another is
 Vice-Minister of Interior. All major appointments in the
 Government are made by the Sandinista National Directorate,
 acting through the Junta of Government. The National
 Directorate has also determined the allocation of seats in the
 Council of State, ensuring unchallenged Sandinista Front
 domination of that body. The Sandinista Front's victory in
 the November 1984 elections will continue its control through
 the Presidency and the new National Assembly, which replaced
 the Junta and the Council of State in January 1985.
 Thirteen political parties exist in Nicaragua. The Government
 routinely harasses the opposition parties through the
 detention of party members and activists, mob action against
 party headquarters, threats, prohibition of large rallies,
 denial of exit visas, and censorship. A number of activists
 from opposition parties were detained during 1984 on
 politically motivated grounds. The Democratic Conservative
 Party obtained the release of approximately 60 imprisoned
 members, but claims another 140 remain in jail. Several
 members of the Social Christian Party were also detained and
 harassed.
 The Government sought to improve its international image
 through the process culminating in the November 1984
 presidential and National Assembly elections. parties that
 registered for the elections were allowed to share 30 minutes
 per week on national television and 45 minutes per week of
 radio time during the three-month campaign. Each registered
 political party was also given nine million cordobas
 (approximately $320,000) to finance its campaign. In theory
 parties were allowed freedom of assembly and expression; in
 
 
 622
 NICARAGUA
 practice the Government frequently violated these rights. The
 Government specifically excluded the armed opposition from
 participating in the elections. Despite the Government's
 guarantees, pro-government forces repeatedly harassed the
 opposition parties throughout the campaign. Press censorship
 continued, including coverage of opposition rallies and
 statements. Opposition party youth activists were detained by
 the police, and in some cases were even drafted into the Armed
 Forces. Pro-government demonstrations repeatedly and
 sometimes violently disrupted opposition rallies without
 punishment or sanction of any kind. On one occasion a membeL
 of the Militia fired into an opposition meeting, injuring two
 persons. The Supreme Electoral Council, required by law to
 supervise the campaign process, did little to correct the
 situation.
 Deeply skeptical of government objectives, and disturbed by
 government violations of the existing campaign rules, the
 principal democratic opposition group--known as the
 Coordinadora--conditioned its participation on the existence
 of adequate electoral conditions, including full freedom of
 assembly and of the press, access to the voter registration
 process, and the postponement of the elections to allow all
 parties to have at least 90 days in which to campaign. During
 Socialist International-sponsored negotiations in October 1984
 between the Government and the Coordinadora, the Government
 initially accepted but then rejected these conditions.
 Consequently, the Coordinadora, led by presidential candidate
 Arturo Cruz, maintained its boycott of the elections.
 The Independent Liberal Party also voted to withdraw from the
 elections, but the Government refused to take it off the
 ballot. In addition, Sandinista Front members interrupted a
 meeting of the Democratic Conservative Party to prevent a
 decision to join the election boycott. Of the remaining four
 non-Sandinista parties that were on the electoral ballot,
 three were small Marxist parties with little popular support.
 Consequently, the Nicaraguan people were denied a broad range
 of opposition parties for whom to vote. The 1984 report of
 the Inter-American Human Rights Commission stated that, 'The
 Commission has been able to verify that during the current
 electoral process, the Sandinista National Liberation Front
 has intensively used all of the resources made available to it
 by its holding of state power, which places it in an
 advantageous position with respect to other contenders. In
 this regard, the denounced harassment of political and union
 leaders is unacceptable. Furthermore, the IACHR considers
 that some candidates have been excluded, which could have been
 avoided if there had been greater flexibility, both on the
 part of the candidates and the Government.'
 With these serious shortcomings in the process, the Government
 party--the Sandinista Front--won the flawed elections with 62
 percent of the vote. Many foreign observers reported that the
 balloting appeared to be orderly and honest, although some
 observers claimed that voter participation was lower than
 official figures indicated. In about two-thirds of the
 polling places there were poll watchers only from the
 Sandinista Front. About 25 percent of the registered voters
 failed to vote, and about 7 percent of the votes were declared
 improperly marked. Notwithstanding the Government's professed
 interest in allowing opposition participation in political
 life, following the elections it increased press censorship
 and restricted foreign travel by opposition leaders.
 
 
 623
 NICARAGUA
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation Of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government undertook a commitment to the Organization of
 American States in July 1979 to observe human rights, as well
 as to respect pluralism and to hold free elections. The
 Government professes to be proud of its human rights record
 and says it officially welcomes the scrutiny of the
 international community. During 1983 a team from the
 Inter-American Human Rights Commission of the OAS visited
 Nicaragua to conduct a follow-up investigation on the
 treatment of Miskito Indians in the Atlantic Coast region. In
 a report and resolution released in June 1984, the Commission
 provided further documention of government violations of the
 Indians' human rights and terminated its role as a friendly
 mediator between the Miskitos and the Government.
 The government-sponsored National Commission for the Promotion
 and Protection of Human Rights (established in 1980) continues
 to be the only organization recognized by the Government as
 competent to file applications for pardons or to request the
 review of cases on human rights grounds. During 1984 it
 brought about the release of approximately one hundred
 political prisoners, most in the week preceding the November 4
 elections. The independent CPDH suffered continued harassment
 from tpe Government in 1984, including the detention of its
 workers and interference with the distribution of its
 reports; The Government refuses to deal directly with the
 CPDH or to acknowledge complaints submitted through it.
 Although lawyers acting on behalf of the CPDH frequently are
 denied access to prisoners, it nevertheless continues to
 collect data and to publish detailed reports.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Nicaragua had a population of roughly 3,400,000 in 1984.
 According to the World Bank, its per capita gross national
 product in 1981 was $860 and its population growth rate was
 3.9 percent (1970-81), although the Government reports a
 population growth rate of 3.3 percent. Nicaraguans have a
 life expectancy at birth of 59.8 years. Zero or negative
 economic growth is expected in 1984. In 1983, exports were
 about $430 million compared to the pre-1979 level of $650
 million. Imports were $803 million in 1984. Foreign
 assistance decreased sharply in 1984, most of it coming from
 the Soviet bloc. Inflation for 1984 was about 60-80 percent.
 About 20 percent of the work force was unemployed.
 Serious economic mismanagement, declining exports and
 guerrilla activity contributed to Nicaragua's economic
 problems in 1984. The lack of political stability and
 investor confidence contributed to the stagnation of the
 economy. The Nicaraguan private sector, which accounts for
 approximately 60 percent of gross domestic product, is very
 closely controlled by the Government, which has, inter alia, a
 monopoly on foreign trade and on bank credit. Although
 government leaders have reiterated their intention to foster a
 mixed economy, arbitrary property confiscations and the
 Government's Marxist rhetoric have discouraged private
 investment. There were numerous instances during the year of
 arbitrary confiscation of land for political reasons.
 The Government made efforts during the year to improve health
 services. Campaigns in 1984 provided vaccinations for several
 
 
 624
 NICARAGUA
 common diseases, reportedly resulting in the elimination of
 polio and a decrease in malaria cases. Medicine provided in
 hospitals and health centers is free, although a lack of
 foreign exchange shortages has resulted in extreme shortages
 of medicines. New health centers and regional hospitals were
 constructed. The infant mortality rate reportedly was reduced
 to 65.2 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1984. According to
 government figures, about 95 percent of the urban population
 and 12 percent of the rural population have access to safe
 water. World Bank statistics from 1976 stated that 70 percent
 of the population had access to safe water. The Government
 claimed to have 10 percent of the population on social
 security rolls in 1984, and to have raised literacy to 88
 percent. The adjusted primary school enrollment ratio in 1983
 was 73 percent. According to 1978 World Bank figures, 85
 percent of school-age children were enrolled in primary
 schools.
 Women are active at all levels of society and at all but the
 highest levels of the Government and the Sandinista Front.
 There is one woman on the Supreme Court and one woman Cabinet
 Minister. Women have served as national coordinators of one
 of the opposition parties as well as of the Permanent Human
 Rights Commission. A large number of seats on the Council of
 State are filled by women. Participation of women in the
 military is voluntary.
 
 
 625
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NICARAGUA
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         6.3      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        6.3      0.0      0.1
 A.AID  .................        5.8      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        5.8      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         5.1      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.4      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.4      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I1-TOTAL .........        0.4      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.4      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..          0.1      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.1      0.0      0.1
 PEACE CORPS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS 0.......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.1      0.0      0.1
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS .......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL NIL.E.TRNG...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         6.3      0.0      0.1
 LOANS .............. 0.0            0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        6.3      0.0      0.1
 OTHER US LOANS                   0.0.......  O. 0 . 00  0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ...... ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........    51.3     31.3      0.3    732.9
 IBRO              16.0      0.0      0.0    231.1
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      9.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     60.0
 lOB               34.4     30.7      0.0    403.7
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.9      0.6      0.0     22.9
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.3      5.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 626
