NICARAGUA
Considering the hostility of the Reagan Administration to the government of Nicaragua, this report is commendably fair and balanced in its assessment of the human rights situation. Nevertheless, there are some inaccuracies and omissions and, especially noteworthy, some glaring inconsistencies with the treatment of similar abuses of human rights in countries considered friendly to the United States.
In contrast with other country reports, the Report on Nicaragua makes little mention of violent actions against the government. It does mention "significant guerrilla activity" without referring to the methods utilized, including bombings of bridges and other public places and the abduction of civilians. It also fails to make any reference to the fact that most of this activity is carried on from bases in Honduras, with overt and covert assistance from the Honduran armed forces and U.S. intelligence agents. Although none of these actions could justify certain attacks on individuals' rights by the Nicaragua government, to be consistent with other Reports, the Report on Nicaragua should have noted the effect of these actions in provoking concerns about security that lead to repression.
-63-
Disappearances
15 cases in which the victim later reappeared are considered disappearances. By way of contrast similar cases reported by Argentine human rights groups are considered ndt to be disappearances in the relevant section of the Argentina Country Report. In the interior of Nicaragua, it is still a pervasive practice for security forces to delay reporting of arrests and refuse information to relatives. Although the Report does not mention it, the government has made some efforts to solve this problem by creating a central registry of detentions and an office for information and complaints.
Torture
On torture, the 1982 Report reverses a sweeping and false statement inserted in the 1981 Report that alleged the widespread use of torture as an interrogation technique. The information in the 1982 Report is, to the best of our knowledge, an accurate description of the situation.
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
The section on prisoners cites the figure of 7,000, which includes all those imprisoned for any type of offense. Although it is true that overcrowding remains a problem, the Report fails to mention that 450 former national guard officers, convicted by special tribunals, were released in 1982,
-64-
and more than 1,500 persons prosecuted by those courts have been released since 1979. It also fails to report the efforts made by the Penitentiary System to provide work opportunities and liberalize visits and other benefits. These efforts included, in 1982 the development of a farm prison, with very limited security, that now holds 50 former National Guard officers. The Report also fails to acknowledge that all women arrested during 1982 on security related charges (all of them Miskito) were released into restrictive liberty and allowed to return to their communities.
Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
The mandatory periods during which police and state security departments must bring detainees to courts have been suspended by the state of emergency, but both departments of the Ministry of the Interior issued internal orders to the effect that those periods should be observed nonetheless. In practice, especially in remote areas, those orders are not observed, and detainees are held for 4 to 6 weeks before being prosecuted or released.
The government has not used its emergency powers, however, to hold prisoners indefinitely without charge. The state of emergency has not specifically suspended habeas
-65-
corpus. The courts of Granada and Leon (two of nine appellate courts in the country) have decided that habeas corpus is available to inquire into the conditions of detention and physical integrity (exhibición de personas) and even into the reasonableness of the arrest in regard to the security problems addressed by the state of emergency.
Denial of Fair Trial
The Report notes the undue weight given by some judges to the testimony of security officials in cases of application of the law of Public Order (Decree No. 5). Although this was certainly true in the case of 130 Miskitos tried in early 1982 in Puerto Cabezas, the Report fails to mention that the judge in these cases was later dismissed and that the Court of Appeals of Bluefields revoked or drastically reduced their sentences and that their cases are now before the Supreme Court. It also fails to state that, on appeal as well as in new cases tried in the Atlantic Coast region there has been a marked improvement in the defendant's access to effective, independent cousel, availability of court interpreters and direct contact with the judge.
The extensive reference to military courts is of little value to understand the situation of human rights, except as it shows a disposition to discipline military
-66-
personnel that is conspicuously absent in many other countries. The jurisdiction of military courts in Nicaragua is no different from that of military courts throughout the world, including in the U.S.
Contrary to the information in the Report, Amnesty International does not consider the 3,200 former Somoza officials and members of the National Guard "prisoners of conscience" (persons imprisoned solely for their political views who have not used nor advocated violence). In fact, the only prisoners adopted by AI as "prisoners of conscience" since 1979, the COSEP business leaders and CAUS-communist party members, were all released by the government and later pardoned through the ley de gracia procedure.
Freedom of Speech and Press
There are several private radio stations that are not allowed to broadcast independent news programs, but more than one has been allowed to resume them, including several in the interior, and some that are critical of the government. The closure of La Prensa in January was not government imposed, but a measure by its management, in agreement with the government, to cool down tensions after an episode in which private guards employed by the newspaper fired into a crowd of hostile demonstrators with deadly results. Since
-67-
the State of Emergency, the printed media are subject to prior censorship; radio is monitored and could be subject to sanctions after the fact, although no such cases were reported during 1982. Prior censorship of the printed media, particularly of La Prensa, is the most serious problem in this area, compounded by the fact that censors have no discernible guidelines to restrict their powers.
Freedom of Religion
Here, as in the section on freedom of assembly, the action of crowds, referred to as "mobs," is generally blamed on the government despite the fact that in many instances police forces have been used to restrain them and restore order. This contrasts to other Country Reports that exonerate governments unless there is absolute proof and governments have acknowledged their responsibility.
Although some Moravian pastors are in prison accused of "counter-revolutionary activities" in the Atlantic Coast region, the government has publicly acknowledged that the Moravian Church as such is not regarded as being involved in them.
In the reference to the violent disturbances in Masaya, there is no mention that all four of the dead were among the pro-government demonstrators. The Report notes the
-68-
restrictions on travel to the Atlantic Coast by non-Nicara-guan citizens including missionaries. This includes the difficulties suffered on two occasions by Catholic Bishop Salvador Schlaefer, a U.S. citizen. The report fails to say that since mid-1982 he has been free to travel widely in his diocese, and that many other non-Nicaraguan missionaries, including some with known anti-Sandinista sympathies, continue to live and work in the Atlantic Coast region.
Freedom of Movement
The relocation of Miskito Indians from villages near the border has been properly criticized by human rights organizations because of the lack of participation by the Miskitos themselves in the decision, the absence of due process, the lack of transportation, and the destruction of property without compensation. Most of all, groups such as the Americas Watch have criticized the confinement of Miskitos to resettlement camps following relocation. Credible reports of the move, however, dispute the allegation that it took place at gunpoint or in any other violent way. Miskito leaders in exile have alleged, but hardly "documented," numerous cases of executions of Indians by security forces. Although some such executions seem to have taken place, their number and circumstances are very difficult to ascertain. Though this
-69-
does not in any way mitigate the abusiveness of what may have taken place, if such executions did occur, they took place not in connection with the relocation but at other times during attempts to round up those suspected of violent anti-governmental activity.
-70-
