 NICARAGUA
 
 The violent disturbances of 1979 deeply affected all aspects
 of human rights in Nicaragua. For the first five months
 of the year deep hostility to the Somoza Government grew
 among almost all sectors of Nicaraguan society. From late
 May until late July, as the insurrection reached its climax,
 the collapse of civic order was marked by widespread torture,
 arbitrary killings, and other violent acts.
 This report deals essentially with the last six months
 of 1979, as the new government strove to rebuild institutions
 and recover from the devastating civil war.
 On assuming power on July 19, the new Nicaraguan government
 inherited a country devastated by war, an empty treasury,
 widespread food shortages, and few essential health services
 or other basic needs. Industry and commerce were at a
 virtual standstill and agricultural production was crippled.
 Public security was haphazard as the National Guard had
 disintegrated and the revolutionary forces were still not
 organized to guarantee safety. The new goyernment faced
 the overwhelming tasks of immediate relief, restoration
 of public order, establishment of a responsible political
 system, and development of a government and policies to
 address public demands for reconstruction and social justice.
 To undertake these tasks, the new authorities abolished
 the constitution of the old regime and installed a five-
 member governing Junta and a cabinet selected from the
 diverse elements opposed to Somoza. The nine-member Sandinista
 Directorate controls the military. The government was
 formally named the Government of National Reconstruction
 (GRN).
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture of political prisoners was widespread under Somoza*
 Some of the present government's leaders were its victims.
 Some cases of torture have also occurred since Somoza's
 fall. A senior official of the new government acknowledged
 in a press conference on November 14, 1979 that there were
 incidents of torture of imprisoned members of the Somoza
 National Guard which the GRN had been unable to prevent.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Prisons in Nicaragua are overcrowded, and conditions are
 generally inadequate by international standards. The standard
 diet for detainees is poor in nutrients, and health facilities
 are extremely limited; The conditions reflect the living
 standard of the population and the ravages of war rather
 than government policy. While there are no indications
 that abuse of prisoners constitutes a regular or intentional
 pattern ordered by government authorities, the Government
 has publicly admitted that abuses do occur. The Government
 
 (M6)
 
 
 has arrested some of the FSLN officials responsible for
 torture and other abuses.
 Visitation rights for prisoners vary widely, depending
 on the place of detention. Most prisons located outside
 Managua, where small numbers of detainees are held, generally
 permit free access to family and friends during designated
 visiting periods. Detainees held in the prison at Tipitapa,
 the central police station in Managua, and the military
 security headquarters in Managua generally have been denied
 visitors. Families, however, frequently have been permitted
 to send food parcels to detainees at all locations. Since
 November, the International Committee of the Red Cross
 has had access to virtually all prisons except the state
 security detention facility in Managua where 200 people
 are held.
 A number of summary executions have occurred since the
 Sandinista takeover. Estimates of 400 executions may be
 supported by evidence. It appears that armed groups outside
 the Managua area which participated in the revolution and
 now consider themselves part of the revolutionary process
 are responsible for most of these assassinations. It is
 possible, however, that some security officials were responsible
 for a small number of deaths. The Government is trying
 to halt these actions. It has announced, for example,
 that it will bring to trial a FSLN official responsible
 for the murder of a former National Guardsman.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Government has acknowledged holding approximately 7,200
 prisoners as of December 31. Some of the prisoners are
 apparently non-Guardsmen arrested after the revolution
 for unspecified rightist or "counterrevolutionary" activities
 or for association with the Somoza regime. The government
 has not always publicly acknowledged these detentions nor
 always permitted access by the family or a lawyer.
 Habeas corpus was suspended through abrogation of the previous
 constitution. Under the terms of the state of emergency,
 persons may be detained without charge or time limit for
 the duration of the emergency. Habeas corpus has been
 reinstated this year.
 The disorder that has reigned in the country has resulted
 in a number of disappearances, many occurring shortly after
 the revolution. Most have taken place in areas where the
 central government's authority is weakest, although there
 are indications that some have occurred in Managua.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Under the Nicaraguan Bill of Rights, decreed by the GRN
 on August 18, defendants have the right to be represented
 by lawyers of their choice, the right to know the charges,
 the right to consult privately with their attorneys, and
 the right to a fair trial. Nicaraguan courts are presently
 functioning in normal criminal and civil cases and have
 thus far established a record of considerable independence
 and honesty. In the case of all persons now detained for
 their past association with the National Guard of the Somoza
 Government, the Government began trials on December 17.
 
 
 371
 The process the GRN has established calls for a government-
 appointed prosecutor to bring charges and review cases
 to determine if evidence is sufficient to bind the accused
 over for trial. Special tribunals have been formed, composed
 of one lawyer and two private citizens--chosen from popular
 organizations formed by the FSLN--and will observe normal
 Nicaraguan judicial procedures, including the right to
 defense counsel for the accused.
 On November 21 the Government of Nicaragua rescinded Decree #3
 which provided for seizure of property belonging to Somoza
 and his allies (allegados). This decree had been ambiguously
 interpreted, and in some cases, arbitrarily implemented
 by government authorities and independent groups. The
 Government has tried to regularize implementation of Decree #3
 to prevent abuse and is allowing complainants recourse
 to a claims court under the state attorney to contest con-
 fiscations. A large backlog of complaints in this area
 remains to be addressed.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The new government has sought to re-establish order and
 the protection of basic rights regarding sanctity of the
 home, but has had to contend, as in other areas, with many
 groups reluctant to accept central authority.
 Warrants for entering a home must be obtained by the police
 from the state attorney. There are indications that the
 state attorney is seeking to establish standard procedures
 and controls, but their effect is not yet known.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 The Nicaraguan economy was shattered by the war and by
 the financial pillage of the previous regime. Nicaragua
 lost more than $300 million in reserves over the last two
 years; per capita income has fallen by 20 percent; at least
 40 percent of the industrial base has been damaged or destroyed;
 inventories have been looted; and only 25 percent of the
 normal cotton crop has been planted in 1979 which could
 cause a $100 million loss in foreign exchange earnings.
 Education and health care were severely disrupted by the
 war. The Government has given high priority to providing
 free education and health services, including eradication
 of illiteracy.
 The current government has committed itself to the creation
 of a mixed economy with state involvement in industrial
 and agricultural production and commerce. However, GRN
 officials have stated that at least 80 percent of agricultural
 and industrial production is and will remain in private
 hands. The Government has also announced its intention
 to undertake a major land reform program to redistribute
 to small farmers the rural property taken from the Somozas
 and their friends. It has nationalized firms engaged in
 commercial banking, insurance, and mining.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 
 
 372
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 The press is, for the most part, generally free to present
 a wide variety of news and editorial points of view. Privately
 owned and managed newspapers and radio stations compete
 routinely with government-controlled media. Radio broadcasting,
 with some 30 stations, is particularly diverse. Nicaragua's
 two operating television stations have been incorporated
 into the Sandinista communications system and present identical
 programming. The Government has not permitted one of these
 stations (in which ex-President Somoza had a minority interest)
 to resume operations with independent programming. The
 Government announced that it would not license private
 TV stations.   The Government has also jailed several journalists
 working for a low-circulation daily in its crackdown on
 extreme leftist organizations.
 The Inter-American Press Association (IAPA) has recently
 criticized the newly enacted press law in Nicaragua which
 requires all Nicaraguan media professionals to become members
 of the Sandinista Managua Radio Newsman's Union and the
 Union of Journalists. The IAPA charged that this law could
 coerce independent journalists to accept official guidance.
 It has also noted a climate of fear in Nicaragua which
 inhibits free expression in the media. The Government
 has reacted sharply to these comments and protested that
 freedom of the press in a "revolutionary context" exists
 in Nicaragua.
 The Government has not restricted religion in Nicaragua.
 Church officials in this 90 percent Catholic country have
 active interchange with the Government.
 Political groups associated with the former regime have
 ceased to exist. Other political groups associated with
 the FSLN are free to organize and function.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no formal restrictions on domestic travel.
 Exit visas are required and initially bureaucratic delays
 in obtaining the visas were often protracted and arbitrary.
 To alleviate these delays, the Government announced November 14
 a major overhaul in the procedures for securing visas.
 A previously required letter of recommendation from the
 neighborhood Sandinista committee will no longer be required,
 and the immigration office has been instructed to review
 exit visa applications within three days.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Government has stated its intention to establish a
 new political order in Nicaragua to give the country a
 new and expanded degree of freedom. The nature of the
 political system that will exist in the future has not
 been defined. The FSLN is the dominant political organ-
 ization, but other political groups--with the exception
 of the Somoza groups--have not been outlawed. These political
 parties are seeking to broaden their bases through meetings,
 rallies, and the press.
 
 
 373
 The Government has not committed itself to a date for national
 elections but has promised to hold municipal elections
 soon. Political parties have expressed concern about the
 Government's decision to postpone convocation of the Council
 of State until May 1980. The Council, which the Government
 had promised to convene in September 1979, was intended
 to perform certain legislative functions and draft a new
 electoral law. At present, it is scheduled to convene
 in May, 1980.
 Women played a major role in the struggle to overthrow
 the old regime which went far beyond the traditional role
 accorded women in Nicaraguan society. Since the new government
 assumed power on July 19, women have occupied positions
 of power in government (one Junta member and one Cabinet
 Minister are female), in the military, and in the police.
 Women have equal access to the limited educational and
 professional opportunities, and the new government is committed
 to the integration of women into political, social and
 economic affairs.
 The Government is actively encouraging the rapid development
 of a Sandinista Trade Union Organization and has already
 succeeded in taking over older unions or forming new unions-
 totalling approximately two-thirds of Nicaragua's organized
 workers. In the early period of the new government, strong-
 arm tactics were used to affiliate some unions to the Sandinista
 group. Sandinista labor officials have been critical of
 the AFL-CIO affiliated Confederation of Labor Unification
 (CUS), but the Government has not taken action against
 the CUS as it has against more radical labor organizers.
 Some CUS unions have reaffiliated with the FSLN group,
 and some union leaders have alleged GRN pressure tactics
 to build up Sandinista unions at the expense of the older
 democratic unions.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights:
 The Government has invited the Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission to visit Nicaragua in early 1980 to conduct
 an on-site inspection.
 A domestic human rights commission, which established a
 strong record defending human rights under the old regime,
 has been permitted to continue to function; the new government,
 however, has criticized the commission, claiming that it
 is a politically-oriented body. The International Committee
 of the Red Cross has been functioning in Nicaragua and
 has visited many prisons but has not been permitted access
 to all detention facilities.
 The GRN deposited its instrument of ratification of the
 American Convention on Human Rights in September 1979.
 
 
 374
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY! NICARAGUA
 1977     1978     1979
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         3.3     14.0     18.5
 LOANS ..............        0.0      10.5     2.6
 GRANTS.............         3.3      3.5      15.9
 A.AID ..................         1.4     12.5      9.7
 LOANS..........*...         0.0      10.5      0.0
 GRANTS..............        1.4      2.0      9.7
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      8.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ...o          0.4       0.1      7.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      2.6
 GRANTS.............         0.4      0.1      4.4
 TITLE I-TOTAL,.........         0.0       0.0     2.6
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS,....         0.0      0.0      2.6
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL ...   .         0.4      0.1      4.4
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,         0.4      0.1      4.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         1.5       1.4      1.8
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............         1.5       1.4      1.8
 CONTR. TO IFI,,,.         0.0      0.0       0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         1.1      1.1       0.2
 OTHER............        0.4      0.3       1.6
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL ...        31       0.4      0.0
 LOANS..............         2.5       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.6      0.4      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS,....,.            0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS...          2.5       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG..           0.6       0.4      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK .          0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS.......          0.0      0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,.o         6,4     14.4     18.5
 LOANS..............  ..      25      10.5     2.6
 GRANTS............         3.9      3.9      15.9
 OTHER US LOANS,   , .          3.4       0.2      8.9
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......         3.4       0.2     8.9
 ALL OTHER............ .0.0             0.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 
 TOTAL........     55.2     66.6    39.0    488.6
 IBRD              22.0     13.1     0.0    161.5
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      9.5
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0     23.0
 IDB               33.2    53.5     36.8    275.3
 ADO                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFDOB              0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.0     1.7     14.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     0.5      4.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
