 NICARAGUA
 Since the Somoza family's rise to political dominance
 more than forty-two years ago through control of the
 National Guard and the Liberal Party, Nicaragua has been
 led by an authoritarian political regime. Stability
 has been maintained, the economy has expanded, the legally
 recognized opposition Conservative Pafty has been allowed
 to contest elections and participate in governmental
 bodies and other non-violent opposition groups have been
 allowed to function. However, the limited nature of
 the channels of dissent in a restricted political system,
 along with disparities in economic conditions, have provided
 a foundation for the growth of a radical opposition movement.
 In December 1974, a leftist group, the National Sandinista
 Liberation Front (ESLN) carried out a dramatic terrorist
 attack aimed at the government. The Nicaraguan Government
 responded by imposing martial law and press censorship
 and by initiating a counter-insurgency campaign in rural
 areas. During that campaign, serious abuses of the rights
 of the person were committed by the National Guard. In
 early 1977, President Somoza ordered the National Guard
 commanders to avoid any abuses whatever. Since that time,
 allegations of new disappearances or killings by the
 National Guard have markedly diminished. On September
 19, 1977, the state of siege was terminated, with elimination
 of press censorship. Subsequently, the political scene
 has been characterized by vehement and lively press and
 public debate, attacks by the FSLN on National Guard
 installations, and steps toward a "national dialogue"
 between Government and opposition groups. Planning for
 the dialogue was interrupted by the assassination of
 opposition leader Pedro Joaquin Chamorro in early
 January 1978.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Allegations of torture have been made by some persons
 detained by the National Guard both in remote rural areas
 and in jails in Managua. These charges have been prominently
 reported in local newspapers, both prior to and since the
 end of censorship. The Nicaraguan Bishops (in their pastoral
 letter of January 8, 1977) and Amnesty International
 charged the National Guard with engaging in torture of
 
 (188).
 
 
 detainees. Some of those charges specified the individual,
 the time and the place, and some seem to be credible.
 All referred to events in 1975 and 1976. There have
 been a few reports of torture or beating of detainees
 and prisoners in 1977.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Most charges of this nature referred to National Guard
 operations against the FSLN or purported supporters
 of the FSLN in the rural north prior to February 1977.
 Accusations included murder, rape and other mistreatment
 of peasants. The Capuchin order in Nicaragua, who were
 active in the remote area from which most reports of
 abuses came, listed 28 reported disappearances or killings
 during eight months in 1975, over 200 in 1976, and
 55 during January 1977. No further reports by the Capuchins
 of deaths or disappearances have been received since
 February 1977. Since the end of martial law in September,
 the Capuchins reported the return of several persons
 who were previously recorded as missing. Additional
 allegations, from other sources, of Guard killings
 and abuses have been received, but most have been vague
 on details or lack corroboration. Overall,it appears
 that many of the allegations of cruel, inhuman, and
 degrading treatment during the course of National Guard
 operations against the FSLN were well founded, but
 others are more dubious. The number of reported
 abuses and their severity have decreased markedly over
 the past year. Nevertheless, isolated incidents still
 occur. For example, in December 1977, three U.S. nuns
 and a Spanish priest were beaten by National Guardsmen
 while the latter were breaking up a public gathering in
 Managua.
 Prison conditions are generally poor. The degree of
 amenities available to those detained is dependent
 upon their ability to obtain material assistance
 from family or friends.
 Prior to the lifting of the state of siege, prisoners
 were at times severely mistreated. Since then, some continued
 abuses have been reported, but their frequency has been
 substantially reduced.
 
 
 190
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Lengthy and sometimes incommunicado detention on security
 grounds without formal charge, which previously occurred
 appears to have been curtailed or terminated following
 the lifting of the state of siege. Nevertheless, persons
 suspected of FSLN collaboration, or other activities
 which the Government considers prejudicial to its interests,
 continue to be detained without formal charge for
 short periods of investigation. It is estimated there
 are between sixty and one hundred persons incarcerated as
 a result of charges of or convictions for violent revolu-
 tionary acts, other proscribed political activities,
 and politically motivated civil crimes. About half of
 these prisoners are held as a result of their conviction
 in the FSLN trials last February. Others are being held
 under indictment as a result of alleged FSLN activity,
 mainly participation in armed attacks on the National
 Guard. Still others have been sentenced to short periods
 of incarceration on conviction for such activities as
 distributing or posting "subversive" propaganda tracts.
 In addition to anti-regime political activities, some
 of these persons were also convicted of civil crimes
 such as murder, assault, robbery, kidnapping, etc.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 With removal of the state of siege, public trial by jury in
 open civilian court for all serious-criminal offenses,
 has been reinstituted. It is not yet clear whether all
 persons detained on political charges receive public
 trial.
 Under martial law, cases of alleged participation
 in the FSLN were remanded to a Military Investigative
 Court. This.body, in turn, referred cases to a council of
 war for consideration and final sentencing. Both these
 proceedings were open to the public and defense attorneys
 were provided after indictment, though not before. Most
 of the several hundred people detained during the past
 two years for suspicion of security offenses were held
 for relatively short periods before being released. On
 February 25, 1977, the Nicaraguan Extraordinary Council
 of War handed down guilty verdicts on 110 prisoners (some

191
 75 were tried in absentia) after more than 2 years of
 military court proceedings. Prison sentences ranged from
 the maximum legal term of 30 years to 18 months. In late
 March, the Military Board of Appeal reviewed most of
 these sentences and reduced 17 of them, making 10 persons
 eligible for release on the basis of time already served.
 Lawyers for other prisoners further appealed their sentences
 to the civilian Supreme Court, which ultimately confirmed
 the convictions.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There have been some credible reports of the National Guard
 invading homes during 1977. These reported incidents
 were generally related to search operations for the
 FSLN or its supporters.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 The Government is engaged in an ambitious integrated
 rural development program to better the life of the
 rural poor, including changes in land tenure. A.I.D.
 efforts supporting the Government's program focused
 primarily on small farmer development programs; on
 solving problems in nutrition, health delivery
 and family planning; and on developing more relevant
 and less costly forms of education. The Government
 contributes 40-60% of the total project costs on A.I.D.-
 supported projects. In addition, the Government is
 still engaged in reconstructing Managua after the massive
 earthquake of December 1972. The present effort is
 largely directed at providing and upgrading housing,
 water, sewers and other essential services to low income
 families.
 Corruption occurs in Nicaragua and has even been
 rumored to have affected the earthquake reconstruction
 program. Some have alleged involvement by members
 of the Somoza family as well as other prominent
 Nicaraguans. Corruption undoubtedly diverts some resources
 away from the poor. However, numerous investigations
 
 
 of A.I.D.-assisted projects since 1973 by the GAO,
 Congressional and A.I.D. auditors and investigators
 have not substantiated those charges with regard to
 A.I.D. funds.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 The state of siege, with limited martial law and censorship,
 imposed in 1974, was removed on September 19, 1977.
 The primary impact of the state of siege on civil and
 political liberties was censorship of the media, occasional
 curfews in areas of suspected FSLN operations, and
 the requirement that political rallies be held indoors.
 These restrictions are no longer in force. However, there
 continues in force a radio and television code which is over
 ten years old and has been used by the Government to
 penalize those it judged to have been responsible for
 seditious or defamatory broadcasts.
 Since the lifting of the state of siege, the press has
 again become free and vigorous, with the country's largest
 newspaper and its most important provincial newspaper often
 critical of the Somoza government. Both in the press
 and in public and private gatherings, many Nicaraguans
 exercise freedom of speech through criticism of the
 Government without apparent fear or negative consequence.
 The labor movement, while weak, has four major elements:
 one controlled by the Governmeit, one independent,
 one Social Christian, and one controlled by self-
 styled, Moscow-line communists. The American Institute
 for Free Labor Development has an active program with the
 independents. The building trades union, one of the largest
 in the country, is under Communist leadership, and the
 leaders are generally permitted to carry out openly
 their trade union activities. Nevertheless, some detentions
 of this group have occurred. As Amnesty International has
 reported (referring to the 1974-76 period) some trade
 union activists and members of legal political parties
 may have been repeatedly imprisoned on political grounds.
 Freedom of religion is respected.
 
 
 193
 The right to peaceful assembly is gdaranteed under
 the Constitution, but outdoor assemblies were prohibited
 under the recent state of siege. The Government has placed no
 impediment on recent outdoor rallies by opposition political
 groups.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Traditionally, persons who have fled the country
 to avoid investigation or proceedings for participation
 in revolutionary activities have eventually been
 permitted to return. There are only a few political exiles
 at present. Movement within the country is unrestricted
 with the exception of a requirement for permits to move
 from or into areas where there are active counter-insurgency
 operations. During the past two years, two members of
 the large group of resident foreign priests have been denied
 visa renewal or re-entry, apparently because in the eyes
 of the authorities they were involved in anti-governmental
 activities.
 Emigration and foreign travel are unhindered except for
 the requirement that the traveler obtain an exit permit.
 A passport or exit permit may not be issued to persons
 against whom there is legal action pending.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The only political parties which have established juridical
 recognition under the constitutional requirements in Nicaragua
 are the PLN (Liberals--the dominant, Somoza-backed group)
 and the PCN, the official opposition Conservative Party.
 The PCN, which is constitutionally guaranteed 40% repre-
 sentation in Congress plus seats on the Supreme Court,
 lower courts and electoral tribunals and in all ministries
 and autonomous agencies, has been generally free from political
 restrictions. There was, however, occasional censorship
 of its criticisms of the government under the recent state
 of siege. Other opposition political parties, factions,
 and movements which have not tried (or have been unsuccessful
 in their attempts) to obtain juridical recognition under
 the Constitutional provisions nonetheless exist, hold political
 rallies and circulate manifestos. The most active opposi-
 tion movement, the Union of Democratic Liberation (UDEL), is
 a coalition of diverse groups including dissident Liberals
 and Conservatives, Social Christians, independents and
 
 
 the small, illegal Communist Party. UDEL, under the former
 state of siege, encountered sporadic, low-level harassment.
 it has held frequent political rallies during the past
 year. Until his death, the movement's former president,
 Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, was able to publicize its activities
 in his newspaper, La Prensa, Nicaragua's largest circulation
 daily.
 Opposition politicians generally feel strongly that the
 electoral process is fraudulent and manipulated by the
 regime. There have been substantial allegations of fraud
 and manipulation in connection with registration for the
 impending municipal elections in February 1978.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 Numerous local individuals and committees are active
 in investigating human rights violations and publicizing
 their findings. The committees, most of which were formed
 in early 1977, have had access to the press to air their
 concerns since the end of censorship. There have been
 outside investigations by Amnesty International in 1976
 and the International Red Cross in 1976 and 1977 as well
 as recent internal investigations by the National Guard
 of allegations against it. But there has been no internal
 or outside investigation of the allegations against
 the National Guard for widespread killing of peasants
 during 1975 and 1976.
 The Government of Nicaragua has not yet invited the
 Inter-American Human Rights Commission or other outside
 bodies to investigate allegations of human rights violations.
 The Government position has been that further outside inves-
 tigations are unnecessary because the restitution of full
 civil liberties and freedom of the press assures access
 to local redress of any violations.
 
 
