NICARAGUA
In previous years we have published closely detailed critiques of the country reports on Nicaragua. Those critiques have shown that the State Department seems to abandon any effort at fair reporting when it deals with this government against which the United States has sponsored a war. As we have pointed out, the country reports on Nicaragua in the past have resembled war propaganda more than judicious human rights reporting.
The report on Nicaragua for 1987 represents a slight improvement on previous practice in that it shows a somewhat greater willingness to acknowledge abuses by the contras, or the Nicaraguan Resistance, as it calls itself. But the report shows the same tendency as in previous years to exa^erate abuses by the government and to report actual abuses in the most tendentious manner possible. In addition, as in previous years, the report contains some allegations of abuses that are new to us and for which we know of no basis.
Although we believe that the State Department's bias on Nicaragua is well known, we cite a few examples to illustrate the Department's continuing failure to insulate what should be its most careful and serious statement on human rights from its propaganda campaign against the Sandinistas and on behalf of the contras.
• To make the case that the Nicaraguan government engages in a regular practice of torture, the report asserts: "Prisoners are often placed naked in barrels of cold water for up to 2 or 3 days, and forced to stand at attention in freezing rooms for as long as 20 hours." As far as we can tell, this charge is an invention. The sole allegation that a prisoner was forced to stand in cold water of which we are aware was made by a representative of the Permanent Commission for Human Rights (CPDH), an organization which the report calls "independent" but which in fact receives U.S. government funding. The CPDH representative's allegation, however, referred to a single case alleged to have taken place at least four years ago. Although we have conducted many
105
Critique
interviews with prisoners and former,prisoners, and have heard complaints of significant abuses from them, we have not heard of this abuse ever having been repeated. Nor have we ever heard of prisoners being forced to stand in cold rooms. If these abuses "are" now occurring, and are occurring "often," as the State Department says, it seems unlikely that they would have escaped our attention.
•	The State Department cites CPDH for the estimate that "roughly 8,200" prisoners remain confined on politically related charges foUowng the release of 985 prisoners in September 1987 in connection with the implementation of the Central American Peace Plan. We have pointed out repeatedly to the State Department — as well as to CPDH — that this is a gross exaggeration. Based in part on published accounts by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which sees all prisoners in the penitentiary system who are held on politically related charges, we believe that the actual number of prisoners in politically related cases held in penitentiaries by the end of 1987 was less than half the figure used by the State Department — some 1,600 contra combatants and civilians accused of supporting the contras, and some 1,800 former National Guardsmen imprisoned since 1979, for a total of about 3,400. If nearly 5,000 additional prisoners are in fact held on politically related charges, CPDH and the State Department should be able to say who they are and where they are held. The sole such effort that we know of has been by CPDH, which has suggested that up to 1,000 are held in state security detention facilities, which have been off-limits to the ICRC and human rights groups. In 1987, we were finally able to tour the best known of these facilities. El Chipote in Managua, and saw that it is too small to hold more than about 140 detainees. Neither CPDH nor the State Department even suggests where the remaining 3,800 political prisoners identified by them are supposedly held.
•	To buttress its claim about the number of prisoners held on politically related charges, the State Department cites an estimate that "there may be up to 20,000 prisoners in the country," including common criminals. It claims "secrecy" on this score by the government, although in fact the government discloses figures, and has permitted us and many other groups to conduct ertensive
106
Nicaragua
visits to the penitentiaries. The State Department's estimate is about 2-1/2 times the known total of all prisoners.
•	The State Department says: "Sandinista soldiers pursued a group of 29 Nicaraguans who attempted to flee to Honduras in July, according to two Honduran press reports. The reports said that the soldiers killed 14 of this group." If this happened, and the 14 who were killed were civilians, as the report's lack of reference to any combatant status seems to imply, it would be one of the most serious abuses by the Sandinistas during the entire conflict. Although we attempt to follow developments in the conflict affecting civilians, we had not heard of this episode. We wonder what Honduran press reports are referred to by the State Department; we wonder why this episode did not come to the attention of the U.S. press; and we wonder why it escaped the attention of human rights groups.
•	The State Department says: "The Government has not allowed the key international human rights organizations to have complete access to prisons or to move freely in the country." The reference to the lack of complete access to the prisons presumably refers to state security (DGSE) pre-trial detention facilities, to which human rights groups have indeed generally been denied access. In this, the assertion is correct. But the failure to mention that state security detention facilities are also off-limits to international human rights groups in most other countries, including facilities such as those of the G-2 in Guatemala, or, most recently, the DIRCOTE in Peru, casts this fact in a deceptive light. As to the alleged refusal to allow "key international human rights groups... to move freely in the country," this is false. The government has not prohibited us from traveling anywhere within the country, nor are we aware of others to whom this sentence might apply.
•	The report rightfully condemns continuing formal restrictions on a free press, but fails to note and applaud the fact that these restrictions are not being applied and that, by August 1987, seven independent radio news programs were operating, all of them airing harsh criticisms of the government. Similarly, the State Department justifiably criticizes the fact that "current laws require police approval before any outdoor march or public demonstration may take place," but it fails to report with approval the fact that most requests for permits
107
Critique
were granted. Indeed, we know of only two cases in which permits were refused, both involving efforts to assemble in war zones
•	While stating that in 1987 "several thousand fled as refugees for both political and economic reasons," the State Department simply observes wthout elaboration that "[s]ome refugees also returned to Nicaragua." In fact, the repatriation program under the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has been far more successful than, for example, in nearby Guatemala, and has permitted the return of large numbers of Miskito and Sumu Indians. The government has also allowed the return oi such well known e?dles as Bishop Vega and Monsignor Carballo. Again, these positive steps should have been specified and encouraged.
•	Finally, the report is simply wrong in asserting that an inmate's refusal to work in the prison system results in his loss of family visiting privileges.
Insofar as contra abuses are concerned, we note again that this report is more frank than in previous years. Even so, we have some criticisms. In discussing abuses by the coniras, the report attributes allegations to the National Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (CNPPDH), the Nicaraguan government's human rights commission. This appears to be a deliberate effort to attribute information to a source that is particularly suspect. The report avoids attributing accusations of abuses by the contras to groups such as Amnesty International or Americas Watch, and avoids any reference to on-the-scene investigations of such abuses published by many U.S. newspapers.
Similarly, the report discusses the U.S. government-funded Nicari^an Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) and reports on its efforts to improve the human rights performance of the contras. It does not, however, mention contra resistance to the efforts of the ANPDH; nor does it mention that an ANPDH report, published in July 1987, contradicted the State Department's own previous denials of contra abuses. The country report also describes the contras' release of prisoners in September 1987 — in compliance with the Central American Peace Plan — vwthout noting that ANPDH reported the taking of additional prisoners by the contras in December 1987.
The country report provides and evidently accepts the contra rationale for its policy of attacking peasant cooperatives — that they purportedly are
108
Nicaragua
defended by "Sandinista militia and army soldiers" — and thus appears to excuse the many killings of civilians that result from this policy. The report does not mention that these attacks have been condemned, let alone give any of the reasons that have been advanced by human rights groups for condemning such attacks, such as that the alleged "militia" and "soldiers" are simply peasants who live and work on the cooperatives and who are armed in a defensive fashion to protect themselves and their families. The same acceptance of contra rationales is evident in the discussion of particular cases. An example is the killing of a U.S. citizen, Benjamin Linder. The claim that he was killed in a firefight is cited, but the evidence that after he had been wounded he was executed by a bullet fired at close range into his temple is not mentioned.
In sum, this is not a report that can be turned to for a fair indication of the human rights situation in Nicaragua. Some accurate statements appear in the report, but they can only be separated from the false and the misleading by a reader who starts out with substantial knowledge of the situation.
109
Critique
