 NICARAGUA
 During its first full year in power, the Government of
 National Reconstruction (GRN) has undertaken a number
 of ambitious policies to rebuild Nicaragua from the
 destruction left by the civil war of 1979 which overthrew
 the Somoza regime and to distribute economic wealth more
 evenly. The Nicaraguan government has publicly committed
 itself to respect human rights and has cooperated with
 visits by human rights organizations. However, the
 continued imprisonment without trial of over 5,000
 political prisoners, the dubious standards of justice
 followed by special tribunals established to try the
 political prisoners, occasional reports of abuse of
 prisoners, and restrictions on freedom of the press and
 political assembly raise questions about the GRN's commit-
 ment to respect the humaf rights of all its citizens.
 The Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) has assumed
 a dominant role in the political process and is the principal
 power within the government. While other political groups
 exist, and are determined to pursue a pluralistic society
 and a mixed economy, the GRN has increasingly restricted
 non-FSLN political activity and the independent media.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 There have been reports of physical abuse of prisoners
 during interrogation. The pro-FSLN newspaper El Nuevo
 Diario asserted on October 27, 1980, that there were re-
 flaSI  reports that torture was being used by police
 at the Palo Alto state security investigation center;
 other sources also allege that abuse of prisoners may
 take place at this center. There are credible reports
 of persons being seriously abused while held by the Depart-
 ment of State Security. Reportedly abused persons are
 obliged to sign statements that they have not been tortured
 and are threatened with severe retaliation if they should
 later claim to have been abused. GRN officials urge
 groups or individuals concerned about reports of torture
 to cite specific cases for investigation and punishment
 of responsible officials. Sources, however, are naturally
 reluctant to expose themselves to possible retaliation.
 Minister of Interior Tomas Borge has admitted that torture
 has occurred and promised to punish those reponsible.
 There are indications that a few individuals have been
 disciplined.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The GRN currently holds approximately 8,000 persons in
 its prisons, of whom about 5,000 can be classed as
 political - a substantial reduction from last year.
 The remainder are common criminals. The prisons are
 seriously overcrowded. The government has acknowledged
 the substandard conditions of the prisons and has attributed
 them to its limited resources. Conditions in the prisons
 improved significantly toward the end of the 1980 from
 the time of the Interamerican Human Rights Commission
 visit. There are, however, reported cases of abuse by
 individual prison guards, and the government reopened
 a substandard facility at the fortress of Coyotepe.
 
 
 490
 Visitation rights in Nicaraguan prisons have been stand-
 ardized and family members are able to visit relatives
 on a regular basis, including conjugal visits. Relatives
 are permitted to supplement the diet of detainees, although
 lack of careful control by prison authorities has sometimes
 resulted in theft of parcels within the prisons. Stricter
 control.over parcels were instituted toward the end of
 1980, and instances of theft were curtailed. The Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) makes periodic
 visits to all detention facilities except those of the
 Department of State Security, although two visits on
 short notice were permitted at the El Chipote State Security
 detention facility during the year. The ICRC supplies
 some food and medicines for the prison population._
 There have been a few cases of prisoners "shot while
 ,attempting to escape" during 1980. Each of these cases
 occurred under circumstances which cast doubt on the
 veracity of the official version of the incidents. In
 one case, three victims reportedly died of single gunshot
 wounds to the head.
 ,In November 1980, private sector leader Jorge Salazar
 was-killed by Nicaraguan security forces, allegedly for
 gun-running and plots against the government. Salazar,
 by the government's admission, was unarmed. Eye-witness
 accounts indicate that Salazar was shot in cold blood,
 differing with the government's account of an accidental
 shoot-out with his armed companion during an attempted
 arrest.
 c.   Disappearances
 During 1980, Nicaragua's independent private Human Rights
 Commission reported 96 cases of disappearances. The
 circumstances of the cases as reported indicated that
 elements of the security forces were involved in many..
 In some cases, disappeared persons reappear after periods
 of detention for investigation by the authorities.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 In the early months after the GRN came to power in 1979,
 there were numerous incidents of persons arrested on
 the basis of anonymous denunciations or loosely defined
 charges of association with the Somoza regime. The govern-
 ment and press encouraged citizens to denounce others
 as sympathizers of former President Anastasio Somoza.
 During 1980, the number of such arbitrary arrests declined.
 The security forces, however, continue to detain persons,
 including foreigners, on vague charges of counter-rev-
 olutionary activity.
 The investigative inexperience of the security forces
 and the slowness of the judicial system have contributed
 to prolonged periods of detention without trial. The
 GRN enacted a law of habeas corpus in early 1980. Technical
 reinstatement.of habeas corpus was part of the revocation
 of the state of emergency in May 1980. This law seems
 to be applied in regular criminal cases, but those accused
 of criminal association with the Somoza regime have been
 remanded to a special judicial authority which is not
 covered by habeas corpus.
 e. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 The GRN established an entirely new judicial system when
 it came to power in July 1979, and created a body of
 laws which guarantees to all Nicaraguans an internationally-
 recognized standard of justice. The regular criminal
 and civil courts appear to function well.
 
 
 491
 The special tribunals, however, which try the political
 prisoners, are outside the normal judicial system. The
 GRN established these tribunals to deal with the over
 7000 prisoners originally jailed for their association
 with the previous regime.
 The special tribunals began functioning December 1979
 and, by December 1980, they had initiated action on 4243
 cases. Action has been completed on 2332 cases of which
 152 resulted in acquittals. Of the 2180 persons convicted,
 two-thirds have been given prison sentences in excess
 of ten years. Thirty years is the maximum sentence under
 Nicaraguan law, and that sentence was given to approximately
 one-quarter of the persons convicted. Approximately
 one-third of the persons subject to the special tribunals
 have been freed prior to trial by the government prosecutor.
 In December, the government decreed pardons for 500 persons
 who had been convicted by the special tribunals. The
 pardons were recommended by the GRN-sponsored human rights
 commission and were intended to benefit persons under
 18 and over 50, the infirm and women. In many of the
 cases brought before the special tribunals, the defendants
 were charged with membership in a criminal association
 (the National Guard), murder, and violation of international
 conventions. Except in a few rare cases of defendants
 involved in notorious incidents during the Somoza regime,
 no evidence of involvement in specific crimes at specific
 times and places has been presented. Many of the judges
 have no legal training. The prosecution normally limits
 itself to presenting the court with the defendant's National
 Guard personnel record as evidence of guilt. Defendants
 are permitted to arrange for their own defense, but since
 very few are able to avail themselves of this right,
 or chose to do so, the court appoints attorneys for them.
 In both the treatment of the trials by the press and
 by special tribunal judges there is a strong presumption
 of guilt of all defendants; many defense lawyers assume
 that their clients will be found guilty and usually make
 only perfunctory defense efforts. Some families of prisoners
 have complained that they cannot present a full defense
 and that witnesses are intimidated. Some lawyers, citing
 lack of time to prepare a defense, restraints on cross-
 examination, and other restrictions, are reluctant to
 undertake cases before the special tribunals.
 After the GRN came to power, a large amount of personal
 property was taken from its owners -- either under the
 terms of Decrees #3 and #38 which ordered the confiscation
 of property belonging to Somoza and those deemed to be
 associated with him or his regime, or by virtue of spontaneous
 confiscation by non-government entities, including plant
 takeovers by labor unions which the FSLN encouraged.
 In the early months of 1980, the GRN encouraged these
 spontaneous confiscations by calling on workers to denounqe
 and combat alleged efforts of private businesses to take
 money out of the country. Virtually all of this property
 has passed to state ownership or is now under state management.
 In May 1980, the GRN undertook to restrain unauthorized
 and unjustified property seizures and to review past
 cases in order to correct unjust seizures. A number
 of cases presented by private sector organizations are
 currently under review, but the GRN is processing these
 expropriation cases slowly, despite a significant number
 of confiscations on apparently questionable grounds.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 Warrants for entering a home must be obtained by the
 police from the state attorney. The GRN has pledged
 
 
 itself to establish respect for the sanctity of the home
 and emphasizes due respect for citizens in the training
 of the police. Officials of the Department of State
 Security are not subject to the same judicial procedures
 as other police agencies'for searching homes. Electronic
 surveillance of private citizens -- primarily through
 telephone taps -- is thought to be common and senior
 GRN officials have admitted to its use. There have been
 credible reports of unlawful entry of homes, searches,
 and the detention of individuals without notification
 of the prisoner's family.
 2.   Government Policy Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Seventeen months after the Sandinista victory, the Nicaraguan
 economy is beginning to recover from the ravages of the
 insurrection and virtual bankruptcy. After a decline
 of 24 percent in Nicaragua's real Gross Domestic Product
 (GDP) in 1979, a recovery of 10 percent in 1980 is tentatively
 projected, a level substantially below the GRN's goal.
 The balance of payments outlook for 1980 and 1981 has
 improved as a result of the successful renegotiation
 of the public debt with private foreign lenders. The
 debt service ratio has fallen from an estimated 66 percent
 of exports in 1979 to 17 percent in 1980 as a result
 of renegotiation. Nicaragua's balance of payments continues
 in very fragile condition, but generous assistance from
 Western nations, including the United States, Federal
 Republic of Germany, and Venezuela has assisted Nicaragua's
 recovery. Cuba has supplied several thousand teachers,
 medical personnel, and advisors in key ministries. Inflation
 has stabilized somewhat after sharp increases (164 percent
 annual rate) in the first half of 1979. The general
 price level increased at an annual rate of 35 percent
 from December 1979 to July 1980.
 The GRN has.stated its intention to foster a mixed economy.
 In the aftermath of GRN-confiscation of holdings belonging
 to the Somosa family or its supporters, the public sector
 has increased its percentage of the GDP from 15 percent
 during the Somoza regime to approximately 41 percent
 today. The principal development goals of the GRN have
 been the reactivation of all sectors of the economy,
 a redistribution of the benefits of production, the
 eradication of illiteracy, the reorganization of the
 health sector, an extension of free health care to the
 general population, and the provision of low-income housing.
 The GRN has also sought to deal vith unemployment through
 labor-intensive public works projects.
 While the redistribution of the wealth and income of
 the Nicaraguan economy is a primary goal of the GRN,
 the reactivation of the economy has been considered a
 more immediate goal and a prerequisite to effective
 redistribution. On these grounds, the agricultural units
 confiscated by the GRN are being kept intact and run
 as state enterprises rather than being subdivided among
 the landless or run as cooperatives. However, these
 state-run farms have been unable to function at full
 capacity, and agricultural production has fallen from
 pre-revolutionary levels. Labor productivity has also
 fallen as much as 40 percent by some estimates. The
 GRN is now discouraging worker takeovers or inflationary
 wage demands. Income transfers are being provided through
 subsidized credit to small farmers and entrepreneurs
 and through artificially low prices set for basic food
 products, many of which are now in short supply.
 
 
 493
 The most successful large-scale effort of the GRN was
 the five month National Literacy Campaign ending in August
 1980. Some 80,000 student teachers went into all areas
 of the country, including the isolated parts of Nicaragua
 and brought the rudiments of literacy to perhaps an addi-
 tional 38 percent of the population - increasing overall
 literacy (defined very liberally) to approximately 88
 percent. Adult education programs are being devised
 to bring the majority of Nicaraguans to the functional
 literacy level. While some complained that the textbooks
 contained government propaganda, the program succeeded
 in teaching rudimentary reading skills to many. In health,
 the GRN is expanding vaccination, maternal child health,
 environmental sanitation, and basic health care programs
 to help reduce the high mortality and morbidity rates
 among the poor. Nevertheless, infant mortality remains
 high at 122 per thousand births.
 To remedy both the historical lack of decent housing
 for the poor and the damage done during the insurrection,
 the GRN is developing large low-income housing projects
 for both urban and rural areas. Foreign assistance has
 already financed the repair or reconstruction of 4000
 homes.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 These basic freedoms are guaranteed by the GRN's Declaration
 of San Jose, which was issued when the government assumed
 power in July 1979. Although they have been reaffirmed
 on several occasions by senior officials, the government
 has not fully complied with these assurances. It has
 imposed restrictions on reporting by the press and on
 the activities of independent parties. Various independent
 groups have protested such actions as contrary to assurances
 of the GRN that the press and political pluralism would
 be respected.
 There is no censorship of domestic or imported books,
 but two foreign films were excluded in 1980 for political
 reasons. Nicaragua allows the importation of cultural
 materials from Cuba and the Soviet Union. Traditional
 Western suppliers continue to be well represented in
 cultural life. The traditional autonomy of the National
 University and the independence of the Catholic Church-
 associated Central American University have been
 circumscribed in a newly created Superior Education Council.
 With a membership of university, government and FSLN
 officials, the Council is intended to rationalize and
 coordinate higher education to meet development needs,
 but it also seeks to reflect the ideological orientation
 of the FSLN in the universities' curricula.
 In September 1979, the GRN enacted a press law which
 affirmed full press freedom, but one of its provisions
 was regarded as a potential threat to press freedom.
 The provision gave the non-governmental journalists union
 power to expel its members and thus exclude them from
 exercise of the profession. That provision of the press
 law has been repealed, but other restrictions on press
 reporting have been imposed.
 In 1980 the GRN enacted decrees #511, #512, and #513
 which required the news media to clear in advance with
 the GRN news reports on certain categories of news which
 the GRN claimed could affect internal security. These
 were broadly defined to include news on scarcitieq, labor
 and popular unrest, counter-revolutionary activities,
 
 
 494
 and armed attacks on the government or reporting of
 electioneering. The GRN has liberally interpreted these
 decrees for restricting reporting on the recent uprising
 in the Atlantic Coast town of Bluefields in September
 1980, denial of a rally permit for an independent political
 party, and the killing of private sector leader Jorge
 Salazar.
 Senior government officials have criticized the independent
 newspaper La Prensa in very harsh terms for alleged
 systematic opposition to the GRN and manipulation of
 the news to weaken the government. While La Prensa has
 adjusted its news reporting to comply with Decrees #511,
 #512, and #513 it continues to exercise considerable
 independence and publish a broad range of news and opinion,
 on domestic and international events.
 In January 1980, the GRN closed a low circulation daily
 newspaper oalled El Pueblo that it claimed was inciting
 labor unrelst with extreme leftist propaganda. The staff
 of the paper was convicted for violations of public security
 laws, imprisoned, and subsequently released after serving
 a sentence. Two radio newsmen were also expelled from
 the journalist's union after criticizing the government.
 The FSLN controls the country's two television stations,
 but a number of radio stations are privately-owned, although
 only a few provide independent news service. Of those
 few, one station was recently confiscated by the GRN
 on the grounds of ownership by a person associated with
 the Somoza government and another is encountering
 difficulties in maintaining its independent news coverage.
 In addition, two radio stations which do not carry news,
 but frequently carry satirical remarks, including comments
 about the GRN/FSLN, were attacked by unidentified persons.
 The GRN has not permitted privately-owned television
 stations. These actions limit freedom of expression
 in Nicaragua, particularly in the case of the independent
 media.
 In 1979 and early 1980, the FSLN actively sought to incorporate
 all trade union organizations into a Sandinista-run confederation,
 sometimes using intimidation. The FSLN succeeded in
 reorganizing some two-thirds of the organized work force
 under the Sandinista umbrella organizations. The traditional
 trade union groups, including the communist unions, resisted
 forced affiliation and all have maintained their own
 identity, except for the independent Workers Front which
 was broken up in January. The GRN does not now interfere
 in activities of the traditional unions, and they carry
 on a wide range of programs to serve and expand their
 membership.
 Labor relations are governed by the labor code
 enacted by the previous regime. Labor ministry officials,
 who exercise considerable authority in labor disputes,
 have reversed the biases of the act and now tend to side
 with the workers in most controversies. The labor code
 permits strikes in the private sector but prohibits them
 in the public sector and calls for heavy government
 involvement in collective bargaining. Many strikes have
 nonetheless occurred in the public sector, largely in
 businesses recently acquired by the government. In its
 early months, the government encouraged increases in
 the real income of the lowest paid sectors of the society,
 but present policy seeks to limit wage increases in light
 of straitened economic circumstances. Forced collective
 bargaining continues with direct participation by labor
 ministry officials who generally seek to restrain wage
 
 
 495
 demands. This ambivalence adds to general uncertainty
 as to the extent and permanence of the freedom to-bargain
 collectively.
 Religion is freely practiced in Nicaragua; 90 percent
 of the population professes the Catholic faith, but members
 of minority denominations experience no discrimination.
 The GRN/FSLN has attempted to deemphasize religion generally.
 The Catholic Church has strongly opposed its efforts
 to do so.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Several hundred thousand Nicaraguans left the country
 during the unrest of 1978 and 1979 for reasons of personal
 safety. The vast majority returned after the war. As
 many as 30,000 may have departed upon the collapse of
 the Somoza regime to escape the new government. The
 GRN places no restrictions on the repatriation of Nicar-
 aguans and has stated that it welcomes the return of
 anyone who wishes to participate in the'economic
 reconstruction. However, it will provide no advance
 assurances of immunity from prosecution for persons who
 wish to return. The government tends to discourage
 repatriation through the official media which indiscrim-
 inately characterize potential returnees as "counter-
 revolutionaries" and "Somocistas." The Council of State
 considered, but shelved, a law to confiscate the property
 of all inaividuals who applied for asylum in foreign
 countries, whether or not asylum was granted.
 Upon the collapse of the Somoza regime, approximately
 1,000 persons sought asylum in foreign embassies in Managua.
 The GRN (after considerable delay) honored the Latin
 American practice regarding this type of asylum and has
 permitted all but about 50 asylees to depart under safe-
 conduct passes. The remaining asylees are accused of
 serious crimes and may not be allowed to depart in the
 foreseeable future. Nicaragua has received a small number
 of refugees from the civil strife in El Salvador. In
 light of its own limited resources, the GRN has sought
 the assistance of the international community to provide
 care for these refugees. There is no indication of forced
 repatriation.
 The GRN has continued the Somoza regime's requirements
 that Nicaraguan citizens and foreign residents must obtain
 an exit permit in order to leave the country. No major
 restrictions are currently observed in granting such
 permits. Women and men are treated equally. Nicaraguans
 seeking to emigrate have encountered some delays in obtaining
 passports and the amount of economic goods they can take
 with them is limited.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 On assuming power, the GRN pledged that it would establish
 a democratic p6litical system in which the nation's leaders
 would be chosen in free elections. But the government's
 failure to call elections before 1985, and prohibitions
 against electioneering, have caused concern that the
 GRN's commitment to an open political system may not
 be kept.
 On August 23, 1980, a member of the FSLN National pirectorate
 announced that elections would not be held before 1985,
 and that, until that time, the FSLN would continue, to
 exercise power. The government says it is delaying elections
 pending a higher literary rate among the population and
 
 
 496
 a greater measure of economic recovery. Political groups
 have been prohibited from promoting specific candidacies
 until 1984. This has been liberally interpreted to prevent
 a fairly broad range of activities by independent political
 groups.
 The FSLN claims that it enjoys the massive popular support
 of the Nicaraguan people and that it has a mandate to
 govern the country by virtue of its military victory
 over the Somoza regime. Its nine-member National Directorate
 is the principal source of policy guidance for the GRN
 juntarand makes decisions in the critical areas of military
 policy and internal security. The junta submits most
 legislation to the Council of State for consultation
 and takes into account the views of the Council. The
 majority of the Council's membership was responsive to
 the FSLN, but nearly all of Nicaragua's major political,
 social,'professional, business and trade unions groups
 were represented as well. These latter groups (with
 11 members) walked out of the Council of State in November
 1980 to protest the Nicaraguan government's prohibition
 of a non-FSLN political rally. These groups have announced
 that they will not return to the Council until the government
 fully respects the political and civil liberties guaranteed
 by the GRN's fundamental statute and until democratic,
 pluralistic principles are respected. Only Sandinista
 organizations and political parties closely allied with
 the FSLN remain in the Council of State, and its value
 as an independent legislative body has thereby been markedly
 reduced.
 A number of political groups, including the private sector
 organization, the Private Sector Council (COSEP), the
 Democratic Conservative Party, and other independent
 political parties and trade unions which participated
 in the anti-Somoza struggle continue to be active and
 enjoy widespread support. While the GRN initially placed
 no restrictions on the activities of these groups, it
 has engaged in frequent verbal, public attacks on the
 non - FSLN groups. In November, the GRN prohibited the
 holding of a public rally by the Nicaraguan Democratic
 Movement and Sandinista Youth sacked its Managua
 headquarters. Several independent leaders have been
 jailed, allegedly for plotting against the government.
 The Nicaraguan business community is well organized and
 is committed to participate with the government in the
 economic-reconstruction of the country. The business
 community seeks out wide opinion among its members,
 including small-scale proprietors, in order to represent
 them in discussions with the government. While relations
 between the government and the private sector are strained,
 the private sector vigorously pursues a pluralistic society
 and a mixed economy. The GRN has previously negotiated
 with the private sector but has yet to do so in the case
 of the November dispute.
 Women play an active role within the GRN and FSLN, mostly
 at lower levels. A female commander during the war,
 Dora Maria Tellez, is a leader of the Council of State,
 and women serve in the Cabinet, in the Nicaraguan Foreign
 Service, and in many mid-level positions -in the government
 ministries.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The GRN has welcomed the interest of the international
 community in human rights observance in Nicaragua. In
 1980, it received visits from the International Commission
 
 
 497
 of Jurists (in July), Amnesty International, and the
 Inter-American Human Rights Commission (in October) to
 review current practices. The ICJ's public report generally
 praised the GRN's human rights record but noted a number
 of deficiencies. The ICJ public report recommended that
 the investigation of those charged with "somocista" crimes
 be accelerated, that bail be facilitated in worthy cases,
 and that convictions be rendered only when defendants
 have responsibility for criminal acts, rather than only
 association with the former regime or its National Guard.
 The government facilitated visits of the independent
 human rights organizations but has taken few steps to
 redress the abuses of the special tribunals. The GRN
 has also extended an invitation to the United Nations
 Human Rights Commission to visit Nicaragua.
 The independent Permanent Commission on Human Rights
 (CPDH) has been monitoring human rights observance in
 Nicaragua since 1977, and it played a significant role
 in exposing the violations of the Somoza regime. The
 CPDH continues to play an active role and maintains
 careful records of reported human rights violations since
 the GRN assumed power. It presents cases to the government
 and to international organizations and seeks to foster
 improved human rights observance. The GRN, like the
 previous regime, has criticized the CPDH as politically
 motivated and has been hostile to its presentations.
 During 1980, the GRN created an official Commission for
 the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights, with a
 membership composed of government officials and private
 citizens. This Commission has undertaken a program of
 monitoring human rights observance with the cooperation
 of the GRN.
 
 
 498
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS4
 COUNTRY: NICARAGUA
 1978     1979     1980
 ------------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        14.0     18.5     38.7
 LOANS...   *.......     10.5      2.6     30.0
 GRANTS.......#.....         3.5     15.9      8.7
 A.AID *....*..*..*..**.        12.5      9.7     19.4
 LOANS......o...*..       10.5      0.0     15.0
 GRANTS......ooo....         2.0      9.7      4.4
 (SECoSUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      8.0      1.1
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......         0.1      7.0     18.0
 LOANS..o..........         0.0      2.6     15.0
 GRANTS...o.......         0.1      4.4      3.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         0.0      2.6     15.0
 REPAY, IN S-LOANS....         0.0      2.6     15.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........         0.1      4.4      3.0
 E.RELIEF.ECDEV & WFP.         0.1     -4.4      2.6
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0      0.4
 C.OTHER ECON, ASSIST..*         1.4      1.8      1*3
 LOANS*...........          0.0      0.0      00
 GRANTS............         1.4      1.8      1.3
 CONTR. TO IFIo...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         1.1      0.2      0.1
 OTHER.*.....m..         0.3      1.6      1.2
 II*4IL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..         0.4      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..,...#*.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............         0.4      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FNS....         0.0.     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         0.4      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK.*.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      000
 XII.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        14.4     18.5     38.7
 LOANSo...........o.        10.5      2.6     30.0
 GRANTS.......***         3.9     15.9      8.7
 --------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS.... ....        0.2      0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS......o         0.2      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............         0.0      0.0      00
 -----      ------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ----      ----------------------------------------- ------
 TOTAL........     66.6     39.0     55.3   .537.1
 18RD              13.1      0.0     20.0    181.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      9.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0     32.0     55.0
 IDS               53.5     36.8      0.0   . 268.6
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      1.7      3.3     17.9
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.5      0.0      4.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 499
