 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, with executive, legislative, judicial, and
 electoral branches of government. President Violeta Barrios de Chamorr and mem-
 bers of the unicameral National Assembly were elected in a free and fair election
 in 1990. The Sandinista Front for National Liberation (FSLN) became, ostensibly,
 the opposition party in the Assembly. In the judicial branch, FSLN justices out-
 number Chamorro appointees five to our on the Supreme Court, with neither group
 having the six-vote majority necessary to decide cases.
 The Minister of Government and the President who also holds the title of Min-
 ister of Defense, are the civilian authorities le ally responsible for overseeing the
 National Police and Sandinista People's Army (    respectively. In practice,how-
 ever, Nicaragua's security forces continued in 1992 to be led by Sandinista ap-
 pointees who operated with substantial autonomy. Total military expenditures for
 1989, the last year far which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency con-
 ducted a detailed analysis, were between $76 and $90 million. In 1992, the Govern-
 ment's military budget was approximately one-half that figure. The size of the
 armed forces was reduced from over 80,000 to under 17,000 between 1990 and 1992.
 Credible accusations of human rights violations were raised against the police and
 the EPS during the year.
 In September 1992 several top police officials with poor human rights records
 were removed, a civilian was named to the newly created post of Vice Minister of
 Government to supervise the police, and an office of human rights was created with-
 in the Attorney General's ofice. However, the new Chief of Police, appointed from
 within the ranks has also been accused of many past human rights violations. At
 the same time, Iresident Chamorro created a Tripartite Commission composed of
 the Government, the Catholic Church, and the Organization of American States'
 
 
 452
 International Commission for Support and Verification (OAS/CIAV) to examine past
 and future cases of political violence.
 Nicaragua continued efforts to rebuild its predominantly agricultural economy in
 1992. Annual per capita income is estimated at about $350 by the World Bank. The
 Government continued an economic stabilization program begun in March, 1991
 under International Monetary Fund (IMF) auspices. Inflation, doubleand even tri-
 ple-digit in 1990, was cut to about one-half percent per month, and the Govern-
 ment's fiscal deficit was reduced by 80 percent since 1990. Nevertheless, Nicaragua's
 economy remains depressed.
 Major, persistent human rights problems in 1992 included extrajudicial killings,
 mistreatment of detainees and other abuses by security forces, violence by para-
 military bands in rural areas, the backloged and often partisan judicial system, the
 Government's continuing failure to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
 human rights abuses, and violence against women (including rape and wife beating).
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Politically motivated violence was
 commonplace in 1992. The civil war which formally concluded in June 1990 with
 the demobilization of the Nicaraguan Resistance (RN) left Nicaraguan society both
 politically polarized and heavily armed. Prior to leaving office after its electoral de-
 feat, the Sandinista Government distributed weapons to many of its supporters;
 some RN members also cached supplies of arms before demobilizing.
 There were credible reports that demobilized RN combatants were killed by the
 olie, army, former agents of the disbanded General Directorate of State Security
 GSEh), or Sandinista militants during the year. According to OAS/CIAV, 13 former
 RN combatants were killed by National Police or active or demobilized EPS mem-
 bers; 2 by former DGSE agents; an additional 8 by Sandinista militants; and 16 by
 unknown assailants. Twelve were killed by rearmed EPS veterans (known as
 "Recompas") and 8 by rearmed members of the RN known as "Recontras' or by
 other ex-RN members. This number of 59 deaths brought to 165 the number of ex-
 RN members who died under violent circumstances since the beginning of the
 Chamorro administration. OAS/CIAV provided details of these homicides and other
 human rights abuses to the Government; however, few investigations or prosecu-
 tions of the perpetrators of these killings occurred.
 Among the extrajudicial and political killings during 1992 were the following: On
 March 9, an EPS patrol attacked a recreation center in the town of Waslala with
 automatic weapons and fragmentation grenades, killing Omar Olivas, a former RN
 member. Although the EPS claimed that the soldiers killed Olivas "in self-defense,"
 a report by the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) described the
 incident as an "indiscriminate attack" by the EPS. Neither the police nor the EPS
 conducted an investigation of the attack.
 On June 14, EPS troops shot and killed Rene Espinales, a demobilized RN mem-
 ber, near Pantasma in Jinotega Province. The ANPDH charged that Espinales was
 ambushed and killed without any attempt to arrest him. The police shot and killed
 two demobilized RN members, Noel Urbina and Abel Fernandez (the village mayor),
 on June 29 in the village of El Coral in southeastern Nicaragua. The police claimed
 the pair were armed and killed while resisting arrest; however, witnesses reported
 that Fernandez was killed during an argument with the local police chief and that
 Urbina was repeatedly shot in the back by police as he tried to leave the scene.
 On November 12, Julio Pravia and Gilberto Pravia were murdered at their farm
 near Quilali, Nueva Segovia department. The Ministry of Government and EPS re-
 ports, carried in the Nicaraguan media, identified the victims as Sandinistas and
 the perpetrators as Recontras. OAS/CIAV subsequently identified Julio Pravia as
 ex-RN member who, along with his family, had been repatriated from Honduras
 under the terms of the demobilization accords of 1990. Three Pravia children were
 seriously wounded. The attack was carried out by a trio of armed gunmen. OAS/
 CIAV named Inocente Rizo and Jacinto Rodriguez Lopez, both former DGSE agents,
 as two of the three gunmen. At year's end, no government prosecution had begun.
 On November 23, Dr. Arges Sequeira Manga was fatally shot by unknown assail-
 ants near the city of El Sauce. Dr. Sequeira was President of the Union of Agricul-
 tural Producers and of the National Association of Confiscated Persons. He was also
 Vice President of the National Constitutional Party and of COSEP, Nicaragua's
 main private sector organization. Dr. Sequeira's political and business associates
 called the murder a politically motivated assassination carried out by the Sandi-
 nistas. President Chamorro publicly condemned the murder and launched an inves-
 
 
 453
 tigation in which criminal investigators of the Spanish Government are participat-
 iany incidents of political and extraludicial killing dating from 1990 had not been
 resolved by the end of 1992. On July 2, the civilian district judge hearing evidence
 in the murder case of 16-year-old Jean Paul Genie transferred it to the military
 court system for further action. Citing a serious presumption" that bodyguards ac-
 companying EPS commander General Humberto Ortega shot Genie to death and
 acted with unnamed "other personnel" to cover up the killing, the judge ruled that
 jurisdiction lay with the military courts. Genie's father and the public prosecutor
 supported by the Nicaraguan Bar Association and the Attorney General, appealed
 the transfer order before a civilian appeals court, arguing that the law giving mili-
 tar courts urisdiction in common crimes is unconstitutional.
 Genie a high school student, was killed by automatic weapons fire on October 28,
 1990, while driving on Managua's Masaya highway;, severae witnesses placed Gen-
 eral Ortega's motorcade at the scene of the murder. After the official heading the
 murder investigation, Mauricio Aguilar, was himself murdered by another police of-
 ficer, Harold Meza, police dropped their investigation of the Genie case without
 making any arrests. An internal military investigation cleared the bodyguards of
 any wrongdoing. While the EPS publicly denied any military involvement in the
 crime, it destroyed the logbooks documenting the movements of Ortega and his
 bodyguards. In February the EPS published an open letter to the judge criticizing
 his conduct of the case and charging that the case had been "politicized" in order
 to damage the reputations of the EPS and General Ortega. In August the Perma-
 nent Human Rights Commission (CPDH) charged that Mauricio Aguilar had been
 murdered to prevent an impartial police investigation of the Genie case. The CPDH
 accused the military court system of partiality and favoritism towards Aguilar's kill-
 er, who, though convicted of homicide by a military court and sentenced to 3 years
 in prison, was quickly released.
 Former RN commander Enrique Bermudez was assassinated on February 16
 1991, in front of Managua's Intercontinental Hotel. The Government has announced
 no progress on this case since a special presidential commission dissolved in Novem-
 ber of ihat year, citing lack of any advance in the Nicaraguan police investigation.
 U.S. Government and private efforts to revive the investigation of Bermudez's mur-
 der during 1992 led to requests by the Government and the Tripartite Commission
 for foreign technical assistance, but these initiatives were not successful. Three
 Catholic nuns and a bishop were attacked near Siuna in a military-style ambush
 on January 1, 1990. One ofthe nuns, an American citizen, Maureen Courtney, died.
 Those responsible have yet to be brought to justice.
 The Government signed a Catholic hur-mediated agreement in January 1992
 with leaders of the Recontras which provided cash bonuses and exemption from
 prosecution for previous attacks on Government security forces in exchange for the
 Recontras' prmise to disband. These and similar acords with other Recontra
 groups were criticized by the Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights (CENIDH) for
 encouraging armed rebellion as a form of political blackmail.
 To addaes te issue of ex-RN deaths, President Chamorro established a Tri-
 aite   ommission composed of the Government, the Catholic Church and OASt
 w      in October 2 ceremony inaugurating the Tripartite Commission, the OASf
 CIAV member publicly presented the Government with a list of 154 prsons (de-
 mobilized members of the RN, their family members, and individuals who had been
 repatriated) killed in Nicaragua since the beginning of the Chamorro Administra-
 tion. OAS/CIAV described most but not all of these deaths as politically motivated.
 By the end of 1992, the Commission finished the review of its first case, the Septem-
 ber 1990 death of an ex-RN member at the hands of members of a Sandinista coop-
 erative.
 During 1992, local human rights monitors chagd that security forces continued
 to be staffed by many former members of the disanded DGSE, cited for repeated
 human rights violations under the Sandinista goverment. While most ex-D  aE of-
 icers assumed positions in the military, some with records as human rights viola-
 tors became police officers in rural areas. In August the CPDH called on President
 Chamorro to remove Colonel Lenin Cerna from his position as Chief of the Defense
 Information Directorate (DID) of the EPS, and to investigate the human rights vio-
 lations attributed to Cera while hhe eaded the DGSE. Corn, however, continued
 in is   m     22, 1991, President Chamorro decreed an amnesty for "al political
 and related common cries" committed since May 10, 1990, which extended to the
 decree date the Sandinista amnesty granted in 1990 to those responsible for prior
 political crimes. Some human rights monitors remain critical of this deceoe, regard-
 ing it as a setback to their efforts to bring known human rights abusers to justice.
 
 
 454
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known cases of political disappearance during
 the year.
 Clandestine graveyards dating from the Sandinista era (1979-1990) continued to
 be discovered in 1992. In January the remains of 75 persons, RN members and civil-
 ians, killed by Sandinista "special troops" in November 1984 were unearthed in the
 area of Biagua, 49 kilometers from Camoapa, Boaco province.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were numerous credible reports during the year that the police beat and oth-
 erwise physically mistreated detained persons, often to obtain confessions. The Gov-
 ernment failed to investigate and prosecute those responsible for mistreatment.
 In June, following a series of inspections of Nicaragua's jails and prisons, the
 CPDH issued a report describing conditions in the national penitentiary system as
 "disastrous," and charged that the Government had "abanon    its oligation to
 care for the prisoners. The CPDH reported that prisoners suffered from lack of
 food, malnutrition, absence of both medicine and medical treatment, contaminated
 water supply systems, and lackof clothing. The report noted that a hi{h percentage
 of prisoners complained of torture and mistreatment in police investgation center
 jails. The CPDH charged that in Tipitapa's Modelo Prison a notorious block of tiny
 cells used in former years for "punishment" were again being used under inhuman
 conditions.
 The Ministry of Government, which is responsible for the police and the prison
 system, took few steps during 1992 to identify and correct human rights abuses. A
 prison official dismissed the CPDH report critical of prison conditions as "slander."
 Generally, the Ministry ignored omplaints of abuses reported by CENIDH, CPDH,
 and ANPH and was slow in responding to requests for information on the deaths
 of former RN members. In September, however, the Government created by decree
 a new section within the Attorney General's office to prsecute human rights viola-
 tions. The Government in September also replaced National Police Chief lKene Vivas
 and several other high police officials, most of whom had been criticized as human
 rights violators under the Sandinista government.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Ex/e.-Arbitrary arrest and detention by the  -
 lice were common in 1992. The Police Functions Law establishes procedures for the
 arrest of criminal suspects. The Law was criticized by local human rights groups
 in 1992 for providing inadequate judicial oversight of police arrests. The Law re-
 quires police to obtain a warrant prior to detaining a suspect, but it is issued by
 a police official rather than a judge. After detaining a suspect, police are required
 by the Law to notify family members of the detainee's whereabouts, but in practice
 this is rarely done. Detainees do not have the right to an attorney until they have
 been formally charged with a crime.
 Under the terms of the Police Functions Law, a suspect may be detained for up
 to 9 days before he is brought before a judge. If released beforte h 9-day deadline,
 the police are not required to justify the detention. Human rights monitors note that
 the 9-day period contravenes the constitutional requirement that a detainee appear
 before a competent judicial authority within 3 days of detention. The National As-
 sembly specifled the 3-day deadline in the Reform Law of Penal Procedures, passed
 in 1991. The Assembly did not amend the Police Functions Law, however, and local
 human rights groups reported that detainees routinely continued to be held without
 charge for more than the 3 days allowed by the Constitution. The Civil Inspection
 Unit of the Ministry of Government, estabhished in 1991, continues to monitor and
 correct police wrongdoing, including illegal detention. Although the Constitution
 provides that detainees are to receive access to legal counsel once they have been
 charged with a crime, in practice police do not act to protect this right. The Reform
 Law of Penal Procedures provides for the release of accused criminals on bail. Pre-
 viously, detainees were permitted to remain at liberty prior to trial only for compel-
 ling personal reasons, such as ill health.
 Exile is not practied.p.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The judicial system comprises both military and
 civilian courts. The military, courts are responsible for investigating, prosecuting,
 and trying crimes committed by or against members of the armed forces or police.
 Proceedings of the military courts are secret but may be released to the public if
 the military authorities so choose. Military courts often fail to investigate or try
 cases against members of the military. Even when soldiers are convicted, often, as
 in the cae Aseof Maricio Aguilar's killer (Section .a.), they either receive light sen-
 tences or the sentences are not enforced.
 The accused has the right to legal counsel; if a defendant cannot afford one, a
 public defender is named b y the presiding judge. One deficiency of the legal system
 is the absence of a cadre of publicly funded attorneys to represent indigent defend-
 ants. Court-appointed counsel, either lawyers or law students, serve without fee; the
 
 
 455
 bar lacks the infrastructure to sustain effective pro bono representation. Defendants
 are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Those convicted have the right of appeal.
 The Constitution provides for the right to a speedy trial but in practice, many per-
 sons arrested and held without bail spend months in jail before appearing in court.
 The CPDH estimates that one-third of all those incarcerated in the prison system
 have been awaiting trial for between 3 months and 2 years.
 The Reform Law of Penal Procedures reestablished trial by jury and allowed indi-
 vidual citizens to denounce criminal activities directly to a judge. Previously all ac-
 cusations of criminal wrongdoing were processed first by the police, who determined
 whether the case merited further action. It is too early to tell how effective the new
 procedures will be in protecting due process and the civil rights of ordinary citizens.
 any members of the judiciary were appointed under the Sandinista government,
 and such judges are often said to be influenced by their political beliefs. During the
 latter part of 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that certain procedural steps taken
 by the National Assembly [eadership were illegal and in violation of the Constitu-
 tion. Opposition Assembl members claimed the Court's decision responded to pres-
 sure from the Executive Branch.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 1987 Constitution establishes that all persons have the right to privacy and the pri-
 vacy of their family and to the inviolability of their home, correspondence, and com-
 munications. It also requires warrants for searches of private homes and excludes
 from legal proceedings illegally seized letters, documents, and private papers. Local
 human rights groups claimed that officers from the Defense Inoration Directorate
 (DID) continued to operate as they had under the DGSE, operating wiretaps and
 other electronic surveillance, intercepting mail, and searching private homes and of-
 flees without judicial authorization. During 1992, there were credible reports that
 the EPS and police officials illegally entered homes and businesses. This same accu-
 sation was leveled against Recontras and demobilized EPS members.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-These freedoms are provided for in the Con-
 stitution. Freedom of speech is guaranteed in Article 30 of the Constitution, which
 declares that "Nicaraguans have the right to freely express their beliefs in public
 or private, individually or collectively, in oral, written and any other form." Freedom
 of the press is restricted, however, by several constitutional provisions. Article 66
 establishes that Nicaraguans have the right to "accurate information," thereby pro-
 viding an exception by which the freedom to publish information the Government
 deems "inaccurate" could be abridged. Although Article 67 specifies that the right
 to provide information cannot be subject to censorship, it subjects it to "retroactive
 liability established by law" and defines it as a 'social responsbility," implying sanc-
 tions against "irresponsibility" by the press. Finally, Article 68 declares that "the
 mass media are at the service of national interests," thus implying that the Govern-
 ment may suppress media activity it decides is not in the national (or conceivably
 merely its own) interest. In practice, during 1992 diverse viewpoints were freely and
 openly discussed in public discourse, in print and broadcast media, and in academic
 circles.
 The most important medium for news distribution in Nicaragua is radio. Listeners
 can receive a wide variety of viewpoints, particularly in Managua. There are five
 television stations: the two largest are operated by the Government, though one is
 owned partly by the private company which manages it. The government station
 broadcasts two news programs nightly one produced by its own news team and a
 second by a Sandinista news team. Sandinista harassment of opposition broad-
 casters, frequent in 1990 and 1991, was not evident in 1992.
 There are three national daily newspapers. Barricada and El Nuevo Diario, which
 reflect rival Sandinista lines, regularly criticized officials and policies of the
 Chamorro administration. During the first half of the year, La Prensa, under the
 collective ownership of President Chamorro and her late husband's family, offered
 a generally progovernment viewpoint which was critical of the Sandinistas and only
 occasionally criticized the Chamorro administration. Following a midyear change in
 editorial management, La Prensa became increasingly independent, however, some-
 times espousing the views of the National Opposition Union, or UNO. Several
 weeklies, including the Sandinista publication El Semanario, and the strongly pro-
 UNO and antigovernment El Nicaraguense were published during 1992.
 There is no official state censorship in Nicaragua. However, the CENIDH reported
 that police attacked an El Nuevo Diario photo journalist in January, and members
 of the EPS attacked a reporter and a photographer from Barricada in March,
 confiscating the latter's camera. In both instances the journalists were attempting
 to cover clashes between labor groups and government security forces. In April the
 
 
 456
 CENIDH charged that the Government discriminated against pro-Sandinista media
 in its distribution of commercial announcements, a principal source of income for all
 the communications media.
 The academic community reflects a wide range of alternative viewpoints.
 b. Freedom of Peacefid Assembly and Association.-Numerous marches and dem-
 onstrations were held throughout the year by groups representing a range of politi-
 cal views. Demonstrators must obtain permission for a march atter registering its
 planned size and location with police. This permission is routinely granted. Opposi-
 tion and independent associations of all sorts coexisted in Nicaragua throughout
 1992. Private associations of any kind may be formed without restrictions but do
 not have legal status until they receive this designation from the National Assem-
 bly. Such legal recognition is routinely conferred.
 On September 14, the police dispersed a small demonstration by disabled war vet-
 erans during a patriotic parade in the national stadium; one demonstrator was
 badly beaten wi   a  lice baton. The CENIDH denounced the police violence before
 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, declaring it evidence of a general
 pattern of conduct. The CENIDH added that the indifference of Cabinet members
 in the stadium demonstrated the Government's "institutionalization of violence as
 a means of silencing the petitions and demands of social sectors justly exercising
 their constitutional right of petition."
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. Nica-
 ragua is at least 75 percent Roman Catholic; other religious groups practice without
 hindrance. Protestant denominations proselytize actively and now constitute as
 much as 20 percent of the population. Missionaries and church workers freely enter
 the countr to engage in religious activities as well as development assistance.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no government restrictions on movement within or from
 Nicaragua.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In the February 1990 election, Nicaraguans exercised the right to change their
 government peacefully. A 14-party UNO coalition, the FSLN, and several smaller
 arties participated in the election, declared free and fair by international observers.
 Violeta Chamorro won the presidency over FSLN candidate Daniel Ortega, and
 UNO obtained a majority of seats in the National Assembly. During 1990 and most
 of 1991, UNO, which supported Chamorro's presidential bid, held a majority in the
 National Assembly; the FSLN was the minority party. In late 1991, at least eight
 deputies broke away from UNO to form the "Center Group." The Chamorro Admin-
 istration often relied on support from the FSLN and the 'Center Group" to pass or
 block legislation since mid-1992 and before, when the majority of UNO deputies in
 the National Assembly, led by Assembly President Alfredo Cesar, became a de facto
 opposition force.
 In September a conflict developed between the executive and legislative branches
 over the legality of certain actions by the National Assembly leadership, because of
 differences over what constitutes a quorum. At the close of the year, President
 Chamorro ordered the National Police to surround the National Assembly while it
 was in recess and appointed a provisional board to govern the internal elections of
 the Assembly, scheduled for January 9, 1993. She based her actions on a determina-
 tion of the Supreme Court that all actions subsequent to September by the Assem-
 bly were unconstitutional. Her supporters upheld her actions as being necessary to
 overcome the impasse which had paralyzed the National Assembly since September.
 UNO politicians condemned the President's decision as a "coup d'etat against the
 Assembly." The next national elections for the Presidency, National Assembly, and
 municipal councils are scheduled for 1996.
 The right of citizens to change their government remains theoretically limited,
 however, by Article 5 of the 1987 Constitution, which guarantees the existence of
 political pluralism "without -ideological restrictions, except for those who seek a re-
 turn to the past or advocate the establishment of a political system similar to it."
 There have yet to be cases which would define this exception in practical terms.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permitted domestic and international human rights monitors to
 operate freely in Nicaragua in 1992. The three active local human rights organiza-
 tions were the Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights (CENIDH), the Permanent
 Commission for Human Rights (CPDH), and the Nicaraguan Association for Human
 Rights (ANPDH). Though officially nonpartisan, the CENIDH has the reputation of
 
 
 457
 being 'pro-Sandinista* The CPDH and the ANPDH are not affiliated with any polit-
 ical party; the CPDH has received U.S. Government funds since June 1990 and the
 ANDPH since mid-1992. Both are known for their active criticism of abuses commit-
 ted under the Sandinista government as well as under the Chamorro administra-
 tion.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of 'birth, nationality, politi-
 cal belief, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, national origin, economic condi-
 tion, or social condition." Most Nicaraguans are of mixed mestizo background and
 skin color does not appear to be a barrier to political or economic success.
 Women continued to suffer discrimination in the male-dominated culture preva-
 lent in some sectors, although this did not prevent women from occupyinF senior
 positions in government, the trade union movement, and social organizations.
 Women are underrepresented in management positions in the private sector and
 form the majority of workers in the traditionally low paid education, textile, and
 health service sectors. According to the CENIDH 57 percent of the households in
 Nicaragua are headed by women and 72 percent of them live in poverty; 57 percent
 of the unemployed are women, and of these 75 percent are single mothers. Othough
 abortion is illegal, increasing numbers of women terminate pregnancy by clandes-
 tine abortions.
 Local human rights organizations continued to monitor violence against women,
 including rape and wife beating. Because victims often are reluctant to publicize
 their charges, it is likely that such abuse is significantly under-reported. Local
 human rights groups report that police sometimes intervene to prevent injury in
 cases of domestic violence, but that the perpetrators are rarely charged or tried for
 their acts. The Ixchen Centers and the Luisa Amanda Espinoza Association of Nica-
 raguan Women, a Sandinista mass organization, providedmedical and psychological
 counseling to women, as well as legal advice in divorce cases and to victims of rape
 and other violence.
 The bipartisan Women's Commission of the National Assembly was actively in-
 volved in promoting legislation of interest to women in 1992. In August President
 Chamorro approved an amendment to the Nicaraguan Penal Code, passed in June
 by the National Assembly, reforming the law against rape. The new law establishes
 a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison, closes loopholes that allowed convicted
 rapists to evade imprisonment, and changes rape from a private to a public crime
 by allowing public prosecutors to initiate hes against violators. The law has not
 been in effect long enout determine how effectively it is being implemented.
 The Government has     n criticized for its failure to expend resources in support
 of the Atlantic Coast population, which is composed largely of ethnic, racial, and re-
 ligious minorities. Successive central governments in Managua have traditionally
 neglected the Atlantic Coast, extracting natural resources while expending a dis-
 proportionately small amount of state funds in the region. Under Article 11 of the
 Constitution, Spanish is the official language of the State. As English and native
 indigenous languages are widely used languages of the people of the Atlantic region,
 those who cannot speak Spanish are frequently at a disadvantage in dealing with
 the national Government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All public and private sector workers, except the
 military and the police, are entitled to form and join unions of their own choosing,
 and they exercise this right extensively. Nearly half of Nicaragua's work force, in-
 cluding agricultural workers, is unionized, according to labor leaders. New unions
 must register with the Ministry of Labor and be granted legal status before they
 may engage in collective bargaining with management. Some labor groups report oc-
 casional delays in obtaining legal status.
 Workers also freely exercise their right to strike. Under the terms of the Labor
 Code, workers may strike legally only after they have exhausted other methods of
 dispute resolution, including mediation by the Ministry of Labor. There were numer-
 ous strikes in Nicaragua in 1992, but use of violence by strikers was less common
 than in previous years. In one violent confrontation, however, police broke up a
 demonstration by hundreds of bus workers outside the Ministry of Transportation
 on January 21. The workers were protesting the Government's failure to carry out
 a privatization accord it had negotiated with a Sandinista bus workers union.
 CENIDH reported that 15 workers were beaten and 5 arrested by the police; it con-
 demned what it termed "violent repression by the police."
 Injuries were also sustained in a March dispute at a collective when EPS troops
 and police evicted workers from ENABAS, the state-owned grain marketing busi-
 
 
 458
 ness. On April 3, shots were fired by unknown assailants at the headquarters of the
 Autonomous Nicaraguan Workers Central wounding three union members. This in-
 cident took place during a strike by Sandinista taxi drivers, protesting the issuing
 of new taxi licenses.
 Unions freely form or join federations or confederations and affiliate with inter-
 national bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to bargain collectively. The Chamorro Government's labor negotiations in
 1992 continued primarily to be ad hoc efforts to resolve pressing labor conflicts, usu-
 ally in the public sector. Despite unfavorable economic conditions and unfamiliarity
 with the practice following 10 years of central economic planning, collective bargain-
 ing is becoming more common in the private sector.
 In July the International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee of Experts issued
 a report noting that the labor law provision which subjects collective agreements to
 the prior approval of the Ministry of Labor before they can come into force violates
 ILO Convention 98 on the right to organize and collective bargaining ratified by
 Nicaragua in 1967. In November the ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association
 (CFA) requested information on deaths and injuries which occurred during particu-
 lar strikes in 1990 and 1991. The Government was asked to reply to allegations of
 helping to organize, promote and finance progovernment trade unions and of placing
 under surveillance trade union officials responsible for strikes.
 By September 1992, eight firms were operating in export processing zones. The
 firms receive tax concessions but operate under the same labor laws in effect for
 other Nicaraguan companies.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there is no evidence that it was practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.--Children under the age of 14 le-
 gally are not permitted to work. Although the Ministry of Labor rarely enforces it,
 the child labor law is generally observed in the small modern sector of the economy;
 however, young street vendors and windshield cleaners ply their trade in Managua
 and children frequently work on family farms at an earlier age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Over the objections of the labor representa-
 tives, sectoral minimum wages were set in mid-1991 by a commission made up of
 representatives from government, labor, and the private sector. Enforcement is lax,
 however, and many workers are paid less than the minimum wage. The labor
 groups argued that the minimum wage rates were inadequate given the high cost
 of living. According to a July 1991 estimate by the Government's National Commis-
 sion on the Standard of Living, the minimum wage does not provide a family of four
 with the income to meet its basic needs. In September 1992, the Permanent Work-
 ers Central (CPT) the democratic labor umbrella group, issued a public manifesto
 demanding that the Government immediately implement a general wage increase
 geared to the cost of living.
 The Constitution specifies an 8-hour workday in a workweek of 48 hours with 1
 day of rest. Health and safety standards are a so provided for by the Constitution.
 The Ministry of Labor's Office of Hygiene and Occupational Security is responsible
 for setting, and verifying compliance with, health and safety standards. Although
 extensive, these standards are not strictly enforced due to an insufficient number
 of inspectors.
