NICARAGUA
The 1991 State Department report continues the encouraging improvements over earlier years, while retaining subtler indicia of bias which distinguish the treatment of Nicaragua from that of other Central American nations, in particular Guatemala and El Salvador.
Viewed against a backdrop of prior State Department reporting on Nicaragua, the report appears to reflect the altered political landscape since President Viol eta Chamorro's defeat of Sand ini sta incumbent Daniel Ortega in 1990. 1991 marked the first full year of the Chamorro administration, which was supported by the United States as a necessary alternative, given the inability of its proxy forces, the contras, to achieve a military victory over the Sandinista government. However, President Chamorro's decision to retain Sandinista General Humberto Ortega as head of the army upset the Bush administration.
The political bias exhibited in this year's report is in many respects a continuation of its uneven assessments throughout the year. Although much of the earlier commentary and criticism were accurate, they were often one-sided, attacking the Sandinistas while neglecting other sources of abuses. Not surprisingly then, the State Department carefully crafts the message that the Sandinista-led armed forces are sovereign, "a state within a state," to quote, as the State Department does, an OAS report on Nicaragua.
It should be recalled, however, that the problem of military resistance to civilian control is not unique to Nicaragua. Within Central America, Guatemala and El Salvador present two well-documented examples of military impunity at the expense of civilian authority. Nonetheless, the report's black and white portrayal of the Nicaraguan situation is not mirrored in reports on these countries. In discussing the balance of power between the militaries in Guatemala and El Salvador and the civilian governments, it mentions mitigating circumstances. In Guatemala, for example, it says the security forces report to a civilian and praises presidential initiatives to assert control over the military. Regarding El Salvador, die report is careful to point out that the security
235
Nicaragua
forces report to a Ministry official. These steps toward democracy have made virtually no dent in military impunity in these countries; if they are nevertheless to be included, this should reflect evenhanded reporting practices. Factors such as the drastically scaled-down Nicaraguan army, now under one-third of its 1990 inauguration day size is not mentioned in the report. President Chamorro's changes to the army's organization, giving her the right to make appointments to the four top military posts, and prohibiting army members from civilian positions or political party leadership, are nowhere found in the Nicaragua discussion. Instead, the report notes only Chamorro administration reforms over the police forces, and intones that the army "took no similar steps" to respond to human rights charges. Under the circumstances, it appears that the Nicaragua report, albeit improved, continues to serve separate policy objectives; in this case, a desire to criticize the Sandinistas while minimizing the responsibility of civilian leadership.
The report uses telling qualifiers in its references to local human rights groups, which are the source of much of its information on critical issues such as political killings. The Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights (CENIDH), headed by a Sandinista, is "pro-Sandinista," while the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) is "independent," though the latter, as the report acknowledges elsewhere, has received U.S. funding since 1987.
The report contains commendable detail on the violence committed by the armed forces or Sandinista militants against demobilized contras. It notes that 45 of the 52 contras killed from January through October were attributed to Sandinista Front supporters, who despite their civilian status are grouped with their governmental counterparts. If such persons are in fact operating in concert with or at the behest of state agents, then the government cannot escape responsibility for their paramilitary actions. However, the report's treatment unnecessarily departs from its usual practice of distinguishing between private and official action and conducting a further analysis to determine whether a factual connection exists. We concur with the State Department that the police forces' failure to act against political violence, whatever the source, is a major human rights problem in Nicaragua.
236
Nicaragua
Indeed, official failure to investigate and prosecute recontra violence against civilian targets contributes to many Nicaraguans' sense that government institutions have not yet supplanted or deterred violence as a means of settling political conflict. The report compounds this perception, linking the recontras' illegitimate tactics with their political demands:
. . . "recontras" conducted several armed attacks to press demands that the Government comply with promises made to the [contras] at the time of demobilization. In making these demands, the recontras echoed calls by other demobilized [Nicaraguan Resistance] combatants for improved security guarantees and in the face of continued harassment by the police, military, and armed Sandinista militants, and they also urged the Government to keep its promise to provide farmland to former combatants.
By subsuming discussion of recontra violence, which includes attacks on civilian targets, within the framework of political grievances, the State Department abdicates its responsibility to articulate the elementary distinction between an objective and the means employed to achieve it. That the report briefly mentions the attacks only to catalogue asserted government and Sandinista abuses suggests that political bias colors its human rights reporting.
The report does not mention the United States' failure to support financially the Chamorro administration's disarmament program which included purchasing arms from civilians in order to destroy them. This program has been thought necessary since many Sandinista supporters as well as rebel fighters retained arms after the peace accord. However, according to Americas Watch, the United States has apparently been loath to fund the buy-back program on the ground that the Sandinistas would benefit disproportionately. Ideally, this program should be designed and monitored to minimize the potential for evasion through hoarding or repurchase, with the sale proceeds, of arms by any party. However, failure to disarm is almost a guarantee of continued violence.
237
Nicaragua
Therefore, the State Department's concern over a potential economic windfall to Sandinista supporters does not justify opposition to a program aimed at replacing means of violence with means of sustenance.
The report is highly critical of the police investigation of former rebel commander Enrique Bermudez' murder in February. However, it fails to mention the United States' own sluggish response to the government's request for specific information and documents, made in April. Americas Watch reports that as of late June, Nicaraguan officials had received none of the information they sought. This strange episode recapitulated another exchange in February, when U.S. officials stated that they possessed "heavy circumstantial evidence" implicating the top army hierarchy to Bermudez' murder, then refused to identify the information or share it with the Chamorro government.
As it did last year, the report devotes almost the entire section on disappearances to ongoing discovery of clandestine gravesites containing victims killed, primarily by Sandinista soldiers, during the contra war. This year's discussion repeats the implication that these gravesites may contain the key to determining the fate of up to 1,000 persons still unaccounted for after the war. In fact, ANPDH, the U.S.-funded human rights group most involved in the investigation and exhumation of these sites, has so far documented a total of approximately 95 victims since the first revelations in 1990. Ninety of these are attributed to state security agents, and five to insurgent forces. No one can tell how many more graves or victims will be discovered, or their killers' identities, but the report's innuendo is not supportable.
When compared with the Guatemala report, the treatment of disappearances in Nicaragua is especially revealing of the report's bias. Guatemala's judicial forensic authorities reported the discovery in 1991 of more than 100 clandestine cemeteries containing remains of human rights victims believed to have "disappeared." Guatemala, not incidentally, now has the third largest number of unresolved "disappearances" of all nations in the world, according to the United Nations. Yet the Guatemala discussion of disappearances neglects even to mention these discoveries of clandestine graves, let alone highlight
238
Nicaragua
their significance. (The cemeteries are briefly mentioned in another portion of the Guatemala report, concerning the Guatemalan authorities' attitude towards investigations of human rights, as follows: "Some foreign groups took part in the location and exhumation of clandestine cemeteries.")
The State Department should have consulted other sources regarding the remaining Nicaraguan "disappeared." According to Americas Watch, the CENIDH has compiled documentation of 900 cases of kidnapping by the insurgent forces, while Witness for Peace, a U.S.-based group operating in Nicaragua, reports 29 persons kidnapped by the contras and still unaccounted for, and an additional 33 cases not previously reported. Another group, the Central American Commission on Human Rights, reporting on the thousands of Nicaraguans who disappeared during the contra war, stated that most of the reports pointed to the rebels, who operated clandestine prisons in Honduras, a major rebel staging area.
Another concern warrants comment. Several of the persons responsible for particular abductions and/or deaths have now been identified, yet they continue to serve in the security forces. Although the report did not say so, the Chamorro government intends no prosecutions, taking the position that the crimes unearthed along with the victims are covered by an amnesty passed in 1990. The amnesty itself is deplorable, but it does not necessarily prevent removal of known violators from government posts. This step, at a minimum, should be taken in order to limit the potential for further abuse and to rebut the dangerous presumption of impunity fostered by the amnesty.
The report does not acknowledge that former rebel combatants were particular targets of arbitrary arrest. According to the annual report of the OAS Inter-American Commission of Human Rights, authorities received complaints concerning 186 arbitrary arrests of demobilized contras.
239
Nicaragua
The report's mention of de facto gender discrimination against women merits commendation; though brief, it succinctly describes a set of problems often neglected in the past.
The discussion of worker rights omits one serious incident, reported by Americas Watch, involving police opening fire on striking workers. The workers, who had abandoned unproductive negotiations with the management of the state-run sugar mill, were stopped by police en route to Managua, where they planned to talk with government officials. The police apparently intended to get the workers to return to the mill, but an argument ensued and the police ultimately shot at the group, killing three persons.
The discussion of labor unions also contains biased characterizations: while pro-Sandinista are identified as such, pro-government {i.e. non-Sandinista) unions are "independent," despite their open allegiance. In addition, the report employs a broad brush: "Sandinista workers typically did not have majority worker support for the work stoppages but used intimidation and threats of violence to prevent workers from entering the workplace." It supplies no evidence to support this allegation.
The report also neglects to mention the improper pressure wielded by the Bush administration to force the government of Nicaragua to withdraw its claim under the World Court judgment entitling it to reparations from the United States. The court's order stemmed from its finding that the United States had violated international law by maintaining its proxy war against Nicaragua and mining its harbors in 1984. The United States, which had refused to recognize the court's jurisdiction over this dispute, has made clear to Nicaragua that its aid package depended on withdrawal of the claim. Nicaragua, its economy in shambles in the wake of war, embargo and failed development policies, uUimately withdrew the claim in September 1991 in hope of obtaining United States reconstruction assistance.
240
