Nicaragua
The State Department's report on Nicaragua is a generally accurate catalogue of human rights abuses, reflecting a trend toward improved reporting. However, the political bias which has undermined prior reports continues to characterize the 1992 edition in several important respects.
As prior critiques have noted, the State Department's reporting on neighboring Central American nations such as Guatemala and El Salvador differs from that on Nicaragua in ways that reveal occasional inconsistencies in the Department's approach. The major flaw in the report is its continued focus on alleged Sandinista conduct, often without sufficient attention to the degree to which those responsible may be fairly characterized as state agents. The problem arises in two fashions: first, insufficient recognition of the government's responsibility for acts committed by the armed forces, and second, a failure to distinguish between government forces (i.e. the Popular Sandinista Army) and supporters of the Sandinista party. This unfortunately detracts from the report's effectiveness in analyzing government human rights practices, which should be the focus of the discussion. In fact, the last year has seen the increased divergence of positions and action between the army and police on the one hand and the Sandinista party on the other. Actions taken by security forces at the government's behest in 1992, for example, clearing demonstrations and removing families from land, underline a continuing need to distinguish between them. Indeed, one of the most pressing human rights concerns in Nicara-
gua during 1992 was police violence in the course of increasingly frequent interventions in demonstrations and labor and land conflicts.
For example, the report's introductory section includes the statement, repeated almost verbatim from last year's report, that "Nicaragua's security forces continued in 1992 to be led by Sandinista appointees who operated with substantial autonomy." "Substantial autonomy" is never explained and lends itself to broader interpretations than would be justified by the reality in Nicaragua. Later, the report notes that the government made substantial changes in top police posts in September, which would seem to undermine such autonomy. The apparent contradiction is never addressed. Instead, it sets the tone for the entire report, which often indiscriminately lumps together police, army and "Sandinista" conduct, without attempting to distinguish those incidents for which the civilian government should be held responsible. This technique creates, at best, confusion and, at worst, the misleading impression that "Sandinistas" are responsible for most of the human rights abuses that occur in Nicaragua.
As in other nations, the civilian leadership must accept responsibility for the actions of its armed forces. While the dominion of members of the Sandinista party over the military and police forces continues to pose a challenge to the human rights situation in Nicaragua, it is important to note that this reflects a decision taken by President Chamorro in the name of post-war reconciliation. In
266
Nicaragua
view of the government's tolerance of Sandinista leadership of the armed forces, the government must be held responsible for human rights abuses carried out by the police and military. The State Department does acknowledge the governmental failure to effectively prosecute official violence, but conveys the impression that the government's responsibility only begins with prosecution of offenses, when it has an affirmative obligation to try to prevent abuses.
When assigning responsibility to "Sandinistas" however, the report takes the opposite approach, choosing to treat all "Sandinistas" equally despite differences in their institutional affiliations. The discussion of political and other extrajudicial killings is one example. The report muddies an already complicated situation by failing to distinguish between killings committed by active members of the police or army, for which the government should be held responsible, and thQse committed by former members of the police or army or others not currently associated with the government forces. While the government's failure to prosecute or investigate cases in the latter category is, of course, noteworthy, the report should have been more rigorous in treating these categories separately, or provided a reasoned basis for treating them as equivalents.
The discussion of political killings is also misleading in its overwhelming focus on killings of former contra rebels, despite a lack in many cases of evidence to suggest that government forces were responsible. The section includes former contras killed by other former contras in its tally of contra killings, without any dis-
cussion of the political motivation or existence of government involvement. The purpose of this inclusion appears to be simply to support a larger number of contra killings, apparently calculated to further the report's single-minded anti-Sandinista focus.
In light of the degree of violence by armed groups comprising, respectively, former government soldiers and rebel fighters, much of which occurs in the form of armed combat between the former rebels {"recontras") and government forces, the report should have acknowledged that many deaths, of contras as well as others, result from combat situations, and not targeted killings. The impression given by the report is that all of the contra killings were political or targeted extrajudicial executions. Unfortunately, the war's formal end has not coincided with a cessation of hostilities. The Tripartite Commission set up by President Chamorro to investigate "postwar" violence (not simply deaths of former contras, as the report indicates) announced in early 1993 that it had received reports of 627 political murders occurring since June 1 990. The Commission found that some 179 of the victims were former contras and their families, 189 were police and army personnel, and 129 were Sandinista sympathizers. Even without the benefit of the Commission's final report, the State Department should have acknowledged the continuation of armed hostilities and given a brief account of the toll. This would have provided a helpful context for the human rights discussion in the rest of the report.
The report's treatment of the 1990 killing of highschool student Jean Paul
267
Nicaragua
Genie bears mention. While there is substantial evidence that bodyguards accompanying Defense Minister Humberto Ortega shot Genie as he drove in proximity to the military caravan, there is no serious allegation that they targeted Genie beforehand. Indeed, the killing appears to have resulted from an egregious overreaction to Genie's passing the military vehicles. In this sense, it is not widely illustrative of human rights abuses in Nicaragua, although the failure of prosecution is unfortunately all too common. The report should clarify the circumstances of the case, as well as the particular basis for its inclusion again this year, which would appear to be the continued impunity from prosecution enjoyed by those responsible.
After noting that there were no reported cases of "disappearances" during 1992, the report goes on to state that "(clandestine graveyards dating back from the Sandinista era (1979-1990) continued to be discovered in 1992." The 1992 report does not, as did prior editions, link such discoveries to "disappearances" by suggesting that they explain the fate of persons considered "disappeared" in prior years. In this regard, it is noteworthy that similar discoveries in Guatemala --the site of many "disappearances" and a good deal of forensic excavation -- are not mentioned or cited in that country's report as a potential key to resolving "disappearance" cases. The State Department's discussion would have been improved by a focus on the Nicaraguan government's action or inaction in 1992 in response to such discoveries or to the investigative efforts from which they resulted.
The report correctly notes that decision-making by the Nicaraguan Supreme Court suffers as a result of its rough political balance and polarization. As the report notes, Nicaraguan law requires a six-vote majority to decide a matter before the Supreme Court. Five of the nine Supreme Court justices are Sandinista party members while four are not. The obvious implication is that the judges -- in both the majority and minority -- vote along party lines, but the report seems to shade this conclusion, stating only that Sandinista judicial appointees are said to be influenced by their political beliefs. The State Department would do well to assess objectively the influence of political opinion and affiliations on the part of all judges, not simply those appointed by the Sandinistas. By contrast, the State Department's report on El Salvador accurately notes the high degree of political influence on the judiciary, but refrains correctly from suggesting that only the • majority ARENA party, which exercises great influence over the Supreme Court, is responsible for the distorting role of politics in jurisprudence.
In addition, where the report alludes to the possibility of politically motivated decisions, it should provide sufficient context and analysis to support an independent judgment of the situation. For example, the report mentions the Supreme Court ruling that procedural steps taken by the legislative leadership violated the Constitution. The report notes only that opposition leaders charged that the High Court had been influenced by pressure from the executive branch; it does not state that the Supreme Court majority included justices from both political blocs, making the implied political motivation
268
Nicaragua
less clear. In this regard, the State Department should take particular pains to spell out the basis of such accusations, since there have been numerous reports of its own attempts to pressure the Chamorro government to distance itself from the Sandinistas in Nicaraguan political affairs. Lastly, the report might have noted President Chamorro's scheduled appointment in late 1992 of four new Supreme Court justices.
The report's discussion of arbitrary arrests should have included one important incident from mid-1992. In Matagal-pa, police and army personnel removed families from farms belonging to a rural workers' association in order to make way for former owners and agribusiness ventures. The security forces came into conflict with some 40 families in residence there. Reports indicate that many were arrested without judicial order and held illegally for more than a month. The troops reportedly also burned crops and threatened with death those who would attempt to return.
In an improvement, this year's report eliminates some, though not all, of the biased descriptions of local human rights groups that were included in prior years' reports. The ready acknowledgement that the Permanent Commission for Human Rights (CPDH) and the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH) receive U.S. government funds is an improvement. However, the report's assertion, in particular regarding ANPDH, that U.S. funding dates only to 1992 conflicts with reports of U.S. assistance as early as 1987.
The report's discussion of discrimina-
tion against women and its emphasis of this issue in the introductory section should be commended. However, the discussion of civil liberties should have made mention of the Penal Code amendments passed by the National Assembly in June, which penalize any person who "induces, promotes or practices in a scandalous manner sexual intercourse between people of the same sex." The statutory language appears to penalize speech without apparent limitation. Thus for instance, the dissemination of health and sex information might be punishable as the promotion of homosexual intercourse.
The report's coverage of strikes and protests ignores certain significant incidents and does not fully explain the status of workers in Nicaragua, which has changed radically over the past few years. In addition to the incidents described in the report, various labor groups have attempted to assert their rights and been met with indifference or violence on the part of the authorities. For example, in July, telecommunications workers went out on strike, citing management promises that were broken. After the strike was declared illegal, union leaders were summoned by management and fired after they refused to quit the union. After judicial inaction on a union complaint alleging interference with the rights to collective bargaining, only a hunger strike by workers served to resolve the problem.
269
