 NICARAGUA
 Nicaragua is a constitutional democracy, with a directly elected president, vice
 president, and unicameral legislature. President Arnoldo Aleman was elected in a
 tree and fair election in 1996, defeating his closest competitor, Daniel Ortega of the
 Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN). The Supreme Electoral Council is an
 independent fourth branch of government. The Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary; however, the judiciary is at times susceptible to political influ-
 ence.
 The President is the supreme chief of national defense and security forces. Presi-
 dent Aleman established the first-ever civilian Defense Ministry upon his inaugura-
 tion. The Ministry of Government oversees the National Police, which is charged for-
 mally with internal security. However, the police share this responsibility with the
 army in rural areas. Some members of the security forces continued to commit seri-
 ous human rights abuses.
 Nicaragua is an extremely poor country, with an estimated per capita income of
 $441. The economy is predominantly agricultural, dependent on sugar, beef, coffee,
 and seafood exports, with some light manufacturing. Hurricane Mitch had a dev-
 astating effect on the country, including its economic infrastructure. The economy
 
 
 706
 rew an estimated 4 percent in 1998-the fifth year of growth after more than a
 ecade of contraction. The inflation rate rose to 18 percent, reflecting hurricane
 damage to the agricultural sector. The unemployment rate was estimated officially
 at 13 percent. Private investment increased, but continues to be hindered by unre-
 solved property disputes and unclear land titles stemming from massive
 confiscations by the Sandinista government of the 1980's. The country continued to
 have a precarious balance of payments position and remained heavily dependent on
 foreign assistance.
 The Government's human rights record improved in a few areas, but some serious
 problems remained. Some members of the security forces committed extrajudicial
 killings. Police beat and otherwise abused detainees. There were allegations of tor-
 ture by the authorities. Prison and police holding cell conditions remain harsh. The
 security forces arbitrarily arrested and detained citizens, although the Government
 effectively punished some of those who committed abuses. Long delays in, trials and
 lengthy pretrial detention remain problems, and the judiciary suffers from a large
 case backlog. The judiciary also is subject at times to political influence and corrup-
 tion. The Supreme Court continued its structural reform program for the judicial
 system. A new Organic Law for the judiciary, intended to address many of these
 problems, was scheduled to enter into effect in January 1999. However, the weak
 judiciary continued to hamper prosecution of human rights abusers in some cases.
 Most of the human rights abusers cited by the Tripartite Commission in well-docu-
 mented reports remain unpunished, and few of the Commission's recommendations
 -have been followed by the Government. Discrimination against women and indige-
 nous people is a problem. Violence against women and children, including domestic
 abuse and rape, remained a problem. Child prostitution increased, and child labor
 remained a problem.
 FSLN leaders continued to threaten, in speeches and public statements, the use
 of violence for political ends, but unlike 1997 there were no violent confrontations
 between the FSLN and the security forces. However, Sandinistas were among those
 involved in a violent confrontation in May between striking doctors and the police.
 The civil war formally concluded in June 1990 with the demobilization of the Nic-
 araguan Resistance (RN, or "Contras"). However, the rule of law and basic infra-
 structure do not extend to all rural areas. Despite the Government's disarmament
 campaigns, many citizens, especially in rural areas, are heavily armed. Marauding
 criminal gangs, some of which claimed political agendas, continued to be a problem
 in the mountainous regions of the north, as well as on the Atlantic Coast.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings by government officials. However, there were several instances of
 extrajudicial killings by police attempting to arrest suspects, of suspects while in de-
 tention, and by army members during operations in rural areas.
 The Inspector General's office of the National Police reported 23 instances in
 which police officers killed alleged criminals, usually while attempting to arrest
 them. Police Inspector General Eva Sacasa stated that the police themselves are
 often in great danger when apprehending heavily armed members of criminal gangs.
 Nevertheless, the authorities deemed 11 of these killings improper and sanctioned
 11 officers as a result.
 In February police officers shot and killed a woman and a 12-year-old girl who
 allegedly were stealing beans in a rural Jinotegan town. Two policemen had accom-
 panied a farmer to a site where he said armed bandits were planning to kidnap his
 son. On arrival, the police spotted two figures in the dark. After firing warning
 shots skyward, the police lowered their sights and fired again, killing the fleeing fe-
 males, whom they had mistaken for the kidnapers. A court tried the policemen and
 a jury found them innocent.
 On December 31, 1997, in Quilali, chief detective Marvin Maradiaga Cordoba ap-
 proached his wife, Saturnina Blandon Negra, as she walked home. He struck her
 in the head with the butt of a gun, then dragged her to her mother's house. She
 arrived unconscious at the house, where she spent the night with no medical atten-
 tion. The next day she was taken to a hospital, where she died 3 months later. De-
 spite the public nature of the crime and multiple eyewitnesses, local authorities re-
 fused to apprehend or prosecute Maradiaga. Eventually, police Inspector General
 Sacasa expelled him from the force and issued a warrant for his arrest, but by this
 time Maradiaga apparently. had fled the country, and has not been seen since.
 Sacasa also demoted and transferred Quilali police chief Cairo David Lopez in con-
 nection with the case.
 
 
 On June 30, Judge Maribel Mena exonerated six army members of the May 15
 killings near La Dalia of three alleged members of a pro-Sandinista armed group,
 ruling that the three men were armed and perished in a firefight. Family members
 of the dead, and the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights (ANPDH), asserted
 that the army lured the men to the scene, then tortured and murdered them. Two
 separate examinations--one of the bodies themselves, and one of photographs of the
 victims-led to conflicting conclusions concerning the circumstances surrounding the
 deaths. Mena based her ruling on the opinion of a forensic specialist, whose review
 of the photographic evidence led him to believe the army's version of events. The
 family members and the ANPDH believed postmortem examinations of the actual
 bodies by a general practitioner, which reported cigarette burns, knife wounds, and
 crushed testicles among the victims, indicating torture. The prosecutor appealed
 Mena's decision, calling for exhumation and an autopsy by a third pathologist to
 clarify the contradictory results of the first two examinations, but the appeal was
 denied. The army's cooperation with civilian authorities in this case was signifi-
 cantly better than in the past.
 In February a judge in Managua sentenced three policemen to prison for their
 role in the death of detainee Roberto Jose Murillo on January 5. The policemen
 claimed that Murillo sustained an injury resulting in peritonitis after falling from
 a wall while trying to escape arrest for theft. The judge dismissed this possibility
 after hearing testimony from expert witnesses and attributed Murillo's injury and
 subsequent death to beating by police at the time of arrest, citing eyewitness testi-
 mony.
 In May a soldier killed a local Miskito Indian in a one-on-one confrontation in
 Bismuna, 85 miles north of the Atlantic port of Puerto Cabezas. The cause of the
 confrontation was unexplained. Following this incident, armed Amerindian groups
 operating as Yatama (see Section 5) and indicating that they had taken up arms
 to protest government neglect and mismanagement in the Atlantic coastal area suc-
 cessfully assaulted the small military outpost at Bismuna. The attackers captured
 7 soldiers, including the lieutenant in charge, and wounded 3 others, at the 12-man
 outpost. According to the localpolice chief, the attackers numbered more than 150.
 The Yatama fighters released the seven captured soldiers a week later in exchange
 for the government release of several of their men who had been jailed following
 an unrelated incident.
 There were further developments in the 1997 "Wamblan case" in which 16-year-
 old Irma Lopez was killed, after allegedly being raped, by an army patrol. Judge
 Adriana Molina exonerated patrol leader Gabino Gomez, who previously had been
 cited by the Tripartite Commission for abuses, based on his testimony that he di-
 rected the ambush from a separate location and therefore was not present at the
 moment of Lopez's murder. Judge Molina then convicted, in absentia, five of the sol-
 diers. According to army officials, the soldiers deserted and cannot be located. In
 September the Appeals Court denied an appeal by the defense, but by year's end
 the authorities still had not located the fugitive soldiers.
 In February a court sentenced four policemen to prison for negligence in a Novem-
 ber 1997 incident that led to the death of 23-year-old Jose Javier Martinez. Accord-
 ing to press accounts, Martinez was arrested following a drunken robbery attempt,
 then taken to the Managua 2nd precinct headquarters and jailed. In an attempt to
 subdue the drunk and disorderly Martinez, police hung him by one wrist with hand-
 cuffs. They reportedly left him hanging for 16 hours despite the prisoner's pleas to
 be let down. Martinez eventually died in that position. The court sentenced the offi-
 cer on duty at the time of the death to 3 years in prison for negligence and sen-
 tenced two other officers to 1 year each.
 To address the issue of unresolved deaths of former Contras, President Violetta
 Chamorro established the Tripartite Commission in 1992. The Commission was
 composed of representatives from the Government, the Catholic Church, and the
 OAS International Support and Verification Commission (CIAV). It concluded its re-
 view in October 1996 and turned 83 human rights cases involving 164 allegedly
 murdered former combatants, as well as 181 specific recommendations, over to the
 Government for followup. In 1997 the military judicial system, which is charged
 with investigating abuses committed in the course of the performance of official du-
 ties by soldiers and police, reported that it had complied with all but one of the 62
 recommendations (from 42 cases) corresponding to its jurisdiction. However, only
 one soldier and five policemen cited by the Commission ever served a partial or
 whole sentence. Some human rights observers described the military judicial sys-
 tem's findings as an effort to maintain impunity of human rights abusers within the
 ranks of the army and police.
 There were no further developments in the 1997 La Patriota case, wherein the
 army killed five members of a criminal band as they slept.
 
 
 708
 There were new developments in the 1996 case of Mario Amador Duarte, who was
 killed while in detention in Nueva Segovia. A civilian court tried Duarte's alleged
 killer, voluntary policeman Juan Isidro Flores, and a jury found him innocent.
 On August 8, members of a Sandinista-affiliated agricultural cooperative attacked
 a group of squatters at the Las Plazuelas Ranch in- Chontales department, leaving
 three persons dead and seven wounded. The squatters included former Contras and
 former members of the Sandinista Popular Army. Based on witness accounts, the
 ANPDH alleged the involvement of a number of voluntary policemen in the attack.
 The police arrested 10 voluntary policemen in the killings, of whom 5 went to trial.
 A court found all 5 not guilty of the deaths and released them. Although the Gov-
 ernment also issued arrest warrants for the two alleged ringleaders of the attack,
 both were still at large at year's end. The title situation of the land in question is
 complex, with the Sandinista cooperative, the squatters, the Government, and two
 foreign citizens all arguing that they have a claim to the ranch. The fact that the
 squatters who were attacked included both former Contras and former Sandinistas
 appeared to indicate that the incident was a land tenure dispute and not a political
 matter. Las Plazuelas was in the possession of the Sandinista cooperative at year's
 end, but the title issue was not resolved.
 There was no progress in the case of former army major Frank Ibarra, who was
 sentenced in absentia in 1993 to 20 years' imprisonment for the November 1992
 murder of Dr. Arges Sequeira Mangas, president of the Association of Nicaraguan
 Confiscated Property Owners. In a report released in February, the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) concluded that the Government violated
 Sequeira's human rights by denying him the rights to life and protection under the
 law. The IACHR recommended that the Government find and punish Ibarra and co-
 conspirators Lieuenant Diego Espinosa and Captain German Lacayo Guerrero for
 their roles in the murder. It also exhorted the Government to investigate and pun-
 ish members of the police who failed to execute the judiciary's orders for Ibarra's
 arrest. At year's end, Ibarra remained a fugitive from justice.
 In 1997 the Government negotiated the disbandment and disarmament of over
 1,200 members, a majority of them former Contras, of the "Northern Front 3-80"
 and promised them food, clothing, seeds, and small plots of land. It also disarmed
 423 members of the pro-Sandinista "Andres Castro United Front," or FUAC. Despite
 these successful disarmaments, armed bands, including former members of the 3-
 80 front and FUAC engaged in murder, kidnaping for ransom, and armed robbery
 in the north and north-central regions. The FUAC members alleged that they were
 acting in opposition to the Aleman administration, and FSLN leaders made positive
 reference to the FUAC activities in public statements. Law enforcement groups and
 political analysts described the political motivations as tenuous and stated that
 most of these actions were purely criminal in nature.
 ,There were no new developments related to the February 1991 killing of former
 Contra commander Enrique Bermudez.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law makes the use of torture a punishable crime; however, there was one credi-
 ble allegation of torture by the authorities in the La Dalia killings of three members
 of an armed group by the army (see Section l.a.). There were credible reports that
 police beat or otherwise physically mistreated detainees, often to obtain confessions.
 The ANPDH received 58 complaints of torture or degrading treatment by the au-
 thorities; 52 against the National Police and 6 against the military. The ANDPH
 and other human rights groups forwarded complaints of human rights abuses di-
 rectly to police Inspector General Sacasa, who proved willing to prosecute abusers.
 Her office recorded 76 complaints of physical abuse by police, including the 52 sub-
 mitted by the ANPDH, and found 16 to have merit. The Inspector General sanc-
 tioned 16 officers in these cases.
 The police Inspector General's office and the Ministry of Government's Office of
 Civil Inspection for Professional Responsibility investigated allegations of abuse and
 the Inspector General's office sanctioned the offenders in many cases. However, a
 degree of impunity persisted. Inadequate budget support for professional training,
 salaries and benefits, and proper equipment and supplies also hampered efforts to
 improve police performance. Nonetheless, the police were provided with some train-
 ing during the year, and salaries were increased.
 In January human rights organizations accused Captain Luciano Hurtado, the
 Bluefields police officer reported to have subjected 14-year-old Juan Carlos Garcia
 to electrical shock while in detention in 1997 on Corn Island, of an additional 17
 instances of abuse, illegal detention, and physical mistreatment of detainees. De-
 spite repeated requests and documented cases of abuse that the ANDPH presented
 
 
 709
 to the police, the authorities never formally charged Hurtado with any crime or neg-
 ligence.
 Following the demotion of Quilali police chief Lopez (see Section L.a.), Orlando
 Siles Gonzalez was named acting chief in his place. In August a drunken Siles
 walked to local resident Reynaldo Figueroa's house and fired four shots, hitting
 Figueroa three times in the arm and wounding 15-year-old bystander Jose Alejandro
 Ortez as well. Siles fled and remained at large. There was an outstanding warrant
 for his arrest at year's end.
 The Office of Civil Inspection for Professional Responsibility, under the auspices
 of the Ministry of Government, is responsible for monitoring allegations of illegal
 detention and police abuse and forwarding complaints received to the police Inspec-
 tor General for followup action. The office received 388 formal complaints during the
 year. Its effectiveness was limited by a small bud et and a small staff. Police In-
 spector General Sacasa received 870 complaints of abuse by police officers during
 the yer, including the complaints forwarded by the Office of Civil Inspection for
 Professional Responsibility, and found 309 of these cases to have merit. She sanc-
 tioned 417 officers in connection with human rights abuse. Of those sanctioned, 43
 officers were dishonorably discharged, 100 were remanded to the courts, and 21
 were jailed; the rest received lesser punishments, including demotion and loss of
 pay.
 The police clashed with violent strikers in May; 10 persons were injured, includ-
 ing 7 police officers (see Sections 2.b. and 6.a.).
 Prison conditions remained harsh. The prison system is overcrowded and under-
 funded, with medical attention virtually nonexistent and malnutrition a constant
 problem. According to government statistics, prisons had a total inmate population
 of 5,570 in September, up from 3,946 in 1997. Prison officials calculated that the
 daily expenditure per prisoner for food was about $1.00 (11 cordobas) and reported
 that the annual budget for food remained constant in spite of the growing prison
 population. Average daily caloric intake remained at 750 to 800 calories, well below
 the 1,800 calories per ay recommended by the United Nations. However, many
 prisoners received additional food from visiting family and friends. Medical care
 available to prisoners fell far short of basic needs. Lack of available medical care
 led prisons to release ill prisoners convicted of lesser offenses. Some prisons and
 many police holding cells were dark, poorly ventilated, and unhygienic. At the Blue-
 fields prison, there were only 4 showers and 4 toilets for 97 prisoners.
 As of September, 8.5 percent of the prison population was between the ages of
 15 and 18, compared with 10.4 percent in 1997. Youths were housed in the same
 prisons as adults due to lack of juvenile detention centers, although in different
 wings of the prisons. Only Managua has a separate prison for women; outside the
 Managua area, women were housed in separate wings in prison facilities and were
 guarded by female custodians.
 Conditions in jails and holding cells also remained harsh. Police station holding
 cells were overcrowded by an average of 30 percent. Suspects often were left in
 these cells during their trials, since budgetary shortfalls often restricted the use of
 fuel for frequent transfers to distant courtrooms. At the Corn Island jail, six cells
 holding six detainees each often were filled to capacity. Detainees occasionally were
 released when the authorities no longer could feed them.
 Several churches and national and international nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) donate foodstuffs, beds, and medicine to the prison system to help alleviate
 shortfalls, which remain severe. Prison guards received human rights training from
 NGO's and the Catholic Church and generally treated prisoners well.
 The Government permits prison visits by independent human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention by the po-
 lice appeared to have occurred less frequently than in the previous year. The Police
 Functions Law requires police to obtain a warrant prior to detaining a suspect and
 to notify family members within 24 hours of the detainee's whereabouts. However,
 the police rarely complied with this law. Detainees do not have the right to an attor-
 ney until they have been charged formally with a crime. Local human rights groups
 are critical of the law for providing inadequate judicial oversight of police arrests.
 The 1995 constitutional reforms reduced from 72 to 48 hours the time police may
 hold a suspect legally before they must bring him before a judge to decide if charges
 should be brought. The judge must then either order the accused released or trans-
 ferred to prison. Due to lack of prison space, there were over 1,000 prisoners in
 badly overcrowded police holding cells, some of whom were being held illegally be-
 yond the 48-hour deadline.
 Lengthy pretrial detention also remained a problem. Contrary to law, more than
 one-third of prisoners had been jailed for 6 months or more without a trial. Many
 prisoners spend more than a year in jail without a trial.
 
 
 710
 The police Inspector General's office recorded 120 complaints of illegal detention
 and deemed 38 of these to have merit. The office sanctioned 40 officers in connection
 with these 38 cases. Some complaints came to the office directly, while others were
 made via human rights organizations such as the ANPDH and the Permanent Com-
 mission for Human Rights (CPDH). As in past years, incidents of arbitrary deten-
 tion were most common in Managua and in the rural northern and north-central
 regions, where much of the civil war was fought.
 Exile is not practiced. There were no reports of political violence against any citi-
 zens returning from civil war era self-imposed exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, the judiciary is still susceptible at times to political influence. The
 judiciary attempts to provide citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process, but
 is hampered in doing so by arcane legal codes, judges and lawyers who often lack
 sufficient training or education, and corruption. Judicial actions and findings report-
 edly often were influenced by judges' political sympathies or acceptance of bribes.
 Human rights and lawyers' groups complained about the delay of justice, sometimes
 for years, caused by judicial inaction. Among the most vocal critics of the judicial
 system were some of the judges themselves. In 1997 the Supreme Court removed
 57 judges and magistrates in a campaign to reduce incompetence and corruption in
 the judiciary. The court removed an additional 35 judges in 1998, bringing the total
 removed since the campaign began to 94-nearly one-third of the 300 judges in the
 system. The Judicial Inspector's office received 438 official complaints against law-
 yers, judges and judicial functionaries, a slight decrease from the 441 complaints re-
 ceived in 1997.
 The judicial system comprises both civil and military courts. The 12-member Su-
 preme Court is the systems highest court, and in addition to administering the judi-
 cial system, is also responsible for nominating all appellate and lower court judges.
 The Court is divided into specialized chambers on adnisttive, criminal, constitu-
 tional, and civil matters. Under the Law of the Child and Family, which took effect
 in November, crimes committed by and against juveniles are investigated by the At-
 torney General's office rather than thepolice. The 1994 Military Code requires the
 civilian court system to try members of the military charged with common crimes.
 A multiyear administration of justice reform program began in 1997. A new Judi-
 cial Organic Law, passed by the National Assembly in 1997 to overhaul the archaic
 structure of the court system, finally was signed by President Aleman in May and
 was to taie effect in January 1999. The new law contains a provision meant to es-
 tablish minimum professional standards for judicial appointees. The Supreme Court
 commission supervising the revision of the country's outdated criminal codes and
 procedures continued its work. Reform of these codes is intended to reduce judicial
 delays and resulting excessive pretrial detention. An important reform of the Attor-
 ney General's office and functions was simultaneously under way during the year.
 In criminal cases, the accused has the right to legal counsel, and defendants are
 presumed innocent until proven guilty. The presiding judge appoints attorneys from
 a standard list to represent indigent defendants, but, because they are not paid by
 the State, many attorneys have paid a fine of about $10.00 (100 cordobas) rather
 than represent such clients. This is no longer an option under the new Judicial Or-
 ganic Law. The new law includes provisions for the country's first public defender's
 office, which was expected to be operational in Managua in 1999.
 According to the ANPDH, approximately 90 percent of indigent defendants go to
 trial without an attorney to represent them. This contributes greatly t tohe slow
 pace ofjstice. Individuals without the means to contract private counsel are often
 forced to turn to law students or have no counsel at all. Under the Napoleonic legal
 system, a trial does not consist of a public hearing. Rather, there is a desk review
 by a magistrate of the accsed's ifile. An initial hearing usually is held within the
 constitutionally mandated 10 days. Although very simple cases or those with high
 profie or outside interest may be resolved quickly, many languish for months. Due
 to a lack of administrative coordination between judges and the penal system, many
 prisoners remained in prison after their release date.
 The country lacks an effective civil law system. As a result, cases more properiy
 handied in a civil proceeding often are transmuted into criminal proceedings. One
 party is then gffectively blackmailed, being jailed due to action by the party wield-
 ing greater influence with the judge. In addition, this heavy civil-based criminal
 caseload claims attention from an overburdened public prosecutor's office and di-
 verts resources that could be directed toward genuine criminal matters.
 There were no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbi     Wian tt rne  With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Consttuti.on provides that all persons have the right to privacy of their family and
 to the inviolability of their home, correspondence, and communications. It also re-
 
 
 quires warrants for searches of private homes and excludes from legal proceedings
 illegally seized letters, documents, and private papers. The Government generally
 respected these rights in practice, although in Sepher both the Vice President
 and the Controller General charged that their telephones were tapped.
 In November 1997, the National Assembly passed a law intended to resolve long-
 standing property disputes that stemmed from massive confiscations by the Sandi-
 nista government of the 1980's. The law's purpose is to implement President
 Aleman's 1996 campaign promise that the poor would receive titles to properties re-
 ceived during Sandinista-era land redistributions, and that wealthier beneficiaries
 either would have to pay for such properties or return them. The law suspended ju-
 dicial actions on property claims until new property courts offering mediation and
 arbitration procedures are established to expedite settlement of property disputes.
 However, the new property courts had not been created by year's end, and property
 claims that were pending for over 1 2 years remained suspended.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and a free press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. The pri-
 vately owned print media, the broadcast media, and academic circles freely and
 openly discussed diverse viewpoints in public discourse without government inter-
 ference.
 The news medium with the largest national audience is radio, but polls show that
 television is the primary source of news in the cities. Listeners receive a wide vari-
 ety of political viewpoints, especially on Managua's 65 radio stations. There are six
 television stations, two of which carry news programming with noticeable partisan
 political content. There is no official state censorship, nor is self-censorship prac-
 ticed.
 However, freedom of the press is potentially qualified by several constitutional
 provisions. The 1987 Constitution stipulates that citizens have the right to "accurate
 information," thereby providing an exception by which the freedom to publish infor-
 mation that the Government deems inaccurate could be abridged. Although the
 right to information cannot be subject to censorship, there is retroactive liability es-
 tablished by law, defined as a "social responsibility," implying the potential for sanc-
 tions against irresponsibility by the press. Although the legislature did not modify
 these provisions in the 1995 constitutional reforms, neither has the Government in-
 yoked these provisions to suppress the media.
 The Government does not restrict academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution recognizes
 the right to peaceful assembly without prior permission, and the Government gen-
 erally respects this right in practice. However, the Constitution also recognizes the
 right to public assembly, demonstration, and mobilization "in conformity with the
 law," and the law requires demonstrators to obtain permission for a rally or march
 by registering its planned size and location with the police. The authorities routinely
 granted such permission, but many groups chose not to register because, they
 claimed, the process was too cumbersome.
 Police clashed with striking public sector doctors and their supporters in street
 demonstrations in April and May. On May 11, violence broke out after the police,
 acting on the Government's instruction, moved to open roads the strikers had
 blocked. President Aleman met with strikers later the same day and ordered
 charges dropped against the 31 demonstrators arrested on public disorderliness and
 related charges. However, violence erupted again on May 12 when medical students
 and Sandinista activists blocked the road to the airport. When police attempted to
 reopen the road, a confrontation with protesters ensued in which 10 persons, includ-
 ing 7 police officers, were wounded, and 24 persons were arrested. The pro-Sandi-
 nista press claimed that the police had forcibly repressed the strikers, and the cen-
 trist press emphasized that some demonstrators had attacked police (also see Sec-
 tion 6.a.).
 The Constitution provides for the right to organize or affiliate with political par-
 ties, and the Government respects this right in practice. Opposition and independ-
 ent associations functioned freely without government interference or restriction.
 Private associations do not have legal status to conduct private fund raising or re-
 ceive public financial support until they receive this authorization from the National
 Assembly, which it routinely confers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right to travel and reside anywhere
 in the country and to enter and exit the country freely. The law requires citizens
 
 
 and residents to obtain an exit visa to leave the country, but immigration authori-
 ties routinely granted these for a small fee. The right of citizens to return to Nica-
 ragua is not established in the Constitution, but, in practice, the Government has
 not restricted anyone's return.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 Constitution provides for asylum, and refugees cannot, be expelled to the country
 that persecuted them. The issue of the provision of first asylum did not arise. There
 were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they feared perse-
 cution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised their right peacefully to change their government in free and
 fair national elections in 1996 held under the auspices of the Supreme Electoral
 Council (CSE), an independent branch of government. Over 90 percent of eligible
 voters registered, and 76 percent of eligible voters voted in 1996. Over 3,000 na-
 tional and international observers declared the elections free and fair, despite some
 logistical and organizational problems.
 The 1995 reforms to the 1987 Constitution established a more even distribution
 of power and authority among the four coequal branches of government. The execu-
 tive branch is headed by the President and a cabinet appointed by the President,
 who is both head of state and head of government, as well as supreme chief of the
 defense and security forces. The Vice President has no constitutionally mandated
 duties or powers. Both the President and Vice President are elected to 5-year terms
 by direct popular vote, with the possibility of a runoff between the top two can-
 didates if one does not obtain at least 45 percent of the vote on the first ballot. The
 Constitution does not permit reelection of the President.
 A single-chamber National Assembly exercises legislative power. In October 1996,
 voters chose 93 members, including 20 deputies from nationwide lists, 70 from lists
 presented in each of the 15 departments and the 2 autonomous regions, and 3 de-
 feated presidential candidates who obtained a minimum percentage of the national
 vote. Members elected concurrently with the President and, Vice President in 1996
 are to serve 5-year terms.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice against women, indigenous groups, or
 other minorities voting or participating in politics. Women served as president and
 vice president until January 1997, and a woman serves as president of the CSE.
 Additionally, 3 of 12 Supreme Court justices are women; women hold ministerial,
 vice ministerial, and other senior positions in government; and voters elected 10
 women to the National Assembly in October 1996. Two members of the National As-
 sembly claim indigenous heritage.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 With the exception of some peace commissions, human rights groups operated
 without government interference. Major organizations included the Permanent Com-
 mission for Human Rights (CPDH), the Nicaraguan Association for Human Rights
 (ANPDH), and the Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights (CENIDH). The CENIDH
 continued to take political positions reflecting strong Sandinista influence, limiting
 the objectivity and impact of its reports. In July 1997, a small successor organiza-
 tion to OAS/CIAV, the OAS Technical Cooperation Mission (TCM), opened at the re-
 quest of the Government and continues to operate. The TCM's presence was focused
 on the 13 municipalities that were most adversely affected by the decade-long civil
 war, where the TCM worked on conflict resolution, reconciliation, improving local
 government, and extending legal infrastructure.
 The OAS/CIAV and Catholic Relief Services helped maintain more than 200 peace
 commissions in the northern and central parts of the country, intended to give in-
 habitants of the area a means of dispute resolution, a means of monitoring human
 rights abuses, and a vehicle for expressing their concerns to government authorities.
 Many of the commissions operate in areas that are without any governmental pres-
 ence, and serve as surrogates for absent police and courts. The Government granted
 legal standing to many of these grassroots organizations during the year. Some
 peace commission members initially reported that soldiers, rural police, and local
 residents sometimes misunderstood their efforts at advocacy on behalf of jailed
 criminals, interpreting them as challenges to law enforcement officials' authority.
 However, during the year the commissions reported increased support from all ele-
 ments of the societies they serve, including law enforcement.
 
 
 713
 The ANPDH, the CENIDH, the CPDH, and the Catholic Relief Services continued
 to conduct human rights workshops at the police training academy, at various police
 headquarters, and with army units throughout the country. However, the ANPDH
 and the Esteli peace commission complained that police often do not follow up on
 their accusations of abusive police behavior. Some military officers received inter-
 nationally sponsored human rights training.
 In 1995, the National Assembly passed a law creating a human rights ombuds-
 man's office, with the Ombudsman to be elected by the Assembly. The Aleman ad-
 ministration publicly supported filling the position, and the Assembly considered a
 list of a dozen candidates in 1997, but the process to elect an ombudsman has
 stalled because no candidate could obtain the 56 votes required for election.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of birth, nationality, politi-
 cal belief, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, national origin, economic condi-
 tion, or social condition. In practice, the Government made little or no effort to com-
 bat discrimination. However, few, if any, discrimination suits or formal complaints
 were filed with government officials.
 Women.-The most prevalent violations of women's rights involved domestic and
 sexual violence, which were widespread and under-reported. The Nicaraguan De-
 mography and Census office reported that in a poll of 13,600 women, more than
 3,900 women stated that they had been physically or sexually abused by their hus-
 bands or boyfriends; 1,400 stated that they were abused while pregnant, and 2,800
 reported that they had suffered severe physical abuse during the past year.
 SThe National Police confirmed local human rights groups' charges that while po-
 lice sometimes intervene to prevent injury in cases of domestic violence, they rarely
 prosecute perpetrators because victims often refuse to press charges. Those cases
 that actually, reached the courts usually resulted in a not guilty verdict due to judi-
 cial inexperience with, and lack of legal training related to, proper judicial handling
 of such violence.
 The National Police reported 1,249 instances of rape during 1997, up from 1,095
 in 1996. Many women are reluctant to report abuse or file charges due to social stig-
 mas attached to victims of rape. However, police stated that the apparent rise in
 rape cases from previous years is at least partially due to the increased willingness
 of rape victims to report the crime.
 Violence against women received widespread coverage in all media, which was en-
 hanced by the high-profile case of Zoilamerica Narvaez, stepdaughter of FSLN lead-
 er and National Assembly Deputy Daniel Ortega. She asserted that her stepfather
 sexually molested and harassed her from the time she was 11 years old until she
 filed charges against him in 1997. The case publicized the problems of incest, rape,
 and women's rights and also highlighted the issue of immunity for parliamentary
 deputies. Narvaez championed an effort to persuade the National Assembly to with-
 draw Ortega's immunity from prosecution so she could bring a lawsuit against him;
 however, the Assembly did not take up the issue of Ortega's immunity during the
 year.
 The police manage 14 "women's commissariats" in 11 cities. Each commissariat
 is located adjacent to a police station and is staffed by six police officers, two social
 workers, one psychologist, and one lawyer. The commissariats provide both social
 and legal help to women and mediate spousal conflicts. A 1996 Law against Aggres-
 sion against Women reformed the Criminal Code to make domestic violence a crime
 and to provide for up to 6 years' imprisonment for those found guilty of such vio-
 lence. The law also provided for the issuance of restraining orders in cases in which
 women fear for their safety.
 Although the Constitution provides for equality between the sexes, reports of dis-
 crimination against women are persistent and widely believed. An April poll on
 women and discrimination showed that 70 percent of women believe that they suffer
 from discrimination and showed the most prevalent form of discrimination to be
 lower pay for similar work. Women are well represented in the public sector, more
 so than in the private sector, but women's groups claim that they are losing ground
 in both. Women are underrepresented in management positions in the private sec-
 tor. Women constitute the majority of workers in the traditionally low-paid edu-
 cation, textile, and health service sectors. Women have equal or somewhat better
 access to education than men, especially in urban areas. Primary school enrollment
 rates for boys and girls are estimated at 73 and 75 percent, respectively; secondary
 school enrollment rates are 39 and 47 percent.
 Children.-Children 18 years of age and younger make up approximately 53 per-
 cent of the population. Education is compulsory through the sixth grade, but this
 
 
 714
 provision is not enforced. The Government expresses its commitment to children's
 human rights and welfare publicly, but does not commit adequate funding levels for
 children's programs or primary education. A constitutional provision known as the
 "6 Percent Rule" automatically allots 6 percent of the annual budget to a higher
 education consortium, often at the expense of funding for primary and secondary
 education programs.
 Children were increasingly involved in crime, both as victims and as perpetrators.
 From January to July, 56 minors (younger than age 17) died as a result of violent
 crime. During the same period, victims of rape included 167 children under the age
 of 13, and 261 between the ages of 13 and 17. Children, especially boys in street
 gangs, contributed to the 6 percent rise in the crime rate. As a result of the Child
 and Family Law, which took effect in late November, juvenile prisoners could no
 ong    be  eld in adult facilities, nor could they be held for more than 24 hours
 wihout being charged. However, implementation of the new law proved difficult by
 year's end.
 The United Nations Children's Fund reported that 65 percent of children are lit-
 erate, and that 20 percent of children from 6 to 9 years of age work. A study pub-
 lished in September by the National Commission against Chid Labor concluded
 that over 160,000 children under 17 years of age work, including approximately
 140,000 employed in rural activities such as the annual harvests. Others are forced
 by their parents to work in the streets of Managua as vendors or beggars (see Sec-
 tion 6.d.). The incidence of child prostitution increased, especially in towns along the
 Pan American highway.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not legislated or otherwise man-
 dated accessibility to buildings for the disabled. In July the Ministry of Health cre-
 ated a National Council for Rehabilitation to address the needs of the 559,000 citi-
 zens with some type of disability, only 3 percent of whom receive medical treatment.
 Through its clinics and hospitals, the Government provides care to war veterans and
 other disabled persons, but the quality of care is generally poor. However, with as-
 sistance from international NGO s, foreign governments, and the public health care
 system, the Government procured thousands of prostheses and other medical equip-
 ment for veterans and former resistance members.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous people constitute about 5 percent of the country's
 population and live primarily in the Northern Autonomous Atlantic Region (RAAN)
 and Southern Autonomous Atlantic Region (RAAS). The RAAN and the RAAS,
 which were created in 1987 out of the former department of Zelaya and which bor-
 der the Caribbean Sea, constitute 47 percent of the national territory. Based on
 1998 information from the Center for Investigation and Documentation of the Atlan-
 tic Coast and other sources, the four major identifiable tribes are the Miskito (with
 approximately 100,000 members), the Sumo (10,000), the Garifuna (3,000), and the
 Rama (1,000). In an effort to encourage indigenous participation in Atlantic coast
 regional elections held in March, the CSE distributed electoral and civic education
 materials in four languages, including Miskito and Sumo.
 The indigenous people of the RAAN, primarily the Miskito and the Sumo, have
 a political-organization known as Yatama, which has representation in regional and
 municipal councils, and there is also an armed faction of the same name. The extent
 to which the two groups are linked is not clear. In May armed Yatama groups as-
 saulted an army outpost after a confrontation between a soldier and a Miskito in
 which the Indian was killed (see Section L.a.). Like many armed groups operating
 since the end of the civil war, the Yatama groups mix banditry with a genuine de-
 sire to force the Government to devote more resources to their underdeveloped re-
 gion. However, two factors differentiate the armed groups in the RAAN from those
 that have operated elsewhere in the country. First, most participants in these
 groups are Amerindians who have long seen themselves as having a separate cul-
 ture. Second, drug trafficking and drug money on the Atlantic coast have become
 far more pervasive than elsewhere in the country. The total strength of Yatama
 armed groups was estimated at 210 armed men.
 On September 4, President Aleman signed a disarmament agreement with rep-
 resentatives of the Yatama armed groups. In return, the Government made a num-
 ber of promises to the Miskitos including land to fighters who turned in their arms,
 support for housing for Yatama-affiliated families, agricultural credits, protection of
 traditional Amerindian fishing rights, and resolution of long-standing disputes
 about the boundaries of communal Miskito land. These provisions had not been im-
 plemented by year's end.
 The 1987 Autonomy Law requires the Government to consult the indigenous re-
 garding the exploitation of their areas' resources. Indigenous people claim that the
 central Government often made decisions without adequate community consultation.
 As in previous years, -some indigenous groups complained that central government
 
 
 authorities excluded the indigenous people of the Atlantic coast from meaningful
 participation in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the alloca-
 tion of natural resources. Government health care exists in the Atlantic towns of
 Puerto Cabezas, Siuna, and Bluefields, but a majority of indigenous people in rural
 areas have no access to health care. Critics of government policy cited extremely
 high unemployment rates, but calculation of reliable employment statistics was com-
 plicated by the fact that most of the working indigenous population on the Atlantic
 coast is engaged in subsistence fishing, farming, and mining.
 The Awas Tingni, an Amerindian tribe in the RAAN, sued the Government in
 1996, claiming that the Government's decision to award a long-term lumber conces-
 sion to a Korean firm on a portion of the land it claims as its own was a violation
 of the American Convention on Human Rights. In 1997 the Supreme Court declared
 the Government's concession to the Korean firm unconstitutional. The case eventu-
 ally went before the IACHR, where it remains. In April a court decree shut down
 the Korean firm's operations on the land, but a domestic company purchased the
 enterprise and reopened it not long afterward.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Most citizens are of mixed background, and
 ethnicity is not a barrier to olitical or economic success. However, various indige-
 nous groups from both the RXAN and the RAAS sometimes linked the Government's
 failure to expend resources in support of the Atlantic coast population to the exist-
 ence of ethnic, racial, and religious (principally members of the Moravian church)
 minorities that predominate in that region.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of workers
 to organize voluntarily in unions, and this right was reaffirmed in the new Labor
 Code that entered into effect in 1996 and replaced the antiquated 1944 code. All
 public and private sector workers, except those in the military and the police, may
 form and join unions of their own choosing, and they exercise this right extensively.
 New unions must register with the Ministry of Labor and be granted legal status
 before they may engage in collective bargaining. The new code legally recognizes co-
 operatives, into which many transportation and agricultural workers are organized.
 Less than half of the formal sector work force, including agricultural workers, is
 unionized, according to labor leaders. Union membership continued to fall during
 the year. The unions are independent of the Government, although many are affili-
 ated with political parties.
 The Constitution recognizes the right to strike. The Labor Code requires a major-
 ity vote of all the workers in an enterprise to call a strike. Workers may strike le-
 gally only after they have demonstrated that they have just cause to strike and have
 exhausted other methods of dispute resolution, including mediation by the Ministry
 of Labor and compulsory arbitration.
 In February public sector doctors began a 4-month strike, initially demanding a
 1,000 percent pay increase that the Government said it could not afford. Strikers
 and supporters confronted police in street demonstrations in April and May (see
 Section 2.b.). The strike ended on June 9 with agreement on an immediate 100 per-
 cent salary increase for the doctors and a further 50 percent increase in 1999. The
 Government also agreed to rehire doctors dismissed during the strike and to restore
 pay withheld.
 The Labor Code prohibits retribution against strikers and union leaders for legal
 strikes. However, this protection may be withdrawn in the case of an illegal strike.
 The 1996 Labor Code provides protected status to union leaders, requiring that com-
 panies receive permission from the Labor Ministry after having shown just cause
 in order to fire union executive board members. Such protection is limited to nine
 individuals per union.
 Unions freely form or join federations or confederations and affiliate with and par-
 ticipate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to bargain collectively, and this right was reaffirmed in the E'96 Labor
 Code. The Government generally sought to foster resolution of pressing labor con-
 flicts (usually in the public sector) through informal negotiations rather than
 through formal administrative or judicial processes. According to the reformed code,
 companies engaged in disputes with employees must negotiate with the employees'
 union if the employees have thus organized themselves.
 Nineteen firms, employing some 13,500 workers, operate in the government-run
 export processing zone (EPZ), and a private EPZ contains another firm with 500 em-
 ployees. Four additional zones were authorized in 1997, but have not opened. In re-
 sponse to long-standing complaints by union representatives that the Labor Min-
 istry did a poor job of enforcing the Labor Code in the EPZ's, the Ministry opened
 
 
 an office in the Managua free trade zone in 1997 to ensure that the code was being
 enforced. Of the 19 EPZ enterprises, only 2 are unionized. EPZ officials claim that,
 due to memories of the corrupt and ineffective unions of the 1980's, workers in the
 other 17 EPZ enterprises simply have no interest in unionizing. They also claim
 that wages and working conditions in EPZ enterprises are better than the national
 average.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor; however, it does not specifically address forced or bonded labor
 by children. The Labor Ministry reported that some child mendicants were forced
 to beg by the parents, and that some were "rented" by their parents to organizers
 of chd be gars (see Section 6.d.). Parents forced many rural children to participate
 in annual harvests.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution prohibits child labor that can affect normal childhood development or inter-
 fere with the obligatory school year. The 1996 Labor Code raised the age at which
 children may begin working with parental permission from 12 to 14 years. Parental
 permission to work also is required for 15- and 16-year-olds. The law limits the
 workday for such children to 6 hours and prohibits night work. However, because
 of the economic needs of many families, a cultural legacy of child work among peas-
 ants, and lack of effective government enforcement mechanisms, child labor rules
 rarely are enforced except in the small formal sector of the economy.
 A study published in September by the National Commission against Child Labor
 concluded that over 160,000 children under 17 years of age work, 140,000 of them
 in rural activities, including the annual harvest of crops such as coffee, cotton, ba-
 nanas, tobacco, and rice. Most of the children working in rural areas are 14 or
 younger. In Managua, 4,000 to 5,000 children work on city streets, selling merchan-
 dise, cleaning automobile windows, or begging. The Labor Ministry reported that
 many child mendicants are forced to beg by their parents, and that many are
 "rented" by their parents to organizers of child beggars. Children the age of 10 or
 older often worked for less than $1.00 per day on the same banana and coffee plan-
 tations as their parents. The Constitution prohibits forced labor, but does not spe-
 cifically prohibit forced or bonded labor by children (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage is set through tripartite
 (business, government, and labor) negotiations, and must be approved by the legisla-
 Tve assembly. A new minmur wage scale took effect in November 1997, the first
 increase since 1991. At year's end, a another adjustment was pending approval in
 the National Assembly. Minimum    wages vary by sector. Examples of monthly rates
 were: agriculture, $27.75 (300 cordobas); fisheries, $46.25 (500 cordobas); construc-
 tion, $44.40 (480 cordobas); government, $32.38 (350 cordobas); and banking, $64.75
 (700 cordobas). The minimum wage does not provide a decent standard of living for
 a worker and family. It falls far below government estimates of what an urban fam-
 ily must spend each month for a basic basket of goods ($129.51, 'or 1,400 cordobas).
 The vast majority of urban workers earn well above the minimum rates.
 The Labor Code incorporates the constitutionally mandated 8-hour workday; the
 standard legal workweek is a maximum of 48 hours, with 1 day of rest weekly. The
 1996 code established that severance pay shall be from 1 to 5 months' duration, de-
 pending on the duration of employment and the circumstances of firing. However,
 persons fired for cause may be denied severance pay through a process requiring
 employers to demonstrate proof of worker misconduct. It also established an obliga-
 tion of an employer to provide housing to employees who are assigned temporarily
 to areas beyond commuting distance.
 The Labor Code seeks to bring the country into compliance with international
 standards and norms of workplace hygiene and safety, but the Ministry of Labor's
 office of hygiene and occupational security lacks adequate staff and resources to en-
 force these provisions. The code gives workers the right to remove themselves from
 dangerous workplace situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
