NICARAGUA
The general tone of the 1994 State Department report on human rights practices in Nicaragua roughly parallels the preceding year's report, with much of the same boilerplate language on the state of the country and its recent history. However, in a welcome contrast to previous years, the report indulges only minimally in unsubstantiated assertions and generalizations. Nevertheless, at times it subtly perpetuates the anti-Sandinista prejudice of previous reports through a combination of rhetoric, omission and occasional misrepresentation.
Nicaragua's tortuous political history and its relations with the United States continue to be the unacknowledged subtext of the State Department's human rights reporting. The shifting array of political and military forces is again reflected in reporting flaws which are oddly anomalous given the Country Reports' treatment of Latin America as a whole. For example, in other reports such as those on Colombia and Peru, the State Department conflates the discussion of political killings by government forces with that of insurgent violence. From all appearances, this approach is designed to diminish the condemnation of official responsibility by intertwining governmental abuses with those committed by non-governmental entities. The Critique has repeatedly suggested that, in dealing with conflictive situations, an appropriate approach might be to include a separate analysis under the heading of humanitarian law, in which the abuses of both sides can be properly addressed.
In the case of Nicaragua, however, violent acts by former members of the contra forces, which were supported by the United States throughout the war, tend to be underplayed, as does the extent to which a hostile and conflictive situation still exists between loyalists from both sides. This omission is significant mainly because it leaves the impression that virtually all of the violence reported between and among factions is the result of official or Sandinista action, when that is not the case. As with other Country Reports, insufficient contextual material hampers the effectiveness of the report on Nicaragua.
161
CRITIQUE 1994
The 1994 report, like those which preceded it, would have benefited from a simple and straightforward explanation of the various forces and actions involved in Nicaragua's human rights scenario, with an assessment of the conduct and responsibility of each. In the case of Nicaragua, the situation does not neatly fit within the bipolar govemment/non-govemmental framework, and the report's approach should therefore be characterized by greater flexibility.
Nicaragua's political situation, in terms of reduced levels of conflict and increasing "governability" of the country, can be said to have improved considerably in 1994. The report cites both the demobilization of a number of bands of recontras (rearmed contras) including the "380 Northern Front" and a marked decline in the number of politically motivated killings. The legislature was able to function through most of the year on the basis of a working majority consisting of the Sandinista delegation together with a centrist faction of the National Opposition Union (UNO) pitted against the remaining core of the former UNO coalition.
The earlier split in UNO appears to have foreshadowed the rupture in the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) between a reformist current led by Sergio Ramirez, former Sandinista vice president, and a more orthodox current led by former president Daniel Ortega. Following a period of increasingly sectarian disagreements — which a special party congress in May could not resolve — and Ramirez's resignation from the FSLN, the party that governed Nicaragua for over a decade finally split. While ignoring these significant developments within the FSLN, which it still treats as a monolith, the report does mention notable legislative achievements, including significant legislation on labor, civil-military relations, property compensation and constitutional reforms.
As with previous reports, the most significant instances of bias and misleading commentary concern violations of the integrity of the person, especially political and extrajudicial killings. The report asserts that "the security forces persisted in committing significant human rights abuses, although they are declining in number.... most human rights observers, including the Sandinista [sic] human rights organization, CENIDH,
162
NICARAGUA
acknowledge that more ex-RN [National Resistance] than FSLN members have been homicide victims."
In fact, CENIDH (the Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights) —
which is not affiliated with the FSLN — reported 200 Sandinista victims through 1993 (as cited in the 1993 edition of the Critique), a figure approximately equal to that of contra victims (215) claimed by the State Department through that year. The State Department, however, cites more recent CENIDH figures of 169 Sandinista victims (through May of 1994) as against 513 ex-RN and recontra (rearmed contra) victims. The discrepancies in the CENIDH data, however, most probably derive from the fact that the category "ex-RN" is very precisely defined, while the category of "Sandinista" is much looser, including everyone from former members of the Sandinista Popular Army (EPS) to Sandinista cooperative members to FSLN sympathizers. Any data cited on Sandinista victims should specify how that category is defined for the report in question.
Whatever the figure, the State Department should adopt a more even-handed approach to its characterizations of human rights organizations. Given the US government's history of funding human rights groups in Nicaragua, the State Department should adopt a policy of fìlli disclosure of any potential bases for bias, so that characterizations of each organization may be properly evaluated.
Citing data from the OrganÌ2sation of America States/ International Commission of Support and Verification (OAS/CIAV), the report actually claims a total to date of 270 ex-RN victims, including 44 alleged victims in 1994. However, since the total cited through 1993 was 215, the addition of 44 new victims would yield a total of 259 (not 270) through 1994. This discrepancy with regard to previously cited figures is not noted. The text of the report is subtly misleading. It opens the discussion of murdered ex-contras by asserting that the army, police and Sandinista militants "continued to kill demobilized RN combatants," although at a diminished rate. In fact, as the report notes later, the majority (23) of the ex-contra victims were killed by other ex-contras; seven were killed by the National
163
CRITIQUE 1994
Police; another three fell at the hands of recompas (rearmed members of the EPS); while the remaining eleven were killed by unknown assailants.
There continues to be no serious or systematic treatment of Sandinista victims of political or other violence in the report. Only the case of Javier Barahona received detailed treatment. This is partly because OAS/CIAV — the State Department's main source — was originally formed to oversee only the reintegration of the ex-RN into Nicaraguan society, while there was no similar group formally dedicated to monitoring the human rights of Sandinistas. The report might have noted this fact, as well as the decision of the Tripartite Commission (of which CIAV is a component) to investigate a total of about 120 cases having significant political or human rights components in 1994. These were divided equally between ex-RN and Sandinista victims. Furthermore, in its then-upcoming fourth report, the Tripartite Commission signaled its intentions to continue correcting an imbalance between the reporting on ex-RN and Sandinista victims, but no "preview" is provided. The report also fails to mention that more than half the cases of Sandinista deaths examined thus far by the commission were attributable to ex-RN.
In fact, the report mentions the Tripartite Commission, composed of the government, the Catholic Church, and OAS/CIAV, only to say that it "has issued recommendations which the security forces continued to resist implementing in 1994." Later, the report expresses the opinion that "since its establishment in September 1992, the Tripartite Commission has been the most effective mechanism for raising human rights allegations to an official level and eliciting a response from government authorities." The State Department might therefore have given the substance of the OAS/CIAV report a more thorough treatment.
According to Human Rights Watch, the Tripartite Commission's reexamination of a number of cases in the CIAV files has actually led to the reversal of some earlier findings attributing responsibility to the security forces. In other cases, where security forces were responsible for the deaths of former contras, the outcome was often found to be the result of the use of excessive force in the pursuit of official duties — still a
164
NICARAGUA
violation of human rights, but short of conspiracy or premeditated murder. Indeed, a major problem with the report is its continued exclusive reliance on discredited data from the CIAV.
The State Department asserts that "the conviction rate among killers of ex-RN is so low that a state of impunity for abuses committed against ex-RN can be said to exist." The conviction rate is low, but not only among killers of ex-RN. It is low across groups of perpetrators and victims, reflecting the shortcomings of an underfunded and inadequately trained police and judiciary. "Impunity," to the degree that it exists, is thus generalized. In this context, it would have been appropriate for the report to remind the reader that in the majority of ex-RN cases resolved security forces were not at fault.
The Tripartite Commission did not find evidence to support the State Department's claim for the existence of blanket impunity for the perpetrators of human rights violations against ex-RN. But it did find a gross imbalance in the conduct of investigations into cases involving contra ana Sandinista victims — the former characterized in at least three-quarters of cases by negligence and cover-up, and the latter apparently "normal" in more than half of the cases. However, it is noteworthy that while judicial proceedings were opened in fewer than half of the cases involving contra victims, they were no less likely to be initiated (via the issuance of arrest warrants) when the suspects were members of security forces rather than civilians. Furthermore, the initiation of judicial proceedings, let alone actual arrests of suspects, was even more dismally low in cases involving Sandinista victims.
The report is indeed correct in its criticism of the government's failure to implement the Tripartite Commission's recommendations, and of the army (and its own internal judiciary) in particular for its unwillingness to investigate, try and sentence human rights violators within military ranks. The new Military Code, passed in August 1994, contains some promising changes. It requires that crimes by members of the armed forces be tried in civilian rather than military courts, and prohibits the trial of
165
CRITIQUE 1994
civilians by military tribunals. It also strengthens civilian oversight and control of security forces by restricting the scope of military intelligence activities and ending the military's exclusive jurisdiction over its own social security system and economic enterprises. Since the code requires additional enabling legislation to implement its provisions, the report is right to withhold judgment on implementation, and future reports should continue to monitor this issue closely.
Stating that "civilian control over the National Police was more evident in 1994," the report does not appear to equate police shortcomings, abuses and failures with alleged Sandinista human rights violations as it did in previous years. The report does not, however, examine whether police performance on human rights has improved or deteriorated along with greater "civilian oversight" and the integration of ex-RN into the ranks.
In the section dealing with the denial of fair public trial, the report states that with the selection of four replacement justices on the Supreme Court at the end of 1993, the court acquired "a non-Sandinista majority for the first time since President Chamorro took office." Strictly speaking, this is inaccurate since the court was split in equal parts between Sandinista and non-Sandinista members, with a neutral ninth member.
The complex and contentious property issue is also raised in this context by the report's assertion that "[i]n several cases, after the presiding magistrate ordered the return of an illegally confiscated property to the original owner, the police refused to enforce eviction orders against occupants, who were frequently members of the FSLN or security forces." Following this statement, the report gives two illustrative examples, one of which has been ruled a violation of the American Convention on Human Rights by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Whatever the specific merits of the two cases cited, the issue of the restoration of property rights is an exceedingly complex one. The report would have done well to outline the concrete solutions that have been worked out by the legitimately concerned parties in the form of a compensation package (mentioned briefly in the introduction to the report).
166
NICARAGUA
which was voted into law by the National Assembly. The report should have given data on the number of claims resolved, the manner of their resolution and the forms of compensation. In many cases the equity and legality of many Nicaraguan property claims are open to question — including, for example, properties that were obtained unlawfully by the Somoza family, properties abandoned for the sole purpose of disrupting and undermining the Nicaraguan economy during the period of Sandinista rule and properties legally titled to tens of thousands of poor Nicaraguans whose labor and investments have provided virtually their entire value. Many of the property claims pursued by the US government on behalf of recently naturalized Nicaraguan exiles are not admissible under customary international law because they were not US citizens at the time their properties were confiscated. The State Department's treatment of this important issue lacks both nuance and substance.
The paragraphs on worker rights in general are perhaps the most complete and even-handed in the report. Nevertheless, there is no mention of the intensive lobbying campaign by groups such as the International Labor Rights Education and Research Fund to counter pressures by multilateral financial institutions to further restrict the labor rights of Nicaraguans. In a "letter of labor policy," attached as a condition to the last major structural adjustment package for Nicaragua, the World Bank imposed on the Nicaraguan government a promise to veto the proposed labor code when passed by the legislature if it proved to be too "pro-labor." In accepting the loan, the government undertook inter alia to guarantee to companies unconstrained powers of worker dismissal, to prohibit strikes in a very broadly defined public sector, and to ensure the legal priority of individual contracts over collective bargaining agreements, even where the latter are already in place — all violations of internationally recognized labor rights. This lacuna on the State Department's part is quite egregious when one notes that the strong labor rights language in the FY 1995 foreign assistance bill is a direct reaction to the revelation that such a labor policy had effectively been imposed on the Nicaraguan government.
167
CRITIQUE 1994
The section on discrimination is well crafted and more thorough than in previous reports, with particularly detailed paragraphs on violence and abuse against women and children. Similarly, there is some discussion of the inadequacy of the minimum wage and the inefficacy of labor laws in the informal sector where most women and children are employed. Child labor is dealt with only briefly, however, in the section on worker rights. The paragraphs on indigenous people correctly indicate a failure to continue to implement the 1987 Autonomy Statute enacted by the Sandinista government but fall short of assigning responsibility to the UNO government for the systematic and deliberate disregard of indigenous rights.
168
