 NICARAGUA
 The National Directorate of the Sandinista National Liberation
 Front (FSLN), a group of nine Marxist revolutionary leaders who
 took control in July 1979, holds political power in Nicaragua.
 A three-man junta, consisting of one of the FSLN National
 Directorate commanders and two civilians, serves as head of
 government. Although it maintains that it is committed to
 pluralism and a mixed economy, the FSLN has progressively
 consolidated its power and restricted civil liberties.
 The human rights situation deteriorated markedly in 1982.
 Freedom House listed Nicaragua in its 1982 study among those
 countries where there was a significant decline in freedom.
 Early in the year, the Government of National Reconstruction
 forcibly moved thousands of Miskito Indians from their
 traditional homes along the river boundary with Honduras to
 camps in the interior, claiming that it had done so in reaction
 to an outbreak of anti-government armed violence. Between
 11,000 and 14,000 Indians fled to Honduras. Many villages were
 burned and animals belonging to the Indians slaughtered.
 Miskito leaders have documented incidents of forced marches,
 tortures, and executions of Indians by government forces. The
 Miskitos have not been permitted to return to their traditional
 homes. The Nicaraguan Roman Catholic Bishops' Conference in
 February 1982 publicly condemned the methods employed to move
 the Miskitos.
 In March, the Government declared a state of emergency,
 claiming an imminent threat of invasion after anti-Sandinistas
 blew up two bridges. In fact the Government is facing several
 areas of significant guerrilla activity. The state of
 emergency suspended many civil liberties guaranteed in the
 Statute on Rights and Guarantees, the basic law guaranteeing
 personal and civil liberties decreed by the revolutionary
 Government in August 1979. Under the state of emergency, the
 Government has instituted prior censorship of all media,
 imposed extensiverestrictions on political party activities and
 detained without due process many Nicaraguans on charges of
 'counterrevolutionary' activities. Statutory guarantees on
 freedom of religion and prohibitions against government-
 sanctioned killing and torture were not affected by the state
 of emergency decree.
 Sandinista crowds attacked Protestant and Catholic churches and
 church leaders in July and August 1982. Many Protestant and
 sectarian churches were "confiscated' by Sandinista mobs. The
 FSLN, however, moved to stop many of those abuses after it
 encountered strong popular reaction and international
 protests. Some church property has been restored to its owners.
 The state of emergency is scheduled to remain in effect at
 least until May 1983.
 While the Government claims to favor a mixed economy, it has
 adopted discriminatory policies against the Nicaraguan private
 sector. Despite sizable amounts of foreign assistance, the
 Nicaraguan economy in 1982 stalled at a point far below
 pre-revolutionary levels.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There is credible evidence that security forces have been
 
 
 580
 responsible for the death of a number of detained persons in
 1982. In addition to these cases, the Ministry of Interior
 publicly announced that several prisoners were killed while
 "attempting to flee detention.' There were in 1982 some 15-20
 credible reports of deaths at the hands of security forces,
 most of of which have been confirmed.
 During 1982 the Government reported a sharp increase in
 activities by armed anti-government forces, some of which,
 according to the Government, operated out of Honduras, while
 others attacked security forces and government installations
 from bases in Nicaragua. The Government claimed several
 occasions during which anti-Sandinistas killed dozens of
 unarmed civilians, as well as an attack on the town of San
 Francisco del Norte, where eight members of the town's militia
 were killed. There have also been reports of kidnappings and
 executions of Miskito Indians by anti-Sandinista forces. The
 Government claimed that in 1982 anti-Sandinistas killed at
 least 253 members of security forces and civilians and claimed
 to have killed 375 of its armed opponents and captured 76.
 Most of these casualties reportedly occurred in clashes between
 opposing armed groups.
 In November and December 1982, there were credible reports of
 security officials killing at least 10 prisoners. In some
 cases, individuals were arrested by the Government and not
 heard from until their names appeared in lists of dead
 'counterrevolutionaries.' In another case, a prisoner died of
 gunshot wounds the day before he was to be released. The
 Government announced that the prisoner had committed suicide.
 b. Disappearance
 In the first nine months of 1982 the independent Permanent
 Human Rights Commission documented 20 cases of disappearances
 under circumstances which indicated security forces were
 involved. In 15 cases the individuals have been located. Five
 cases are still unresolved.
 c. Torture
 Torture is not widely practiced by the Government. There have
 been, however, at least half a dozen documented cases of
 torture committed by security forces in 1982. In the most
 notorious case, a taxi driver, who the Interior Ministry
 claimed was killed while attempting to escape, was tortured and
 then shot at close range. In one case the Government investi-
 gated and punished police officials who abused prisoners in the
 town of Granada. The prisoners, charged with common crimes,
 were later set free by the courts because of the abuse they had
 suffered under detention. In the case of the tortured-murdered
 taxi driver, the Supreme Court has requested a full investi-
 gation from the Government. State security regularly uses
 sophisticated methods of psychological interrogation. There
 are credible reports of prisoners under interrogation being
 forced to remain nude, threatened with the death of members of
 their family, and subjected to other types of psychological
 abuse. In some instances, the prisoners have been beaten.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The Government currently holds about 7,000 prisoners. About
 3,600 of these can be considered political prisoners, most of
 whom are ex-members of the National Guard who were convicted by
 special tribunals. Overcrowding and substandard conditions
 remain serious problems which the Government acknowledges and
 
 
 581
 attributes to its limited resources. The International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continues to make periodic
 visits to prisoners in the penitentiary system. The ICRC
 continues to provide medical attention and food supplements to
 prisoners and food to some of their families.
 Some prisoner abuse has continued. After several prisoners
 escaped from a penitentiary, their colleagues remaining in that
 prison were forced to work nude and their families were denied
 visitation rights for several months.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Nicaraguan law guarantees that a prisoner will not be held by
 police for more than seven days or state security more than 48
 hours before his case is presented to a judge. These rights,
 however, were suspended by the state of emergency in March
 1982. Consequently, arbitrary detention has dramatically
 increased in 1982. State security has detained without due
 process hundreds of suspected anti-Sandinistas. Some have been
 released after a few days, others after a few weeks. Scores
 are still being held.
 The right of habeas corpus, guaranteed in the statute of rights
 and guarantees, has been suspended by the state of emergency.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In theory, the judicial system operates independently in
 Nicaragua and there are few complaints that those accused of
 common crimes have not received a fair trial. However, in the
 case of those charged with violating the law of maintenance of
 public order and security, the judges usually base the sentence
 on the findings of the Government interrogators. Military
 personnel or civilians accused of participating in a crime
 involving a member of the military are tried by military rather
 than civilian courts. Civilians tried by military courts are
 not subject to the guarantees of the civilian judicial system,
 though they are allowed to be represented by counsel, but may
 appeal to thq Supreme Court. Although there is provision for
 legal counsel for military defendants, in practice, many do not
 receive adequate legal assistance. Sentences imposed by the
 military courts, generally for crimes of desertion, robbery,
 and assault are severe, varying in those cases between 18 and
 26 years. It is estimated that 40 to 50 civilians are in
 military jails.
 In its 1982 report Amnesty International expressed concern
 about the continued detention of approximately 3,200 'prisoners
 of conscience' (former Samoza officials and ex-members of the
 National Guard) who were convicted by special tribunals in 1979
 and 1980. Amnesty International also expressed concern about
 the absence of a mechanism for appeal of these convictions and
 urged that the cases be systenatically reviewed.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The legal requirement for a search warrant was suspended under
 the state of emergency imposed in March. Even prior to March,
 the police occasionally entered and searched homes without a
 proper warrant, but subsequently there have been numerous
 instances of the police arbitrarily entering and searching
 private residences. The Government taps a number of private
 telephones. There are substantiated reports that the
 Government is violating the privacy of the mail.
 
 
 582
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 In 1982 the Government moved further away from its original
 program, which guaranteed basic freedoms, as issued July 1979
 in Costa Rica, in its governing statute, and in the statute of
 rights and guarantees governing Nicaraguans.
 Both the printed and spoken media are now subject to prior
 censorship. The censors are arbitrary and capricious, removing
 virtually all references to activities of the external
 opposition, as well as many articles implicitly critical of
 government policies or programs.
 All independent newscasts were prohibited for the first three
 months of the state of emergency and a single government-run
 radio news program was broadcast by all stations. In June,
 several pro-government radio stations and one independent radio
 station were permitted to broadcast their own news programs,
 but the remaining radio stations are still prohibited from
 broadcasting independent news or political programs. The
 Government controls the only two television stations and
 non-Sandinista groups are denied access to television.
 One of the three daily newspapers is the official voice of the
 FSLN; another is pro-government. There have been several cases
 this year of journalists being harassed, beaten and intimidated.
 In January, the only independent newspaper, "La Prensa," was
 closed for several days after a 'La Prensa" watchman fired at a
 crowd of hostile Sandinista demonstrators. It was closed again
 in November for two days.
 Since the imposition of the state of emergency, it has been
 very difficult for the opposition to make any of its views
 known publicly, although occasionally the censors have
 permitted some articles reflecting opposition viewpoints. The
 Government permits in its own papers some criticism of lower
 ranking bureaucrats, but no criticism of the FSLN leadership
 and their policies is allowed.
 While there is'no censorship of domestic or imported books, the
 foreign exchange crisis has meant that few books from the West
 are imported into Nicaragua, while Marxist literature
 circulates freely. The 'curriculum rationalization and
 coordination" imposed on the National Autonomous University and
 the Catholic University of Central America is a government
 measure which has limited the universities' autonomy in
 developing the curriculum and has circumscribed university
 freedom. Moreover, the choice of textbooks is limited, as
 described above, and, in the social sciences, texts with a high
 ideological content are used. Nevertheless, the universities
 retain a significant degree of independence in naming their
 faculties.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The state of emergency suspended the right of assembly and of
 political parties to hold public meetings. Even prior to the
 imposition of the state of emergency, opposition political
 parties suffered harassment and intimidation by pro-government
 forces. Hostile, FSLN-orchestrated mobs painted political
 parties headquarters and opposition leaders' homes with
 pro-FSLN graffiti. The only party which attempted to hold a
 public meeting, the Conservative Party, was denied permission
 to hold a political rally in January.
 
 
 583
 In 1982 the Sandinistas continued their pressure on independent
 labor unions. Members and activists, particularly of the
 Christian Democrat-oriented Nicaraguan Workers Central, were
 subject to repeated harassment, arrests, and threats. The
 independent Confederation of Labor Unification also experienced
 harassment and arbitrary detention of its organizers. The
 right to strike has been prohibited since the September 1981
 Economic and Social Emergency Decree and compulsory arbitration
 procedures remain in effect. Independent unions have found
 that their efforts, both to inscribe new unions and to register
 collective-bargaining agreements with the Ministry of Labor,
 receive slow and difficult treatment from the Government
 compared to the treatment received by the Sandinista-controlled
 union. By law the Labor Ministry participates in all
 collective-bargaining negotiations and must approve final
 agreements.
 The Sandinista Workers Central, which claims a membership of
 over 93,000, exceeding the membership of the independent
 unions, often serves as an instrument of Sandinista policy as
 well as, in principle, a conduit of workers' desires and
 grievances to the Government. Some 10-15 percent of the urban
 and rural work force is unionized.
 Unions maintain ties with recognized international bodies in
 their field. The Confederation of Labor Unification is
 affiliated with Inter-American Regional Organization of
 Workers, the Nicaraguan Workers Central with Latin American
 Confederation of Workers, and the Sandinista Workers Central is
 a member of the communist World Federation of Trade Unions.
 There are two professional organizations in Nicaragua, one
 independent and one pro-Sandinista, but only the pro-Sandinista
 organization is represented in the Council of State.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Statute of Rights and Guarantees of Nicaraguans provides
 'for freedom of religion. This freedom was not suspended by the
 state of emergency. Nevertheless, in 1982 there were numerous
 Sandinista-sponsored attacks on individual churches and
 churchmen. Catholicism is the predominant religion, but other
 churches are legal and operate freely. Conversion from one
 religion to another is permitted and members of minority
 religions generally, despite the exceptions noted below, have
 not been discriminated against, or persecuted because of their
 affiliation.
 Adherence to a particular church does not confer advantage or
 disadvantage in any sphere in Nicaragua. However, in 1982, the
 Government accused certain religious sects of engaging in
 anti-Sandinista activities, including, in some cases, calls for
 non-participation in the military, and orchestrated a campaign
 against these groups. Pro-Sandinista groups took over churches
 belonging to the Seventh-Day Adventists, Mormons, and Jehovah's
 Witnesses. Furthermore, some Jehovah's Witnesses and Mennonite
 missionaries were detained and expelled from the country.
 Government leaders, however, later described the confiscation
 of the churches as excessive and discouraged further
 takeovers. Some, but not all, of the churches have been
 returned to their original owners. Government officials also
 accused Moravian pastors of supporting anti-Sandinista
 activities on the east coast. As a result, some have been
 arrested and sentenced to lengthy jail terms.
 
 
 584
 Catholic churches have also been attacked by Sandinista mobs.
 Leaders of the FSLN and the government-controlled media have
 attacked Archbishop Obando y Bravo personally, accusing him of
 representing only the bourgeoisie and sympathizing with
 anti-Sandinista activities. Sandinista groups repeatedly
 clashed with supporters of the archbishop. In August
 pro-government student groups fought with students at Catholic
 schools who had gone on strike to protest the treatment of the
 church. A pro-church demonstration and counter-demonstration
 by pro-government groups in front of a Catholic school in
 Masaya led to several deaths. As a result the school was
 temporarily taken over by the Education Ministry and four
 priests at the school remained in asylum in embassies for
 several days. One priest was expelled from the country. After
 negotiation with church authorities, control of the school was
 returned to church authorites and all the remaining priests
 were permitted to return to the school.
 Five American Catholic priests and nuns on Nicaragua's east
 coast were also expelled in January. They were subsequently
 permitted to return to the country but not to their original
 working places. The bishop of the east coast was forced by
 security forces to leave his diocese on one occasion and on
 another occasion had temporary difficulties in renewing his
 residence permit.
 One of the most visible attacks on the church involved a plot
 to entrap the head of the Catholic radio station. The priest,
 who was lunching with a female parishioner, was forced to
 disrobe by an intruder and then led off naked by the police who
 detained him for six hours. Pictures of the naked priest shown
 on Sandinista TV and published in pro-government newspapers
 deeply shocked the populace.
 In August a letter critical of the "popular church,* from the
 Pope to the Nicaraguan bishops, was temporarily banned. The
 censors later reversed their positions and ordered the letter
 to be published together with a government declaration against
 the letter. Government actions against the Catholic church
 have also been criticized by the President of the National
 Conference of Catholic Bishops and the Vatican newspaper.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Early in 1982, in the wake of fighting with anti-Sandinista
 groups, security forces forcibly removed thousands of Miskito
 Indians from their traditional homes along the Coco River
 boundary between Nicaragua and Honduras. Between 8,000 and
 10,000 were moved at gunpoint, many of their houses burned, and
 their animals killed. As noted above, some cases of executions
 of Indians have been documented by Miskito leaders.
 Most of the Indians were given only a few hours to collect
 their belongings, and the majority of them were forced to walk
 for days through the jungles to relocation camps in Nicaragua's
 interior. Originally, they were not permitted to leave these
 camps, but subsequently this restriction was relaxed. They
 have not, however, been permitted to return to their tradi-
 tional homes. The Government has provided to the relocated
 Indians food, medical services, and education. However, the
 Miskito culture is based on a combination of fishing and
 agriculture and their relocation sites are far from the rivers
 which formed an integral part of their traditional way of
 life. Another 11,000 to 14,000 Miskitos fled to Honduras. An
 additional 3,000 non-Indian Nicaraguans have fled to Honduras
 in the past year.
 
 
 585
 The condition and treatment of the Miskito Indians was the
 subject of an on-site investigation by the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights in 1982. The Commission submitted a
 report to the Government which has not yet been made public.
 The entire Nicaraguan east coast is a restricted military area
 and Interior Ministry permission is needed to travel there.
 Permission is seldom granted to non-residents to travel to the
 northern half of the east coast, and it is often difficult for
 residents of the area to return once they have left.
 With the imposition of the state of emergency, the Government
 temporarily restricted travel out of the country by any
 opposition figures. Government officials and doctors need
 special permission to leave the country. These restrictions
 have eased and as of December 1982 there were few reports of
 Nicaraguans encountering difficulties entering or leaving the
 country.
 Since 1979 thousands of Nicaraguans have left the country
 because of their opposition to the Government. Some 5,000 to
 10,000 went to Honduras and a similar number to Costa Rica.
 Several thousands have come to the US.
 Nicaragua in turn has received approximately 20,000 refugees
 from El Salvador, hundreds from Guatemala, and a few from other
 countries. These groups are provided refugee status and
 assistance from the Government. They are given all the rights
 and privileges of Nicaraguan citizens including access to
 social services and education. Hundreds of Salvadoran refugees
 are living in camps, but the vast majority are integrated into
 Nicaraguan society. The Salvadorans are free to remain or to
 leave as they choose.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 A three-man junta formally governs Nicaragua, but political
 power rests with the nine members of the Sandinista
 Directorate. While the Sandinistas claim to be committed to
 political pluralism, the sphere of activity left for the
 opposition decreased considerably in 1982. There have been no
 elections since the Sandinistas came to power; the FSLN has
 postponed holding them until 1985. The FSLN, as the
 self-proclaimed vanguard of the revolution, dominates the
 political life of the country. It has, in its three years in
 power, repressed and harassed the opposition parties. In 1982
 these actions included Sandinista mob attacks on opposition
 party headquarters, jailing of activists, and the prohibition
 of a Conservative Party rally. Nevertheless, the opposition
 continues to organize and participate in the national
 legislature, the Council of State, whose power is limited, and
 which is dominated by the Sandinistas.
 The state of emergency eliminated the right to form political
 parties. However, the practice has varied and the Sandinistas
 did not object when the Social Christians celebrated their 25th
 anniversary with a relatively large public meeting.
 Censorship under the state of emergency has seriously
 circumscribed the political opposition access to the media.
 Their only instruments for communication with the public are
 their party letters and bulletins, some of which have a
 substantial circulation.
 All opposition political parties have had members in jail,
 generally accused of anti-Sandinista activities. Repeated
 
 
 586
 efforts by the party leaders to effect the release of their
 activists have usually been unsuccessful. One political party,
 the Nicaraguan Democratic Movement, gave up the civic battle
 and its leaders, including former junta member Alfonso Robelo,
 went into exile in April 1982.
 The year 1982 began with the promise of negotiations between
 the opposition and the Sandinistas on a law governing political
 parties. The FSLN, however, suspended discussions in
 February. In September, it took the initiative to renew the
 dialogue with the opposition. This new dialogue has not yet
 yielded concrete results, although there has been discussion of
 the need for a law which would provide adequate guarantees for
 opposition parties.
 Sandinista leaders have stated on numerous occasions in 1982
 that elections will be held in 1985 provided political
 conditions permit. They have made clear, however, that the
 elections will not contest their control of the Government and
 will not resemble the "bourgeois' Costa Rican electoral
 system. Thus far, the Sandinistas have not created the
 institutional framework for the elections.
 There is no official discrimination against women in
 Nicaragua. Women are active at all levels of Nicaraguan
 society and in the Government. There is one woman in the
 Cabinet and another one in the Supreme Court. Close to half of
 the members of the Council of State are women. One opposition
 party andthe independent human rights commission are led by
 women.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Government has welcomed the interest of the international
 community in human rights observance in Nicaragua and claims
 that it has a human rights record of which it is proud. As
 discussed above, in 1982 the Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission visited Nicaragua, primarily to investigate charges
 of the mistreatment of the Miskito Indians. In addition, in
 its annual report the Commission expressed concern about due
 process in the Nicaraguan judicial system and called attention
 to restrictions on freedom of the press and to conflicts
 between the Catholic church and the Government. It also
 highlighted the Government's lack of progress in respecting
 ideological pluralism and expressed concern about the
 conditions that will govern the 1985 elections. The Government
 contested an Amnesty International letter protesting the
 existence of political prisoners.
 There are two human rights organizations operating in
 Nicaragua. The Independent Permanent Commission on Human
 Rights has been monitoring human rights since 1977 and played a
 significant role in exposing violations committed by the Somoza
 regime. In spite of government pressure, it continues to
 publicize excesses committed by the Sandinista regime.
 However, the former national coordinator, Jose Esteban
 Gonzalez, now in exile, was charged and convicted in absentia
 for having participated in an alleged anti-Sandinista plot. In
 addition, security forces arrested a Commission employee who
 was distributing a bulletin describing the torture and killing
 of the taxi driver noted above. The employee was convicted of
 disrespect for authority and served a two-month jail sentence.
 
 
 587
 In the latter months of 1982, the Government stepped up its
 harassment of the Commission. A Commission employee was
 arrested and Commission informants threatened by the
 Government. Interior Ministry officials have threatened to
 impose prior censorship on Commission bulletins. Nevertheless,
 the Commission continues to maintain careful records of human
 rights violations and to present its cases to government and
 international organizations.
 The Government crested an official Commission for the
 Protection and Promotion of Human Rights in 1980. This
 commission defines its work as convincing government officials
 of the importance of the observation of human rights. It has
 reviewed some trials and recommended release of prisioners in a
 few cases, but its accomplishments are few.
 Nicaragua is a signatory of the Inter-American Convention on
 Human rights which it has ratified, of the United Nations
 Statute and Protocol on Refugees, and of the United Nations
 Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Nicaragua is a poor country of 2,917,000 people (1982) with a
 GNP per capita of $901 and a population growth rate of 3.3
 percent. Nicaraguans have a life expectancy at birth of 56.4
 years. There are serious economic contraints on the
 Government's ambitious goals of providing greater access to
 public services, particularly in education and health. Foreign
 exchange shortages have caused drug and medical supply
 shortages.
 The basic Statute of Rights and Guarantees prohibits discrimi-
 nation on the basis of sex, race, or religious preference.
 Although this guarantee was suspended by the state of emergency,
 the Government does not discriminate in meeting economic and
 social needs on these grounds. Women serve as ministers and
 vice ministers, in the supreme court, and hold significant
 positions within the Sandinista Front.
 When the Sandinistas came to power in July 1979, Nicaragua
 faced virtual bankruptcy. The Government made economic
 recovery its immediate goal and the prerequisite to an
 effective redistribution of wealth promised by the revolution.
 In 1982, the economy stalled at well below pre-revolutionary
 levels. In 1982 exports were about $430 million (compared to
 the pre-revolutionary level of $650 million). Foreign
 assistance from Western nations and the Soviet Bloc was less
 than in previous years. Inflation for 1982 was about 25-30
 percent due to a large central government deficit and higher
 demand for credit. Some 25 percent of the work force is
 unemployed and labor productivity remains below
 pre-revolutionary levels.
 Flooding, drought, and current low international commodity
 prices have contributed to Nicaragua's 1982 economic problems.
 The lack of political stability and investor confidence has
 also contributed to the stagnation of the economy. The Nicara-
 guan private sector still accounts for aproximately 60 percent
 of gross domestic product. Although government leaders have
 reiterated their intention to foster a mixed economy, arbitrary
 property confiscations and the Government's Marxist rhetoric
 have discouraged private investment. In 1982 there were
 additional instances of arbitrary confiscation of land for
 apparently political reasons, but few cases of confiscation of
 industrial properties.
 
 
 588
 The Government has implemented discriminatory credit policies
 against the Nicaraguan business community. The FSLN has used
 its media to portray the large and medium-size business as
 anti-Sandinista and exploiters who protect their own interests
 at the expense of the working class. Three top business
 leaders, who were imprisoned in October 1981 for protesting the
 Government's policies, were released after serving four months
 in prison. Despite strained relations between the Government
 and the private sector, the business community continues to
 vigorously pursue a pluralistic society and the preservation of
 a mixed economy.
 The Government has made efforts to improve general health
 services. Health campaigns in 1982 provided vaccinations for
 several common diseases such as polio and malaria. Polio was
 reportedly eliminated. Major subsidies were given to basic
 grains, oil, eggs, and milk. Medical services and medicine
 provided in hospitals and health centers are free. New health
 centers and regional hospitals are being built. Medical visits
 have increased 90 percent over pre-revolution levels. The
 leading pre-revolutionary cause of infant mortality, diarrhea,
 has fallen to sixth among causes of infant deaths. The infant
 mortality rate was reduced from the pre-revolutionary level of
 122 deaths to 90.5 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1980. About
 95 percent of Nicaragua's urban population and 10.4 of its
 rural population have access to safe water.
 Education is another high priority for the Sandinistas. The
 Government claims, through a 1980 literacy campaign, to have
 reduced illiteracy from 50 percent to 12 percent. The
 Government maintains an adult education-program to supplement
 the gains in the literacy campaign. It has constructed 2,696
 new schools since 1979. Over a million students were in school
 in 1982 compared to 502,000 in 1978. Adjusted primary school
 enrollent is 80 percent. The Government provides subsidies for
 mass transporation, although shortages of spare parts have
 hampered efforts to provide adequate mass transportation. It
 has a modest low-cost housing program which, from mid-1981 to
 mid-1982, completed 1,892 houses and began constructon on 3,698
 more.
 
 
 589
 U.S.0ViRSEAi -LOANS ANC GRANTS- OBLIGATI-ONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MZLLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NICARAGJA
 1930     1981      1982
 I.dCGN. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         35.7      59.1      6.3
 LOANS..    .....           30.U      43.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         3.7      11.8      6.3
 A.AIO ,,.         ...., .     19.4      55.4      5.8
 LOANS ............          15.0      43.0      0.0
 GRANTS     ....              4.4      10.4      5.8
 CSECSUDPPASSST),             1.1      56.6      5.1
 i.FOOU FOR PEACE    .           10.0       1.2      0.4
 LOANS ...... ,.,,.          15.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS......*..            3.0       1.2      0.4
 TITL  I-TOTAL ..........        15.0       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS,.,..         15.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CUR,,0.0                     0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL,.....           3.0       1.2      0.4
 A.RdLIEFtcDEV t NFP,          2.6       0.6      0.4.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          0.4       0.6      0.0
 C.OTHER dCON. ASSIST,..          1.3       0.2      0.1
 LOANSo .........  ...  ..0.0          0.0      0oO
 GRANTS.........s..          1.3       0.2      0.1
 PdAG CORPS.,,,            0.1      0.1       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTN..,......              1.2      0.1       0.1
 Ii.lIL. A5SAST.-TPTAL...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS.......   ..........    0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.. ............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 AMAP GRANTSN.....            0.0       0.0      0.0
 .CREOIT SALES-FPS ....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.toTRNG,...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 0.IRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..          0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTrQX GRANTS..   .          0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ELON.    M IL..        31.7     59.8      6.3
 LOANS.                      30.0      45.0      0.0
 GRANTS........'.   ...... ..7       11.c      6.3
 -ThER US LOAN---.                       - 0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS                 0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER.............0.0               0.0      0.0.
 AS$ISTANCE PRUJ INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1960     1981      1982     1946-82
 TOTAL.....     ..55.3    112.9      504    69B.4
 I8KD               20.0     34.7     16.0     231.0
 lPc                 0.0      0.0      0.0       9.5
 IDA                32.0      0.0      0.0      55.6
 10                 0.0     O5.0     34.4     375.5
 ADS                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP                3.3      3.5       0.0     21.4
 OTHER-UN            0.0'     0.7       0.0      5.4
 EC                  0.0   "  0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 590
