 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary legislative
 system. Executive authority is exercised by the Prime       an   Cabinet rep-
 resenting the governing political parties (traditionally a coalition of at least two
 major parties). The bicameral Parliament is elected through nationwide proportional
 voting. The police, Royal Constabulary, and investigative organs concerned with in-
 ternal and external security are effectively subordinated to the executive and judi-
 cial authorities.
 The Netherlands has an economy which is based on private enterprise but which
 also has extensive involvement by governmental entities. A complex social welfare
 system provides a high level of social benefits.
 The Netherlands attaches great importance to human rights in its foreign and do-
 mestic policies. Individual rights are protected by Dutch law and are widely re-
 spected in practice by both the State and the general public. The press, public inter-
 est groups, and domestic and international human rights organizations are quick to
 chalenge practices which they believe violate established human rights norms. Such
 complatnts are thoroughly-discussed by the media and in Parliament and are often
 subjected to a judicial process.
 There are no significant differences in human rights practices between the Neth-
 erlands proper and the autonomous regions of the Kingdom, i.e., Aruba and the five
 islands of the Netherlands Antilles.
 RESPECT FOR LUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing-No politically motivated killings by
 overn ment or domestic political groups ar known to have occurred. An impa  ial
 Netherlands Antilles Commission constituted to investigate the claims of police bru-
 
 
 856
 tality in 1991 and previous years concluded in September, after extensive investiga-
 tion, that the charges were unsubstantiated.
 b. Disappearance.-No known abductions, secret arrests, or clandestine detention
 by police or other official security forces took place.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law and were not
 known to occur.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Freedom from arbitrary arrest is pro-
 vided for by law and respected in practice. Preventive detention is permitted only
 in an emergency declared by national or municipal authorities, and even then the
 detention may be for only a limited time. Under normal circumstances a suspect
 may be held for no longer than 6 hours (or 9 hours if arrested at night) before
 charges must be brought. Persons suspected of having committed serious crimes
 may be held in custody for 48 hours with the agreement of the public prosecutor,
 who is authorized to decide on an extension of the detention for an additional 48
 hours. Any further decision on extending detention is made by an investigating
 judge. Search and arrest warrants issued by the judiciary are required in most
 criminal cases. Forced exile from the Netherlands is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Netherlands has a court system which, as a
 rule, provides the right of appeal in all civil and criminal cases. The judiciary is
 independent. The right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by law and respected in
 ractice Defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Charges must be
 Formally stated. Defendants have the right to counsel. A system of free or low cost
 legal assistance exists for those defendants unable to pay. There are no political
 prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-A judi-
 cial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to monitor private correspond-
 ence or telephone conversations. The state respects individual freedom of choice in
 family matters.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-A functioning democratic political system, an
 independent press, and an effective judiciary ensure freedom of speech and ress.
 Dutch media policy allocates broadcast time to a wide range of social, politica, and
 ethnic groups, ensuring that minority viewpoints are heard. In addition, a cable sys-
 tem brings in numerous television and radio broadcasts from neighboring countries.
 There are no prepublication restraints on any of the media. A traditional consen-
 sus precludes the mainstream media from disseminating sensitive information in-
 volving national security, defense, or the royal family. Violent or sensational crimes
 are treated with discretion, with suspects and victims often identified only by their
 initials. In ongoing investigations, only minimal personal data are released on crimi-
 nal suspects, both to maintain the privacy of the suspect and his family and to pro-
 tect the integrity of the investigation. Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly and asso-
 ciation is virtually unrestricted. For large assemblies and demonstrations of a politi-
 cal nature, permits from local governmental authorities are required. These permits
 are routinely granted but may be denied when authorities believe that "public order
 and safety" cannot be guaranteed as a result of a rally or demonstration. Public
 meetings of extreme rightist or racist groups have been prohibited from time to
 time. The Government does not arbitrarily impede membership in, or the formation
 of, organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies are pro-
 vided to religious organizations that maintain educational facilities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration, and repa-
 triation.
 The Netherlands has elaborate procedures for deciding asylum applications; these
 respect the applicant's right to due process and take into account conditions in the
 applicant's countr of origin. Applicants who do not meet the criteria for political
 asylum are nevertheless permitted to remain in the Netherlands provisionally with-
 out refugee status if conditions in their country of origin are so violent or unsettled
 that returning them to that country would place them in danger.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy. Elections are based on
 proportional representation. There is universal suffrage for citizens aged 18 and
 nldpr Fnrniiin residents may vote in municinal elections after 5 years of legal resi-
 
 
 857
 dence. Dutch citizens elect the Second Chamber (House of Representatives) of Par-
 liament every 4 years (sooner if a government resigns or falls due to a parliamen-
 tary vote of no confidence). The most recent national elections, held in September
 1989, resulted in the formation of a center-left coalition, with Prime Minister Ruud
 Lubbers remaining in office. Four major and five minor political parties have seats
 in Parliament, representing the political spectrum from far left to far right. There
 are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women and minori-
 ties in government and politics. The Government has encouraged women to seek
 elected office. The two Houses of Parliament now count 43 women among their 150
 members.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups, the media, and other interested parties are free to pursue
 inquiries into human rights issues, and Dutch authorities readily assist inter-
 national and nongovernmental organizations in their investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Larguage, or Social Status
 Integration of racial and ethnic minorities into the social and cultural mainstream
 is a difficult domestic issue. Some 264,000 persons from the former Dutch colony
 of Suriname have come to live in the Netherlands since 1975. There are also ap-
 proximately 85,000 persons from the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba in the Nether-
 lands. In addition, there are about 207,000 Turkish and 168,000 Moroccan workers
 and family members. These groups face some de facto discrimination in housing and
 employment, as well as practical limits on opportunities for economic and social ad-
 vancement as a result of educational and skill levels which do not compare favor-
 ably with those of the majority of Dutch citizens.
 Unemployment among large minority groups is four times higher than the na-
 tional average. Government, employers, and union leaders agreed in November 1990
 on a series of measures designed to reduce minority unemployment levels to the na-
 tional average. The goal was to increase minority employment by 15,000 jobs per
 year over a 4-year period. The Government continues to work with employers to
 meet this goal. However, the Government has said it will refrain from using con-
 tract compliance measures or imposing quotas. Minorities now compose 3 percent
 of the personnel employed in the national Government; the stated goal is to raise
 this to 5 percent by 1995.
 The National Advisory and Consultation Board on Minority Policy addresses the
 problems of minorities in the fields of health, education, employment, and the law.
 Chaired by the Minister of Internal Affairs, it includes representatives of seven eth-
 nic minority groups and acts as a consultative body to the Cabinet on minority is-
 sues and as a conduit to the Government for the expression of minority concerns.
 Administrative tribunals have been set up for filing claims of discrimination both
 against employers and the Government and in housing matters. They provide a
 practical means of redress for discrimination claims.
 Incidents of violence against foreigners are rare and isolated. The Government
 has tried to increase public awareness of racism and discrimination. The Cabinet
 published in October a general declaration opposing racial discrimination which is
 to be signed by national and local authorities, political parties, employers, and em-
 ployees' organizations.
 According to a study of violence against women financed by the Dutch Ministry
 of Welfare, Health, and Culture, and published in 1989, 20.8 percent of Dutch
 women in heterosexual relationships are or have been victims of violence. Slightly
 over half of these (11 percent) experience repeated severe violence. The Government
 supports programs to reduce and prevent violence against women. Battered women
 findrefuge in a network of government subsidize dwomen's shelters offering the
 services of social workers and psychologists. In addition, battered women who leave
 their domestic partners become eligible for social benefits which include an adequate
 basic subsidy as well as an allowance for dependent children. There are also organi-
 zations that advise and assist women who have been victims of sexual assault.
 Traditional cultural factors, combined with structural impediments such as provi-
 sions of the tax code that penalize two-income families, continue to discourage
 women, especially married women and women with children, from entering or re-
 maining in the labor force. Despite this, the trend-especially for younger women-
 is upward. Net participation of women rose by 180,000 labor years in the period
 from 1988 to 1991, a rise of 4.5 percent per year, compared to a 1 percent annual
 growth in male participation. However, participation of women in the Dutch labor
 market is still below the European Community average; net participation of women
 was 46.1 percent in 1990. When excluding women working less than 10 hours per
 
 
 858
 week, net participation in labor years in 1990 dropped even lower, to 36.9 percent,
 ompared to the EC average of 44.6 percent under the same criterion. The unem-
 ployment rate of women reentering the labor market is high; most of the jobs they
 have are in the low administrative and services sector, women have less chance of
 promotion; and day-care facilities are still limited. The situation is, however, im-
 proving. In 1988 the Government started positive action programs for women, and
 a study of 1990 collective labor agreements by the SocialAffairs Ministry showed
 that almost all of these contracts included one or more schemes to strengthen the
 position of women. Legislation mandates equal pay for equal work; prohibits dismis-
 sal because of marriage, pregnancy, or motherhood; and provides the basis for equal-
 ity in other employment-reated areas. A legislatively mandated Equal Treatment
 Commission actively pursues complaints of discrimination in these areas as well as
 allegations of pay differentials. Women have full legal and judicial rights and enter
 marriage with the option of choosing community property or separate regimes for
 their assets.
 Women's groups dedicated to such issues as equal rights in social security, the
 legal position of women, sexual abuse, taxation, education, work, and prostitution
 operate freely throughout the Netherlands. In February 1991 the Equal Rights
 Council, in a report entitled "Sexual Intimidation in Work Situations," called for
 tougher legislation to control sexual harassment in the work place. Nevertheless, a
 study published in January showed that 20 percent of working women in the Neth-
 erlands say they have been a victim of sexual harassment in the workplace. This
 figure rises to 29 percent for women in the 25 to 34 age group.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of Dutch workers to associate freely is well
 established. The active trade union movement-two major labor federations (Fed-
 erated Dutch Trade Union Movement-FNV and National Federal of Christian Trade
 Unions-CNV), a separate smaller labor center of white collar employees, and a few
 independent unions-includes in its membership 25 percent of the employee work
 force. Members of the Dutch armed forces may belong to unions. Unions are entirely
 free of control by the Government and political parties. They may and do participate
 in political activities, and they and their federations maintain active relations with
 recognized international labor organizations.
 With the exception of most civil servants, all workers have the right to strike, and
 this right is exercised freely. In the first 3 months of 1992 there were 10 labor dis-
 putes involving 3,150 workers and a total of 10,727 workdays lost. Disputes involv-
 ing civil servant complaints may be appealed to an arbitration panel. The Govern-
 ment and unions continue to discuss their longstanding differences over the issue
 of the right of civil service workers to strike and the definition of "essential" civil
 services.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized and well established. Discrimination against work-
 ers because of their union membership is illegal and does not exist in practice. Ap-
 proximately 76 percent of all paid workers are currently covered by collective bar-
 gaining agreements which are negotiated in the framework of the social partnership
 in industrial relations developed among trade unions, private employers, and the
 Government. Every year these three participants seek to develop a "central accord"
 with agreed social and economic goars for the coming year. Sectoral collective bar-
 gaining then takes place under this umbrella agreement A central tripartite body,
 the Labor Commission, oversees implementation of the industrial relations system.
 International Labor Organization committees for a number of years have asked
 the Government to amend the Wage Determination Act of 1970, which gives the
 Government the power to freeze the terms and conditions of employment in the pub-
 lic sector in the face of compelling reasons of national economic interest. The ,v.-
 ernment has now agreed to obviate any future question of freezes by including non-
 discretionary funding for labor costs in the general budgets for those public sector
 enterprises. Agreements to this effect, covering a total of two-thirds of all public sec-
 tor employees, have thus far been concluded for the hospital, railway, broadcasting,
 and regional transport industries.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by the Constitution and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16. At that age, young people may work full time only if they have completed
 the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Those still in school at age 16 may not work
 more than 8 hours per week. People under the age of 18 are prohibited by law from
 working at night. working overtime, or working in areas which could be dangerous
 
 
 859
 to their physical or mental development. The laws are effectively enforced by the
 Labor Commission, a tripartite entity which monitors hiring practices and conducts
 inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage for adult workers is estab-
 lished by law and is adjusted every 6 months for changes in the cost of living. There
 is a reduced minimum wage for workers under 23 which ranges from 85 percent of
 the adult minimum wage or workers aged 22 to 33 percent for those aged 16. The
 purpose of the reduced minimum wage law is to provide incentives for the employ-
 ment of young people, one of the demographic groups with the highest rate of unem-
 ployment. The legislated minimum wage, together with social benefits available to
 all minimum wage earners, provides an adequate living for wohmers and their fami-
 lies.
 The standard workweek is determined by calculating the average of collective bar-
 gaining areements; it is not imposed by statute or regulation. Full-time workers
 over age 16 receive a paid vacation of at least 190 hours per year. There are also
 generous welfare provisions for workers who become sick or disabled. For unem-
 ployed workers, there is an extensive system of benefits which allows recipients to
 maintain an adequate standard of living.
 Working conditions, including comprehensive occupational safety and health
 standards set by law and regulation, are actively monitored by the Labor Commis-
 sion. Enforcement is effective. Workers may refuse to continue work at a hazardous
 work site. The Ministry of Social Affairs also polices standards through its Labor
 Inspectorate.
 NORWAY
 Norway is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy with King
 Harald V as the titular Head of State. Norway is governed by a Prime Minister,
 Cabinet, and a 165-seat Storting (parliament) that is elected every 4 years and can-
 not be dissolved.
 The police, security forces, and the military are scrupulous in their protection of
 human rights. The Government (including the judicial system and the Storting) ex-
 ercises firm control over these organizations and investigates thoroughly any allega-
 tions of human rights violations.
 Norway is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy combining private,
 public, and state ownership. Personal freedoms, such as freedom of association and
 of speech and the right to pursue private interests and to hold private property, are
 protected by the Constitution and respected in practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian tradition, an independ-
 ent press, and highly developed educational and social welfare systems have made
 Norway a leading advocate of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Such killings did not occur.
 b. Disappearance.--Secret arrests and detentions did not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment do not
 exist in Norway's penal system. Generous furlough and visitation rights characterize
 the system, which emphasizes rehabilitation. The maximum sentence for any crime
 is 21 years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Norwegian law provides for arrest war-
 rants, which are used except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without being charged. A person charged with a crime
 has the right, observed in practice, to appear before a judge for arraignment within
 24 hours. If charges are forzialized at the arraignment, the judge then determines
 whether the detainee should be kept in custody or released pending trial. Bail need
 not be posted. A strong case must be made to justify detention. Possible grounds
 include fear of flight, the needs of the investigation, and fear that a detainee will
 commit further crimes.
 Any person held in pretrial detention appears before a judge every 4 weeks for
 a determination of the necessity of continued detention. There is no legal limit on
 the time a prisoner may be held before trial; however, lengthy pretrial detention is
 rare. Preventive detention also exists but is used infrequently. There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The right to a fair, public trial is ensured by law
 and honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those involving state sccu-
 
 
 860
 rity or private family matters, are trials closed. In criminal cases, all Norwegian
 citizens and aliens are entitled to free counsel. Indigent persons are granted free
 counsel in certain civil cases as well.
 Norway has a three-tiered system of district and city courts, high courts, and the
 Supreme Court-all of which deal with both penal and civil cases-as well as special
 courts, including the Labor Disputes Court and the Social Insurance Court. The ju-
 diciary is independent of both the legislative and the executive branches of the Gov-
 ernment and tries military and security as well as civil and criminal cases. The
 Labor Court mediates industrial relations disputes.
 Persons refusing both military service and alternative civilian service may be held
 in prison for up to 16 months (a period equivalent to military service) without a
 trial. Detention is based on an administrative rather than a judicial decision, and
 prisoners held in this manner receive the salary and benefits normally accorded to
 military recruits during their period of confinement. Administrative decisions by the
 Ministries of Justice and Defense expanded the grounds for conscientious objector
 status in 1988.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The pri-
 vacy of the family and the person is free from arbitrary interference by the Govern-
 ment. Police may conduct searches of the home only with court approval and in in-
 stances of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed. There were
 no allegations of forced entry into Norwegian homes in 1992. In most cases, wire-
 taps are prohibited by law, but they may be used in cases involving state security
 or narcotics offenses when officially a pproved by the court within carefully drawn
 legal guidelines. Correspondence may be opened only by court order in cases involv-
 ing state security.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is protected by the
 Constitution and respected in practice. In addition to restrictions on slander and
 libel, Norwegian law forbids racist or sexist remarks in print or public speech. It
 is forbidden to publish information concerning national defense that could prove
 damaging to Norwegian security.
 Norway has an active and diversified press, and many papers are sustained by
 government subsidies. Some newspapers are loosely connected to various national
 political parties. Norway's state broadcasting company is the major one of two na-
 tional television broadcasters and retains a monopoly on national radio stations, but
 the Government does not exercise editorial control over programming. Private local
 radio stations exist, as do privately owned local cable stations. Private and foreign
 television networks are also available on cable throughout Norway.
 Certain restrictions apply to the showing of films. The Film Control Board has
 the authority to censor or ban any film deemed overly violent, pornographic, or blas-
 phemous. The blasphemy clause in the censorship law, however, has not been used
 in the last 20 years. There is no evidence that any films have been censored because
 of political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Norwegians exercise these
 freedoms without restraint. Permits for public demonstrations are granted routinely.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of
 Norway, which is financially supported by the State, and to which 93 percent of the
 population nominally belongs. There is a constitutional requirement that the King
 and half of the Cabinet belong to the state church. The Workers' Protection and
 Working Environment Act permits prospective employers to ask job applicants
 wheth!r they respect Christian beliefs and principles when applying for a job in pri-
 vate, religious-run schools and day-care centers.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered members of 20 other de-
 nominations which operate freely and may proselytize. Foreign clergy are welcome
 in Norway. No religious community is required to register with the Government un-
 less it desires state support, which is provided to all registered denominations on
 a proportional basis in accordance with membership.
 Although the state religion is taught in all public schools, children of other faiths
 are allowed to be absent from such classes upon parental request. If there are
 enough students of the same faith, the school will arrange religion classes in that
 faith. Workers belonging to minority denominations are allowed leave for religious
 holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel. The right
 to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed. Refugees and asylum seekers are provided
 generous benefits, including social services, free medical care, and education while
 awaitinw decisions on their asylum anolications. Norway maintains the right to re-
 
 
 atriate rejected asylum seekers involuntarily in certain situations. In practice,
 owever, there have been no recent cases in which a person with a valid claim to
 fear of persecution has been involuntarily repatriated from Norway.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Right& The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Norway is a multiparty democracy. Seven parties are represented in the Storting,
 and the distribution of seats is based upon proportional representation by district.
 The Storting may reject or modify government proposals; if a government loses a
 vote on a major issue of confidence, it resigns, and a new government is formed.
 The minimum voting age is 18, and voter turnout in the 1989 parliamentary elec-
 tions was over 82 percent. Foreigners who have resided in Norway for at least 3
 years, and are otherwise eligible, have the right to vote in local elections only.
 In addition to participating freely in the national political process Norwegian
 Sami (Lapp) elected their own constituent assembly, the Sameting, for the first time
 in 1989. The 39-seat body is a consultative group which meets regularly to consider
 issues of importance to the Sami people. In August 1990, the Sami population of
 Norway hosted the annual convention of the World Council of Indigenous Peoples
 in Tromso.
 There are no restrictions, in law or in practice, on the participation of women in
 government or in the political arena generally.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of public and private organizations monitor alleged human rights
 abuses either inside or, more often, outside the country. The Government cooperates
 with nongovernmental investigations of alleged violations of human rights and, in
 recent years, has cooperated with both the European Commission of Human Rights
 and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Norway is an active par-
 ticipant in international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects a long tradition of
 egalitarianism, the Government provides for the health, education, retirement, and
 other needs of its people, regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background, or po-
 litical opinion.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the northeastern corner of
 the country, the Sami (Lapp) people were Norway's only significant minority group
 until the influx of immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the Government
 has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of the Sami by providing Sami-lan-
 guage instruction at schools in Sami-inhabited areas, radio and television programs
 broadcast or subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies for the publication of
 newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami (see Section 3).
 There is continuing political debate on whether current restrictions on non-Nordic
 immigration, in effect since 1975, are racially motivated and whether immigrant mi-
 nority oups such as Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans are accorded
 equalnghts by Norwegian authorities. The Government provides legal protection for
 the rights of all minorities and has taken active measures to help these groups ad-
 just to Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language instruction for any
 foreign resident.
 As a result of a dramatic increase in the number of persons seeking political asy-
 lum in the mid-1980's, the Storting passed a bill in 1988 that would no longer allow
 asylum applicants who are not bona fide refugees to remain on humanitarian
 grounds.
 The law, while limiting the number of those granted asylum, safeguards the
 rights of those asylum seekers allowed to remain in Norway. Refugee policy contin-
 ues to be a significant political issue; some groups call for reducing the inflow of
 refugees, and others-humail rights groups and political parties--urge the Govern-
 ment to accept more refugees. Although some individual refugee cases have caused
 problems Norway has a well-organized system which includes advance planning,
 careful dispersion of refugees throughout Norway, and generous welfare, edu-
 cational, and vocational training programs. Occasional racially motivated attacks on
 non-European immigrant groups are dealt with firmly by the police and judicial au-
 thorities.
 Women are protected under the equal rights law of 1978 and other regulations.
 Under that law, "women and men engaged in the same activity shall have equal
 wages for work of equal value." An Equal Rights Council monitors enforcement of
 the 1978 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes complaints of sexual dis-
 
 
 862
 crimination. The Government provides liberal maternity leave and time off for ei-
 ther parent to care for their children.
 Crime against women is not widespread. A recent increase in the crime rate has
 included crimes against women, although police authorities believe that much of the
 increase in reported rapes and incidents of wife beating is due to a greater willing-
 ness among women to report these crimes than has been the case in the past. The
 police vigorously investigate and prosecute such crimes and have instituted special
 programs for rape and domestic violence prevention and for counseling victims. Pub-
 lic and private organizations run several free shelters which give battered wives an
 alternative to returning to a violent domestic situation after an incident of wife
 beating.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have and exercise the right to associate
 freely and to strike. The Government, however, has the right, with the approval of
 the Storting, to invoke compulsory arbitration under certain circumstances. This
 procedure, which was invoked several times in the 1980's, particularly in the oil in-
 dustry, has been criticized repeatedly by the Committee of Experts of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization, which argued that the situations were not a sufficient
 threat to public health and safety to justify the action. The Government again in-
 voked this procedure in 1992 to stop a public workers' strike.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force, unions play an im-
 portant role in political and economic life and are consulted by the Government on
 important economic and social problems. Although the largest trade union federa-
 tion is associated with the Labor Party, all unions and labor federations are free
 of party and government control. Unions are free to form federations and to affiliate
 internationally. They maintain strong ties with such international bodies as the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All workers, including govern-
 ment employees and military personnel, exercise the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. Collective bargaining is widespread, with most wage earners covered by
 negotiated settlements, either directly or through understandings which extend the
 contract terms to workers outside of the main labor federation and the employers'
 bargaining group. The 1992 collective bargaining round between the National Union
 Organization (LO) and the Employers Organization (NHO), to set the nationwide le-
 gally binding "basic agreement," required the services of a government wage medi-
 ator. The last-minute resolution of wage negotiations resulted in moderate wage and
 benefit increases. There have been no complaints in recent years of antiunion dis-
 crimination, but such complaints would be dealt with through the Labor Court.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.--Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 law and does not exist. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.---Children aged 13 to 18 may be
 employed part-time in light work that will not adversely affect their health, develop-
 ment, or schooling. Minimum age rules are observed in practice and enforced by the
 Directorate of Labor Inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Normal working hours are mandated by law
 and do not exceed 37.5 hours per week. The law also provides for 25 working days
 of paid leave per year (31 for those over age 60). A 28-hour rest period is legally
 mandated on the weekend and for holidays. There is ro minimum wage as such in
 Norway, but wages normally fall within a national wage scale negotiated by labor,
 employers, and the Government. The average annual per capita income, not includ-
 ing extensive social benefits, is adequate to provide a family a decent living.
 Under the Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act of 1977, all em-
 ployed persons are assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions. Spe-
 cific standards are set by the Directorate of Labor Inspections in consultation with
 nongovernmental experts. According to the Act, working environment committees,
 composed of management, workers, and health personnel, must be established in all
 enterprises with 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in all or-
 ganizations. Workers enjoy strong rights to remove themselves from situations
 which endanger their health. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures effective
 compliance with labor legislation and standards.
 
 
 863
