 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a parliamentary democracy under a
 constitutional monarch. The full range of the political
 spectrum is represented in Parliament and the media. A number
 of special features of the Dutch political system, including
 nationwide proportional voting for Parliament and a media
 policy that allocates some broadcasting time to all social and
 political groups, insures that minority viewpoints are heard.
 The Dutch attach great importance in their foreign and domestic
 policies to human rights. Internationally recognized rights
 are protected by Dutch law and respected in practice. The
 Dutch have a free market economy with a large social welfare
 system providing a relatively high level of social benefits.
 The most significant human rights development in the
 Netherlands in 1983 was the publication of the Government's
 'Minority Note," a plan of action designed to address remaining
 problems in effectively integrating racial and cultural
 minorities into Dutch society.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 opposition political groups does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 Abductions, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by police
 or other official security forces do not occur.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and do not occur in practice. Prison conditions are good by
 international standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is guaranteed by
 law and respected in practice. There are no political
 prisoners in the Netherlands. The equivalent of the right of
 habeas corpus exists in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted only in times of emergency, upon declaration, for a
 limited time by national or municipal authorities. This power
 is used infrequently, and normally a person can be held no
 longer than six hours unless charges are brought. Exile is
 unknown in the Netherlands.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is guaranteed by law and
 respected in practice. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 and a system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for
 those unable to pay for such counsel. Charges must be formally
 stated. The judiciary is independent, with a functioning
 appeals process and a Supreme Court.
 
 (1048)
 
 
 1049
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or
 monitor private correspondence. The state respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.  Among non-Dutch
 minorities resident in the Netherlands, there have been
 complaints that new immigration rules restrict their right to
 marry persons of their choosing. Those rules require minimum
 incomes for persons seeking to have foreign-born spouses join
 them in the Netherlands.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are respected. There is no system
 of censorship. The press is privately owned and a wide variety
 of daily newspapers is published, both at the national and
 regional level. Television and radio are partially subsidized
 by the Government, but broadcast time is allocated on the basis
 of audience reaction, and support is provided to private
 broadcasting societies representing different religious,
 political, and ethnic groups. Minority political and ethnic
 groups also receive broadcast time under this system.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedoms of assembly and association are not restricted. An
 active trade union movement with almost two million members has
 the legal right to strike. The rights of unions to organize
 and bargain collectively are well established. Unions are free
 to participate in political life, and the two major labor
 federations directly support their affiliated political
 parties. Various private interest groups exist in the
 Netherlands and play an active political role.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion in the Netherlands. State
 subsidies in the educational field are provided to religious
 organizations which maintain educational facilities. The
 amount of the subsidy is based on the number of students
 attending the schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation in the Netherlands. Restrictions are not
 placed on residence. The Netherlands has provided first asylum
 for refugees from Eastern European countries and provided
 permanent resettlement for a limited number of persons,
 principally from Eastern Europe and Vietnam. In 1983, the
 Dutch Government announced it would begin including Cambodians
 for consideration for permanent resettlement under its
 Indochinese refugee program.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 
 
 1050
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Nationwide elections are held every four years (or more
 frequently in the event of a parliamentary vote of
 no-confidence). There have been numerous peaceful changes of
 government as a result of such elections. The most recent was
 in September 1982 when a center-right coalition came to power,
 replacing a center-left government. Political parties are
 numerous (12 have seats in Parliament) and represent all points
 of view, from the far right to the far left. Women have full
 political rights and are increasingly represented in political
 life. Approximately 20 percent of the members of the lower
 house of Parliament are women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Netherlands has not been the subject of international human
 rights investigations. There are a number of Dutch groups
 interested in human rights abroad, as well as national chapters
 of international organizations such as Amnesty International.
 The Netherlands Government is active in the United Nations
 Human Rights Commission and other international forums
 concerned with human rights. Freedom House rates the
 Netherlands 'free.-
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Netherlands per capita gross national product (GNP) was
 slightly over $11,000 in 1981. The right to private property
 is protected in the Dutch market economy. The welfare state is
 well established, with an extensive system of cash and tax
 benefits to assist the unemployed and handicapped and to
 provide adequate educational and health opportunities to all
 citizens. There were some reductions in these benefits in 1983
 as part of a government program to cut the size of the national
 budget deficit. Average life expectancy is 75 years, and the
 infant mortality rate is 8.3 per 1,000 live births.  Primary
 education is universal. Food consumption, measured in daily
 caloric intake per capita, is 125 percent of requirements.
 The entry of substantial numbers of women into the labor force
 occurred somewhat later in the Netherlands than in most of the
 industrialized countries of Western Europe and North America.
 In recent years, women have succeeded in achieving greater
 equality with men in employment status and promotions. Full
 equality has not yet been reached, and the Government and most
 political parties advocate special considerations for women in
 order to achieve further progress in this area.
 The problems of effectively integrating Dutch racial and ethnic
 minorities into national economic and social life is perhaps
 the most difficult human rights task confronting the Dutch
 Government. Thousands of persons from the former Dutch colony
 of Suriname and the Netherlands Antilles have come to live in
 the Netherlands in recent years. In addition, there are
 significant numbers of foreign guest workers, mostly from
 Turkey and Morocco. These groups face some overt
 discrimination in housing and employment, as well as practical
 limits on opportunities for social and economic advancement
 caused by inadequate educational levels compared to the
 majority of Dutch citizens. There is a widespread fear among
 
 
 1051
 the Dutch that discrimination is on the rise, prompted by bad
 economic times throughout the Netherlands. There have been
 isolated instances of violence against persons for racial
 reasons. A symbol of this fear has been the public support for
 the still tiny Center Party, an anti-foreign worker party that
 many consider openly racist. As a result of electoral gains
 posted by the Center Party in a municipal election in September
 1983, the leaders of the major political parties have called
 for a joint front to combat racism in the Netherlands.
 The Government has also taken steps to address this problem by
 its publication of the 'Minority Note" in September. This
 document is a comprehensive plan of action to address the
 problems of minorities in the fields of health, education,
 employment, and the law. It works from a basic premise that
 maximum integration of racial minorities into broader Dutch
 society is the only way to achieve full equality. The report
 includes sections to address the special problems of minority
 youth and women. There have been criticisms, however, of some
 aspects of the report, particularly a section proposing
 financial incentives for those foreign-born persons who wish to
 return to their former country of residence.
 
 
 1052
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS
 1981
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 A .A ID  .................
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 5.FuOD  FOR  PEACE ......
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........
 REPAY.  !N S-LOANS .....
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........
 E.PELIEF.EC.DEV 3 WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....
 C.OTIIER  ECON.  ASSIST...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 PEACE  CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER ............
 II-MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 A.rAP  GRANTS ..........
 9.CREDIT  FINANCING ....
 C.!NTL  MiL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS  STOCK...
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........
 III.TOTAL  ECON. &  MIL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......
 ALL  OTHER  ..............
 
 1982     1983
 - o .- - . . . . . . . . . . . - - - -
 
 0.0    0.0    0.0
 0.0    0.0    0.0
 0.0    0.0    0.0
 .....    - -.0... 0. . 0.... 0. . 0..
 0.0    0.0    0.0
 0.0    0.0    0.0
 0.0    0.0    0.0
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983    1946-83
 ---.-.------------.-..----------.---.-----------..--..---
 
 TOTAL ........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 236.7
 236.5
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.2
 0.0
 
 
