 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary legislative
 system. Executive authority is exercised by the Prime Minister and Cabinet rep-
 resenting the governing political parties (traditionally a coalition.'of at least two
 major parties). The bicameral Parliament is elected through free and fair elections.
 The judiciary is independent.
 Regional police forces are primarily responsible for maintaining internal security.
 The police, the royal constabulary, and investigative organizations concerned with
 internal and external security are effectively under civilian authority.
 The market-based economy is export oriented and features a mixture of industry,
 services, and agriculture. Key industries include chemicals, oil refining, natural gas,
 machinery, and electronics. The agricultural sector produces fruit, vegetables, flow-
 ers, meat, and dairy products. Living standards and the level of social benefits are
 high. Unemployment is 4 percent; however, long-term unemployment, in particular
 among ethnic minorities, was still a problem.
 
 
 1397
 The Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, and the law and judi-
 ciary provide effective means of dealing with individual instances of abuse. The Gov-
 ernment is taking serious steps to address violence and discrimination against
 women. The Government has also taken steps to address societal discrimination
 against minorities.
 Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles, which are two autonomous regions of the
 kingdom, also feature parliamentary systems and full constitutional protection of
 human rights. In practice government- respect for human rights in these islands
 generally is little different from that in the European Netherlands. The two Carib-
 bean Governments have taken measures to address past reports of police brutality,
 but the islands' prison conditions remain substandard-
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there 'Were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Following a visit to the Netherlands, the Council of Europe's Committee for the
 Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT)
 published a report in August which noted that it did not find any torture and few
 incidents in which officials did not treat arrested or detained persons correctly. The
 CPT made a positive assessment of the facilities at most police stations and at de-
 tention, secure psychiatric, and Asylum centers. However, it recommended that de-
 tainees be allowed better access to medikal and recreational facilities.
 A government-funded police professionalization program, as well as the establish-
 ment of a grievance committee, have contributed significantly to countering inci-
 dents of police brutality in both the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba. No new inci-
 dents were reported, nor have there been any allegations of torture.
 Prison conditions in the Netherlands meet minimum international standards, and
 the Government permits visits by human rights monitors.
 In other reports, the CPT has urged the Governments of the Netherlands, the
 Netherlands Antilles, and Aruba to improve the "inhuman" conditions in Curacao's
 Koraal Specht prison and in cell blocks at the police stations on the islands of St.
 Maarten, Bonaire, and Aruba. The CPT's criticism focused on overcrowding, ex-
 tremely poor sanitary conditions, poor food, and insufficient ventilation. The Com-
 mittee also criticized widespread corruption and the mistreatment of prisoners by
 guards at Koraal Specht. The CPT's most recent report criticized the absence of any
 major improvement in conditions at the Koraal Specht prison.
 The Dutch Government repeatedly offered financial assistance to the government
 of the Netherlands Antilles for the construction of a new juvenile wing, a maximum
 security facility, and other improvements at Koraal Specht. The Government also
 sent experts on prison organization and training of guards. While acknowledging
 that more work needs to be done, Koraal Specht prison officials point to recent
 progress in improving conditions (all prisoners now have mattresses, hygiene and
 food have improved, and construction has begun on a small new wing to relieve
 overcrowding). They add that the CPT was invited to visit again to witness the im-
 provement.
 The Governments of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba allow access by non-
 governmental organizations to prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides
 citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process.
 The judicial system is based on the Napoleonic Code. A pyramidal system of can-
 tonal, district, and appellate courts handles both criminal and civil cases. The Su-
 preme Court acts as the highest appellate court and ensures the uniform, interpreta-
 tion of the law. In criminal trials, the law provides for a presumption of innocence
 and the right to public trial, to counsel (virtually free for low income persons), and
 to appeal. The law provides for the right to a fair trial, and the independent judici-
 ary vigorously enforces this right.
 There were no reports of-political prisoners.
 
 
 1398
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this right in practice. State subsidies are provided to religious organi-
 zations that maintain educational facilities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 There were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee
 status. The Government does not provide first asylum as such, but most asylum
 seekers (89 percent in 1997), except those who obviously came from a "safe country
 of origin" or stayed for some time in a "safe third country," are permitted to apply
 for resident status. Some of those (about 15 percent in 1997) whose applications
 eventually are denied nonetheless are permitted to stay temporarily on humani-
 tarian grounds or as long as their country of origin is considered unsafe.
 In recent years, new legislation has aimed to protect genuine refugees while ex-
 cluding economic refugees and illegal immigrants. More stringent criteria for grant-
 ing asylum resulted in a significant decrease in the number of new asylum seekers,
 from 52,576 in 1994 to 29,258 in 1995, and 22,857 in 1996. However, the number
 rose again to 34,400 in 1997 and to over 40,000 in 1998 due in large part to even
 stricter laws in other European countries. The focus has recently shifted to advanc-
 ing the return of rejected asylum seekers through financial incentives, job training
 programs, and assistance with reintegration projects in their countries of origin. To
 this end, the Government concluded bilateral agreements with countries such as
 Ethiopia and Somalia.
 The Government has an active policy against alien smuggling. The maximum sen-
 tence for trafficking in aliens is 6 years. In cases involving minors, severe physical
 violence, or organized trafficking, the maximum sentence is 10 years.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women and
 minorities in government and politics. A total of 54 of the 150 members of the sec-
 ond chamber of Parliament are women, as are 4 of the 15 cabinet ministers. The
 Government pursues an active policy to promote the participation of women in poli-
 tics and public administration.
 Although a minority, women also hold positions in the parliaments and cabinets
 of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings. Government officials are very cooperative and responsive
 to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law bans discrimination on the basis of any of these factors or on sexual ori-
 entation or political preference. The Government generally is effective in enforcing
 these provisions. Under a new Equal Treatment Act, complainants may take offend-
 ers to court under civil law.
 Woen.-A recent study reported that about 211,000 women are victims of vio-
 lence by their former and present partners each year, about 50,000 of these are sub-
 jected to severe violence. In addition to the personal suffering, this form of violence
 
 
 1399
 against women cost society about $175 million (f. 332 million) per year in hos-
 pitalization and absence from work.
 The Government supports programs to reduce and prevent violence against
 women. Battered women find refuge in a network of 48 government-subsidized wom-
 en's shelters offering the services of social workers and psychologists- In addition,
 battered women who leave their domestic partners become eligible for social bene-
 fits, which include an adequat basic subsidy as well as an allowance for dependent
 children. Nongovernmental organizations also advise and assist women who are vic-
 tims of sexual assault. Since 1991 marital rape has been a crime and carries the
 same penalty as nonmarital rape. Spousal abuse carries a one-third higher penalty
 than ordinary battery.
 In addition to helping victims of sexual abuse, the Government has pursued an
 active prevention campaign through commercials and awareness training of edu-
 caters. A recent evaluation of the results of the first 5 years of this campaign dem-
 onstrated greatr awareness of the problem, particularly among the target group of
 men between the ages of 15 and 35, but little change in their attitudes.
 Prostittiion is legal, and an estimated 30,000 women work as prostitutes. Some
 3,000 of these are believed to wyork under compulsion or in degrading circumstances.
 High-priority government measures to combat trafficking in women for prostitution
 include a more aggressive prosecution policy as well as more effective international
 cooperation.-Several police forces have established special units to deal with the
 problem. A number of arrests were made in October of suspected traffickers who
 smuggled young girls into the country.  0
 The Dutch Foundation Against Trafficking in Women estimates that each year be-
 twe      een1,50  a  om    and girls are brought into the Netherlands for the
 purpose of prostitution, not only from Central and Eastern Europe, but also from
 the Far East and West Africa. Women victims of trafficking- who are forced to work
 as prostitutes and who are apprehended are offered temporary residence permits by
 the Government so that they can avai Themselves of social, medical, legal, and fi-
 nancial assistance.
 Women are increasingly entering the job market, but traditional cultural factors
 and inadequate child care facilities can discourage women-especially those with
 young children-from working. The number of women in the labor market is rising
 steadily. In 1983 only 38 percent of women between the ages of 15 and 64 held paid
 jobs, compared with almost 50. percent at present. Unemployment among women
 dropped considerably, from 6.8 percent in July 1997 to 4.6 percent in July 1998.
 Male unemployment was 3.5 percent About 67 percent of working women work part
 time, compared with 17 percent of the male working population. The Government
 established favorable conditions for part-time employment by adopting a law that
 prohibits employers from treating part-thie workers differently from those in full-
 time jobs.
 According to the Education Ministry, women have made up ually the arrears they
 had experienced in education. At present girls form the majority in higher secondary
 education where they also score better, and in 1996, for the first time, as many
 women as men entered college and university.
 Women often are underemployed and have less chance of promotion than their
 male colleagues. They oten hold lower level positions than men, mostly because of
 their part-time jobs. According to the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment,
 the difference in earnings between men and women remains at 24 percent. Despite
 this, some women are making steady progress by moving into professional and high-
 visibility jobs.
 In 1988 the Government started affwrmative action programs for women. Collec-
 tive labor agreements usually include one r ore schemes to strengthen the posi-
 eduntion wme Leislation mandates equal pay for equal work, prohibits dismissal
 because of marriage, pregnancy, or motherhood, and provides the basis for equality
 in other employment-related areas. A legislatively mandated Equal Treatment Com-
 mission actively pursues complaints of discrimination in these areas as well as alle-
 gations of pay differences.
 The social welfare and national health systems provide considerable assistance to
 working women with families. Women are eligible for 16 weeks of maternity leave
 with full pay. The Parental Leave Law that requires employers to allow new moth-
 ers and fathers to work 20 hours a week for up to 6 months was made more flexible
 in 1997. The new law allows parents to take (unpaid) full-time leave during 3
 months and to extend the leave over a period longer than 6 months. People working
 fewer than 20 hours per week will also be entitled to parental leave.
 Women have full legal and judicial rights and enter marriage with the option of
 choosing community propertyor separate regimes for their assets.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1400
 Women's groups dedicated to such problems as equal rights in social security, the
 legal position of women, sexual abuse, taxation, education, work, and prostitution
 operate freely. The law requires employers to take measures to protect- workers
 against sexual harassment; research showed that one in three working women has
 experienced sexual harassment in the workplace. The Government funds an ongoing
 publicity campaign to increase awareness of-the problem. As the largest employer,
 it has taken measures'to counter harassment among civil servants, for example, in
 the police force.
 Children.-The Government works to ensure the well-being of children through
 numerous well-funded health, education, and public information programs. The
 Council for the Protection of Children, operated through the Ministry of Justice, en-
 forces child support orders, investigates cases of child abuse, and recommends rem-
 edies ranging from counseling to withdrawal of parental rights. In addition, the
 Government has set up a popular hot line for children and a network of pediatri-
 cians who track suspected cases of child abuse on a confidential basis. There is no
 societal pattern of abuse of children.
 International sex tourism involving the abuse of minor children is prosecutable.
 Since 1996 several Dutch citizens have been tried and convicted for- the abuse of
 minors in other countries. The age of consent is 16. The prosecution of adults for
 sex with minors between the ages of 12 and 16 only occurs when a complaint is filed
 by an interested party.
 The maximum penalty for child pornography was raised from 3 months' to 4
 years' imprisonment, 6 years in the event of financial gain, and the maximum fine
 was more than tripled. New legislation allows for provisional arrest, house searches,
 and criminal financial investigations. Moreover, the authorities no longer must
 prove that a person possesses child pornography for the purpose of distribution or
 public display. The Supreme Court has ruled that the mere possession of child por-
 nography is sufficient -cause for'prosecution. For the first time, in September a
 Dutch citizen was convicted and sentenced solely on this ground. The discovery of
 a major child pornography case in July resulted in stricter enforcement of antichild
 abuse legislation and the allocation of additional resources to enforcement efforts.
 It also underscored the absence of appropriate legislation to fight the dissemination
 of child pornography over the Internet. The Government believes that international
 cooperation is required to deal effectively with the latter problem.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. Local govern-
 ments are increasingly mandating access to public buildings for the disabled.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The integration of racial and ethnic minori-
 ties into the social and cultural mainstream remains a difficult problem.
 The Government pursues an active campaign aimed at increasing public aware-
 ness of racism and discrimination. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the
 basis of race and nationality and allows those who claim that they have been dis-
 criminated against to take alleged offenders to court under civil law. In 1997 the
 prosecution norms for discrimination were tightened: Penalties were raised for dis-
 crimination by political parties, companies, and institutions, because it was consid-
 ered more dangerous when this is done by such organizations than by individuals.
 The police were required to report any complaint of discrimination meticulously.
 Any policeman guilty of discrimination now risks disciplinary measures as well as
 criminal legal proceedings. According to the latest statistics, in 1997, 112 persons
 or organizations were brought to trial on discrimination charges. These included 37
 labor disputes, 20 cases of defamation, and 11 consumer disputes.
 Racially motivated incidents ranged from racist pamphlets and painted slogans to
 bomb threats, harassment, physical abuse, and destruction of property. However, no
 officially recorded incidents of a life-threatening nature were directed against ethnic
 minorities. As last year, local antidiscrIanination bureaus reported over a thousand
 complaints during 1998. The Discrimination on the Internet Registration Center re-
 corded 155 complaints in 1997 about discriminatory statements, racial discrimina-
 tion, or anti-Semitism on the Internet. Most statements were removed voluntarily
 by the authors at the Center's request. In nine case, the Center requested that a
 prosecutor initiate criminal proceedings.
 Immigrant groups face some discrimination in housing and employment. These
 groups, concentrated in the larger cities, suffer from a high rate of unemployment.
 The Government has been working for several years with employers' groups and
 unions to reduce minority unemployment levels to the national average. As a result
 of these efforts, in recent years the rate of job creation among ethnic minorities was
 higher than among the general population. Despite this, unemployment among eth-
 nic minorities is still about three times as high as within the native population.
 
 
 1401
 On January 1, the Act on the Stimulation of Labor Participation by Ethnic Mi-
 norities (SAMEN) became effective. The law, which replaces a similar 1994 act, is
 intended to increase job opportunities for ethnic minorities. It requires employers
 with a work force of over 35 people to register their non-Dutch employees. Employ-
 ers are to strive for a composition of their workforce that reflects the regional work-
 ing population. They are required to submit their annual social action plans, includ-
 ing recruitment targets, to the regional labor bureaus. The Labor Inspectorate over-
 sees implementation of the law.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Membership in labor unions is open to all workers
 including military, police, and civil service employees. Workers are entitled to form
 or join unions of their own choosing without prior government authorization, and
 unions are free to affiliate with national trade union federations. This right is freely
 exercised.
 Unions are entirely free of control by the Government and political parties. Union
 members may and do participate in political activities.
 All workers have the right to strike, except for most civil servants who have other
 institutionalized means of protection and redress. Industrial relations are very har-
 monious, and strikes are infrequent. In 1997 some 15 labor days per 1,000 workers
 were lost, mostly over union demands for a 36-hour workweek. There is no retribu-
 tion against striking workers.
 About 28 percent of the work force is unionized, but union-negotiated collective
 bargaining agreements are usually extended to cover about three-quarters of the
 work force. The white-collar unions' membership is the fastest growing.
 The four union federations are active internationally, without restriction.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized and well established. Discrimination against work-
 ers because of union membership is illegal and does not occur. "
 Collective bargaining agreements are negotiated in the framework of the "Social
 Partnership" developed between trade unions and private employers. Representa-
 tives of the main union federations, employers' organizations, and the government
 meet each autumn to discuss labor issues, including wage levels and their relation
 to the state of the economy and to international competition. The discussions lead
 to a central accord with social as well as economic goals for the coming year. Under
 this umbrella agreement, unions and employers in various sectors negotiate sectoral
 agreements, which the government usually extends to all companies in the respec-
 tive sector.
 Antiunion discrimination is prohibited. Union federations and employers' organi-
 zations are represented, along with independent experts, on the Social and Eco-
 nomic Council. The Council is the major advisory board for the government on poli-
 cies and legislation regarding national and international social and economic mat-
 ters.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor, in-
 cluding that performed by children, is prohibited by the Constitution and does not
 occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, and this prohibition is enforced effec-
 tively (see Section 6.c.). The minimum age for employment is 16 years, and for full-
 time work it is conditioned on completion of the mandatory 10 years of schooling.
 Those still in school at the age of 16 may not work more than 8 hours per week.
 People under the age of 18 are prohibited by law from working at night, overtime,
 or in areas dangerous to their physical or mental well-being. The laws are effec-
 tively enforced by the tripartite Labor Commission, which monitors hiring practices
 and conducts inspections.
 The Government takes a leading role in an international campaign against child
 labor in developing countries. The main Dutch labor federation, together with the
 United Nations Children's Fund and several nongovernmental organizations, also
 started a campaign against the sale of products suspected of being made through
 child labor, and for a "trademark" for clothing made without child labor.
 In March the Minister of Social Affairs and Employment announced measures to
 tighten the ban on working during school vacations by children under 13 years of
 age. Although child labor is banned, an increasing number of children work for pay
 during holidays. The parents of such children are to be reported officially by Labor
 Inspectors, and the Public Prosecutor may decide to prosecute the parents for violat-
 ing the ban on child labor. In 1997 some 20 employers were cited for employing chil-
 drecn under age 13 to do hoiday work.
 
 
 1402
 
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage for adults is established
 by law and can be adjusted every 6 months to changes in the cost-of-living index.
 Over the last few years, the statutory minimum wage has been pegged to the aver-
 age wage in collective labor contracts. The gross minimum wage is about $1,138 (f.
 2,276) per month. Foi workers earning the minimum wage, employers currently pay
 $3,750 a year (f. 6,000) in premiums for social security benefits, which includes med-
 ical insurance. Only 3 percent of workers earn the minimum wage because collective
 bargaining agreements, which are normally extended across a sector, usually set a
 minimum wage well above the legislated minimum. The Government, unions, and
 employers have taken measures to increase the number of minimum wage jobs and
 to decrease employers' social payments in order to lower the cost of hiring new
 workers and to create more jobs, especially for the long-term unemployed.
 A reduced minimum.wage applies to young people under the age of 23-one of
 the demographic groups with the highest rate of unemployment-intended to pro-
 vide incentives for their employment. This wage ranges from 34.5 percent of the
 adult minimum wage for workers 16 years of age to 85 percent for those 22 years
 of age. The legislated minimum wage and social benefits available to all minimum
 wage earners provide an adequate standard of living for workers and their families.
 Although the law establishes a, 40-hour workweek, the average workweek for
 those with full-time jobs is 37.5 hours. This workweek is the result of agreements
 reached in collective bargaining on shorter workweeks, often in conjunction with
 more flexible working hours. This combination makes it possible to adapt shorter
 working hours to the specific situation in a particular business or branch of indus-
 try. Collective bargaining negotiations generally were heading toward a 36-hour
 week for full-time employees.
 Working conditions, including comprehensive occupational safety and health
 standards set by law and regulations, are monitored actively by the tripartite Labor
 Commission. Enforcement is effective. Workers may refuse-to continue working at
 a hazardous work site. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs also monitors
 standards through its Labor Inspectorate.
