 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a parliamentary democracy under a
 constitutional monarch. A special feature of the Dutch
 political system is nationwide proportional voting for
 Parliament, where the full range of the political spectrum is
 represented.
 The Dutch have a free market economy with an extensive social
 welfare system providing a relatively high level of social
 benefits.
 The Dutch attach great importance to human rights in their
 foreign and domestic policies. Internationally recognized
 rights are protected by Dutch law and respected in practice.
 There were two significant recent developments. In 1986 for
 the first time in Dutch history, all legal residents,
 including foreign workers legally resident in the Netherlands
 for at least 5 years, were permitted to vote in municipal
 elections. In 1985 the Government established a National
 Advisory and Consultation Board on Minority Policy, chaired by
 the Minister of Internal Affairs and including the
 representatives of seven ethnic minority groups. The Dutch
 Government recognizes the right of this body to advise it in
 all matters of minority policy.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 political groups did not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 Abductions, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 police or other official security forces did not occur.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and do not occur in practice. Prison conditions are good by
 international standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is guaranteed
 by law and respected in practice. There are no political
 prisoners in The Netherlands. A right of release from
 detention exists in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted only in times of emergency, upon declaration, for a
 limited time, by national or municipal authorities. This
 power is used infrequently, and normally a person can be held
 no longer than 6 hours unless charges are brought. Exile is
 unknown in The Netherlands. There is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by law and
 respected in practice. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 and a system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for
 
 
 984
 THE NETHERLANDS
 those unable to pay for such counsel. Charges must be formally
 stated. The judiciary is independent, with a functioning
 appeals process and a Supreme Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to
 monitor private correspondence. The State respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. A feature of media policy is the
 allocation of broadcasting time to all social and political
 groups, whtch ensures that minority viewpoints are heard.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association is not restricted.
 Various private interest groups exist and play an active role
 in the political process.
 The right of unions to organize and bargain collectively is
 well established. The active trade union movement includes in
 its membership approximately 30 percent of the employed labor
 force. Unions are entirely free of government and political
 party control and may participate in political life. They are
 free to maintain relations with recognized international
 bodies in their fields. All union members, except civil
 servants, have the legal right to strike. Negotiations
 between the civil service unions and the Government take place
 in a legally established central negotiating body.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies in the
 educational field are provided to religious organizations
 which maintain educational facilities. The amount of the
 subsidy is based on the number of students attending the
 schools, subject to limitations on the nation's budget for
 public schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation. Restrictions are not placed on residence.
 The Netherlands has provided first asylum for refugees from
 Eastern European countries and permanent resettlement for a
 limited number of persons (the quota for "invited" refugees
 was increased from 250 to 500 per year in 1986), principally
 from Vietnam and Iran.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Nationwide elections are held every 4 years (or more frequently
 
 
 985
 THE NETHERLANDS
 in the event of a parliamentary vote of no confidence). In
 the most recent elections in May 1986, the center-right
 coalition, which has been in power since 1982, was reelected.
 Political parties are numerous (10 have seats in Parliament)
 and represent all points of view, from the far right to the
 far left. Women have full political rights and are
 increasingly represented in political life. Approximately 20
 percent of the members of the lower house of Parliament are
 women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In recent years The Netherlands has been the subject of
 charges by the local chapter of Amnesty International
 concerning human rights violations in connection with alleged
 government stringency in the enforcement of laws concerning
 the admission and stay of asylum-seekers. In most instances
 the Government has been able to satisfy Parliament and the
 public that individuals excluded from the country or
 repatriated were not bona fide political refugees but rather
 undocumented aliens or persons seeking economic betterment.
 For example, in its 1986 Report (covering the year 1985),
 Amnesty International expressed its concern about the January
 1985 involuntary return by The Netherlands of 45 Tamils to Sri
 Lanka. According to Amnesty International, the Tamils had
 reason to fear that they would be arrested, mistreated, or
 even killed upon their return to Sri Lanka. The Government
 informed Amnesty International that the Tamils did not at any
 time request asylum or express fear of persecution. The
 Netherlands Government stated that existing procedures
 contained sufficient safeguards for persons requesting
 asylum. The Parliament in 1985 extensively debated the
 incident but did not disapprove the Government's handling of
 the incident.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The welfare state is well established. There is an extensive
 system of cash and tax benefits to assist the needy, including
 the unemployed and the handicapped, and to provide adequate
 educational and health opportunities to all citizens and
 permanent residents. Even asylum-seekers awaiting decision on
 their applications are granted free housing and modest welfare
 payments.
 The problem of effectively integrating racial and ethnic
 minorities into national economic and social life remains the
 most difficult issue related to human rights confronting the
 Government. Thousands of persons from the former Dutch colony
 of Suriname and the Netherlands Antilles have come to live in
 The Netherlands during the past decade. In addition, there
 are significant numbers of foreign workers and their families,
 mostly from Turkey and Morocco. These groups face some overt
 private discrimination in housing and employment, as well as
 practical limits on opportunities for social and economic
 advancement as a result of educational levels that are
 inadequate compared to those of the majority of Dutch
 citizens. Unemployment among minority groups runs
 significantly higher than among the population as a whole.
 
 
 986
 THE NETHERLANDS
 There is a widespread fear among the Dutch that discrimination,
 prompted by recent difficult economic adjustments, is
 increasing. There have been isolated incidents of violence
 against persons for racial reasons during the past several
 years.
 Government policy to combat discrimination is outlined in its
 1983 "Minority Note," a comprehensive plan of action to
 address the problems of minorities in the fields of health,
 education, employment, and the law. The Government hopes that
 by 1988 the National Advisory Board on Minority Policy will be
 incorporated by legislation into the administrative structure
 of the country.
 During 1986 the Government successfully implemented the pilot
 program for return migration set up in 1985. Financial
 assistance was provided to 1,000 persons who wished to leave
 The Netherlands for their home countries but who lacked the
 means to do so. The Government anticipates continuation of
 this program which, however, affects only a small minority of
 foreign-born workers.
 Women enjoy full legal and political equality. In economic
 life, the entry of substantial numbers of women into the labor
 force occurred somewhat later ii, The Netherlands than in most
 Western industrialized countries. During 1986, however, women
 reached the average European Community rate of participation
 in the labor force.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Dutch law adequately protects the safety and health of
 workers. The average workweek for adults is 38 hours.
 Workers 18 years and older receive a minimum paid vacation of
 15 days per year. Full-time workers between the ages of 16
 and 18 receive a minimum paid vacation of 20 days per year.
 Wages are sufficient to provide a decent living for workers
 and their families.
 The minimum age for employment of young people is 16. At 16
 years of age, youth may work full-time only if they have
 completed the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Children still
 in school at age 16 may not work more than 8 hours per week.
 Laws prohibit children under the age of 18 from working at
 night, overtime, or in areas which could be dangerous to their
 physical or mental development.
 
 
 987
