 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a
 parliamentaryiegislative system. Executive authority is
 exercised by a council of ministers, representing the
 governing political parties.   A bicameral parliament, in
 whibh the full range of the political spectrum is represented,
 ,is selected'through nationwide proportional voting.
 The police and security organs are effectively subordinated to
 the excutive and judicial authorities.
 The Dutch have a mixed free market economy with extensive
 involvement-by governmental entiti~s  The Netherlands has a
 complex social welfare system, providing a high level of
 social benefits.
 The Dutch attach great importance to human rights in their
 foreign and domestic policies. Individual rights are
 protected by Dutch law and widely respected in practice by
 both the State and the general public. The press, public
 interest groups, and both domestic and international human
 rights organizations are quick to challenge practices which
 they believe violate established human-.rights norms. Such
 complaints characteristically receive a full airing in the
 media, through the judicial process, and in Parliament.
 There are no significant differences in human rights practices
 between the Netherlands proper and the autonomous regions of
 the kingdom: Aruba and the five islands of the Netherlands
 Antilles.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 political groups did not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known abductions, secret arrests, or clandestine
 detention by police or other official security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and were not known to occur.
 d. -'Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom -from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is provided for
 by law and respected in practice. A right of release from
 detention exists in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted only in times of emergency upon declaration, for a
 limited time, by national or municipal authorities.
 Under normal circumstances, a person may be held no longer
 than 6 hours, or 9 if the arrest was made at night, unless
 charges are brought. Persons suspected of having committed
 serious crimes may be held in custody for 48 hours with the
 
 
 THE NETHERLANDS
 agreement of the public prosecutor, who is also authorized to
 decide on an extension of another 48 hours. Any further
 decision on extending detention is made by an investigating
 judge. In January 1989, the Netherlands was criticized by the
 European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg for holding some
 suspects in custody up to 4 days and 9 hours without access to
 a judge. The Court declared the Dutch practice a violation of
 the European Convention on Human Rights, which guarantees
 arrested persons "immediate" access to a judge. The
 ,Government is still reviewing this issue, which has not yet
 been resolved.
 Search and arrest warrants issued by the judiciary are
 required in most criminal cases. Forced exile from the
 Netherlands is unknown.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 - The Netherlands has a civil court system with the right of
 appeal. Defendants are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty. The right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by law
 and respected in practice. A recent Supreme Court ruling
 states that a person may not be convicted largely or solely on
 the basis of anonymous testimony. Defendants have the right
 to counsel, and a system of free or low cost legal assistance
 exists for those unable to pay. Charges must be formally
 stated. The judiciary is independent. There are no political
 prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to
 monitor private correspondence. The State respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. Dutch media policy allocates
 broadcasting time to a wide range of social and political
 groups, ensuring that minority viewpoints are heard. There
 are no prepublication restraints on any media, but there
 exists a traditional consensus that precludes the mainstream
 media from disseminating sensitive information involving
 national security, defense, or the royal family and inhibits
 them from publishing the details of sensational crimes.
 The Ministry of Justice announced in 1990 that it will no
 longer furnish personal data on criminal suspects in ongoing
 investigations. This is to maintain the privacy of the
 suspect and his family and also to protect the integrity of
 the investigation. This decision has drawn some protest from
 newspaper reporters and publishers, who claim that freedom of
 information has been restricted. Academic freedom is
 respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association are effectively
 unrestricted. Permits are required from local governmental
 authorities for large assemblies and demonstrations of a
 
 
 THE NETHERLANDS
 political nature. Permits are granted on a routine basis but
 may be denied when authorities believe that "public order and
 safety" cannot be guaranteed as a result of a rally or
 demonstration. Public meetings 6f extreme rightist groups
 have been prohibited from time to time. Except under
 exceptional circumstances, the Government does not impede
 membership in, or the formation of, organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion. State'subsidies in the
 educational field are provided to religious organizations that
 maintain educational facilities. The subsidy is set on a per*
 student basis to both parochial and nonparochial educational
 institutions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation. Due to the shortage of housing in major
 cities, there are some restrictions on the allocation of
 housing subsidized by the Government.
 The Netherlands has elaborate procedures for deciding asylum
 applications.. Thess procedures are designed to give full
 respect to applicants' rights of due process and to take into
 account conditions in the applicants' countries of origin. In
 close cooperation with the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees, the Netherlands annually offers permanent
 resettlement to 500 refugees, principally Iranians,
 Vietnamese, and Cambodians, who are in temporary asylum in
 other countries. The Dutch provide housing and social
 services to asylum applicants awaiting decisions as well as to
 those awarded refugee status. Applicants denied refugee
 status are requested to leave the Netherlands, but a'
 significant portion do not depart. The Dutch Government
 rarely sends asylum seekers back to their country of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Election results are decided on the basis of proportional
 representation. There is universal suffrage for persons 18
 years of age and older. Foreign residents have the right-to
 vote in municipal elections. Dutch citizens elect the Second
 Chamber (House of Representatives) of Parliament every 4 years
 (or more frequently in the event a government resigns or is
 toppled by a parliamentary vote of no confidence-). The most
 recent national elections, held in September 1989, resulted in
 the formation of a center-left coalition, with Prime Minister
 Ruud Lubbers remaining in office. Nine political parties have
 seats in Parliament, representing all points of view from the
 far right to the far left. There are no restrictions, in law
 or in practice, on the participation of women and minorities
 in government and politics.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is responsive to allegations of human rights
 violations arising both domestically and internationally. The
 Dutch consider themselves to be in the forefront of those
 
 
 1224
 THE NETHERLANDS
 countries most concerned about human rights abuses, and Dutch
 authorities readily assist international and nongovernmental
 organizations in their investigations. Support for human
 rights is a key tenet of Dutch foreign policy. The
 Netherlands is a strong advocate of human rights, both
 bilaterally and in international forums; including the United
 Nations, its agencies, and the Conference on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe. The Dutch have repeatedly spoken out
 against human rights violations in all -parts of the world.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Dutch view the problem of fully integrating racial and
 ethnic minorities into national economic and social life as
 one of their most difficult domestic issues. Hundreds of
 thousands of persons from the former Dutch colony of Suriname
 and the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba have come to live in
 the Netherlands since 1975.
 In addition, there are significant numbers of foreign workers
 and their families mostly from Turkey and Morocco. These
 groups face some private discrimination in housing and
 employment, as well as practical limits on opportunities for
 social and economic advancement as a result of educational
 levels that are inadequate when compared to those of the
 majority of Dutch citizens. Unemployment among minority
 groups runs significantly higher than in the general
 population. The Government at one point considered the
 possibility of instituting quota systems to increase minority
 hiring but, facing a chronically tight job market,
 subsequently backed away from this proposal.
 The Government's longstanding policy of combating
 discrimination is outlined in its 1983 "Minority Note," a
 comprehensive plan of action to address the problems of
 minorities in the fields of health, education, employment, and
 the law. This plan is continuously under review; recently,
 some doubts have been raised about its overall effectiveness.
 The National Advisory and Consultation Board on Minority
 Policy is incorporated by legislation into the administrative
 structure of the country. Chaired by the Minister of Internal
 Affairs, it includes representatives of seven ethnic minority
 groups and acts as a consultative body to the Cabinet on
 minority issues and as a conduit into the Government for the
 expression of minority concerns.
 Administrative tribunals have been set up for filing claims of
 discrimination against employers and the Government and in
 housing matters. They provide a practical means of redress
 for discrimination claims. The number of complaints of
 discrimination increased considerably in 1990; it is unknown
 whether the rise is attributable more to increased awareness
 of the opportunity to complain and seek redress than to an
 actual increase in the amount of discrimination.
 According to a recent study ("Violence against Women in
 Heterosexual Relationships"), financed by the Dutch Ministry
 of Welfare, Health, and Culture, 20.8 percent of Dutch women
 in heterosexual relationships are the victims of violence.
 Slightly over half of these (or 11. percent of women)
 experience repeated severe violence. The Government supports
 programs to reduce and prevent violence against women.
 Battered women find refuge in a network of women's shelters
 subsidized by the Government which offer the services of
 
 
 1225
 THE NETHERLANDS
 social workers and psychologists. -In addition, battered women
 who leave their husbands immediately become eligible for an
 array of soial benefits, including-an adequate basic subsidy
 as well as an allowance for any dependent children.
 Although trends for younger'women are encouraging, cultural
 factors combine with structural impediments, such as
 provisions of the tax code which penalize two-income families,
 discourage women'from entering the work force. only 45
 percent of Dutch women aged-25-54 work part- or full-time, the
 second lowest figure in northern Europe. Women's gross hourly
 wages average only.$7.75 compared to $12.50 for men. Pay
 differentials remain large even for men and women performing
 identical work. Representation -of women in business and the
 professions, while lower than the European Community average,
 is increasing. Womenenjoy full legal rights and enter
 marriage with the choice of-pooling wealth or maintaining
 separate assets: Women's groups. operate freely throughout the
 Netherlands.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of Dutch workers to associate freely is well
 established. Theactive trade union movement includes in its
 membership approximately 28 percent of the-employed labor
 force. Even members of -the Dutch armed forces belong to
 unions. While entirely free of government and political party
 control, unions may and do participate in political life.
 They have formed several domestic federations and actively
 maintain relations with recognized international bodies. All
 union members, except civil servants, havethe legal right to
 strike, which was freely'exercised in 1990.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is recognized
 and well established. Discrimination against union membership
 does not exist either in law or in practice. The country has
 developed a social partnership between government, private
 employers, and trade unions, which grew out of post-World War
 II reconstruction efforts. This "harmony model of industrial
 relations" involves all three participants in negotiating
 collective bargaining agreements. Every year the three
 participants develop a "central accord" with agreed social and
 economic goals for the nation. Sectoral collective bargaining
 then takes place under the umbrella of the "central accord."
 Negotiations among the unions, the employers, and the
 Government take place both locally and in a fixed central
 negotiating body called the Labor Foundation. There are no
 export processing zones, and labor rights and protections are
 applied uniformly throughout the country.
 There is an ongoing disagreement between the Government and
 the major Dutch trade union confederation (FNV) over the
 degree of government participation in the collective
 bargaining process permitted by a series of laws passed in the
 1980's. Although a predecessor labor confederation raised
 this matter with the International Labor Organization several
 years ago, the FNV itself does not consider this difference of
 opinion to be a worker rights issue.
 
 
 1226
 THE NETHERLANDS
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution
 and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of young people is 16. At that
 age, youths may work full time only if they have completed the
 mandatory 10 years of schooling. Those still in school at age
 16 may not work more than 8 hours per week. Laws prohibit
 youths under the age of 18 from working at night, overtime, or
 in areas which could be dangerous to their physical or mental
 development. The Netherlands has a reduced minimum wage for
 employees under age 23. The purpose of this law is to provide
 incentives for the employment of young people, one of the
 groups with the highest rate of unemployment. Full-time
 workers 16 years and older receive a paid vacation of at least
 20 days per year. The laws are effectively enforced by the
 Labor Commission, a tripartite entity which monitors hiring
 practices and conducts inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legally mandated maximum workweek. The average
 workweek for adults is 38 hours. There is minimum wage
 legislation, and the minimum wage is approximately $278 per
 week. This minimum wage, together with social benefits
 available to all minimum wage earners, provides an adequate
 living for workers and their families. For unemployed
 workers, an extensive system of unemployment benefits allows
 recipients to maintain an adequate standard of living. The
 Labor Commission effectively enforces the comprehensive
 occupational health and safety standards.
 
 
 1227
