 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary legislative
 system  . Executive authority is exercised by the Prime  Mister and Cabinet. The
 bicameral Pariament iselectedthroughnationwideproportionalvoting.
 The military, police, royal constabulary, and investigative organs concerned with
 internal and external security are effectively subordinated to the executive and judi-
 cial authorities.
 The economy is based on private enterprise, but also features extensive involve-
 ment by governmental entities. A complex social welfare system provides a high
 level of social benefits.
 The Netherlands attaches great importance to human rights. Dutch law protects
 individual rights, and both the state and the general public respect them. The press,
 public interest groups, and domestic and international human rights organizations
 are quick to challenge practices which they believe violate established human rights
 norms. Such complaints are thoroughly discussed by the media and in Parliament
 and are often subjected to a judicial process.
 In 1994 the treatment of minorities, immigrants, and asylum seekers was the sub-
 ject of much debate, particularly in the context of the campaign for the May par-
 liamentary elections. The racist political parties fared poorly in those elections, and
 there has been increased public concern about isolated incidents of violence against
 minorities.
 In most respects, there are no significant differences in human rights practices
 between the Netherlands proer and the autonomous regions of the   gdhe, i.e.,
 Aruba and the five isl and ofte  n ternds Antilles. Tne exception appears to
 be, according to persistent reports, excessive use of force by police in the islands.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kdl ing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.Ther were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law and were not
 known to occur in the Netherlands proper. However, in response to persistent re-
 ports of police mistreatment of suspects and prisoners in the Netherlands Antilles
 
 
 904
 and Aruba, the Government of the Netherlands Antilles, at the instigation of the
 Dutch Government, established a commission in 1991 to investigate the subject.
 This commission reported in 1992 that there was no pattern of police brutality, but
 that verifiable incidents had occurred on every island but Saba. In 1994 the Nether-
 lands Antilles Government responded to this report by establishing an independent
 commission with investigatory powers to respond to complaints from the public al-
 leging police brutality, and by initiating a training program to professionalize the
 police force, with substantial financial support from the Government of the Nether-
 lands.
 There were complaints about prison conditions on Curacao and St. Maarten in
 1993, including allegations of beatings, lack of access to medical personnel, and
 overcrowding. In 1994 these complaints prompted an official investigation by the
 Public Prosecutor on St. Maarten and a program of prison improvements on Cura-
 cao. In March the investigation formally cleared the prison guards of the charges
 of brutality. In another response to the complaints, the Antillean Government per-
 suaded the Dutch Ministry of Justice to send a mission to study the prison system
 on the islands. The mission reported its findings in September, and the Antillean
 Minister of Justice has pledged to follow the reorganization plan outlined in the re-
 port.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Freedom from arbitrary arrest is pro-
 vided for by law and respected in practice. Preventive detention is permitted only
 if national or municipal authorities declare an emergency. On such occasions, how-
 ever, the detention may only be for a limited time. Under normal circumstances a
 suspect may be held for no longer than 6 hours (or 9 hours if arrested at night)
 before charges must be brought. The Public Prosecutor may allow a 48-hour deten-
 tion of persons suspected of having committed serious crimes, and has authority to
 extend it to 96 hours. An investigating judge must authorize any further extensions.
 There are no political prisoners. The Netherlands does not practice forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and a right to a fair public trial. The Dutch court system provides for the right
 of appeal. Charges must be formally stated, and the accused is presumed innocent
 until proven guilty. Defendants have the right to counsel; free or low-cost legal as-
 sistance is provided for the indigent.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In most
 criminal cases, a judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to monitor
 private correspondence or telephone conversations. The State respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-A functioning democratic political system, an
 independent press, and an effective judiciary ensure freedom of speech and press.
 Dutch media policy allocates broadcast time to a wide range of social, political, and
 ethnic groups, ensuring that minority viewpoints are heard.
 There are no prepublication restraints on the media. A traditional consensus effec-
 tively prevents the mainstream media from disseminating sensitive information in-
 volving national security, defense, or the royal family. Violent or sensational crimes
 are treated discreetly, with suspects and victims often identified only by their ini-
 tials. In ongoing investigations, only minimal personal data are released on criminal
 suspects. The law prohibits incitement of hatred. Courts may ban a poitical party
 at the request of the Public Prosecutor on the grounds of the party's discriminatory,
 racist, or violent character, but this provision has never been invoked.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly and asso-
 ciation is virtually unrestricted. For large assemblies and political demonstrations,
 permits from local authorities are required. These permits are routinely granted un-
 less authorities believe that "public order and safety" cannot be guaranteed. Public
 meetings of extreme rightist or racist groups have been prohibited from time to
 time. The Government does not arbitrarily impede membership in, or the formation
 of, or anizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies are pro-
 vided to religious organizations that maintain educational facilities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There is full freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration, and re-
 patriation.
 The Netherlands has elaborate asylum procedures which take into account condi-
 tions in the applicant's country of origin. Applicants who do not meet the criteria
 for political asylum are nevertheless permitted to stay, without refugee status, if
 conditions in their country of origin would place them in danger. In January a new
 
 
 905
 
 asylum law came into effect, proscribing consideration of asylum requests by appli-
 cants whose previous requests were turned down by the Netherlands.
 Despite some tightening of regulations and procedures, asylum is still relatively
 easy to obtain. The number of asylum seekers trended dramatically higher than in
 1993. After polls showed that the public considers this a major domestic problem,
 the Palliament passed legislation in December making applicants ineligible for asy-
 lum if they come from a country the law designates as a "safe country of origin"
 or if they arrive by way of a "safe third countr where asylum is possible.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights. The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy. Elections are based on
 proportional representation. There is universal suffrage for citizens aged 18 and
 older. Foreign residents may vote in municipal elections after 5 years of legal resi-
 dence. Citizens elect the second chamber (House of Representatives) of Parliament
 every 4 years (sooner if a government resigns or falls).
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women and
 minorities in government and politics. The Government continues to seek to in-
 crease the number of female candidates for elected office. Only modest gains have
 been scored on the local level over the last 3 years, but women have fared better
 on the national level, due in part to efforts by political parties to feature more
 women on their election lists. The second chamber of Parliament now counts 49
 women among its 150 members, up from 44 before the recent elections. In the Cabi
 net of the new Government, a record 4 of 13 ministers are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vest igation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups, the media, and other interested parties are free to pursue
 inquiries into human rights issues, and Dutch authorities readily assist inter-
 national and nongovernmental organizations in their investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law bans discrimination on the basis of any of these factors or on sexual ori-
 entation or political preference. A new Equal Treatment Act came into force on Jan-
 uary 1, 1994, which allows complainants to take offenders to court under civil law.
 Women.-There is increased awareness in the Netherlands that abuse of women
 is a problem that needs to be aired and addressed. Accordingly, the Government ma-
 terially supports programs to reduce and prevent violence against women. Battered
 women find refuge in a network of government-subsidized shelters offering the serv-
 ices of social workers and psychologists. Battered women who leave their domestic
 partners become eligible for social benefits, including an adequate basic subsidy as
 well as an allowance for dependent children. There are also organizations that ad-
 vise and assist women who have been victims of sexual assault. Spousal rape or
 abuse each carry the same penalty as the same crime against other persons.
 The Social Ministry, citing recent research indicating that one-third of all working
 women have experienced sexual harassment in the workplace, initiated legislation
 to address this problem. In July the first chamber of Parliament passed an
 antiharassment amendment to the Workers' Conditions Act requiring employers to
 take measures to protect workers (of either sex). The Government-the nation's
 largest employer-has instituted such measures in the civil service, and it runs an
 onging campaign to publicize the problem.
 Women are increasingly entering the job market, despite traditional constraints
 and inadequate child-care facilities. Although more than 40 percent of the Dutch
 work force is now female, many women work only part time.
 The social welfare system provides considerable assistance to working women
 with families. Women are eligible for 16 weeks of maternity leave at full pay. The
 parental leave law allows parents (of either sex) to work only 20 hours a week over
 a 6-month period, since the enactment of the law in 1991, 27 percent of eligible
 women have used this benefit, and 11 percent of eligible men.
 On the other hand, many women work in low-level administrative or service jobs,
 and women often have less chance of promotion than male colleagues. The unem-
 ployment rate of women reentering the labor market is high. Legislation mandates
 equal pay for equal work; prohibits dismissal because of marriage, pregnancy, or
 motherhood; and provides for equality in other matters regarding employment. A
 legislatively mandated equal-treatment commission deals with complaints on these
 matters.
 
 
 906
 Women have the same legal and judicial rights as men. Upon marriage, a couple
 may sign a prenuptial agreement to preserve individual ownership of their respec-
 tive assets, or they may declare their assets joint property.
 Children.-The Government is committed to ensuring the well-being of children
 through numerous well-funded health, education, and public information programs.
 The Council for the Protection of Children, which operates under the Ministry of
 Justice, enforces child-support orders, investigates cases of child abuse, and rec-
 ommends remedies ranging from counseling to withdrawal of parental rights. In ad-
 dition, the Government has set up a popular hot-line for children, along with a net-
 work of pediatricians who look or indications of child abuse and also track sus-
 pected cases.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-A study by the University of Leiden and the
 Dutch Public Safety Service found that the number of incidents of violence against
 foreigners and ethnic minorities has increased over recent years. The study tallied
 about 350 reported racially motivated 1993 incidents, and estimated that there were
 a significant number of unreported incidents as well.
 The Government has been trying, through publicity campaigns and legislative ini-
 tiatives, to increase public awareness of racism and  crimnation.
 The main     *iant groups in the Netherlands are from the former Dutch colony
 of Suriname, the Netherlands Antilles, Aruba, Turkey, and Morocco. Concentrated
 in the larger cities, they suffer high unemployment. The Government has been
 working for several years with emp oyers' groups and unions to reduce this to the
 national average rate. As a result, over the past year the rate of job creation among
 ethnic minorities has been higher than among the general population. But with the
 influx of immigrants still growing, the unemployment problem remains difficult to
 overcome, especially during the current recession in the Netherlands.
 The municipalities of Rotterdam and Amsterdam have a number of programs,
 many funded in part by the national Government, to promote integration of ethnic
 minorities. Several focus on education and vocational training for minority children.
 Others seek to bring persons of different cultures together and prevent flare-ups in
 certain nei hborhoods.
 A law effected July 1 requires employers with over 35 employees to register with
 the local Chamber of Commerce the number of their employees who identify them-
 selves as members of a non-Dutch ethnic group. People who do not wish to be identi-
 fied as ethnically non-Dutch are not required to register. Employers must submit
 confidential affirmative action plans, including recruitment targets and proposed
 means of attaining them.
 People With Disabilities.--Government-funded programs for the disabled include
 subsidies to adapt housing and public transportation, day-activity centers, and in-
 centives to employers to hire the handicapped. Local governments are increasingly
 mandating access to public buildings for the disabled. Since 1992, there has been
 a national telephone line to report structural obstacles to handicapped access or mo-
 bility on public property.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Membership in labor unions is open to all workers,
 including military, police, and civil service employees. People are entitled to form
 or join unions of their own choosing without previous government authorization, and
 unions are free to affiliate with national trade union federations. This right is freely
 exercised.
 Unions are entirely free of control by the Government and political parties. They
 may and do participate in political activities.
 All workers have the right to strike, except most civil servants (who have other
 institutionalized means of protection and redress). The right to strike is exercised
 freely, but the number of strikes each year is very low. There is no retribution
 against striking workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized and well established. Discrimination against work-
 ers because of union membership is illegal and does not occur.
 Collective bargaining agreements are negotiated in the framework of the social
 partnership developed among trade unions and private employers. Representatives
 of the main union federations, employers' organizations, and the Government meet
 each autumn to discuss labor issues, including wage levels and their relation to the
 state of the economy and to international competition. The discussions aim to de-
 velop a "central accord" with social as well as economic goals for the coming year.
 Under this umbrella agreement, unions and employers in various sectors negotiate
 sectoral agreements, which the Government usually extends to all companies in the
 
 
 907
 respective sector. As a result, collective bargaining agreements cover three-quarters
 of the labor force.
 Antiunion discrimination is prohibited. Union federations and employers' organi-
 zations form the "social partnership" and are represented, along with independent
 experts, on the Social and Economic Council The Council is the major advisory
 board to the Government on its policies and legislation regarding national and inter-
 national social and economic matters.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by the Constitution and does not occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16, and for full-time work it is conditioned on completion of the mandatory 10
 years of schooling. Those still in school at age 16 may not work more than 8 hours
 per week. People under age 18 are prohibited by law from working at night, over-
 time, or in areas dangerous to their physical or mental well-being. The laws are ef-
 fectively enforced by the Labor Commission, which monitors hiring practices and
 conducts inspections of work sites.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-The minimum wage for adults is established
 by law and may be adjusted every 6 months to changes in the cost-of-living index.
 Since 1982 few austments have been made, and the rise in the minimum wage
 has lagged well behind the rise in the index. The minimum wage is $1,243 (2,163
 Dutch guilders) per month. Fewer than 3 percent of all workers get the minimum
 wage. Sectoral wage contracts usually fix a minimum that is high above the legis-
 lated minimum wage.
 For workers under age 23 the minimum ranges from 33 percent of the adult mini-
 mum (for those aged 16) to 85 percent (for those aged 22). The legislated minimum
 wage, together with social benefits available to all who receive only that, provides
 an adequate living for workers and their families.
 The standard workweek in the Netherlands is 40 hours. The workday, fixed by
 law, cannot exceed 8  hours a day. There are legislated curbs on work during
 nights and weekends. In December, Parliament approved some deregulation of
 workhours to encourage flexible work schedules, and delegated limited authority to
 localities to make decisions on workhours.
 Working conditions, including all safety and health standards set by law and reg-
 ulations, are actively monitored and effectively enforced by the Labor Commission.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs also polices standards, through its Labor Inspectorate.
 Workers may refuse to continue work at a hazardous site.
