 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary legislative
 system and an independent judiciary. Executive authority is exercised by the Prime
 Minister and Cabinet representing the governing political parties (traditionally a co-
 alition of at least two major parties). The bicameral Parliament is elected through
 free and fair elections.
 Regional police forces are primarily responsible for maintaining internal security.
 The police, the royal constabulary, and investigative organizations concerned with
 internal and external security ar effectively subordinated to civilian authority.
 The market-based economy is export oriented and features a mixture of industry,
 services, and agriculture. Key industries include chemicals, oil refining, natural gas,
 machinery, and e          The agricultural sector produces fruit, vegetables, flow-
 ers, meat, and dairy products. Living standards and the level of social benefits are
 high. At just over 6.3 percent, unemployment is a serious problem, and one which
 affects minorities relatively more than the general population.
 The Government fully respects the rights of its citizens, and the law and judiciary
 provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse. The Govern-
 ment is taking serious steps to adrss violence and discrimination against women.
 The Government has also taken steps to address societal discrimination against mi-
 norities.
 Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles, which are two autonomous regions of the
 kingdom, also feature parliamentary systems and full constitutional protection of
 human rights. In practice, government respect for human rights on these islands
 generaly is little different rom that in the European Netherlands. The two Carib-
 bean Governments have taken measures to address past reports of police brutality.
 The islands' prison conditions remain substandard.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kll!ing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed ther.
 A Dutch government-funded police professionalization program, as well as the es-
 tablishment of a grievance committee, have contributed significantly to countering
 incidents of police brutality in both the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba. New inci-
 dents have not been reported, nor has there been any allegation of torture.
 Prison conditions in the Netherlands meet minimum international standards, and
 the Government permits visits by human rights monitors.
 Publication of two reports of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture of the
 Council of Europe encouraged the Governments of the Netherlands, the Netherlands
 Antilles, and Aruba to improve the "inhuman" conditions in Curacao's prison and
 in cell blocks at the police stations on the islands of St. Maarten, Bonaire, and
 Aruba. Complaints ranged from overcrowding and deplorable sanitary conditions to
 poor food and insufficient ventilation. The Dutch Government has offered substan-
 tial financial and lo gitic assistance. The authorities plan to ease overcrowding at
 Curacao's prisn by C  construction of a maximum security facility and a new wing
 for young delinquents, as well as through bilateral agreements with neighboring
 countries on the transfer of sentenced persons, since most prisoners are from these
 countries. The Governments of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba allow access by
 nongovernmental organizations to prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides
 citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process. The law provides for the right to
 a fair trial, and the independent judiciary vigorously enforces this right.
 
 
 1048
 There were no reports of olitical prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interence WIh Privacy, Famiy, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 . b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.:-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment res      this right in practice. State subsidies are provided to religious organi-
 zations tat maintain educational facilities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Forein Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 mp ractice.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no re-
 ports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status. The Gov-
 ernment does not provide first asylum as such, but most asylum seekers (87 percent
 in 1996), except those who obviously came from a 'safe country of origin" or stayed
 for some time in a 'safe third country," are permitted to apply for status. A sizable
 number (about 40 percent in 1996) of those whose applications are eventually de-
 nied are nonetheless permitted to stay temporarily on humanitirian grounds or as
 long as their country of origin is considered unsafe.
 In 1996 Parliament passed a bill that aims to protect genuine refugees while shut-
 ting out economic refugees and illegal immigrants. The new bill will come into effect
 in early 1997. Since tighter criteria for granting asylum were introduced in January
 1995, the number of new asylum applicants has decreased from 52,576 in 1994 to
 29,258 in 1995 and to a projected 21,000 for all of 1996. The Government has adopt-
 ed a remigration proga    for rejected asylum seekers from selected countries, in-
 cluding Somalia, Sri     a, an  the former Yugoslavia, which aims to stimulate
 their voluntary repatriation through financial incentives.
 The Government pursues an active policy against alien smuggling, the penalties
 for which were raised considerably.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women and
 minorities in government and politics. The second chamber ofParliament includes
 49 women among its 150 members. Four of 13 cabinet ministers and 80 of 633 may-
 ors are women.
 Although in the minority, women also hold positions in the parliaments and cabi-
 nets of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings. Government officials are very cooperative and responsive
 to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law bans discrimination on the basis of any of these factors or on sexual ori-
 entation or political preference. The Government generally is effective in enforcing
 these provisions. Under a new Equal Treatment Act, complainants may take offend-
 ers to court under civil law.
 Women.-The Government supports programs to reduce and prevent violence
 against women. Battered women find refuge in a network of 48 government-sub-
 sidized women's shelters offering the services of social workers and psychologists.
 In addition, battered women who leave their domestic partners become eligible for
 social benefits which include an adequate basic subsidy as well as an allowance for
 dependent children. Nongovernmental organizations also advise and assist women
 who have been victims of sexual assault. Since 1991 marital rape has been a crime
 
 
 1049
 and carries the same penalty as rape. Spousal abuse carries a one-third higher pen-
 alty than ordinary battery. However, since the judicial system does not compile sta-
 tistics distinguishing Bpousal abuse from battery, it is difficult to estimate the ex-
 tent of the problem.l'e most recent study, by the Ministry of Welfare, Health, and
 Culture in 1989, showed that over 20 percent of women in heterosexual relation-
 ships were victims of violence during their lifetimes. Slightly over half of these suf-
 fered repeated severe violence.
 High-priority government measures to combat trafficking in women for prostitu-
 tionincludeamre aggressive prosecution policy as well as closer international co-
 operation. A number of police forces have established special units to deal with the
 issue. The Dutch Foundation Against Trafficking in Women estimates that each
 year around 1,000 women are brought into the Netherlands for the purpose of pros-
 titution, not only from Central andTastern Europe, but also from the Far East and
 West Africa. Women who are forced to work illegally as prostitutes and who are ap-
 prehended have special exemptions in immigration law and receive counseling and
 legal assistance.
 Women are increasingly entering the job market, but traditional cultural factors
 and inadequate child care facilities can discourage women--especially those with
 young children-from working. Although more than 40 percent of the Dutch work
 force is female, many women work only part time. Only 52 percent of women ages
 15-64 have jobs, and only 42 percent of those work more than 35 hours a week.
 By contrast, 75 percent of men in this age group are employed, 88 percent of whom
 work 35 or more hours a week.
 According to the Dutch Education Ministry, women have fully made up the ar-
 rears the had experienced in education. At present, girls form the majority in high-
 er secondary education where they also score better, and in 1996, for the first time,
 as many women as men entered college and university.
 Women are often underemployed and have less chance of promotion than their
 male colleagues. The unemployment rate of women reentering the labor market is
 high. A 1993 study of central government civil servants showed that, while 58 per-
 cent of those in the lowest salary grade were women, only 9 percent in the highest
 grade were women. These problems notwithstanding, women are making steady
 progress by moving into important professional and high-visibility jobs.
 In 1988 the Government began instituting affirmative action programs for women.
 Collective labor agreements usually include one or more schemes to strengthen the
 position of women. Legislation mandates equal pay for equal work prohibits dismis-
 sal because of marriage, pregnancy, or motherhood, and provides te basis for equal-
 ity in other employment-re ated areas. A legislatively mandated Equal Treatment
 Commission actively pursues complaints of discrimination in these areas as well as
 allegations of pay differences.
 The Dutch social welfare and national health systems provide considerable assist-
 ance to working women with families. Women are eligible for 16 weeks of maternity
 leave at full pay. The Parental Leave Law allows new mothers and fathers to work
 only 20 hours a week over a 6-month period. The Netherlands Antilles and Aruba
 allow 60 days of paid maternity leave at up to 80 percent of full salary.
 Women have full legal and judicial rights and enter marriage with the option of
 choosing community property or separate regimes for their assets.
 Women's groups dedicated to such issues as equal rights in social security, the
 legal position of women, sexual abuse taxation, education, work, and prostitution
 operate freely. The law requires employers to take measures to protect workers
 against sexual harassment; research showed that one in three working women has
 experienced sexual harassment in the workplace. The Government runs an ongoing
 publicity campaign to increase awareness of the problem. As the biggest employer
 in the country, it has taken measures to counter harassment among civil servants,
 for example, in the police force.
 Children.-The Government works to ensure the well-being of children through
 numerous well-funded health education, and public information programs. The
 Council for the Protection of dbildren, operated through the Ministry of Justice, en-
 forces child support orders, investigates cases of child abuse, and recommends rem-
 edies rangin om counseling to withdrawal of parental rights. In addition, the
 Government has set up a popular hot line for children and a network of pediatri.
 cians who track suspected cases of child abuse on a confidential basis. There is no
 societal pattern of abuse of children.
 International sex tourism involving abuse of minor children is prosecutable under
 Dutch law. For the first time ever, a Dutchman was tried in the Netherlands in
 1996 for abuse of minors in the Philippines. On October he was convicted and sen-
 tenced to 5 years' imprisonment for sexual abuse of minors, some as young as age
 11. The maximum penalty for child pornography was raised from 3 months' to 4
 
 
 1050
 
 years' imprisonment, 6 years in the event of financial gain, and the maximum fine
 was more than tripled. New legislation allows for provisional arrest, house searches,
 and criminal financial investigations. Moreover, the authorities will no longer have
 to prove that a person possesses child pornography for the purpose of distribution
 or public display. The possession of pictures of sexual behavior with minors alone
 will be sufficient cause for prosecution. The Government is considering raising the
 age limit under which sex with minors is automatically a criminal offense from 12
 to 14 years. At present, the age of consent is 16. Prosecution of adults for sex with
 minors between the ages of 12 to 16 only occurs upon the filing of a complaint by
 an intorested party.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. Local govern-
 ments are increasingly mandating access to public buildings for the disabled.
 National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-Integration of racial and ethnic minorities
 into the social and cultural mainstream remains a difficult problem.
 The Government pursues an active campaign aimed at increasing public aware-
 ness of racism and discrimination. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the
 basis of race and nationality and allows those who claim that they have been dis-
 criminated against to take offenders to court under civil law. The rising trend in
 recent years in incidents of violence against ethnic minorities has been reversed.
 The Criminal Investigation Service reported in 1996 a significant decrease in racist
 incidents, particularly in those of a life-threatening nature. The decline in incidents
 was attributed to waning interest in racist extremism in politics and to a decrease
 in rightwing activists to a hardeore group of 50 to 60 in a total population of over
 15 million.
 Immigrant groups face some discrimination in housing and employment. These
 groups, concentrated in the larger cities, suffer from a high rate o unemployment.
 The Government has been working for several years with employers' groups and
 unions to reduce minority unemployment levels to the national average. As a result
 of these efforts, in recent years the rate of job creation among ethnic minorities has
 been higher than among the general population.
 A 1994 law requiring employers with a work force of over 35 people to register
 their non-Dutch employees has run into implementation problems. Some employers
 find the law burdensome, and some minority employees object to being counted as
 "non-Dutch." Employers must submit confidential affirmative action plans, including
 recruitment targets and proposed means of reaching that target.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Membership in labor unions is open to all workers
 including military, police, and civil service employees. People are entitled to form
 or join unions of their own choosing without previous government authorization, and
 unions are free to affiliate with national trade union federations. This right is freely �
 exercised.
 Unions are entirely free of control by the Government and political parties. Union
 members may and do participate in political activities.
 All workers have the right to strike, except for most civil servants who have other
 institutionalized means of protection and redress. The right to strike is exercised
 freely, but the number of strikes each year is very low: on average about 17 labor
 days per 1,000 workers are lost each year. There is no retribution against striking
 workers.
 About 25 percent of the work force is unionized, but union-negotiated collective
 bargaining agreements are usually extended to cover about three-quarters of the
 work force. The white-collar unions' membership is the fastest growing.
 The four union federations are active internationally, without restriction.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized and well established. Discrimination against work-
 ers because of union membership is illegal and does not occur.
 Collective barg      agreements are negotiated in the framework of the "Social
 Partnership" developed between trade unions and private employera. Representa-
 tives of the main union federations, employers' organizations, andthe Government
 meet each autumn to discuss labor issues, including wage levels and their relation
 to the state of the economy and to international competition. The discussions lead
 to a central accord with social as well as economic goals for the coming year. Under
 this umbrella agreement unions and employers in various sectors negotiate sectoral
 agreements, which the dovernment usually extends to all companies in the respec-
 tive sector.
 Antiunion discrimination is prohibited. Union federations and employers' organi-
 zations are represented, along with independent experts, on the Social and Eco-
 
 
 1051
 
 nomic Council. The Council is the major advisory board to the Government on its
 policies and legislation regarding national and international social and economic
 matters.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by the Constitution and does not occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years, and for full-time work it is conditioned on completion of the mandatory
 10 years of schooling. Those still in school at the age of 16 may not work more than
 8 hours per week. People under the age of 18 are prohibited by law from working
 at night, overtime, or in areas dangerous to their physical or mental well-being. The
 laws are effectively enforced by the tripartite Labor Commission, which monitors
 hiring practices and conducts inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-The minimum wage for adults is established
 by law and can be adjusted every 6 months to changes in the cost-of-living index.
 Since 1982 few adjustments have been made, and the rise in the minimum wage
 has lagged well behind the rise in the index. The gross minimum wage is $1,350
 (f. 2,204) per month. For workers earning the minimum wage, employers currently
 pay $3,750 a year (f. 6,000) in premiums for social security benefits, which includes
 medical insurance. Only 3 percent of workers earn the minimum wage because col-
 lective bargaining agreements, which are normally extended across a sector, usually
 fix a minimum wage well above the legislated minimum. The Government, unions,
 and employers have taken measures to increase the number of minimum wage jobs
 and to decrease employers' social payments in order to lower the cost of hiring new
 workers and to create more jobs, especially for the long-term unemployed.
 There is a reduced minimum wage for young people under the age of 23-one of
 the demographic groups with the highest rate of unemployment-intended to pro-
 vide incentives for their employment. This wage ranges from 34.5 percent of the
 adult minimum wage for workers 16 years of age to 85 percent for those 22 years
 of age. The legislated minimum wage and social benefits available to all minimum
 wage earners provide an adequate standard of living for workers and their families.
 A 40-hour workweek is established by law, but collective bargaining agreements
 often set a shorter workweek. The rapid increase of telecommuting and high level
 of part-time work have lowered the estimated actual workweek to 35.8 hours. As
 a job creating measure, the Government now permits flexible hours. For some, this
 could mean more than an 8-hour day, within the weekly legal limits. However, col-
 lective bargaining negotiations are heading toward an eventual 36-hour week for
 full-time employees.
 Working conditions, including comprehensive occupational safety and health
 standards set by law and regulations, are actively monitored by the tripartite Labor
 Commission. Enforcement is effective. Workers may refuse to continue working at
 a hazardous work site. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs also monitors
 standards through its labor inspectorate.
