 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a
 parliamentary legislative system. Executive authority is
 exercised by a council of ministers representing the governing
 political parties. A bicameral parliament, in which the full
 range of the political spectrum is represented, is selected
 through nationwide proportional voting.
 The police and security organs are effectively subordinated to
 the executive and judicial authorities.
 The Dutch have a mixed free market economy with extensive
 involvement by governmental entities. The Netherlands has a
 complex social welfare system providing a high level of social
 benefits.
 The Dutch attach great importance to human rights in their
 foreign and domestic policies. The principal internationally
 recognized rights are protected by Dutch law and widely
 respected in practice by both the State and the general public.
 The press, public interest groups, and both domestic and
 international human rights organizations are quick to
 challenge practices which they believe violate established
 human rights norms. Such complaints characteristically
 receive a full airing in the media, through the judicial
 process, and in Parliament.
 There are no significant differences in human rights practices
 between the Netherlands proper and the autonomous regions of
 the Kingdom: Aruba and the five-island Netherlands Antilles.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 political groups did not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 Abductions, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 police or other official security forces did not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and did not occur in practice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is guaranteed
 by law and respected in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted only in times of emergency, upon declaration, for a
 limited time, by national or municipal authorities. The
 practice of preventive custody is frequently used in drug
 smuggling cases.
 Under normal circumstances, a person may be held no longer
 than 6 hours, or 9 if the arrest was made at night, unless
 charges are brought. Persons suspected of having committed
 
 
 1198
 THE NETHERLANDS
 serious crimes may be held in custody for 48 hours without
 charge with the agreement of the public prosecutor, who is
 also authorized to decide on an extension of another 48
 hours. Any further decision on extending detention is made by
 an investigating judge. In January the Netherlands was
 criticized by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg
 for holding suspects in custody up to 4 days and 9 hours
 without access to a judge. The Court considered the Dutch
 practice a violation of the European Convention on Human
 Rights which guarantees arrested persons "immediate" access to
 a judge. The Dutch Justice Ministry is currently
 investigating how its procedures may be brought in line with
 the Court's verdict. Search and arrest warrants issued by the
 judiciary are required in most criminal cases.
 Forced exile from the Netherlands is unknown. With regard to
 forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by law and
 respected in practice. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 and a system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for
 those unable to pay. Charges must be formally stated. The
 judiciary is independent. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to
 monitor private communications. The State respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. Dutch media policy allocates
 broadcasting time to a wide range of social and political
 groups, ensuring that minority viewpoints are heard. There
 are no prepublication restraints on any media, but there
 exists a broad social understanding which precludes the
 mainstream media from disseminating sensitive information
 involving national security, defense, or the royal family.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association are effectively
 unrestricted. Permits are required from local governmental
 authorities for large-scale assemblies and for demonstrations
 of a political nature. Permits are granted on a routine basis
 but may be denied when authorities believe that "public order
 and safety" cannot be guaranteed as a result of a rally or
 demonstration. Membership in, or the- formation of,
 organizations is not impeded by the Government except under
 exceptional circumstances.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 
 
 1199
 THE NETHERLANDS
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies in the
 educational field are provided to.religious organizations-
 which maintain educational facilities. The subsidy is granted
 on a fixed per student basis.to both parochial and
 nonparochial educational institutions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation. Due to the Netherlands* shortage of housing
 in its major cities, there are some restrictions on the
 allocation of government-subsidized housing.
 The Netherlands has elaborate procedures for deciding asylum
 applications, designed to give full respect to the due process
 rights of applicants and to take into account conditions in
 the applicants, countries of origin. In close cooperation
 with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, the Netherlands
 annually offers permanent resettlement to 500 refugees,
 principally Iranians, Vietnamese, and Cambodians, who are in
 temporary asylum in other countries. The Dutch provide
 housing and social services to asylum applicants awaiting
 decisions as well as to those awarded refugee status.
 Applicants denied refugee status are requested to leave the
 Netherlands, but a significant portion do not depart. The
 Dutch Government rarely sends asylum seekers back to their
 country of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Election results are decided on the basis of proportional
 representation. There is universal suffrage for persons over
 18 years of age, and foreign residents have the right to vote
 in municipal elections. Dutch citizens elect the Second
 Chamber of Parliament every 4-years (or more frequently in the
 event a government resigns or is toppled by a parliamentary
 vote of no confidence). The most recent national elections,
 held in September, led to-the formation of a center-left
 government with Prime Minister Lubbers remaining in office.
 Eleven political parties have seats'in'Parliament,
 representing all points of view from-the far right to the far
 left.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is responsive to allegations of human rights
 violations arising both domestically and internationally. The
 Dutch consider themselves to be in the forefront of
 international concern over reported human rights abuses, and
 Dutch authorities readily assist international and
 nongovernmental organizations in their investigation. Support
 for human rights is a key tenet of Dutch foreign policy. The
 Netherlands is a strong advocate of human rights, both
 bilaterally and in international forums, including the United
 Nations and its agencies and the Conference on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe. The Dutch have repeatedly spoken out
 against human rights violations in all parts of the world.
 
 
 1200
 THE NETHERLANDS
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Dutch view the problem of fully integrating racial and
 ethnic minorities into national economic and social life as
 one of their most difficult domestic issues. Hundreds of
 thousands of persons from the former Dutch colony of Suriname
 and the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba have come to live in
 the Netherlands since 1975. In addition, there are
 significant numbers of foreign workers and their families,
 mostly from Turkey and Morocco. These groups face some
 private discrimination in housing and employment, as well as
 practical limits on opportunities for social and economic
 advancement as a result of educational levels that are
 inadequate when compared to those of the majority of Dutch
 citizens. Unemployment among minority groups runs
 significantly higher than among the population as a whole.
 The Government's longstanding policy of combatting
 discrimination is outlined in its 1983 "Minority Note," a
 comprehensive plan of action to address the problems of
 minorities in the fields of health, education, employment, and
 the law. The National Advisory and Consultation Board on
 Minority Policy, which is incorporated by legislation into the
 administrative structure of the country, is chaired by the
 Minister of Internal Affairs and includes representatives of
 seven ethnic minority groups. It acts as a consultative body
 to the Cabinet on minority issues and as a conduit into the
 Government for the expression of minority concerns.
 Administrative tribunals have been set up for filing claims of
 discrimination against employers and government and in housing
 matters. They provide a practical means of redress for
 discrimination claims.
 Women enjoy full legal rights and enter marriage with the
 choice of pooling wealth or maintaining separate assets.
 According to a recent study ("Violence Against Women in
 Heterosexual Relationships") financed by the Dutch Ministry of
 Welfare, Health, and Culture, 20.8 percent of Dutch women in
 heterosexual relationships are or have been the victims of
 unreciprocated violence. Slightly over half of these (or 11
 percent of women) experience or have experienced repeated
 violence severe enough to be considered wife beating. The
 Government supports programs to prevent or reduce violence
 against women. Battered women find refuge in a network of
 government-subsidized women's shelters which offer the
 services of social workers and psychologists. In addition,
 battered women who leave their husbands immediately become
 eligible for an array of social benefits, including a basic
 (and livable) subsidy as well as an allowance for any
 dependent children.
 Section 6 Wqrker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of Dutch workers to associate freely is well
 established. The active trade union movement includes in its
 membership approximately 30 percent of the employed labor
 force. Unions, while entirely free of government and
 political party control, may and do participate in political
 life. They are free to form federations and to maintain
 relations with recognized international bodies. All union
 members, except civil servants, have the legal right to
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1201
 THE NETHERLANDS
 strike. Even Dutch military personnel are free to join
 unions. Legislation is pending which would grant the right to
 strike to civil servants not involved in "lifesaving"
 activities.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is recognized
 and well established in the Netherlands. Neither in law nor
 in practice is discrimination against union members practiced.
 Dutch society has developed a social partnership between
 government, private employers, and trade unions which grew out
 of post-World War II reconstruction efforts. This "harmony
 model of industrial relations" involves all three participants
 in negotiating collective bargaining agreements. Every year,
 the three participants develop a "central accord" with
 agreed-upon social and economic goals for the nation.
 Sectoral collective bargaining then takes place under the
 umbrella of the "central accord."
 There is a disagreement between the Government and the major
 Dutch trade union confederation (FNV) over the degree of
 government participation in the collective bargaining process
 permitted by a series of laws passed in the 1980's. This
 legislation moved the status of quasi-public workers from
 being "trend followers of the private sector" to being "trend
 followers of the public sector." The status of quasi-public
 workers is now closer to the status of government workers
 whose salaries and terms of employment are determined by the
 Government. A predecessor confederation of the FNV, the NVV,
 unhappy with this situation, appealed to the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) under Convention 87. An ILO
 fact-finding mission in 1985 essentially agreed with the
 union's position. The Government continues to maintain that
 its role in the discussion of salaries and terms of employment
 does not constitute interference in the collective bargaining
 process, and the FNV itself does not consider this
 disagreement to be a worker rights issue.
 There are no export processing zones in the Netherlands.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law and does not
 exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of young people is 16. At 16
 years of age, youths may work full time only if they have
 completed the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Those still in
 school at age 16 may not work more than 8 hours per week.
 Laws prohibit youths under the age of 18 from working at
 night, overtime, or in areas which could be dangerous to their
 physical or mental development. The Netherlands has a reduced
 minimum'wage for employees under age 23. The purpose of this
 law is to provide incentives for the employment of young
 people, one of the groups with the highest rate of
 unemployment. Full-time workers 16 years and older receive a
 paid vacation of at least 20 days per year.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Dutch law and practice adequately protect the safety and
 health of workers. The average workweek for adults is 38
 
 
 1202
 THE NETHERLANDS
 hours. There is minimum wage legislation, and the minimum
 wage is approximately $6.00 per hour. This minimum wage,
 together with social benefits available to all minimum wage
 earners, provides an adequate living for workers and their
 families. For unemployed workers, an extensive system of
 unemployment benefits allows recipients to maintain an
 adequate standard of living.
 
 
 1203"
