 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a parliamentary democracy under a
 constitutional monarch. The full range of the political
 spectrum is represented in Parliament and the media. Several
 special features of the Dutch political system, including
 nationwide proportional voting for Parliament and a media
 policy that allocates some broadcasting time to all social and
 political groups, insure that minority viewpoints are
 represented.
 The Dutch attach great importance in their foreign and
 domestic policies to human rights. Internationally recognized
 rights are protected by Dutch law and respected in practice.
 The Dutch have a free market economy with a large social
 welfare system providing a relatively high level of social
 benefits.
 The state of human rights in the Netherlands remained very
 good in 1984. The most significant development was the
 extension of the right to vote in municipal elections to
 aliens who have resided legally in the Netherlands for 5 years.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 opposition political groups does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 Abductions, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 police or other official security forces do not occur.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and do not occur in practice. Prison conditions are good by
 international standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is guaranteed
 by law and respected in practice. There are no political
 prisoners in the Netherlands. The equivalent of the right of
 habeas corpus exists in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted only in times of emergency, upon declaration, for a
 limited time by national or municipal authorities. This power
 is used infrequently, and normally a person can be held no
 longer than 6 hours unless charges are brought. Exile is
 unknown in the Netherlands.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is guaranteed by law and
 respected in practice. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 and a system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for
 those unable to pay for such counsel. Charges must be
 formally stated. The judiciary is independent, with a
 functioning appeals process and a Supreme Court.
 
 40-387 0 - 85
 
 
 1048
 THE NETHERLANDS
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or
 monitor private correspondence. The state respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are respected. There is no system
 of censorship. The press is privately owned, and a wide
 variety of daily newspapers is published both at the national
 and regional level. Television and radio are partially
 subsidized by the Government, but broadcast time is allocated
 on the basis of audience reaction, and support is provided to
 private broadcasting societies representing different
 religious, political, and ethnic groups. Minority political
 and ethnic groups also receive broadcast time under this
 system.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association is not restricted. An
 active trade union movement with almost 2 million members has
 the legal right to strike. The rights of unions to organize
 and bargain collectively are well established. Unions are
 free to participate in political life and frequently exercise
 that right. Various private interest groups play an active
 political role.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion in the Netherlands. State
 subsidies are provided to religious organizations for their
 educational facilities. The amount of the subsidy is based on
 the number of students attending the schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation in the Netherlands. Restrictions are not
 placed on residence. The Netherlands has provided first
 asylum for refugees from Eastern European countries and
 permanent resettlement for a limited number of persons,
 principally from Eastern Europe and Vietnam.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Nationwide elections are held every 4 years, or more
 frequently in the event of a parliamentary vote of
 no-confidence. The most recent elections were in September
 1982 when a center-right coalition came to power, replacing a
 center-left government. Political parties are numerous (13
 have seats in Parliament) and'represent all points of view,
 from the far right to the far left. In 1984, some leaders of
 leftwing parties called for a legal ban on the small extreme
 center-right party, which many consider openly racist. The
 Government, however, has opposed such a ban, while at the same
 time expressing its distaste for the anti-foreign worker
 
 
 1049
 .THE NETHERLANDS
 sentiments of the Center Party. Women have full political
 rights and are increasingly represented in political life.
 Approximately 20 percent of the members of the lower house of
 Parliament are women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alle'ged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Netherlands has not been the subject of international
 human rights investigations. There are a number of Dutch
 groups interested in human rights abroad, as well as national
 chapters of international organizations such as Amnesty
 International. The Netherlands Government is active in the
 United Nations Human Rights Commission and other international
 forums concerned with human rights. Freedom House rates the
 Netherlands "free.-
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Netherlands per capita gross national product was just
 under $11,000 in 1982. The right to private property is
 protected in the Dutch market economy. The welfare state is
 well established, with an extensive system of cash and tax
 benefits to assist the unemployed and handicapped and to
 provide adequate educational and health opportunities to all
 citizens. There were some reductions in these benefits in
 1984 as part of a government program to cut the size of the
 national budget deficit. Average life expectancy is 75 years,
 and the infant mortality rate is 7.6 per 1,000 live births.
 Primary education is universal.
 Women enjoy full legal and political equality in the
 Netherlands. In economic life, the entry of substantial
 numbers of women into the labor force occurred somewhat later
 in the Netherlands than in most Western industrialized
 countries. The Government and most political parties continue
 to advocate special considerations for women in order to
 further progress in the area of economic equality. Government
 programs in this area are coordinated by the State Secretary
 for Emancipation Policy, equivalent to a deputy minister.
 There are disagreements among various women's groups and
 political parties over the effectiveness of the Government's
 policy in this area, but these disagreements reflect differing
 political choices over how the goal of full equality can be
 most effectively reached rather than divergencies about the
 desired result.
 The problems of effectively integrating Dutch racial and
 ethnic minorities into national economic and social life is
 perhaps the most difficult human rights task confronting the
 Dutch Government. Thousands of persons from the former Dutch
 colony of Suriname and the Netherlands Antilles have come to
 live in the Netherlands in recent years. In addition, there
 are significant numbers of foreign guest workers, mostly from
 Turkey and Morocco. These groups face some overt
 discrimination in housing and employment, as well as practical
 limits on opportunities for social and economic advancement
 caused by inadequate educational levels compared to the
 majority of Dutch citizens. There is a widespread fear among
 the Dutch that discrimination is on the rise, prompted by
 difficult economic times throughout the Netherlands. There
 have been isolated instances of violence against persons for
 racial reasons over the last 2 years.
 
 
 1050
 
