 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a parliamentary democracy under a
 constitutional monarchy. The government is based on
 the principles of ministerial responsibility and
 parliamentarygovernment common to most constitutional
 monarchies in Western Europe. It is composed of three
 basic institutions:  (1) the Crown (Monarch, Council of
 Ministers, and Council of State);  (2) the States
 General (Parliament); and (3) the Courts.
 The Dutch observance of internationally recognized
 human rights is based on deep-seated and widely-shared
 concepts of human dignity and respect for law. The
 Netherlands has one of the longest consistent tradi-
 tions of respect for human .rights in the West.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Freedom from torture is guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment is guaranteed by law and respected in
 practice.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is
 guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 
 (477)
 
 
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Freedom from denial of fair public trial is guaranteed
 by law and respected in practice.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Freedom from invasion of the home is guaranteed by law
 and respected in practice.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Netherlands enjoys a high per capita income
 -- $7,600 -- and is one of the most affluent countries
 in Europe. The Government pursues policies to ensure
 that these benefits are distributed equitably through-
 out the economy. The Netherlands pursues a liberal
 wage and social benefit policy. There is a relative
 absence of class distinction. A common educational
 system serves all economic levels.
 The Government pursues equal rights and even special
 considerations for women, for minority groups and for
 the economically disadvantaged through legislation and
 effective government procedures to ensure compliance.
 Some minority groups -- particularly Moluccans, foreign
 workers and Surinamers -- face discrimination in
 regard to employment, housing and lack of social
 acceptance. These problems stem from individual atti-
 tudes, not from official policy or procedures. The
 Government is taking specific measures, such as fair
 hiring and housing laws, to eliminate or reduce such
 discrimination.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 
 
 479
 These freedoms are in effect.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, and
 of emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Progess
 Political life is carried out in a highly democratic
 fashion. Legislative power is vested in an assembly
 elected by universal suffrage. Labor is free to
 organize and the labor movement is well-developed.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The issue of outside investigation has not arisen with
 regard to the Netherlands.
 
 
