 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Dutch observance of internationally recognized
 human rights is exemplary and is based on deep-
 seated and widely-shared concepts of human dignity
 and respect for law. The Netherlands has had the
 longest consistent tradition of respect for human
 rights in the West, and any altering of government
 habits is not anticipated.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Freedom from torture is guaranteed by law and
 respected in practice.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
 or punishment is guaranteed by law and respected in
 practice.
 C.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is
 guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Freedom from denial of fair public trial is guaranteed
 by law and respected in practice.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 Freedom from invasion of the home is guaranteed by
 law and respected in practice.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfill-
 ment of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter,
 Health Care and Education
 
 (MO)
 
 
 303
 
 The Netherlands enjoys a high per capita income and
 is one of the most affluent countries in Europe.
 The government pursues policies to ensure that
 these benefits are distributed equitably throughout
 the economy. The Netherlands pursues a liberal wage
 and social benefit policy.- There is a relative
 absence of class distinction and a common educational
 system serving all economic levels.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a.   Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press,
 Religion, and Assembly
 These freedoms are in effect.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel,
 and of emigration.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 The Netherlands is a parliamentary democracy under a
 constitutional monarchy. Political life is carried
 out in a highly democratic fashion. Legislative
 power is vested in an assembly elected by universal
 suffrage. Labor is free to organize, and the labor
 movement is well-developed.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-Governmental Investigation
 of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The record of the government is sufficiently good
 that the issue of outside investigation has not
 come up.
 
 
