 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a
 parliamentary legislative system. Executive authority is
 exercised by a council of ministers representing the governing
 political parties. A bicameral parliament, in which the full
 range of the political spectrum is represented, is selected
 through nationwide proportional voting.
 The Dutch have a mixed free market economy with extensive
 involvement by governmental entities. The Netherlands has a
 complex social welfare system providing a relatively high
 level of social benefits.
 The Dutch attach great importance to human rights in their
 foreign and domestic policies. The principal internationally
 recognized rights are protected by Dutch law and widely
 respected in practice by both the State and the general
 public.
 In 1988 the Netherlands was criticized by the European
 Commission on Human Rights for discriminating against women in
 the payment of social benefits and for excessive reliance on
 testimony by anonymous infmrmants in a criminal case. The
 expulsion by the Netherlands of persons found by the Dutch
 legal process not to be bona fide refugees also has drawn
 domestic and international criticism. Some Surinamese filed
 complaints in Dutch courts and with the European Commission on
 Human Rights, charging that some asylum seekers were not
 treated individually but lumped together as a group, which
 would violate a European Convention on Human Rights Protocol
 against collective deportations. During 1988 Dutch courts
 ruled consistently that these challenges to expulsions were
 unfounded (see Section 2.d.).
 There are no significant differences in human rights practices
 between the Netherlands proper and the autonomous regions of
 the Kingdom: Aruba and the five-island Netherlands Antilles.
 RESPECT FOR HUIAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or domestic
 political groups did not occur. Three off-duty British
 soldiers were killed and three others seriously wounded on
 April 30 in separate but apparently related shooting and
 bombing incidents in two villages along the Dutch-German
 border. The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility for
 the attacks. In June a prominent Turkish labor leader
 resident in the Netherlands was found dead in his home. The
 crime remains unsolved, but police speculated publicly that he
 was murdered by members of a Dutch-Turkish organized crime
 syndicate.
 b. Disappearance
 Abductions, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 police or other official security forces did not occur.
 
 
 1136
 THE NETHERLANDS
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and do not occur in practice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is provided for
 by law and respected in practice. There are no political
 prisoners in the Netherlands. A right of release from
 detention exists in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted, for a limited time, only when national or municipal
 authorities declare an emergency. Normally a person may be
 held no longer than 6 hours unless charges are brought.
 Persons suspected of committing serious crimes can be held for
 cause with the agreement of a judge for up to 48 hours before
 charges are brought or the person is released. This form of
 incarceration is frequently used in drug smuggling cases.
 Search and arrest warrants issued by the judiciary are
 required in most criminal cases.
 Forced exile from the Netherlands is unknown. With regard to
 forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and
 respected in practice. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 and a system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for
 those unable to pay. Charges must be formally stated. The
 judiciary is independent, with a functioning appeals process
 and a Supreme Court. In August the European Commission on
 Human Rights criticized the Netherlands over a case in which
 conviction of an accused bank robber was based exclusively on
 testimony by anonymous informants. The Commission considered
 this a violation of the right to a fair trial as outlined in
 the European Convention on Human Rights. Dutch justice
 officials argued that the case represented an 'evident
 exception" to normal practice, which was justifiable under the
 circumstances. A prominent Dutch professor of criminal law
 observed, however, that Dutch courts frequently go further in
 allowing anonymous testimony than do other Western countries.
 The Commission has submitted the case to the European Court on
 Human Rights for review.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to
 monitor private correspondence. The State respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. A feature of media policy is the
 allocation of broadcasting time to a wide range of social and
 political groups, which ensures that minority viewpoints are
 heard. There are no prepublication restraints on any media,
 but there exists a broad social understanding which precludes
 
 
 1137
 THE NETHERLANDS
 the mainstream media from disseminating sensitive information
 involving national security, defense, or the royal family.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association are effectively
 unrestricted. Permits are required from local governmental
 authorities for large-scale assemblies and for demonstrations
 of a political nature. Permits are granted on a routine basis
 but may be denied when authorities believe that "public order
 and safety" cannot be guaranteed as a result of a rally or
 demonstration. Neither the formation of organizations nor
 membership in them is impeded by the Government except in
 exceptional circumstances.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies in the
 educational field are provided to religious organizations
 which maintain educational facilities. The subsidy is granted
 on a fixed per student basis to both parochial and nonparochial
 educational institutions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation. Due to a shortage of housing, there are
 some legal restrictions on the transfer of residence to major
 cities.
 The Netherlands provides first asylum for refugees and
 permanent resettlement for a limited number of persons,
 principally from Eastern Europe, Indochina, and Iran. The
 decision by Dutch courts to expel from the Netherlands six Sri
 Lankan citizens who !-:d been refused refugee status drew the
 involvement of the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and criticism by human rights activists, who
 charged that the six--all ethnic Tamils--could not be
 guaranteed safety upon their return to Sri Lanka.
 The Government continues to provide limited financial
 assistance to persons wishing to return permanently to their
 country of origin but who lack the means to do so. This
 program affects a small minority of foreign-born workers--most
 of whom came to the Netherlands in the early 1970's--who no
 longer can find employment, and are now receiving unemployment
 benefits.
 In February the Dutch Government decided that the political
 situation in its former colony of Suriname had stabilized to
 the point where applications for asylum from about 5,000
 persons who had fled from Suriname to the Netherlands could be
 evaluated. The Government had suspended the processing of
 Surinamese asylum cases in September 1986, when, in the Dutch
 view, the human rights situation in Suriname had deteriorated
 so that it was no longer possible accurately to judge the
 validity of requests for asylum. The decision to process the
 Surinamese asylum application backlog was opposed by some
 members of the Surinamese community, who charged that the
 situation in Suriname remained too dangerous for the safe
 return of those who had fled. In July a Dutch court granted a
 
 
 1138
 THE NETHERLANDS
 temporary injunction preventing the Government from deporting
 to Suriname those persons refused refugee status until the
 Government clarified its grounds for deciding that conditions
 in Suriname permitted their safe return. The Government's
 subsequent analysis satisfied the judge, but at least one of
 the affected Surinamese took his case to the European
 Commission on Human Rights on the grounds that the Surinamese
 are not being given proper, individual treatment by the Dutch
 Government.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Nationwide elections are held every 4 years, or more
 frequently in the event of a parliamentary vote of no
 confidence or if a coalition partner opts out of the
 government. In the most recent general election in May 1986,
 the center-right coalition, which had been in power since
 1982, was reelected. Provincial elections were held in March
 1987. In June 1987, the provincial legislatures elected the
 Upper House of Parliament on the basis of proportional
 representation. Ten political parties have seats in
 Parliament, representing all points of view from the far right
 to the far left. There is universal suffrage for persons
 18 years of age and over. Women are increasingly represented
 in political life; they presently hold 21.5 percent of the
 seats in the Lower House of Parliament.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is responsive to allegations of human rights
 violations arising both domestically and internationally. The
 Dutch consider themselves in the forefront of international
 efforts to prevent human rights abuses, and Dutch authorities
 readily assist international and nongovernmental organizations
 in their investigations. Support for human rights is a key
 tenet of Dutch foreign policy. The Netherlands is a strong
 advocate of human rights, both bilaterally and in international
 forums, including the United Nations and its agencies and the
 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Dutch
 have repeatedly spoken out against human rights violations in
 Eastern Europe, Central America, and Southern Africa.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The problem of fully integrating racial and ethnic minorities
 into national economic and social life remains one of the most
 difficult domestic issues confronting the Government.
 Thousands of persons from the former Dutch colony of Suriname,
 the Netherlands Antilles, and Aruba have come to live in the
 Netherlands since 1975. In addition, there are significant
 numbers of foreign workers and their families, mostly from
 Turkey and Morocco. These groups face some overt private
 discrimination in housing and employment, as well as practical
 limits on opportunities for social and economic advancement
 resulting from inadequate educational levels compared to those
 of most Dutch citizens. Unemployment among minority groups
 runs significantly higher than among the population as a whole.
 The Government's longstanding policy of combating
 discrimination is outlined in its 1983 "Minority Note," a
 
 
 1139
 THE NETHERLANDS
 comprehensive plan of action to address the problems of
 minorities in the fields of health, education, employment, and
 the law. The National Advisory and Consultation Board on
 Minority Policy is incorporated by legislation into the
 administrative structure of the country. It is chaired by the
 Minister of Internal Affairs and includes representatives of
 seven ethnic minority groups. A consultative body to the
 Cabinet on minority issues, it also serves as a conduit to the
 Government for the expression of minority concerns.-
 Appeals to administrative tribunals in regard to claims of
 discrimination by employers and the Government and to housing
 matters, provide a practical means of redress. In March the
 Government introduced new antidiscrimination legislation,
 including provisions on sexual preference; however, the
 proposal later was judged "redundant" by the highest official
 advisory body, the Council of State, in view of language in
 the 1983 Constitution prohibiting discrimination "on the
 grounds of religion, belief, political opinion, race, sex, or
 any other grounds whatsoever." It remains to be seen whether
 further legislation will be pursued in this area.
 Women enjoy full legal and political equality. Although the
 entry of substantial numbers of women into the labor force
 occurred somewhat later in the Netherlands than in most
 Western industrialized countries, the rate of female
 participation in the work force is now on a par with the
 European Community average. Despite the good overall Dutch
 record in this area, the Government was cited twice in 1988
 for having discriminated against women. The European Court of
 Justice ruled in March that laws governing unemployment
 benefits discriminated against married women. In August the
 European Commission (the executive body of the European
 Community) ruled that the Government's cuts in part-time
 workers' compensation under the Dutch disabilities act
 affected far more women than men and were therefore
 discriminatory.
 Section 6   Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers to associate freely is well established.
 The active trade union movement includes in its membership
 approximately 30 percent of the employed labor force. Unions,
 while entirely free of government and political party control,
 may and do participate in political life. They are free to
 maintain relations with recognized international bodies. All
 union members, except civil servants, have the legal right to
 strike. The Government plans to introduce legislation during
 the 1989 session of Parliament which would grant the right to
 strike to civil servants not involved in "lifesaving"
 activities.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is well
 established. Negotiations between the unions and the
 Government take place both locally and in a fixed central
 negotiating body called the Labor Foundation. These rights
 and protections are applied uniformly throughout the country.
 
 
 1140
 THE NETHERLANDS
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of young people is 16. At 16
 years of age, youths may work full time only if they have
 completed the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Those still in
 school at age 16 may not work more than 8 hours per week.
 Laws prohibit youths under the age of 18 from working at
 night, overtime, or in areas which could be dangerous to their
 physical or mental development. The Netherlands has a reduced
 minimum wage for empioyees under age 23. The purpose of this
 law is to provide incentives for the employment of young
 people, one of the groups with the highest rate of
 unemployment. Full-time workers 16 years and older receive a
 paid vacation of at least 20 days per year.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Dutch law and practice adequately protect the safety and
 health of workers. The average workweek for adults is 38
 hours. There is minimum wage legislation, and the minimum
 wage is approximately $6.03 per hour. This minimum wage,
 together with other benefits which are available to all
 minimum wage earners, is sufficient to provide a decent living
 for workers and their families. For unemployed workers, an
 extensive system of unemployment benefits allows recipients to
 maintain an adequate standard of living.
 
 
 1141
