 TILE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary legislative
 system. Executive authority is exercised by the Prime Minister and Cabinet rep-
 resenting the governing political parties (traditionally a coalition of at least two
 major parties). The bicameral Parliament is elected through nationwide proportional
 voting. The police, Royal Constabulary, and investigative organs concerned with in-
 ternal and external security are effectively subordinated to the executive and judi-
 cial authorities.
 The Netherlands has an economy which is based on private enterprise but which
 also has extensive involvement by gcvarnmental entities. A complex social welfare
 system provides a high level of social benefits.
 The Netherlands attaches great importance to human rights. Individual rights are
 protected by Dutch law and are widely respected in practice by both the State and
 the general public. The press, public interest groups, and domestic and international
 human rights organizations are quick to challenge practices which they believe vio-
 late established human rights norms. Any complaints are thoroughly discussed by
 the media and in Parliament and are often subjected to a judicial process.
 There are no significant differences in human rights practices between The Neth-
 erlands proper and the autonomous regions of the  ingom, i.e., Aruba and the five
 islands of the Netherlands Antilles.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-No politically motivated killings by
 the Government or domestic political groups are known to have occurred.
 b. Disappearance.-No known abductions, secret arrests, or clandestine detention
 by police or other official security forces took place.
 
 
 985
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law and were not
 known to occur in The Netherlands proper. An impartial Netherlands Antilles Com-
 mission of Inquiry constituted to investigate the claims of police brutality in 1991
 and previous years concluded in September 1992, after extensive investigation, that
 the charges were unsubstantiated. However, according to Amnesty International,
 the Commission in August 1992 reported that "it found evidence of unlawful use of
 violence by the police on every island but Saba. The violence consisted of beatings
 with truncheons and, occasionally, fists." Further "the Commission stated that nei-
 ther disciplinary nor criminal action had been taken in obvious cases of serious po-
 lice violence.! Complaints about prison conditions on Curacao and St. Maarten in
 1993, including allegations of beatings, lack of access to medical personnel and over-
 crowding, have prompted an ongoing official investigation by the public prosecutor's
 office.
 In 1992, at the instigation of the Dutch Government, the Government of the Neth-
 erlands Antilles established The Roemer Commission to look into reports of police
 brutalities in the Antilles and Aruba, and the structure of the police environment
 there. Subsequently, and in cooperation with the Governments of the Netherlands
 Antilles and Aruba, the Dutch Government encouraged the initiation of training
 courses for Antillean and Aruban police designed in part to prevent any future mis-
 handling of prisoners.
 d. Arbirary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Freedom from arbitrary arrest is pro-
 vided for by law and respected in practice. Preventive detention is permitted only
 in an emergency declared by national or municipal authorities, and even then the
 detention may be for only a limited time. Under normal circumstances a suspect
 may be held for no longer than 6 hours (or 9 hours if arrested at night) before
 charges must be brought. Persons suspected of having committed serious crimes
 maybe held in custody for 48 hours with the agement of the public prosecutor,
 who is authorized to decide on an extension of the detention for an additional 48
 hours. Any further decision on extending detention is made by an investigating
 judge. Search and arrest warrants issued by the judiciary are required in most
 criminal cases. There are no political prisoners. Forced exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-The court system provides the right of appeal in
 all civil and criminal cases. The judiciary is independent. The right to a fair public
 trial is guaranteed by law and respected in practice. Defendants are presumed inno-
 cent until proven guilty. Charges must be formally stated. Defendants have the
 right to counsel. A system of free or low cost legal assistance exists for those defend-
 ants unable to pay. However, The Netherlands was criticized in September 1993 by
 the European Commission for Human Rights for limiting the right of an attorney
 whose client is not present for the trial to speak in court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-A judi-
 cial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to monitor private correspond-
 ence or telephone conversations. Such warrants are granted upon the presentation
 of sufficient justification to judicial authorities. The State respects individual free-
 dom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-A functioning democratic political system, an
 independent press, and an effective judiciary ensure freedom of speech and press.
 Dutch media policy allocates broadcast time to a wide range of social, political, and
 ethnic groups, ensuring that minority viewpoints are heard. In addition, a cable sys-
 tem brings in numerous television and radio broadcasts from neighboring countries.
 There are no prepublication restraints on any of the media. A traditional consen-
 sus precludes the mainstream media from disseminating sensitive information in-
 volving national security defense, or the Royal Family. Violent or sensational
 crimes are treated with discretion, with suspects and victims often identified only
 by their initials. In ongoing investigations, only minimal personal data are released
 on criminal suspects, both to maintain the privacy of the suspect and his family and
 to protect the integrity ofhe e investigation. Discrimination and incitement of hatred
 are prohibited under law. While courts may ban political parties at the request of
 the public prosecutor on the grounds of a party's racist, violent, or discriminatory
 character, there has never been an nttempt to do so.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assciation.-Freedom of assembly and asso-
 ciation is virtually unrestricted. F or large assemblies and demonstrations of a politi-
 cal nature, permits from local governmental authorities are required. These permits
 are routinely granted, but may be denied when authorities believe that "public order
 and safety" cannot be guaranteed as a result of a rally or demonstration. Public
 meetings of extreme rightist or racist groups have been prohibited from time to
 
 
 986
 time. The Government does not arbitrarily impede membership in, or the formation
 of, organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies are pro-
 vided to religious organizations which maintain educational facilities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration, and repa-
 triation. In May 1992, The Netherlands began to recognize dual citizenship and to
 make it easier for former Dutch citizens to reclaim their citizenship.
 The Netherlands has elaborate procedures for deciding asylum applications; these
 take into account conditions in the applicant's country of origin. Applicants who do
 not meet the criteria for political asylum are nevertheless permitted to remain in
 the Netherlands provisionally without refugee status if conditions in their country
 of origin are so violent or unsettled that returning them to that country would place
 them in danger. However, rules regarding asylum seekers which were proposed by
 the Ministry of Justice and approved by Parliament in September proscribe consid-
 eration of an asylum request if the applicant has had a previous request turned
 down or arrives from another country where he or she could have applied for asy-
 lum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy. Elections are based on
 proportional representation. There is universal suffrage for citizens aged 18 and
 older. Foreign residents may vote in municipal elections after 5 years of legal resi-
 dence. Citizens elect the Second Chamber (House of Representatives) of Parliament
 generally every 4 years (sooner if a government resigns or falls due to a parliamen-
 tary vote of no confidence). The most recent national elections, held in September
 1989, resulted in a formation of a center-left coalition, with Prime Minister Ruud
 Lubbers remaining in office. Four major and five minor political parties have seats
 in Parliament, representing the  litical spectrum from far left to far right. National
 elections are next scheduled for May 1994.
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women and
 minorities in government and politics. The Government has encouraged women to
 seek elected office by, among other things, a preferential hiring and promotion pol-
 icy. Furthermore, political parties have made strong efforts to ensure greater rep-
 resentation of women on their election lists. The Second Chamber of Parliament
 now counts 44 women among its 150 members.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups, the media, and other interested parties are free to pursue
 inquiries into human rights issues, and Dutch authorities readily assist inter-
 national and nongovernmental organizations in their investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-According to a study of violence against women, financed by the Min-
 istry of Welfare, Health, and Culture and published in 1989, 20.8 percent of Dutch
 women in heterosexual relationships were victims of violence. Slightly over half of
 these (11 percent) experienced repeated severe violence.
 The Government supports programs to reduce and prevent violence against
 women. Battered women find refuge in a network of government-subsidized women's
 shelters offering the services of social workers and psychologists. In addition, bat-
 tered women who leave their domestic partners become eligible for social benefits
 which include an adequate basic subsidy as well as an allowance for dependent chil-
 dren. There are also organizations that advise and assist women who have been vic-
 tims of sexual assault. Spousal rape is a crime and carries the same penalty as rape.
 Likewise, spousal abuse carries the same penalty as assault.
 Traditional cultural factors and inadequate child care facilities can discourage
 women, especially women with young children, from working, although part-time job
 opportunities are often filled by women with families. The Dutch tax system could
 be another obstacle to both spouses working, but only if they are in different tax
 brackets. In practice, this is not frequent because, since 1990, there have been only
 three tax brackets, and 80 percent of the working population is in the hightest tax
 bracket. The trend-especially for younger women-is toward a higher level of em-
 ployment.
 Net participation of women rose by 180,000 labor years in the period from 1988
 to 1991, a rise of 4.5 percent per year, compared to a 1 percent annual growth in
 male participation. Nearly one-third of all workers in the Dutch economy work part-
 
 
 time. Many of these part-time jobs are held by women who seek part-time, rather
 than full-time, work because of family demands on their time andlack of adequate
 childeare facilities. Social services lag behind the demand caused by the large in-
 crease in the number of working women with children. In 1992, 46 percent of
 women aged 15 to 64 had full- or part-time jobs, and about 40 percent of the work
 force was female. The unemployment rate of women reentering the labor market is
 high; most of the jobs available to them are in low administrative and service cat-
 egories. Women have less chance of promotion than do men.
 In 1988 the Government started positive action programs for women, and a study
 of 1990 collective labor agreements by the Social Affairs Ministry showed that al-
 most all of these contracts included one or more schemes to strengthen the position
 of women. Legislation mandates equal tay for e ual work; rohibits dismissal be-
 cause of marriage, pregnancy, or mother ood; and provides the basis for equality in
 other employment-related areas. A legislatively mandated Equal Treatment Com-
 mission actively pursues complaints of discrimination in these areas as well as alle-
 gations of pay differentials.
 Women have full legal and judicial rights and enter marriage with the option of
 choosing community property or separate regimes for their assets.
 Women's groups dedicated to such issues as equal rights in social security, the
 legal position of women, sexual abuse, taxation, education, work, an.d prostitution
 operate freely throughout The Netherlands. In February 1991 the Equal Rights
 Council, in a report entitled "Sexual Intimidation in Work Situations," called for
 tougher legislation to control sexual harassment in the workplace. Nevertheless, a
 study published in January 1992 showed that 20 percent of working women said
 they had been a victim of sexual harassment in the workplace. This figure rose to
 29 percent for women in the 25 to 34 age group. The Government has launched pub-
 licity campaigns to increase awareness of the problem. As the biggest employer in
 the country, it has taken measures to counter harassment among civil servants, for
 example, in the police force.
 Chdren.-The Government is committed to ensuring the well-being of children
 through numerous well-funded health education, and public information programs.
 The Council for the Protection of Children, operated through the Ministry of Justice,
 enforces child support orders, investigates cases of child abuse, and recommends
 remedies ranging from counseling to withdrawal of parental rights. In addition, the
 Government as set up a popular children's hotline and a network of pe&iatricians
 who track suspected cases of child abuse on a confidential basis.
 National I."aial /Ethnic Minorities.-Integration of racial and ethnic minorities
 into the social and cultural mainstream remains a difficult domestic issue. Incidents
 of violence against foreigners are relatively rare and isolated. In November 1993,
 for example, a group known as White Power took credit for an arson attack on a
 Rotterdam store owned by a Pakistani as weli as a series of threatening letters to
 minority families. The Government has tried to increase public awareness of racism
 and discrimination through, among other media, television specials, billboard cam-
 paigns and public speeches. In February, following years of debate, Parliament ap-
 proved an Equal Rights Act which bans discrimination on the basis of sex, race, na-
 tionality, creed, se:.:ual, or political preference, and allows those who balieve they
 have been discriminated against to take the offender to court under civil law.
 There was a small number of isolated anti-Semitic incidents at soccer matches,
 involving rascist chants and Nazi gestures. As a result of a year long stud on rac-
 ism and soccer, the Royal Dutch Football Union on January 22 announced a series
 of measures designed tc combat hooliganism and racial incidents at soccer games,
 including a threat to stop matches if racial taunting was heard. No further incidents
 of racial taunting have occurred since that time.
 Some 264,000 persons from :he former Dutch colony of Suriname have come to
 lie i-i the Netherlands since 1975. There are also approximately 85,000 persons
 from the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba. 1I addition, there are about 207,000
 Turkish and 168,000 Moroccan workers and family members. These groups face
 some de facto discrir.aination in housing and employment, as well as practical limits
 on opportunities for economic i:nd social advancement as a result of educational and
 skill levels which do not compare favorably with those of .he majority of Dutch citi-
 zens.
 Un-mployment among large minority groups is four times higher than the na-
 tional average. Government, employers, and union leade-s agreed in Nove-mber 1990
 on a series of measures designed to reduce minority unemployment levels to the na-
 tional average. The goal was to increase minority employment by 15,000 jobs per
 Year over a 4-year period. The Government continued to work with employers to
 meet this goal. It announced in July that the number of jobs held by ethnic minori-
 lies increased by 38,000 during the same period. Anecdotal evidence suggests the
 
 
 988
 unemployment rate of minorities in the larger cities has steadily increased and now
 is estimated to stand at 35 to 40 percent n Amsterdam and Rotterdam, compared
 with the national unemployment rate (ILO criteria) of 7 to 8 percent. The unemploy-
 ment rate is highest among Moroccans and Turks, and substantially higher for the
 female population or both communities.
 The municipalities of Rotterdam and Amsterdam have a number of programs to
 promote integration of ethnic minorities. Several seek to keep minority children in
 school and provide them with the skills they need to enter the labor force. Others
 seek to bring persons of different cultures together and prevent flare- ups in certain
 neighborhoods. Many of these programs receive funding from the national Govern-
 ment. Although police forces in Rotterdam and Amsterdam have outreach programs,
 efforts to hire minorities for the police forces have been largely unsuccessful. For
 example, Amsterdam has only two Turkish speaking policemen on its police force.
 While the Government has said it will refrain from using contract compliance meas-
 ures or imposing quotas, the Second Chamber of Parliament approved legislation in
 July which will oblige businesses to report to labor councils on the number of ethnic
 minority personnel they employ. Minorities now comprise 3 percent of the personnel
 employed in the national Government; the stated goal is to raise this to 5 percent
 by 1995.
 The National Advisory and Consultation Board on Minority Policy addresses the
 problems of minorities in the fields of health, education, employment, and the law.
 haired by the Minister of Internal Affairs, it includes representatives of seven eth-
 nic minority groups and acts as a consultative body to the Cabinet on minority is-
 sues and as a conduit to the Government for the expression of minority concerns.
 Currently represented on the Board are the Surinamese, Turks, Moroccans, Indo-
 nesians, legally admitted refugees, Antilleans and "Northern Mediterraneans." Ad-
 ministrative tribunals have been set up for filing claims of discrimination both
 against employers and the Government and in housing matters. They provide a
 practical means of redress for discrimination claims.
 People with Disabdities.-The Netherlands has made an effort to ensure that the
 needs of disabled people are met. The government-funded programs for the disabled
 included subsidies to adapt housing and public transportation, day activity centers,
 and incentives to employers to hire people with disabilities. Local governments are
 increasingly mandating access to public buildings for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The active trade union movement includes in its
 membership about 25 percent of the employee work force, but the collective labor
 agreements negotiated by the unions cover about 76 percent of all paid workers.
 Dutch trade unions used to be confessional, related to the three pillars of old
 Dutch society-Protestant, Catholic, and non-affiliated/Socialist. This clear division
 no longer exists. The largest labor federation is the Federated Dutch Trade Union
 Movement (FNV), created in 1982 by a merger of Catholic and Socialist unions.
 About 60 percent of all trade union members are in the FNV. About 20 percent of
 union members belong to the Christian National Trade Union Confederation (CNV),
 which is mainly but not exclusively Protestant. The Trade Union Confederation
 which covers middle management and managerial staff has about 7 percent of the
 union membership. Other union members belong to smaller, independent unions.
 Members of the Dutch armed forces may belong to unions.
 Unions are entirely free of control by the Government and political parties. They
 may and do participate in political activities. Several Labor Party (PVDA) Members
 of Parliament have a background as union activists.
 With the exception of most civil servants, all workers have the right to strike, and
 this right is exercised freely. In 1992 there were 23 labor disputes involving 52,419
 workers with 85,416 workdays lost. Disputes involving civil servant complaints may
 be appealed to an arbitration panel. The Government and unions continue to discuss
 their longstanding differences over the issue of the right of civil service workers to
 strike and the definition of "essential" civil services.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized and well established. Discrimination against work-
 ers because of their union membership is illegal and does not exist in practice.
 Collective bargaining agreements are negotiated in the framework of the social
 partnership in industrial relations develnoed among trade unions, private employ-
 ers, and the Government. These three participants in the Social Economic Council
 meet every autumn and discuss labor issues, including the state of the economy, ap-
 propriate wage levels for existing conditions, and maintaining international competi-
 tiveness. They develop a "cert i1 accord" with agreed social and economic goals for
 
 
 the coming year. A central tripartite body, the Labor Commission, oversees imple-
 mentation of the industrial relations system.
 Under this umbrella agreement, unions and employers' associations negotiate col-
 lective bargaining agreements on a sectoral basis. The Government can, and usually
 does, extend these agreements to all companies in the sector. As a result, approxi-
 mately 76 percent of workers are covered by collective bargaining agreements.
 Government, unions, and employers recognize the seriousness of the unemploy-
 ment problem (some of it structural and common to certain other industrialized
 countries) and the need to maintain Dutch competitiveness by moderating wage de-
 mands and keeping labor costs as low as possible. The Government announced in
 September that it would freeze wages, by legislation if necessary, to put pressure
 on employer groups and unions to reach ollective hargaining agreements which do
 not include wage increases. This announcement created controversy because of com-
 mitments arising from International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions and the
 Social Charter of the Council of Europe. The social partners agreed that in any case
 wage increases should not rise above the rate of inflation.
 The Government has been asked by I1O committees to amend the Wage Deter-
 mination Act of 1970, which gave the Government the power to freeze terms and
 conditions of employment in the public sector in the face of compelling reasons of
 national economic interest. At year's end, the Government was in the final stages
 of amending the Act to remove these sections.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by the Constitution and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16. At that age, young people may work full time only if they have completed
 the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Those still in school at age 16 may not work
 more than 8 hours per week. People under the age of 18 are prohibited by law from
 working at night, working overtime, or working in areas which could be dangerous
 to their physical or mental development. The laws are effectively enforced by the
 Labor Commission, a tripartite entity which monitors hiring practices and conducts
 inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage for adult workers is estab-
 lished by law and can be adjusted at government discretion every 6 months to re-
 flect changes in the cost of living. Since 1982, few adjustments have been made; had
 adjustments been made consistently, it is estimated that the minimum wage would
 be about 15 percent higher than it is. There is a reduced minimum wage for workers
 under 23 which ranges from 33 percent of the adult minimum wage for workers
 aged 16 to 85 percent for those aged 22. The purpose of the reduced minimum wage
 law is to provide incentives for the employment of young people, one of the demo-
 graphic groups with the highest rate of unemployment. The legislated minimum
 wage, together with social benefits available to all minimum wage earners, provides
 an adequate living for workers and their families.
 The actual working week in the Netherlands, according to European Union (EU)
 figures, is 35.8 hours, compared to the EU's average of 38.8 hours. This figure partly
 reflects the high level of part-time work done in the Netherlands. Maximun -ork
 hours are now legislated at 48 hours a week with strict rules about working hours
 at night, Saturday afternoon, and Sunday. At year's end the Government was pre-
 paring to introduce a bill to permit more flexible working hours, although the maxi-
 mum number of hours per week will still be limited. Full time workers over age 16
 receive, on the basis of 38 hours a week, 152 hours of vacation a year. However,
 the usual vacation period is 24.2 days or 190 hours a year. There are also generous
 welfare provisions for workers who become sick or disabled. For unemployed work-
 ers, there is an extensive system of benefits that allows recipients to maintain an
 adequate standard of living.
 Working conditions, including comprehensive occupational safety and health
 standards set by law and regulation, are actively monitored by the Labor Commis-
 sion. Enforcement is effective. Workers may refuse to continue work at a hazardous
 work site. The Ministry of Social Affairs also polices standards through its Labor
 inspectorate.
