 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a parliamentary democracy under a
 constitutional monarch. A special feature of the Dutch
 political system is nationwide proportional voting for
 Parliament where the full range of the political spectrum is
 represented.
 The Dutch have a free market economy with a large social
 welfare system providing a relatively high level of social
 benefits.
 The Dutch attach great importance in their foreign and
 domestic policies to human rights. Internationally recognized
 rights are protected by Dutch law and respected in practice.
 The most significant development in 1985 was a government
 memorandum on return migration which emphasized that the
 return of foreign nationals legally resident in the
 Netherlands to their own countries was entirely a voluntary
 matter.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 political groups has not occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 Abductions, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 police or other official security forces has not occurred.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and do not occur in practice. Prison conditions are good by
 international standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is guaranteed
 by law and respected in practice. There are no political
 prisoners in The Netherlands. A right of release from
 detention exists in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted only in times of emergency, upon declaration, for a
 limited time by national or municipal authorities. This power
 is used infrequently, and normally a person can be held no
 longer than 6 hours unless charges are brought.. Exile is
 unknown in The Netherlands. There is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by law and
 respected in practice. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 and a system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for
 those unable to pay for such counsel. Charges must be
 formally stated. The judiciary is independent, with a
 functioning appeals process and a Supreme Court.
 
 
 1044
 THE NETHERLANDS
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or
 monitor private correspondence. The State respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
 functioning democratic political system, combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. A feature of media policy is the
 allocation of broadcasting time to all social and political
 groups, which ensures that minority viewpoints are heard.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association is not restricted.
 Various private interest groups exist and play an active role
 in the political process.
 The right of unions to organize and bargain collectively is
 well established. The active trade union movement includes in
 its membership approximately 32 percent of the employed labor
 force. Unions are entirely free of government and political
 party control and may participate in political life. They are
 free to maintain relations with recognized international
 bodies in their fields.
 All union members, except civil servants, have the legal right
 to strike. The interests of civil servants are safeguarded by
 an arbitration committee. Moreover, the Government is
 considering proposing a bill that would permit most civil
 servants to strike, except those who provide vital services,
 such as air traffic controllers and soldiers.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion in The Netherlands. State
 subsidies in the educational field are provided to religious
 organizations which maintain educational facilities. The
 amount of the subsidy is based on the number of students
 attending the schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation in The Netherlands. Restrictions are not
 placed on residence. The Netherlands has provided first
 asylum for refugees from Eastern European countries and
 permanent resettlement for a limited number of persons,
 principally from Eastern Europe and Vietnam.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Nationwide elections are held every 4 years (or more
 frequently in the event of a parliamentary vote of
 no-confidence). In the most recent elections in September
 1982, a center-right coalition came to power replacing a
 
 
 1045
 THE NETHERLANDS
 center-left government. Political parties are numerous (13
 have seats in Parliament) and represent all points of view,
 from the far right to the far left. Women have full political
 rights and are increasingly represented in political life.
 Approximately 20 percent of the members of the lower house of
 Parliament are women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Netherlands has not been the subject of international
 human rights investigations. There are a number of Dutch
 groups interested in human rights abroad, as well as national
 chapters of international organizations such as Amnesty
 International. The Netherlands Government is active in the
 United Nations Human Rights Commission and other international
 forums concerned with human rights.
 Amnesty International's 1985 Report did not mention the
 Netherlands. Freedom House rated the Netherlands "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Netherlands has a population of 14,481,000, and per capita
 gross national product was just under $10,000 in 1983. The
 right to private property is protected in the Dutch market
 economy.
 The welfare state is well established, with an extensive
 system of cash and tax benefits to assist the unemployed and
 handicapped and to provide adequate educational and health
 opportunities to all citizens. Average life expectancy is 76
 years, and the infant mortality rate is 8.1 per 1,000 live
 births. Primary education is universal.
 The minimum age for employment of young people is 15. At 15
 years of age, they may work full-time only if they have
 completed the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Children still
 in school at age 15 may not work more than 8 hours per week.
 Laws prohibit children under the age of 18 from working at
 night, from working overtime, and from working in areas which
 could be dangerous to their physical or mental development.
 Dutch law adequately protects the safety and health of
 workers. The average workweek for adults is 38 hours.
 Workers 18 years and older receive a minimum of 15 days paid
 vacation per year. Full-time workers between the ages of 15
 and 18 receive a' minimum paid vacation of 20 days per year.
 Wages are sufficient to provide a decent living for workers
 and their families.
 Women enjoy full legal and political equality in The
 Netherlands. In economic life, the entry of substantial
 numbers of women into the labor force occurred somewhat later
 in The Netherlands than in most Western industrialized
 countries. The Government and most political parties continue
 to advocate special consideration for women in order to
 further progress in the area of economic equality.
 The problem of effectively integrating Dutch racial and ethnic
 minorities into national economic and social life is perhaps
 the most difficult human rights related issue confronting the
 Dutch Government. Thousands of persons from the former Dutch
 
 
 1046
 THE NETHERLANDS
 colony of Suriname and The Netherlands Antilles have come to
 live in The Netherlands in recent years. In addition, there
 are significant numbers of foreign guest workers, mostly from
 Turkey and Morocco. These groups face some overt
 discrimination in housing and employment, as well as practical
 limits on opportunities for social and economic advancement
 caused by inadequate educational levels compared to the
 majority of Dutch citizens. There is a widespread fear among
 the Dutch that discrimination, prompted by difficult economic
 times throughout The Netherlands, is increasing. There have
 been isolated instances of violence against persons for racial
 reasons during the past 2 years.
 Government policy to combat discrimination is outlined in its
 1983 "Minority Note." This document is a comprehensive plan
 of action to address the problems of minorities in the fields
 of health, education, employment, and the law. It works from
 a basic premise that maximum integration of racial minorities
 into broader Dutch society is the only way to achieve full
 equality. The report includes sections to address the special
 problems of minorities, youth, and women.
 In 1985, the Government sent to Parliament a policy memorandum
 on return migration. The memorandum was designed to clarify
 the return policy, first outlined in the 1983 Note. There had
 been criticism of aspects of the policy which proposed
 financial "incentives" for those foreign-born persons who wish
 to return to their former country of residence. The 1985
 memorandum made clear that return migration was entirely
 voluntary. Financial assistance is provided to assist certain
 foreign nationals who wish to leave The Netherlands but lack
 the means to do so. In an experimental program to last
 1 year, workers between the ages of 55 and 64 who have been
 legally resident in The Netherlands for not less than 5 years
 and have been unemployed for not less than 6 months may be
 eligible to receive payment of the costs of the return journey
 and regular Dutch social security benefits.
 
 
 1047
