 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary legislative
 aostem and an independent judici . Executive authority is exercised by the Prime
 Minister and Cabinet reprintin  the verning politicalparties (traditinally a co-
 alition of at least two major partis). The bicameral Parliament is elected through
 free and fair elections.
 Regional police forces are primarily responsible for maintaining internal security.
 The police, the royal onsimulm, and investigative organizations concerned with
 internal and external security are effectively subordinated to civilian authority.
 The market-based economy is exprt oriented and features a mixture of industry,
 services, and agriculture. Ke industries include chemicals, oil refining, natural gas,
 machnery, and eleronics. ihe agricultural sector produces fruit, vegetables, flow-
 ers, meat, and dairy products. Living standards and the level of social benefits are
 high. At just over 7 percent of the work force, unemployment is a serious problem,
 - and one which affects minorities relatively mere than the general population.
 The Government fully res   the rights of its citizens, and the law and judiciary
 provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse. The Govern-
 ment is taking serious steps to adrss violence and discrimination against women.
 The Government has also taken steps to address societal discrimination against mi-
 norities. The Criminal Investigation Service registered dozens of racist incidents
 with life-threatening violence, such as shootings, arson, and physical abuse.
 Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles, which are two autonomous regions of the
 kingdom, also feature parliamentary systems and full constitutional protection of
 human rights. In practice, government respect for human rights on these islands
 generally is little different from that in the European Netherlands. The two Carib-
 bean Governments have taken measures to address past reports of police brutality.
 Prison conditions remain substandard.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial K hling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrjudicial killings.
 b. Disappearane.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Derading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, an there were no reports that officals
 employed them.
 
 
 In response to police mistreatment of suspects and prisoners in the Netherlands
 Antilles, the Antillean Government established an independent commission with in-
 vestigatory powers to respond to complaints from the public about police brutality,
 and he Dutch Government funded a police professionalization training program
 there, which graduated its first class in September. The Dutch agreed to adapt the
 training program for Aruba as well and to establish a commission to look into Ar-
 ba's police training needs.
 Prison conditions in the islands, and particularly on Curacao and St. Maarten in
 the Netherlands Antilles, are generally considered substandard. Prisoners continued
 to complain of poor food, lack of access to medical personnel, and overcrowding. The
 Dutch Ministry of Justice made a series of recommendations in 1994 for the reorga-
 nization of the Netherlands Antillean prison system. In January the island govern-
 ment pledged to implement those recommendations but took no action during the
 year. The governments allow access by nongovernmental organizations (NCO's) to
 prisons; Council of Europe rapporteurs visited Aruba, Curacao, and St. Maarten in
 the spring.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides
 citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process. The law provides for the right to
 a fair trial, and the independent judiciary vigorously enforces this right.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech-and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this right in practice. State subsidies are provided to religious organi-
 zations that maintain educational facilities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights and the Government respects them
 m practice. The Government cooperates with tle U.N. High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no re-
 ports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status. In January
 the Government instituted tighter criteria for granting asylum, resulting in a 50
 percent drop in the number of asylum applicants in the first half of the year.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women and
 minorities in government and politics. The second chamber of Parliament includes
 49 women among its 150 members. Four of 13 cabinet ministers and 80 of 633 may-
 ors are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings. Government officials are very cooperative and responsive
 to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law bans discrimination on the basis of any of these factors or on sexual ori-
 entation or political preference. The Government generally is effective in enforcing
 these provisions. Under a new Equal Treatment Act, complainants may take offend-
 ers to court under civil law.
 Women.-The Government supports programs to reduce and prevent violence
 against women. Battered women find refuge in a network of 48 government-sub-
 
 
 960
 sidized women's shelters offering the services of social workers and psychologists.
 In addition battered women who leave their domestic partners become eligib  for
 social benehts which include an adequate basic subsidy as well as an allowance for
 dependent children. Nongovernmental organizations also advise and assist women
 who have been victims of sexual assault. Since 1991 marital rape has been a crime
 and carries the same penalty as rape. Spousal abuse carries a one-third higher pen-
 alty than ordinary battery. However, since the judicial system does not compile sta-
 tistics distinguishingspousal abuse from battery, it is difficult to estimate the ex-
 tent of the problem. The most recent study, by the Ministry of Welfare, Health, and
 Culture in 1989, showed that over 20 percent of women in heterosexual relation-
 ships were victims of violence during their lifetimes. Slightly over half of these suf-
 fered repeated severe violence.
 Concern over trafficking in women for prostitution is on the rise. The Dutch Foun-
 dation Against Trafficking in Women estimates that each year around 1,000 women
 are brought into the Netherlands for purposes of prostitution. The International Or-
 anization for Migration collected data on 155 women brought from Eastern and
 Central Euroe to the Netherlands in 1994 and found that over 95 percent had be-
 come trapped in prostitution. Women who are forced to work illegally as prostitutes
 have special exemptions in immigration law and receive counseling and legal assist-
 ance. In June the Dutch Society of Attorneys General issued new guidelines for
 prosecutors to improve enforcement of the existing law against trafficking in women.
 Women are increasingly entering the job market, but traditional cultural factors
 and inaduate child care facilities can disourage women--especially those with
 young children-from working. Although more than 40 percent of the Dutch work
 force is now female, many women work only part-time. Only 52 percent of women
 ages 15 to 64 have jobs, and 64 percent of these employed women work less than
 35 hours a week. By contrast, 75 percent of men in this age group are employed,
 85 percent of whom work 35 or more hours a week.
 Women are often underemployed and have less chance of promotion than their
 male colleagues. The unemployment rate of women reentering the labor market is
 high. A 1993 study of central government civil servants showed that, while 58 per-
 cent of those in the lowest salary grade were women, only 9 percent in the highest
 grade were women. These problems notwithstanding, women are making steady
 progress by moving into important professional and high-visibility jobs.
 In 1988 the Government began instituting affirmative action programs for women.
 Collective labor agreements usually include one or more schemes to strengthen the
 position of women. Legislation mandates equal pay for equal work, prohibits dismis-
 sal because of marriage, pregnancy, or motherhood, and provides the basis for equal-
 ity in other employment-refated areas. A legislatively mandated Equal-Treatment
 Commission actively pursues complaints of discrimination in these areas as well as
 allegations of pay differences.
 The Dutch social welfare and national health systems provide considerable assist-
 ance to working women with families. Women are eligible for 16 weeks of maternity
 leave at full pay. The Parental Leave Law allows new mothers and fathers to work
 only 20 hours a week over a 6-month period.
 Women have full legal and judicial rights and enter marriage with the option of
 choosing community property or separate regimes for their assets.
 Women's groups dedicated to such issues as equal rights in social security, the
 legal position of women, sexual abuse, taxation, education, work, and prostitution
 operate freely. The Social Ministry, citing research which showed that one in three
 working women has experienced sexual harassment in the work place, initiated leg-
 islation to address this problem. And in 1994, Parliament passed an amendment to
 the Workers' Conditions Act requiring employers to take measures to protect work-
 ers. The Government runs an ongoing publicity campaign to increase awareness of
 the problem. As the biggest employer in the country, it has taken measures to
 counter harassment among civil servants, for example, in the police force.
 Children.-The Government is committed to ensuring the well-being of children
 through numerous well-funded health education, and public information programs.
 The Council for the Protection of Children, operated through the Ministry of Justice,
 enforces child support orders, investigates cases of child abuse, and recommends
 remedies ranging from counseling to withdrawal of parental rights. In addition, the
 Government has set up a popular hot line for children and a network of pediatri-
 cians who track suspected cases of child abuse on a confidential basis. There is no
 pattern of societal abuse of children.
 International sex tourism involving abuse of minor children is prosecutable under
 Dutch law. In November Parliament passed legislation raising the minimum penalty
 for child pornography offenses from 3 months' to 4 years' imprisonment, and to 6
 years' in the event of financial gain. The new legislation also allows for provisional
 
 
 961
 arrest, house searches, and criminal financial investigations. Moreover, it will no
 longer have to be proven that a person possesses child pornography for the purpose
 of distribution or public display. Sufficient cause for prosecution will be "the posses-
 sion of pictures ofsexual behavior with minors."
 Peope With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. Local govern-
 ments are increasingly mandating access to public buildings for the disabled.
 NationallRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-Integration of racial and ethnic minorities
 into the social and cultural mainstream remains a difficult domestic issue.
 The Government has tried to increase public awareness of racism and discrimina-
 tion. The law bans discrimination on the basis of race or nationality and allows
 those who believe that they have been discriminated against to take the offender
 to court under civil law. A 1994 study by the University of Leiden and the Dutch
 Public Safety Service concluded that the number of incidents of violence against for-
 eigners and ethnic minorities had increased in recent years. The study counted the
 number of reprted racially motivated incidents of violence in 1993 to be around 350
 but estimated the unreported number to be much higher. In 1994 the Criminal In-
 vestigation Service (CRI) registered 1,114 racist incidents, rang  from racist pam-
 phlets and painted slogans to bomb threats, assaults, physica ause, and destruc-
 tion of property. There was no noticeable increase in the number of incidents in the
 first 6 months of 1995. CRI registers only incidents of "lighter offenses," e.g., paint-
 ed swastikas, when a complaint has been field. Therefore, it estimates that the
 number of such incidents is much higher.
 Immigrant groups face some de facto discrimination in housing and employment.
 These groups, concentrated in the larger cities, suffer from a high rate of unemploy-
 ment. The Government has been working for several years with employers' groups
 and unions to reduce minority unemployment levels to the national average. As a
 result of these efforts, in recent years the rate of job creation among ethnic minori-
 ties has been higher than among the general population.
 A 1994 law requiring employers with a work force of over 35 people to register
 their non-Dutch employees has run into implementation problems. Some employers
 find the law burdensome, and some minority employees object to being counted as
 "non-Dutch." Employers must submit confidential affirmative action plans including
 recruitment targets and proposed means of reaching that target.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Membership in labor unions is open to all workers
 including military, police, and civil service employees. People are entitled to form
 or join unions of their own choosing without previous government authorization, and
 unions are free to affiliate with national trade union federations. This right is freely
 exercised.
 Unions are entirely free of control by the Government and political parties. Union
 members may and do participate in political activities.
 All workers have the right to strike, except for most civil servants who have other
 institutionalized means of protection and redress. The right to strike is exercised
 freely, but the number of strikes each year is very low and resulted in only 47.5
 lost labor days in 1994. There is no retribution against striking workers.
 About 25 percent of the Dutch work force is unionized, but union-negotiated col-
 lective bargaining agreements are usually extended to cover about three-quarters of
 the work fore. The white-collar unions' membership is the fastest growing.
 There are four union federations in the Netherlands, and there are also independ-
 ent unions. These federations are active internationally, without restriction.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recogniz d and well established. Discrimination against work-
 ers because of union membership is illegal and does not occur.
 Collective bargaining agreements are negotiated in the framework of the "Social
 Partnership" developed between trade unions and private employers. Representa-
 tives of the main union federations, employers' organizations, andthe Government
 meet each autumn to discuss labor issues, including wage levels and their relation
 to the state of the economy and to international competition. The discussions lead
 to a central accord with social as well as economic goals for the coming year. Under
 this umbrella agreement, unions and employers in various sectors negotiate sectoral
 agreements, which the Government usually extends to all companies in the respec-
 tive sector. As a result, collective bargaining agreements cover three-quarters of the
 labor force.
 Antiunion discrimination is prohibited. Union federations and employers' organi-
 zations form the "Social Partnership" and are represented, along with independent
 experts, on the Social and Economic Council. The Council is the major advisory
 
 
 board to the Government on its policies and legislation regarding national and inter-
 national social and economic matters.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Fored or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by the Constitution and does not occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years, and for full-time work it is conditioned on completion of the mandatory
 10 years of schooling. Those still in school at age 16 may not work more than 8
 hours per week. People under age 18 are prohibited by law from working at night,
 overtime, or in areas dangerous to their physical or mental well-being. The laws are
 effectively enforced by the tripartite Labor Commission, which monitors hiring prac-
 tices and conducts inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage for adults is established
 by law and can be adjusted every 6 months to changes in the cost-of-living index.
 Since 1982 few adjustments have been made, and the rise in the minimum wage
 has lagged well behind the rise in the index. The gross minimum wage is $1,352
 per month (2,163 guilders). For workers earning the minimum wage, employers cur-
 rently pay $3,750 a year (f. 6,000) in premiums for social security benefits, which
 includes medical insurance. Only 3 percent of workers earn the minimum wage be-
 cause collective -bargaining agreements, which are normally extended across a sec-
 tor, usually fix a minimum wage well above the legislated minimum. Government,
 unions, and employers are discussing ways to increase the number of minimum
 wage jobs and to decrease employers' social payments in order to lower the cost of
 hiring new workers and to create more jobs, especially for the long-term unem-
 plo ed.                                                                   d
 C ere is a reduced minimum wage for young people under age 23-one of the de-
 mographic groups with the highest rate of unemployment-intended to provide in-
 centives for their employment. This wage ranges from 33 percent of the adult mini-
 mum wage for workers ages 16 to 85 percent for those ages 22. The legislated mini-
 mum wage and social benefits available to all minimum wage earners provide an
 adequate standard of living for workers and their families.
 A 40-hour workweek is established by law, but collective bargaining agreements
 often set a shorter workweek. The rapid increase of telecommuting and high level
 of part-time work have lowered the estimated actual workweek to 35.8 hours, under
 the European average. As a job creating measure, the Government now permits
 - flexible hours. For some, this could mean more than an 8-hour day, within the
 weekly legal limits. However, collective bargaining negotiations are heading toward
 an eventual 36-hour week for full-time employees.
 Working conditions, including comprehensive occupational safety and health
 standards set by law and regulations, are actively monitored by the tripartite Labor
 Commission. Enforcement is effective. Workers may refuse to continue working at
 a hazardous work site. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs also monitors
 standards through its labor inspectorate.
 NORWAY
 Norway is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy with King
 Harald V as the Head of State. It is governed by a Prime Minister, Cabinet, and
 a 165-seat Storting (Parliament) which is elected every 4 years and cannot be dis-
 solved.
 The police security forces, and the military scrupulously protect human rights.
 Civilian autorities effectively control these organizations and investigate thor-
 oughly any allegations of human rights violations.
 Norway is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy combining private,
 public, and state ownership. Personal freedoms, such as the right to hold private
 property, are protected by the Constitution and respected in practice.
 The Government fully respects the rights of its citizens, and the law and judiciary
 provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disapiearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 
 
 963
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The law provides for the right to a fair trial, and
 an independent judiciary vigorously enforces this right.
 The present court system consists of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court Ap-
 pellate Court (committee), Superior Courts, County Courts for criminal cases, Mag-
 istrate Courts for civil cases, and Claims Courts. Special courts are the Impeach-
 meant Court (made up of Parliamentarians), the bor Court, Trsteeship Courts,
 Fishery Courts, and something similar to land ownership severance courts. There
 are no religious, political, or security courts. All Norwegian courts, which date back
 to laws passed in the eleventh century, meet internationally accepted standards for
 fair trials.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Both
 the Constitution and law prohibit such practices, government authorities generally
 respect these prohibitions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. An independent press, an
 effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system, combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government res pects them in practie.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway, which is f'man-
 cially supported by the State, and to which some 93 percent of the population nomi-
 nally belong. There is a constitutional requirement that the King and one-half of
 the Cabinet belong to this church. The Workers' Protection and Working Environ-
 ment Act permits prospective employers to ask job applicants in private or religious
 schools, or in day~care centers, whether they respect Christian beliefs and prin-
 ciples.
 Other denominations operate freely. A religious community is required to register
 with the Government only if it desires state support, which is provided to a Il reg-
 istered denominations on a proportional basis in accordance with membership. Al-
 though the state religion is taught in all public schools, children of other faiths are
 allowed to be absent from such classes upon parental request. If there are enough
 students of the same faith, the school will arrange classes in that faith. Workers
 belonging to minority denominations are allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 Government cooperates with the U.. High Commissioner for Refugees and
 other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no forced expul-
 sions of those having a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 nen~t
 The law provides itizens with the right to change their Government peacefully,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections
 held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions, in law or practice, on the participation of women in gov-
 ernment or in the political arena generally. Norway has a female Prime Minister,
 a female president of Parliament, and women lead two of the six main political par-
 ties. Women constitute 65 of the 165 members of parliament (39.4 percent), and
 chair 5 of 15 standing cmmittes.
 hI addition to participating freely in the national political process, Norwegian
 Sami(Lapps) elected their own cnstituent assembly, the Sameting, in 1993 for the
 second time. Under the law establishing the 39-seat body, it is a consultative group
 which meets regularly to deal with "all matters which in (its) opinion are of special
 importance to the Sami people." In practice, the Sameting has been most interested
 
 
 in protecting the group's language and cultural rights and in influencing decisions
 on resources and lands where Sami are a majority.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are very cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, religion, disability,
 IIIguage, or social status, and the Government enforces this prohibition in practice.
 Women.-In 1994, there were 38,689 contacts by women with crisis action centers
 and 2,979 overnight stays by women at shelters. Police authorities believe that in-
 _ creases in reported rapes and wife beatings in recent years have been largely due
 to greater willingness among women to report these crimes. The police vigorously
 investigate and prosecute such crimes and have instituted special programs to pre-
 vent rape and domestic violence and to counsel victims. Public and private organiza-
 tions run several shelters which give battered wives an alternative to returning to
 a violent domestic situation.
 The rights of women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other
 regulations. According to that law "women and men engaged in the same activity
 shall have equal wages for work of equal value." An Equal Rights Council monitors
 enforcement of the 1978 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes com-
 plaints of sexual discrimination. There were 250 written complaints in 1994 and 500
 by telephone. There were 150 written complaints in 1995 as of September. On aver-
 age, 20 percent of all complaints of sexual discrimination are filed by men.
 Chidren.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical
 care. An independent Children's Ombudsman Office assures the protection of ch-
 dren in law and practice. There is no pattern of societal abuse directed against chil-
 dren. There is no difference in the treatment of girls and boys in education or health
 care services.
 People With Disabiities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. The law man-
 dates access to buildings for people with disabilities, and the Government enforces
 these provisions in practice.
 Indigenous People.-Apart from a tiny Finnish population in the northeast, the
 Sami onstituted~orwas only significant minority group until the influx of immi-
 grants during the 1970's. In recent years, the Government has taken steps to pro-
 tect the San's cultural rights by providing Sami-language instruction at schools in
 their areas, radio and television progranvibroadcast or subtitled in Sami, and sub-
 sidies for newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami (see Section 3).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-yThe law provides workers with the right to associate
 - freely and to strike. Strikes increased in 1995 over previous years and were settled
 through notiations. The Government has the right, with the approval of the
 Strting, to ivoke compulsory arbitration under certain circumstances. The Govern-
 ment came under increasing criticism in 1995 for resorting to compulsory arbitra-
 tion too quickly during striokes. In addition, this procedure, which was also invoked
 several times in the 1980's, particularly in the oil industry, was criticized repeatedly
 by the Committee of Experts of the International Labor Organization, which argued
 that the situations were not a sufficient threat to public health and safety to justiy
 the actions.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force, unions play an im-
 portant role in political and economic life and are consulted by the Government on
 important economic and social problems. Although the largest trade union federa-
 tion is associated with the Labor Party, all unions and labor federations are free
 of party and gevernment control. Unions are free to form federations and to afiliate
 internationally. They maintain strong ties with such international bodies as the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-Al workers, includinG overn -
 ment employees and miitary personnel, exercise the right to organize an dargain
 collectively. Collective bargainin is widespread, with most wage earners covered by
 negotiated settlements, either directly or through understandings which extend the
 contract terms to workers outside of the main labor federation and the employers'
 
 
 bargaining group. Any complaint of antiunion discrimination would be dealt with by
 thelabor court, hut there have been none in recent years.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 law and does not exist. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children aged 13 to 18 may be
 employed part time in light work that will not adversely affect their health, develop-
 ment, or schooling. Minimum-age rules are observed in practice and enforced by the
 Directorate of Labor Inspections. Nine years of education is compulsory. Children
 are normally in school up to the age of 16.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Normal working hours are mandated by law
 and limited to 37  hours per week. The law also provides for 25 wori.  days of
 paid leave per year (31 days for those over age 60). A 28-hour rest period is legally
 mandated on weekends and holidays. There is no specified minimum wage, but
 wages normally fall within a national scale negotiated by labor, employers, and the
 Government. Average income, not including extnsive social benefits, is adequate to
 provide a worker and family a decent living.
 Under the Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act of 1977, all em-
 ployed persons are assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions. Spe-
 cific standards are set by the Directorate of Labor Inspections in consultation with
 nongovernmental experts. According to the Act, working environment committees
 composed of management, workers, and health personnel must be established in all
 enterprises with 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in all or-
 ganizations. Workers eqjoy strong rights to remove themselves from situations
 which endanger their health. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures effective
 compliance with labor legislation and standards.
 POLAND
 Poland is a parliamentary democracy based on a multiparty political system and
 free and fair elections. President Aleksander Kwasniewski, who defeated Lech
 Walesa in Poland's second postwar free Presidential election in November, shares
 power with the Prime Minister, the Council of Ministers, and the bicameral Par-
 liament (Senate and Sejm). The coalition Government, composed of the Democratic
 Left Alliance (SLD), a successor to the former Communist party, and the Polish
 Peasant Party, a successor to the Peasant Party of the Communist era, continues
 to enjoy a nearly two-thirds majority in both houses of Parliament. In addition to
 the 1990 and 1995 Presidential elections, Poland has held two parliamentary elec-
 tions in the 6 years since the end of communism.
 The armed forces and the internal security apparatus are subject to governmental
 authority and are under civilian control. The precise division of authority over the
 military between the President and Prime Minister continues to be the subject of
 debate. In this election year, both the military and the police were accused of engag-
 ing in incidents of partisan campaign activity in violation of existing law requiring
 that these institutions be apolitical. One Interior Ministry general was fired as a
 result. The Ministry of Defense was conducting an inquiry into the incidents in the
 army in early autumn.
 Poland's economy registered strong growth (5 percent), and its level of exports
 continued to reflect an expanding economy. The pace of implementation of free mar-
 ket reforms including privatization slowed in 1994 and early 1995 but picked up
 under the Olekay Government. The official registered unemployment rate has de-
 clined compared to previous years, standing at 15.1 percent. However, specific sec-
 tors of the population, such as women anT younger and semiskilled workers, con-
 tinue to remain particularly vulnerable and mere acutely feel the effects of the re-
 structuring or closing of large state enterprises. Discontent continues among a sig-
 nificant minority who believe that the transition to a market economy has left them
 worse off than before.
 While the Government generally respected most of its citizens' human rights,
 there were some abuses. Freedom of speech and the press are subject to some limi-
 tations. There have been several incidents of intolerance toward minorities. Persons
 of color and Asian or Arab descent have been subject to attack by radical elements
 of society. Lack of public confidence as well as an inadequate budget plague the
 court system. Court decisions are frequently not implemented, particularly in the
 administrative courts, and simple civil cases can take as long as 2 or 3 years before
 they are resolved. Low salaries for prosecutors and judges resulted in many leaving
 public service for more lucrative employment. Prison conditions are poor.
 
 
 966
 The threat of organized crime has provoked legislative responses that could
 threaten the right to privacy. Although the rights to organize and bargain collec-
 tively were largely observed, there were employer violations of other worker rights
 provided by law, particularly in the growing private sector. Women continue to ex-
 perience serious discrimination in the labor market, are not full participants in po-
 litical life and are subject to various legal inequities as a consequence of paterna
 tic laws. Spousal abuse is a serious problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Klling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 Grzegorz Piotrowski, a former Polish security police captain who was jailed for the
 murder of Father Jerzy Popieluszko and released on parole in October 1994, was
 sent back to jail for a period of 5 years after a Supreme Court review. The trial
 of two militiamen accused of beating to death Grzegorz Przemyk, a student, in 1983,
 continues. The police are accused of covering up the death and blaming it on the
 ambulance drivers who took Przemyk to the hospital. The prosecution has been un-
 able to establish the names of all militiamen involved in the incident.
 Police closed the investigation into the case of two homeless persons who were al-
 legedly beaten to death by police in 1993. The prosecutor determined that someone
 murdered one of the homeless persons but found he did not have enough evidence
 to indict the accused officers. The prosecutor further determined that it was unclear
 whether the second homeless person was murdered. Human rights monitors believe
 that one of the homeless was, in fact, murdered by a police officer and that the pros-
 ecutor closed the case prematurely.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 .Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatm or or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code prohibits torture, and there were no reported incidents of it.
 In a March letter to the Prime Minister, the Commissioner for for Civil Rights
 Protection (Ombudsman) charged that the condition of many detention facilities and
 prisons is poor and that several dozen should be closed in whole or in part for ren-
 ovation. The Ombudsman recommended that actions be taken to lower the prison
 population, including the decriminalization of certain offenses, such as failure to pay
 aimony. The Government permits visits to civiian prisons by human rights mon-
 itors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention. There were no reports of such acts. The law allows a 48-hour
 detention period before authorities are required to bring formal charges, during
 which detainees are normally denied access to a lawyer. Once a prosecutor presents
 the legal basis for a formal investigation, the law provides the detainee access to
 a lawyer. Detainees may be held under "temporary" arrest for up to 3 months and
 may challenge the legality of an arrest through appeal to the district court. A court
 may extend this pretrial conrimement period every 3 months until the trial date.
 Bail is available, and human rights organizations report that most detainees were
 released on bail pending trial.
 The Government does not employ forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The judicial branch is independent from the Presi-
 dent and the Government. Poland has a three-tier court system, consisting of re-
 gional and provincial courts a    Supreme Court which is divided into five divi-
 sions: military, civil, criminal, labor, and family. Judges are nominated by the Na-
 tional Judicial Council and appointed by the President. Judges are appointed to the
 bench for life and can be reassigned but not dismissed, except by a decision of the
 National Judicial Council. The Constitutional Tribunal rules on the constitutionality
 of legislation, but its decisions may be overruled by an absolute majority in the
 Sejm...
 All defendants are p resumed innocent until proven guilty. At the end of a trial
 the court renders its decision orally andt t  ha  praso prepare a written deci-
 sion. A defendaint has the right to appeal a decision within 14 days of the written
 decision. Appeals may be ma ie on, among other grounds, the basis of new evidence
 orprcedural irregularities.
 C   al cases are tried in regional and provincial courts by a panel consisting
 of a professional jue and two ay assessors. The seriousness of the offense deter-
 mines which of these is the court of first instance. Once formal charges are filed
 the defendant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an attorney, who
 is provided atpublic expense if necessary. Once the defendant is prepared, a trial
 date is set. Deend    are required to be present during trial and may present evi-
 
 
 967
 dence and confront witnesses in their own defense. The right to testify is universal.
 A law allowing for the use of incognito witnesses, designed to assist in combating
 organized crime, threatens a defendant's ability to confront witnesses.
 Trials are normally public. The court, however, reserves the right to close a trial
 to the public in some circumstances, such as divorce cases, trials in which state se-
 crets may be disclosed, or cases whose content might offend "public morality." The
 court rarely invokes this prerogative.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy of correspondence. There is no legisla-
 tion that guarantees the general right to privacy, although Poland has signed the
 European human rights convention, which provides for that right. In response to the
 growing threat of organized crime and money laundering, the Parliament passed a
 law in July permitting the police and secret services to monitor private correspond-
 ence and to use wire taps and electronic monitoring devices in cases involving a se-
 rious crime, narcotics, money laundering, or illegal arms sales. The Minister of Jus-
 tice and the Minister of Interior, both political appointees, must authorize these in-
 vestigative methods. In emergency cases, the police may initiate an investigation
 using wiretaps or opening private correspondence at the same time that they file
 an application for permission with the ministries to engage in these activities. There
 is no independent judicial review of these decisions nor is there a control mechanism
 over how the information derived from these investigations will be used.
 The law forbids arbitrary forced entry into homes. Search warrants issued by a
 prosecutor are required in order to enter private residences. In emergency cases
 when a prosecutor is not immediately available, police may enter a residence with
 the approval of the local police commander. In the most urgent cases, in which there
 is not time to consult with the police commander police may enter a private resi-
 dence after showing their official identification. here were no reports that police
 abused search warrant procedures.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although these freedoms are generally guaran-
 teed in the Constitution, they are subject to some restrictions in law andpractice.
 Citizens may generally express their opinions publicly and privately. The Penal
 Code, however, states that anyone who "publicly insults, ridicules, and derides the
 Polish nation, Polish People's Republic, its political system, or its principal organs
 is punishable by between 6 months and 8 years of imprisonment." The Code imposes
 a prison term of up to 10 years for a person who commits any of the prohibited acts
 in print or through the mass media. In October Presidential candidate Leazek Bubel
 was charged with violating this law. Bubel claimed on a radio program that, when
 he served as deputy prosecutor general, a former head of the Presidential chan-
 celleryprotected a group of criminals.
 The Penal Code also stipulates that offending religious sentiment through public
 speech is punishable by a fine or a 2-year prison term. Father Stanislaw Jankowski
 is currently being investigated for violation of this law for an allegedly anti-Semitic
 sermon he gave in Gdansk in June. Catholic organizations have challenged the le-
 gality of certain films and images published in the press on the basis of this provi-
 sion. In October a provincial court charged presidential candidate Leszek Bubel with
 violating this article by publishing a pamphlet containing anti-Semitic humor. An
 investigation continues into the Augst 1994 case invlving the weekly magazine
 Wprost which printed an image of te Blac Madonna and Child in gas masks as
 a means of dramatizing the seriousness of envronmental pollution. The print media
 in Poland are uncensored and independent, although they may be subject to pros-
 ecution under the Penal Code provisions described above.
 In January, in a review of a 1994 case against newspaper editor Waclaw Bialy,
 the Supreme Court ruled that a prsecutor or a judge, in the context of a criminal
 trial, may request that a journalist divulge the name of a source. The penalty for
 noncompliance is a fine of appro ately$2,00 (5,000 new zloty) and 1 month in
 jail.
 In July the Government sold 2 percent of its shares in the only remaining gvern-
 ment controlled company publishing a major newspaper, thereby ceasing to have a
 controlling interest. However, the national wire service, PAP, is still government-
 owned. There is no restriction on the establishment of private newspapers or dis-
 tribution of journals. Rooks expressing a wide range of political and social view-
 points are widely available, as are foreign periodicals. Foreign publications and for-
 eign radio broadcasts are also widely available.
 The National Broadcasting Council (NBC) has broad interpretive powers in super-
 vising programming on public television, allocating broadcasting frequencies an li-
 
 
 968
 censes and apportioning subscription revenues. In order to encourage the NBC's
 apolitical character, the nine NBC members are obliged under the law to suspend
 any membership in political parties or public associations. They were, however, cho-
 sen for their political allegiances and nominated by the Sejm, the Senate, and the
 President following political bargaining, raising serious questions about the inde-
 pendence of broadcasting from political influence. Polsat Corporation continues to
 hold an exclusive nationwide concession for private television. The broadcasting law
 stipulates that programs should not promote activities that are illegal or against
 Polish state policy, morality, or the common good. The law also requires that all
 broadcasts "respect the religious feelings of the audiences and in particular respect
 the Christian system of values." The law does not fully define the term "Christian
 values." The Constitutional Tribunal has confirmed the constitutionality of this pro-
 vision. Since the NBC has the ultimate responsibility for supervising the content of
 programs, these restrictions could be used as a means of censorship. The penalty
 for violating this provision of the law is up to 50 percent of a broadcaster's annual
 fee for the transmission frequency, plus the prospect of having the license with-
 drawn or experiencing difficulty in renewal when it expires.
 Academic freedom is generaly respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to assembly and association. Permits are not necessary for public meetings
 but are required for public demonstrations; demonstration organizers must obtain
 these permits from local authorities if the demonstration might block a public road.
 For large demonstrations, organizers are also required to inform the local police of
 the time and place of their activities and their planned route. Every gathering must
 have a chairman who is required to open the demonstration, preside over it, and
 close it.
 Private associations need governmental approval to organize and must register
 with their district court. The procedure essentially requires the organization to sign
 a declaration that it will abide by the laws of Poland. In practice, however, the pro-
 cedure itself is complicated and may be subject to the discretion of the judge in
 charge.
 c. Preedom of Rel*gion.-The Constitution, as amended, provides for freedom of
 conscience and belief, and the Government respects this right in practice. Citizens
 enjoy the freedom to practice any religion they choose. Religious groups may orga-
 nize, select, and train personnel, solicit and receive contributions, publish, and en-
 gage in consultations without government interference. There are no government re-
 strictions on establishing and maintaining places of worship.
 More than 95 percent of Poles are Roman Catholic, but Eastern Orthodox,
 Ukrainian Catholic, and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim congrega-
 tions meet freely. Although the Constitution provides for the separation of church
 and state, state-run radio broadcasts Catholic mass on Sundays. The Catholic
 Church is authorized to relicense radio and television stations to operate on fre-
 quencies assigned to the Church, the only body outside the NBC allowed to do so.
 In  January   a  "soldier's  prayer book", authored   by   General Kazimierz
 Tomaszewski, Chief of the Warsaw Military District, was published for the military.
 The book states that members of a special honor guard who do not take part in mili-
 tary mass are considered to be disobeying orders. While this publication does not
 constitute law, it bears the same weight. Ombudman Zielinski met this year with
 Field Bishop Leszek Slawoj Glodz about deleting this requirement from the book,
 but no change had been made by year's end.
 While the Sejm ratified the human rights protocol guaranteeing parents the right
 to bring up their children in compliance with their own religious and philosophical
 beliefs, religious education classes continue to be taught in the public schools, at
 public expense. While children are supposed to have the choice between religious in-
 struction and ethics, a spokesperson from the Office of the Ombudsman stated that
 in many schools, there is no such choice. Although Catholic Church representatives
 teach the vast majority of religious classes in the schools, parents can request reli-
 gious classes in any of the religions legally registered in Poland, including Protes-
 tant, Orthodox, and Jewish religious instruction. Such non-Catholic religious in-
 struction exists in practice, and the instructors are paid by the Ministry of Edu-
 cation. The spokesperson for the Ombudsman's office also stated that scouting orga-
 nizations, which receive government funding, include in their pledges mention of
 Catholic religious symbols. In August the Ombudsman wrote a letter to the Ministry
 of Interior protesting the language in these pledges: at year's end he had not re-
 ceived a response. In September the Minister of Education agreed with the epis-
 copate to allow church representatives to be included on a commission charged with
 qualifying books for school use.
 
 
 969
 A government-proposed resolution on ratification of the Concordat, a treaty regu-
 lating relations between the Government and the Vatican signed in 1993, remains
 under consideration in the Sejm. Critics of the Concordat have called for legislation
 requiring the Church to register all church marriages with civil authorities and for-
 bidding the Church from eny    burial to non-Catholics in cemeteries it controls.
 The Council of Polish-Jewish relations, established by former President Lech
 Walesa, ceased to exist when Walesa's term expired on December 23. Kwasniewski
 has not stated whether he would create a similar body. Several of the Council's
 members had resigned to protest the dormancy of the Council, especially during
 events of crucial importance to the Jewish community in Poland.
 d. Freedom of Moement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Although the Constitution does not address freedom of movement, the
 Government does not restrict internal or foreign travel. Citizens who have left Po-
 land have no trouble returning. There are no restrictions on emigration.
 The Government generally cooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability peacefully to change their government. This
 right is provided for in the Constitution and exists in practice. Poland is a
 multiparty democracy in which all citizens 18 years of age and older have the right
 to vote and to cast secret ballots. A 1990 law prohibits Poles living abroad who still
 retain their Polish citizenship from voting in the second round of-Presidential elec-
 tions. The Ombudsman is currently studying this law and may recommend revision.
 Executive power is divided between the President and a government chosen by
 Parliament, which is composed of an upper house (the Senate) and a lower house
 (the Seim). The Constitution provides for parliamentary elections at least every 4
 years. The President, elected for 5 years has the right to dissolve Parliament follow-
 ing a vote of no confidence or when Parliament fails to pass a budget within 3
 months after the Government submits it. Parliament may impeach the President.
 The electoral law exempts ethnic minority parties from the requirement to win 5
 percent of the vote nationwid in order to qualify for seats in individual districts.
 In February the President threatened to dissolve Parliament claiming that it
 failed to pass a budget within the constitutional time limit. The President then ac-
 knowleded that the constitutional conditions were not met, but harshly attacked
 then Prime Minister Pawlak and demanded his resignation. The ruling coalition
 subsequently agreed that Pawlak should resign and approved a new cabinet shortly
 thereafter under Jozef Oleksy.
 The current interim Constitution consists of the "Small Constitution" of 1992, gov-
 erning the structure of government, and several sections of the 1952 Communist-
 era Constitution, including a bill of rights. The latter includes so-called economic
 rights. The interim Constitution provides for an independent judiciary. The National
 Assembly's (joint Sejm and Senate) Constitutional Commission continued its work
 on drafting a new constitution, begun in 1994. Seven versions of a constitution, sub-
 mitted by various parties, including the President and the Senate, are before the
 Commission. The Commission will submit a single composite version for consider-
 ation by the National Assembly with bracketed minority language on controversial
 points. There is no legal deadline for completion of work on the new constitution,
 although the current chairman has targeted early 1996 for submission to the Na-
 tional Assembly and the summer of 1996 for a national referendum.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. They comprise 13 per-
 cent of parliamentarians. Of a total of 17 ministries, only 1 is headed by a women.
 With the exception of the Prime Minister's spokesperson, there are no women in
 senior positions in the Cabinet Office. None of the leaders of the parties represented
 in Parliament is a women. One of the three Vice Marshals of the Sejm is a woman.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Helsinki Committee, a major nongovernmental organization (NGO), con-
 ducted human rights investigations without government interference in 1995. Mem-
 bers of the Committee reported that the Government displays a generally positive
 and helpful attitude towards human rights investigations. Some local NYOs, how-
 ever, sense that there is a hostile regulatory climate developing within the govern-
 ment bureaucracy.
 Two government organizations monitor human rights in Poland. The office of the
 Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (The Ombudsman), established in 1987, is
 an independent body with broad authority to investigate alleged violations of civil
 
 
 970
 rights and liberties. The Ombudsman registers each reported case and files griev-
 aces, where appropriate, with the relevant government office. He has no legislative
 authority and is sworn to act apolitically. In late 1995, the current Ombudsman,
 Tadusz Zielin.ki, however, declared his candidacy for President without resigning
 from the Ombudsman position, prompting criticism that his actions may not be free
 from political motivation.
 A second governmental institution, the Senate Office for Intervention, investigates
 a wide range of grievances. In addition to responding to grievances, it may also in-
 vestigate judicial proceedings. Created in 1989 the Office conducts investigations
 and refers legitimate cases to Senators whom tihe investigator feels will be sympa-
 thetic to the grievance, regardless of their district or political affiliation. If no Sen-
 ator wishes to become involved in the case, the Office presents it to another senator
 or senators until it finds someone willing to pursue the matter. The Office does not
 release public reports.
 There are no restrictions on visits by international organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution calls for equal rights "irrespective of sex, birth, education, pro-
 fession, nationality, race, religion, social status, and origin." Other clauses provide
 equal rights to women and religious minorities. Representatives of gay rights groups
 allege that there is discrimination in housing and the workplace. Former President
 Lech Walesa openly opposed their call for a constitutional provision prohibiting dis-
 crimination based on sexual preference.
 Women.-Violence against women continued to be a problem, with occasional re-
 ports in the press of wife beating and spousal rape. According to a government re-
 port, 41 percent of women questioned said that th ey know someone personally who
 has been beaten by their husband. The report also stated that the Government does
 not have a program addressing violence towards women, nor has it provided an ade-
 quate research tool to determine the extent of the problem. Government statistics
 o not differentiate between male and female victims of violence. In addition, the
 Government has not supplied public information on the problem. Police do intervene
 in cases of domestic violence, and husbands can be convicted for beating their wives.
 A first offender is put on probation, and the penalty for a second offense is 8 to 12
 months in prison.
 Trafficking in women is illegal. Two specific provisions in the Criminal Code ad-
 dress this problem. However, according to the government report, there is an in-
 crease in the incidence of such trafficking, most often, Polish women are induced
 to work as prostitutes in Western Europe, often under false pretenses.
 No statistical data are available about the extent of sexual harassment or dis-
 crimination in the workplace, although anecdotal evidence indicates that workplace
 discrimination is a serious problem. According to some activists, few complaints
 about harassment or discrimination are registered because of the lack of specific
 provisions in the Labor Code that provide for redress.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights regardless of sex and grants women
 equal rights with men in all fields of public, political, economic social and cultural
 life, including equal pay for equal work. However, while the onstitution calls for
 equal treatment, it contains provisions which aim at protecting women rather than
 offering them true eality. In practice, women are frequently paid less for equiva-
 lent work, mainly hold lower level positions, are discharged more quickly, and are
 less likely to be promoted than men. A report issued by a committee of nongovern-
 mental organizations in preparation for the fourth UN World Conference on Women
 in Beijing (NGO Report) states that women earn on average 30 percent less than
 men for similar work.
 Although women are employed in a broad variety of professions and occupations,
 and a few women occupy high positions in government and in the private sector,
 legal barriers, such as clauses in social insurance law limiting child sick care bene-
 fits to women only and early retirement for women, encourage discrimination in hir-
 m    e law does not address equality in hiring practices (there are no legal penalties
 for discriminatory hiring practices), and advertisements for jobs frequently indicate
 a gender preference. Women remain banned from working in 90 occupations in 18
 fields of industry, health care, forestry, agriculture, and transportation, but unions
 support the desire of women to gain entry into these occupations. The rise in unem-
 ployment and other social changes accompanying economic reforms and restructur-
 ing have hit women harder than men. Women accounted for 55.2 percent of all those
 unemployed as of July.
 
 
 The NGO Report as well as a recent feature series in the press provide informa-
 tion on the ill-treatment of women in maternity clinics, where most give birth. The
 reports state that women are subject to humiliation, deprivation of their identity,
 and undergo unnecessary discomfort during labor.
 The 196L      on  itizenship discrimnates against women by not granting them
 the same right as men to transmit citizenship to their foreign-brn spouses.
 Children.-The interim Constitution extends some state protection to the family
 and children. Specifically, it states that children born in and out of wedlock sha
 be treated equally. It also charges the State with ensuringthat alimony rights and
 obligations are implemented and tasks the government with "devoting special atten-
 tion to the education of youth ..  However, the realities of economic and social
 life make it difficlt for the Government to implement these mandates. There is an
 increasing incidence of prostitution among 12- and 13-year-olds, and unemployment,
 alcoholism, and housing shortages have affected the quality of life of children. More-
 over, there are no laws explicitly addressing violence toward children or corporal
 punishment. Abuse is rarely reported, and convictions for child abuse are even
 rarer. Parents have the right to make all decisions concerning their children's medi-
 cal treatment and education.
 There is unequal treatment of young men and women in terms of the age of ma-
 jority. Men and women reach majority at the age of 18 under the Civil Code. How-
 ever, a young woman can reach majority at the age of 16 if she has entered into
 marriage with the consent of her parents and the guardianship court. In addition,
 men are not permitted to marry without parental consent until the age of 21, where-
 as women may do so at the age of 18. (The lawmakers' rationale for this difference
 in treatment is the assumption that it is better that men entering compulsory mili-
 tar service not be encumbered with families.)
 ducation is compulsory until the age of 16, although the Government has pro-
 sed raisin the age to 18. There are no procedures n schools to protect children
 from abuse by teachers; in fact, the teachers work code guarantees legal immunity
 from prosecution for the use of corporal punishment in classrooms.
 People With Disabilities.-There are approximately 4.5 million disabled persons in
 the population, and it is predicted that the number will reach 6 million by the year
 2010. The Central Bureau of Statistics reports that 17 percent of those disabled who
 can work are unemployed. Disabled persons groups claim that the percentage is
 much higher.
 In 1991 the Government passed a number of laws protecting the rights of people
 with disabilities. Implementation, however, falls short of rights set forth in the leg-
 islation. Public buildings and transportation are generally not accessible to people
 with disabilities; the law provides only that such buildings "should be accesible."
 The law created a state fund for the rehabilitation of the disabled which derives its
 assets from a tax on employers of over 50 persons, unless 6 percent of the employ-
 er's work force are disabled persons. While the fund has adequate resources, it has
 been fraught with difficulties, including frequent changes in leadership. Over the
 last 4 years, the fund has gone through six chairpersons, each of whom had only
 worked for 6 months. Recent newspaper reports state that the fund has 4,000 appli-
 cations for financial assistance pending. In addition, pursuant to the 1991 law, the
 fund cannot be used to assist disabled children, that is, persons under 16 years of
 age.
 Religious Minorities.--Current law places the Protestant churches on the same
 legal footing as Catholic and Orthodox churches. Protestants now have the same
 ability to claim restitution of property lost during the Communist era and have the
 same tax reduction as that granted to the Orthodox and Catholic Churches. This
 law covers only church property seized by the People's Republic of Poland and con-
 sequently does not address either the issue of private property or Jewish religious
 property seized during World War II.
 The Government's resolve to denounce anti-Semitism came into question when a
 well-known church figure and then President Walesa's personal priest, Father
 Henryk Jankowki, made overtly anti-Semitic remarks in a public sermon at which
 Walesa was present. Walesa did not condemn nor distance himself from those re-
 marks until 10 days after the speech, following international pressure. His lateness
 in responding plus his neglct of the Council on Polish-Jewish Rlations raised ques-
 tions about the Government's seriousness in combating anti-Semitism. In Krakow
 local authorities refused to permit construction of a park to honor the memory of
 Poland's prewar Jewish community.
 There were also some anti-Semi'tic attacks in connection with the electoral can-
 paig. One fringe presidential candidate, Stanislaw Tyminski, used the campaign
 slogan "Poland for Poles." While stating that he did not want to discriminate, he
 claimed that a large portion of a major political party had many Jews within its
 
 
 972
 
 membership, thereby insinuating that the party was dominated by "outside influ-
 ences.' Presidential candidate Lessek Bubel, who received only 0.4 percent of the
 vote published two anti-Semitic pamphlets during the campaign (see Section 2.a.)
 and broadcast an anti-Semitic television campaign ad.
 NationallRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-The law provides for the educational rights
 of ethnic minorities, including the right to be taught in their own language.
 The Romani community, numbering around 30,000, faced disproportionately high
 unemployment and was more negatively affected by the current economic changes
 and restructuring than were ethnic Poles, according to its leaders. While the na-
 tional Government does not overtly discriminate against Roma some local officials
 sometimes do discriminate by not providing services in a timely manner or at all.
 According to the national Roma community chairman, the Government did not ade-
 quately take into account his organization a proposals in plans to commemorate the
 0th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. In a recent poll, over 60 percent
 of Poles viewed the Roma negatively.
 In June around 30 skinheads attempted to disrupt the Ukrainian cultural festival
 in Przemysl by starting brawls but were prevented from doing so by the local police.
 On July 2, police arrested 4 persons suspected of throwing-Molotov cocktailsinto
 a building where 120 participants of the Ukrainian cultural festival were staying.
 These incidents and other hate attacks against Ukrainians were spurred by an
 agreement to allow the building of a Ukrainian monument in Przemysl.
 There were several racially motivated incidents including death threats and at-
 tacks on African-American basketball players working on contract in Poland. In
 January two black Americans were assaulted in a discotheque in what they de-
 scribed as a racially motivated attack. On Februaiy 13, approximately 8 skinheads
 in the city of Stargard Szczecinski assaulted Martin Eggleston, an African-American
 player, and his 13 year old daughter. He was threatened with a knife and then
 sprayed with Mace. His daughter was not injured. Approximately 50 bystanders
 took no action. Four men accused of taking part in the attack have been convicted.
 one man received a 9-month prison sentence and three others received 6-month
 prison sentences suspended for 3 years, and a tinme equivalent to $208.
 Also in February two other African-American basketball players complained of
 anonymous death threats made to them in their homes. The press and the Polish
 team manager initially treated the players' complaints as lacking in credibility but
 later investigated the incident to the satisfaction of the complainants.
 In April a group of skinheade attacked an African-American woman working in
 danak. Police arrested several suspects in this case but were unable to prosecute
 since the victim would not fie a complaint and left the country the following day.
 One month earlier, an African-American man was harassed in Gdansk and also de-
 cided not to ile a vomplaint.
 According to a study conducted by the Warsaw University Sociology Institute, 25
 percent of visitors to Poland of African, Asian, or Arab descent experienced some
 type of aggression during their stay, and 60 percent experienced verbal abuse based
 on their skin color.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides that all civilian workers, including
 military employees, police, and frontier guards, have the right to establish and join
 trade unions of their own choosing, the right to join labor federations and confed-
 erations, and the right to affiliate with international labor organizations. Independ-
 ent labor leaders reported that these rights were largely observed in practice.
 The law sets minimum size requirements for establishing a trade union: 10 per-
 sons may form a local union, and 30 may establish a national union. Unions, includ-
 ing interbranch national unions and national interbranch federations, must be reg-
 istered with the courts. A court decision refusing registration may be appealed to
 an appeals court. As of September, 288 national unions were registered. No precise
 data exist on work force unionization, but some estimates put membership at some
 40 percent of state sector employees, with the figure at about 5 percent in the pri-
 vate sector.
 The Independent Self-Governing Trade Union (NSZZ) Solidarity is affiliated with
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the World Con-
 federation of Labor. Solidarity's verified, dues-paying membership fell further in
 1995 to about 1.4 million. Spinoffs from mainstream Solidarity include the two rival
 factions, "Solidarity '80" and "August '80,' and the Christian Trade Union Solidarity
 (Popieluszko). There are no reliable estimates of their membership. The other prin-
 cipal national unions are the All-Poland Trade Union Alliance (OPZZ), the Com-
 munist-inspired confederation established in 1984 as the sole legal alternative to the
 then-repressed NSZZ Solidarity, and its teachers' affiliate (ZNP). The OPZZ claims
 
 
 973
 a membership of 4.5 million, but numerous recent polls suggest that its regular,
 dues-paying membership may be less than Solidarity's. The 1994 collective bargain-
 ing law did not require union membership figures to be verified or union finances
 to be based on dues-paying members to be considered a "representative" negotiating
 partner. As a result, Solidarity refused to participate in some multilateral negotia-
 tions with the Government and other social partners on the grounds that OPZZ and
 other union membership figures were unproven.
 There was no resolution in 1995 of the longstanding dispute over Solidarity assets
 seized during the martial law period and still administered by the OPZZ. The
 ICFTU and the European Trade Union Confederation continued to decline to cooper-
 ate with the OPZZ, largely because of the outstanding assets issue.
 Most trade unions operate independently of the Government, and some are par-
 ticularly active in politics. According to OPZZ chair Ewa Spychalska, more than
 two-thirds of the 178 governing Democratic Left Alliance (SL) Deputies are OPZZ
 members. Of these, the OPZZ formally sponsored 63 as "trade union deputies" dur-
 the 1993 elections. Soidarity, other small Solidarity-origin unions, and some
 onal leaders charge that the OPZZ national leadership is not independent
 because   e SLD enforces party discipline on important votes in the Sejm. Solidarity
 has an 11-member caucusin the Senate, while the trade union wing of the Confed-
 eration of Independent Poland, Kontra, has 1 Deputy in the Sejm.
 Unions have the right to strike except in "essential services." According to the
 unions, the 1991 Act on Collective Dispute Resolution prescribes an overly lengthy
 process before a strike may be called. According to employers, the law is too lenient
 by aowing only one quarter of the work force to vote to call a strike. Arbitration
 is not obligatory and depends on the will of disputing parties. Employers and union
 leaders agree that as many as 60 to 90 percent of strikes may be technically "illegal"
 because the sides to a dispute do not complete each step required by law. There are
 no apparent remedies to this phenomenon because labor courts act slowly on decid-
 ingthe legality of strikes while sanctions against unions for calling illegal strikes,
 or against employers for provoking them, are minimal. Laws prohibiting retribution
 against strikers are not consistently enforced, and fnes imposed as punishment are
 so minimal that they are ineffective sanctions to illegal activity. If a strike is orga-
 nized in accordance with the law, workers retain their right to social insurance but
 not pay. If a labor court finds a strike "contrary to provwsions of the law," workers
 may lose social benefits, and organizers are iable for damages and may face civil
 charges and fines.
 The Government continued work on its "Strategy for Poland," to adapt existing
 but outdated laws governing labor activity to the market economy, to establish a
 comprehensive legal framework governing all aset of work, and to bring labor
 law into line with European Union practices. In December he Senate amended the
 lower house's bill on the new labor code, which is expected to become law in early
 1996 after further consideration in the Seim. Legislative work continued on the bill
 on collective dispute resolution, one of the central elements of the Government's
 strategy to modernize labor relations. Meanwhile, legal ambiguities remain.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Coeetively.-The 1991 laws on trade
 unions and resolution of collective disputes generally create a favorable environment
 to conduct trade union activity.
 Labor leaders, however, reported numerous cases of employer discrimination
 agint workers seeking to organize or join unions in the growing private sector.
 Union leaders also say that the 1991 laws lack specific provisions to ensure that
 a union has continued rights of representation when a state firm undergoes privat-
 isation, commercialization, bankruptcy, or sale, which contributed to the very low
 unionization rate in the private sector. The law provides for parties to take disputes
 over implementation of existing laws first to the mabor Court, then to the Prosecutor
 Gonerehe and finally to the Supreme Court, if unresolved at lower levels. In recent
 years, Solidarity has taken several thousand such cases to the Labor Court, several
 hundred to the Prosecutor General, and in 1994 about 60 to the Supreme Court for
 resolution. In many of these cases, the courts ordered employers to correct practices
 or reinstate dismissed workers. In others, the courts ordered unions to reimburse
 employers for strikes determined to be "illegal." Penalties, however, are minimal
 andare not an effective deterrent.
 The Government sought to make enterrise-level collective bargaining over wages
 and working conditions a key element of the new labor relations system. Negotia-
 tions between unions, management, and workers councils are becoing increasingly
 common i   the state manufacturing sector, but a majority of enterprises are still
 unprepared to conclude agreements independently of central government involve-
 ment. Solidarity reported that collective agreements governed as few as 10 percent
 
 
 974
 
 of state sector firms, primarily in the heavy industrial sector. Many enterprises op-
 erated on the basis of agreements renewed from previous years.
 Many disputes arose during collective bargaining negotiations because of the
 weakness of the employer side of the labor/management/government triangle. State
 sector employers, still subordinate to Warsaw branch ministries, were unable to ne-
 gotiate directly and independently with organized labor, while the Government re-
 peat edly stated its intention not to be drawn into labor disputes.
 Since its formation in early 1994, the Tripartite Commission (labor, management,
 and government) has increasingly determined wage and benefit levels in the so-
 called budget sector (public employees). A Solidarity-organized protest campaign in
 early 1995 was resolved at the Tripartite Commission, which became the principal
 consultative/negotiating body for the public budget sector.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Poland has ratified ILO Conven-
 tions 29 and 105 on forced labor. Compulsory labor does not exist, except for pris-
 oners convicted of criminal offenses, and. is otherwise prohibited by law. There were
 no reports of coerced or bonded labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law contains strict legal pre-
 scriptions about the conditions in which children may work. The Labor Code forbids
 the employment of persons under the age of 15. Those between ages 15 and 18 may
 be employed only if they have completed primary school and if the proposed employ-
 ment constitutes vocational training and is not harmful to their health. The age
 floor rises to 18 if a particular job might pose a health danger. Children are re-
 quired to attend school until age 15.
 Despite these prescriptions, the State Labor Inspectorate reported in 1994 that in-
 creasing numbers of children now work and that many employers violated labor
 rules in employing them (underpayment, late payment, etc.). Inspectors found viola-
 tions on stud horse farms, in restaurants, and, in isolated instances, in factories in
 the private sector.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A national minimum wage is negotiated every
 3 months by the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy, the trade unions, and employ-
 ers. The minimum monthly wage for employees in state-owned enterprises rose to
 roughly $120 (295 new zloty). This was insufficient to provide a worker or family
 with a decent standard of living. A large percentage of construction workers and
 seasonal agricultural laborers from the former Soviet Union earn less than the mini-
 mum. The large size of the gray economy, along with insufficient numbers of state
 labor inspectors, make enforcement of the minimum wage very difficult.
 There is a standard legal workweek of 42 hours which allows 6- or 7-hour days,
 including at least one 24-hour rest period. The law requires overtime payment for
 hours in excess of the standard workweek. The Labor Code defines minimum condi-
 tions for the protection of workers' health and safety. Prescriptions are strict and
 extensive, and trade unions have the right to stop production or extract a worker
 from dangerous working conditions without jeopardy to continued employment. En-
 forcement, however, is a major problem because the State Labor Inspectorate is un-
 able to monitor the state sector sufficiently, or the private sector, where a growing
 percentage of accidents take place. In addition, there is a lack of clarity concerning
 wvhich government or legislative body has responsibiity for enforcin the law.
 Of the 102,309 work-related accidents reported in 1994, 636 involved deaths,
 slightly fewer than in 1993. This represents 9 accidents per 1000 workers, propor-
 tionally similar to 1993. The Government in September noted that working condi-
 tions were poor and sanctions minimal. Some Sjm Deputies considered them "high-
 ly unsatisfactory." Standards for exposure to chemicals, dust, and noise are rou-
 tinely exceeded, which more than doubled the incidence of work-related sicknesses
 in 1993 compared to 1971.
