 THE NETHEWLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary legislative
 system and an independent judiciary. Executive authority is exercised by the Prime
 Minister and Cabinet representing the governing political parties (traditionally a co-
 alition of at least two major parties). The bicameral Parliament is elected through
 free and fair elections.
 Regional police forces are primarily responsible for maintaining internal security.
 The police, the royal constabulary, and investigative organizations concerned with
 internal and external security are effectively under civilian authority.
 The market-based economy is export oriented and features a mixture of industry,
 services, and agriculture. Key industries include chemicals, oil refining, natural gas,
 machinery, and electronics. The agricultural sector produces fruit, vegetables, flow-
 ers, meat, and dairy products. Living standards and the level of social benefits are
 high. Unemployment is 5.7 percent; however, long-term unemployment, in particu-
 lar among ethnic minorities, is still a problem.
 The Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, and the law and judi-
 ciary provide effective means of dealing with individual instances of abuse. The Gov-
 ernment is taking serious steps to address violence and discrimination against
 women. The Government has also taken steps to address societal discrimination
 against minorities.
 Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles, which are two autonomous regions of the
 kingdom, also feature parliamentary systems and full constitutional protection of
 human rights. In practice, government respect for human rights in these islands
 generally is little different from that in the European Netherlands. The two Carib-
 bean Governments have taken measures to address past reports of police brutality,
 but the islands' prison conditions remain substandard.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 
 
 1204
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them
 A Dutch government-funded police professionalization program, as well as the es-
 tablishment of a grievance committee, have contributed significantly to countering
 incidents of police brutality in both the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba. No new in-
 cidents were reported, nor has there been any allegation of torture.
 Prison conditions in the Netherlands meet minimum international standards, and
 the Government permits visits by human rights monitors.
 The publication of two reports of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture of
 the Council of Europe encouraged the Governments of the Netherlands, the Nether-
 lands Antilles, and Aruba to consider the improvement of the "inhuman" conditions
 in Curacao's prison and in cell blocks at the police stations in the islands of St.
 Maarten, Bonaire, and Aruba. Complaints ranged from overcrowding and deplorable
 sanitary conditions to poor food and insufficient ventilation. On Curacao prisoners
 violently protested poor prison conditions, taking control of Koraal Specht prison in
 August. A local commission inquiry into prison conditions after the riots reported
 32 claims of mistreatment by prison guards through October, the majority occurring
 after the prison takeover, and termed the overall situation in Koraal Specht "com-
 pletely unacceptable."
 The Dutch Government has offered substantial financial and logistic assistance.
 The authorities plan to ease overcrowding at Curacao's prison by the construction
 of a maximum security facility and a new wing for young offenders, as well as
 through bilateral agreements with neighboring countries on the transfer of sen-
 tencedprsons, since most prisoners are from these countries. However, little
 progress was made towards the realization of these plans.
 The Governments of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba allow access by non-
 governmental organizations to prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides
 citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process.
 The judicial system is based on the Napoleonic Code. A national pyramidal system
 of cantonal, district, and appellate courts handles both criminal and civil cases. The
 Supreme Court acts as the highest appellate court and guarantees uniform interpre-
 tation of the law. In criminal trials, the law provides for a presumption of innocence
 and the right to public trial, to counsel (virtually free for low income persons), and
 to appeal. The law provides for the right to a fair trial, and the independent judici-
 ary vigorously enforces this right.
 In April the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg ruled that the
 Netherands violated Article 6 of the European human rights convention in a court
 ruling in which a conviction was based "to a decisive extent" on anonymous testi-
 mony. Accordingly, it ruled that there had been no "fair" trial. In response to this
 decision, the Government is reviewing its policy on the issue in order to avoid re-
 newed violations.
 There were no reors of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this right in practice. State subsidies are provided to religious organi-
 zations that maintain educational facilities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no re-
 ports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status. The Gov-
 ernment does not provide first asylum as such, but most asylum seekers (87 percent
 
 
 1205
 in 1996), except those who obviously came from a "safe country of origin" or stayed
 for some time in a "safe third country," are permitted to apply for resident status.
 A sizable number (about 40 percent in 1996) of those whose applications are eventu-
 ally denied are nonetheless permitted to stay temporarily on humanitarian grounds
 or as long as their country of origin is considered unsafe.
 In recent years, new legislation has aimed to protect genuine refugees while ex-
 cluding economic refugees and illegal immigrants. More stringent criteria for grant-
 ing asylum resulted in a significant decrease in the number of new asylum seekers,
 from 52,576 in 1994 to 29,258 in 1995, and 22,857 in 1996 (latest available statis-
 tics). The focus has recently shifted to advancing the return of rejected asylum seek-
 ers through financial incentives and assistance to reintegration projects in their
 countries of origin. To this end, the Government concluded bilateral agreements
 with countries such as Ethiopia and Somalia.
 The Government has an active policy against alien smuggling, the penalties for
 which were raised considerably.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women and
 minorities in government and politics. About one-third of Members of Parliament
 are women, as are 4 of the 13 cabinet ministers.
 Although a minority, women also hold positions in the parliaments and cabinets
 of the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings. Government officials are very cooperative and responsive
 to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law bans discrimination on the basis of any of these factors or on sexual ori-
 entation or political preference. The Government generally is effective in enforcing
 these provisions. Under a new Equal Treatment Act, complainants may take offend-
 ers to court under civil law.
 Women.-The Government supports programs to reduce and prevent violence
 against women. Battered women find refuge in a network of 48 government-sub-
 sidized women's shelters offering the services of social workers and psychologists.
 In addition, battered women who leave their domestic partners become eligible for
 social benefits, which include an adequate basic subsidy as well as an allowance for
 dependent children. Nongovernmentl organizations also advise and assist women
 who have been victims of sexual assault. Since 1991 marital rape has been a crime
 and carries the same penalty as nonmarital rape. Spousal abuse carries a one-third
 higher penalty than ordinary battery. However, since the judicial system does not
 compile statistics distinguishing spousal abuse from battery, it is difficult to docu-
 ment the extent of the problem. The most recent study, by the Ministry of Welfare,
 Health, and Culture in 1989, showed that over 20 percent of women in heterosexual
 relationships were victims of violence during their lifetimes. Slightly over half of
 these suffered repeated severe violence.
 In addition to -helping victims of sexual abuse, the Government has pursued an
 active prevention campaign through commercials and awareness training of edu-
 cators. A recent evaluation of the results of the first 5 years of this campaign dem-
 onstrated greater awareness of the problem, particularly among the target group of
 men between the ages of 15 and 35, but little change in their attitudes.
 High-priority government measures to combat trafficking in women for prostitu-
 tion incude a more aggressive prosecution policy as well as closer international co-
 operation. A number o police forces have established special units to deal with the
 problem. The Dutch Foundation Against Trafficking inWomen estimates that each
 year around 1,000 women are brought into the Netherlands for the purpose of pros-
 titution, not only from Central and Eastern Europe, but also from the Far East and
 West Africa. Women who are forced to work illegally as prostitutes and who are ap-
 prehended have special exemptions in immigration law and receive counseling and
 legal assistance.
 Women are increasingly entering the job market, but traditional cultural factors
 and inadequate child care facilities can discourage women--especially those with
 
 
 1206
 young children-from working. The number of women in the labor market is rising
 steadily. In 1983 only some 38 percent of women aged between 15 and 64 held paid
 jobs, compared with almost 50 percent at present. However, unemployment among
 women is still high: 7.1 percent of the working-age population, compared with 4.8
 percent of male workers. About 67 percent of working women work part time, com-
 pared with 17 percent of the male working population. The Government established
 favorable conditions for part-time employment by adopting a law that prohibits em-
 ployers from treating part-time workers differently from those in full-time jobs.
 According to the Education Ministry, women have fully made up the arrears they
 had experienced in education. At present, girls form the majority in higher second-
 ary education where they also score better, and in 1996, for the first time, as many
 women as men entered college and university.
 Women are often underemployed and have less chance of promotion than their
 male colleagues. They often hold lower level positions than men, mostly because of
 their part-time jobs. Despite this, some women are making steady progress by mov-
 ing into professional and high-visibility jobs.
 In 1988 the Government started affirmative action programs for women. Collec-
 tive labor agreements usually include one or more schemes to strengthen the posi-
 tion of women. Legislation mandates equal pay for equal work, prohibits dismissal
 because of marriage, pregnancy, or motherhood, and provides the basis for equality
 in other employment-related areas. A legislatively mandated Equal Treatment Com-
 mission actively pursues complaints of discrimination in these areas as well as alle-
 gations of pay differences.
 The social welfare and national health systems provide considerable assistance to
 working women with families. Women are eli gble for 16 weeks of maternity leave
 with full pay. The Parental Leave Law, which allows new mothers and fathers to
 work only 20 hours a week over a 6-month period, was made more flexible in July.
 The new law allows parents to take (unpaid) full-time leave during 3 months or to
 extend the leave over a period longer than 6 months. People working fewer than
 20 hours per week will also be entitled to parental leave. In addition, the child's
 age limit at which parental leave may be taken has been extended from 4 to 8
 years. The Netherlands Antilles and Aruba allow 60 days of paid maternity leave
 at upto 80 percent of full salary.
 Women have full legal and judicial rights and enter marriage with the option of
 choosing community property or separate regimes for their assets.
 Women's groups dedicated to such problems as equal rights in social security, the
 legal position of women, sexual abuse, taxation, education, work, and prostitution
 operate freely. The law requires employers to take measures to protect workers
 against sexual harassment; research showed that one in three working women has
 experienced sexual harassment in the workplace. The Government funds an ongoing
 publicity campaign to increase awareness of the problem. As the biggest employer
 in the country, it has taken measures to counter harassment among civil servants,
 for example, in the police force.
 Children.-The Government works to ensure the well-being of children through
 numerous well-funded health, education, and public information programs. The
 Council for the Protection of Children, operated through the Ministry of Justice, en-
 forces child suppor orders, investigates cases of child abuse, and recommends rem-
 edies ranging from counseling to withdrawal of parental rights. In addition, the
 Government %as set up a popular hot line for children and a network of pediatri-
 cians who track suspected cases of child abuse on a confidential basis. There is no
 societal pattern of abuse of children.
 International sex tourism involving abuse of minor children is prosecutable under
 the law. Since 1996 three Dutchmen have been tried and convicted for abuse of mi-
 nors in the Philippines and Thailand respectively. The maximum penalty for child
 pornography was raised from 3 months' to 4 years' imprisonment, 6 years in the
 event of financial gain, and the maximum fine was more than tripled. New legisla-
 tion allows for provisional arrest, house searches, and criminal financial investiga-
 tions. Moreover, the authorities no longer must prove that a person possesses child
 pornography for the purpose of distribution or public display. The possession of pic-
 tures of sexual behavior with minors itself will be sufficient cause for prosecution.
 The age of consent is 16. Prosecution of adults for sex with minors between the ages
 of 12 and 16 only occurs upon the filing of a complaint by an interested party.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. Local govern-
 ments are increasingly mandating access to public buildings for the disabled.
 National /Racial/Ethnic Minonties.-The integration of racial and ethnic minori-
 ties into the social and cultural mainstream remains a difficult problem.
 
 
 1207
 
 The Government pursues an active campaign aimed at increasing public aware-
 ness of racism and discrimination. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the
 basis of race and nationality and allows those who claim that they have been dis-
 criminated against to take offenders to court under civil law. In 1997 the prosecu-
 tion norms for discrimination were tightened: Penalties were raised for discrimina-
 tion by political parties, companies, and institutions, because it was considered more
 dangerous when this is done by such organizations than by individuals. The police
 were required to report any complaint of discrimination meticulously. Any police-
 man guilty of discrimination now risks disciplinary measures as we  as criminal
 legal proceedings. The latest statistics show that in 1996, 86 persons or organiza-
 tions were brought to trial on discrimination charges. In 8 cases, the charge was
 incitement to hatred, discrimination or violence; 11 cases concerned distribution of
 racist pamphlets; and 3 cases concerned discrimination in the exercise of a profes-
 sion.
 Over a thousand racially motivated incidents occurred, ranging from racist pam-
 phlets and painted slogans to bomb threats, harassment, physical abuse, and de-
 struction of property. However, no officially recorded incidents of a life-threatening
 nature were directed against ethnic minorities. Research by the Ministry of Justice
 established that most of the antiforeigner violence is committed by thrill-seeking
 youths for nonpolitical reasons. Such youths often feel threatened by ethnic minori-
 ties in their immediate living space. The Criminal Investigation Service believes
 that the number of rightwing activists has dwindled to a hard~ore group of 50 to
 60 individuals out of a total population of 15.5 million.
 Immigrant groups face some discrimination in housing and employment. These
 grups, concentrated in the larger cities, suffer from a high rate of unemployment.
 Te Government has been working for several years with employers' groups and
 unions to reduce minority unemployment levels to the national average. As a result
 of these efforts, in recent years the rate of job creation among etbnic minorities has
 been igher than among the general population.
 The 1994 law requiring employers with a workforce of over 35 people to register
 their non-Dutech employees has been simplified, in consultation with employers and
 workers organizations. Employers must strive for a workforce composition that re-
 flects the regional working population. They are required to submit their social ac-
 tion plans, including recruitment targets, to the regional labor bureaus. The Labor
 Inspectorate controls implementation of the law.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Membership in labor unions is open to all workers
 including military, police, and civil service employees. Workers are entitled to form
 or join unions of their own choosing without previous government authorization, and
 uions are free to affiliate with national trade union federations. This right is freely
 exercised.
 Unions are entirely free of control by the Government and political parties. Union
 members may and do participate in political activities.
 All workers have the right to strike, except for most civil servants who have other
 institutionalized means of protection and redress. Industrial relations are very har-
 monious, and the number of strikes each year is very low. In 1996 some 10 labor
 days per 1,000 workers were lost, mostly over disputes about a 36-hour workweek.
 There is no retribution against striking workers.
 About 25 percent of the work force is unionized, but union-negotiated collective
 bargaining agreements are usually extended to cover about three-quarters of the
 work force. The whitecllar unions' membership is the fastest growing.
 The four union federations are active internationally, without restriction.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized and well established. Discrimination against work-
 ers because of union membership is illegal and does not occur.
 Collective bargaining agreements are negotiated in the framework of the 'Social
 Partnership" developed between trade unions and private employers. Representa-
 tives of the main union federations, employers' organizations, andthe Government
 meet each autumn to discuss labor issues, including wage levels and their relation
 to the state of the economy and to international competition. The discussions lead
 to a central accord with social as well as economic goals for the coming year. Under
 this umbrella agreement, unions and employers in various sectors negotiate sectoral
 agreements, which the Government usually extends to all companies in the respec-
 tive sector.
 Antiunion discrimination is prohibited. Union federations and employeras organi-
 zations are represented, along with independent exprts, on the Social andEco-
 nomic Council. The Council is the major advisory board to the Government on its
 
 
 1208
 policies and legislation regarding national and international social and economic
 matters.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor, in-
 cluding that performed by children, is prohibited by the Constitution and does not
 occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, and this prohibition is enforced effec-
 tively. The minimum age for employment is 16 years, and for full-time work it is
 conditioned on completion of the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Those still in
 school at the age of 16 may not work more than 8 hours per week. People under
 the age of 18 are prohibited by law from working at night, overtime, or in areas
 dangerous to their physical or mental well-being. The laws are effectively enforced
 by the tripartite La or Commission, which monitors hiring practices and conducts
 inspections.
 The Government takes a leading role in an international campaign against child
 labor in developing countries. The main Dutch labor federation, together with the
 United Nations Children's Fund and several nongovernmental organizations, also
 started a campaign against the sale of products suspeted of being made through
 child labor, ana for a atrademark" for clot ing made without child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage for adults is established
 by law and can be adjusted every 6 months to changes in the cost-of-living index.
 Over the last few years, the link between statutory minimum wages and the aver-
 age wage increase in collective labor contracts (approximately 2.5 percent in 1997)
 has been maintained. The gross minimum wage is about $1,120 (f. 2,244) per
 month. For workers earning the minimum wage, employers currently pay $3,750 a
 year (f. 6,000) in premiums for social security benefits, which includes medical in-
 surance. Only 3 percent of workers earn the minimum wage because collective bar-
 gaining agreements, which are normally extended across a sector, usually set a min-
 imum wage well above the legislated minimum. The Government, unions, and em-
 ployers have taken measures to increase the number of minimum wage jobs and to
 decrease employers' social payments in order to lower the cost of hiring new workers
 and to create more jobs, especially for the long-term unemployed.
 A reduced minimum wage applies to young people under the age of 23-one of
 the demographic groups with the highest rate of unemployment-intended to pro-
 vide incentives for their employment. This wage ranges from 34.5 percent of the
 adult minimum wage for workers 16 years of age to 85 percent for those 22 years
 of age. The legislated minimum wage and social benefits available to all minimum
 wage earners provide an adequate standard of living for workers and their families.
 Although a 40-hour workweek is established by law, the average workweek for
 full time jobs now stands at 371/2 hours. This is the result of agreements reached
 in collective labor agreements on shorter working weeks, often in combination with
 more flexible working hours. This combination makes it possible to gear shorter
 working hours to the specific situation in a particular business or branch of indus-
 try.
 Working conditions, including comprehensive occupational safety and health
 standards set by law and regulations, are actively monitored by the tripartite Labor
 Commission. Enforcement is effective. Workers may refuse to continue working at
 a hazardous work site. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs also monitors
 standards through its Labor Inspectorate.
