 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a parliamentary democracy headed by a
 constitutional monarch. The Dutch political system features
 nationwide proportional voting for a bicameral parliament, in
 which the full range of the political spectrum is represented.
 The Dutch have a free market economy with an extensive social
 welfare system providing a relatively high level of social
 benefits.
 The Netherlands continues to attach great importance to human
 rights in its foreign and domestic policies. Internationally
 recognized rights are protected by Dutch law and respected in
 practice. In 1987 regulations were enacted which codified the
 rights of asylum seekers but limited the right of appeal in
 the case of a refused application for asylum or refugee
 status. A National Advisory and Consultation Board on
 Minority Policy, which includes representatives of seven
 ethnic groups, advises the Government in all matters of
 minority policy.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN-RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 political groups did not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 Abductions, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 police or other official security forces did not occur.
 c. Torture and pther Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited
 by law and do not occur in practice. Prison conditions are
 good by international standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment is ensured by
 law and respected in practice. There are no political
 prisoners in The Netherlands. A right of release from
 detention exists in practice. Preventive detention is
 permitted for a limited time only in periods of emergency upon
 declaration by national or municipal authorities. This power
 is used infrequently, and normally a person can be held
 incommunicado no longer than 6 hours. Persons suspected of
 committing serious crimes can be held for cause up to 106 days
 before either charges are brought or the person is released.
 This form of incarceration is frequently used in drug
 smuggling cases. Exile is unknown in The Netherlands. There
 is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and
 respected in practice. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 and a system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for
 those unable to pay for such counsel. Charges must be
 
 
 979
 THE NETHERLANDS
 formally stated. The judiciary is independent, with a
 functioning appeals process and a Supreme Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to
 monitor private correspondence. The State respects individual
 freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. A feature of media policy is the
 allocation of broadcasting time to all social and political
 groups, which ensures that minority viewpoints are heard.
 There are no prepublication restraints on any media, but a
 broad social understanding exists that the mainstream media
 will not disseminate sensitive information involving national
 security, defense, or the royal family.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association are generally not
 restricted. During 1987, however, local government
 authorities on two occasions refused to permit rallies by a
 rightwing political party, the Center-Democrats, on the
 grounds that such demonstrations would be detrimental to
 public order. Various private interest groups exist and play
 an active role in the political process.
 The right of unions to organize and bargain collectively is
 well established. The active trade union movement includes in
 its membership approximately 30 percent of the employed labor
 force. Unions, while entirely free of government and
 political party control, have a strong influence on political
 life and are actively courted by the political parties. They
 are free to maintain relations with recognized international
 bodies. All union members, except civil servants, have the
 legal right to strike. Civil servants do, however, strike
 without serious repercussions. Negotiations between the civil
 service unions and the Government take place in a legally
 established central negotiating body.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies in the
 educational field are provided to religious oranizations which
 maintain educational facilities. The amount of the subsidy is
 based on the number of students attending those schools,
 subject to limitations on the nation's budget for public
 schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation. Due to the shortage of housing, there are
 some legal restrictions on the transfer of residence to the
 major cities.
 
 
 980
 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands has provided first asylum for refugees from
 Eastern European countries and permanent resettlement for a
 limited number of persons (the quota for "invited" refugees
 was increased in 1986 from 250 to 500 per year), principally
 from Vietnam and Iran.
 Regulations went into effect in April 1987 that streamlined
 the Government's review of applications for asylum, which now
 number more than 6,000 per year. Applications are adjudicated
 within 48 hours of receipt, and applicants are given the
 choice of departing the country or staying in a holding center
 while awaiting appeal. Special administrative courts were
 established to limit appeals and to hear such cases faster.
 The new regulations also tightened criteria for the granting
 of asylum to exclude those persons applying for refugee status
 in The Netherlands whose true motives involved only economic
 betterment, as well as those persons who had previously
 applied in another European country.
 During 1986 the Government continued implementation of a pilot
 program for return migration set up in 1985. Financial
 assistance was provided to persons wishing to leave The
 Netherlands for their home countries but who lacked the means
 to do so. The Government anticipates continuation of this
 program which, however, affects only a small minority of
 foreign-born workers.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Nationwide elections are held every 4 years (or more
 frequently in the event of a parliamentary vote of no
 confidence). In the most recent general election in May 1986,
 the center-right coalition, which has been in power since
 1982, was reelected. Provincial elections were held in March
 1987. Ip June 1987, the provincial legislatures selected the
 Upper House of Parliament on the basis of proportional
 representation. Ten political parties have seats in
 Paeliament, representing all points of view from the far right
 to the.far left. Women have full political rights and are
 increasingly represented in political life. Approximately 20
 percent of the members of the Lower House of Parliament are
 women.
 Section 4   Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is acutely sensitive to allegations of human
 rights violations both domestically and internationally. The
 Governent considerq itself a leader in monitoring human
 rights abuses and readily assists international and
 nongovernmental organizations in their investigations.
 Support fDr human rights is a key tenet of Dutch foreign
 policy. The Netherlands is a strong advocate of human rights
 both bilaterally and in international forums, including the
 United Nations and its'agencies and the Conference on Security
 and Cooperation in Europe. The Dutch have repeatedly spoken
 out against human rights violations in Eastern Europe and in
 Suriname. Foreign Minister van den Broek used his visits to
 Poland and Hungary during 1987 to raise human rights issues
 and to hold well-publicized meetings with dissident leaders.
 
 
 981
 THE NETHERLANDS
 Section 5  Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The problem of integrating racial and ethnic minorities
 effectively into national economic and social life remains the
 most difficult issue related to human rights confronting the
 Government. Thousands of persons from Suriname and The
 Netherlands Antilles have come to live in The Netherlands
 since 1975. In addition, there are significant numbers of
 foreign workers and their families, mostly from Turkey and
 Morocco. These groups face some overt private discrimination
 in housing and employment, as well as practical limits on
 opportunities for social and economic advancement as a result
 of educational levels that are inadequate compared to those of
 the majority of Dutch citizens. Unemployment among minority
 groups runs significantly higher than among the population as
 a whole.
 There is widespread fear among the Dutch that discrimination,
 prompted by recent difficult economic adjustments, is
 increasing. Isolated incidents of violence against persons
 for racial reasons continue to take place. Partly as a result
 of these incidents, the Government in September 1987
 introduced legislation which forbids discrimination on the
 basis of age, sex, religion, race, ethnicity, or sexual
 preference. Religious organizations may be granted a broad
 exemption.
 Government policy to combat discrimination is outlined in its
 1983 "minority note," a comprehensive plan of action to
 address the problems of minorities in the fields of health,
 education, employment, and the law. The National Advisory and
 Consultation Board on Minority Policy was recently
 incorporated by legislation into the administrative structure
 of the country. It is chaired by the Minister of Internal
 Affairs, includes representatives of seven ethnic minority
 groups, and acts as a consultative body to the Cabinet on
 minority issues and as a conduit into the Government for the
 expression of minority concerns. That legislation also
 introduced administrative tribunals for filing claims of
 discrimination against employers and the Government, as well
 as in housing matters. These tribunals have provided a
 practical means of redress for discrimination claims.
 As a further step toward integrating ethnic minorities, the
 Parliament voted to give noncitizens who have resided in The
 Netherlands for more than 5 years the right to vote in
 municipal elections. In 1986, in the first elections in which
 resident aliens were allowed to vote, about 20 percent of
 those eligible to vote did so.
 Women enjoy full legal and political equality. In economic
 life, the entry of substantial numbers of women into the labor
 force occurred somewhat later in The Netherlands than in most
 Western industrialized countries. During 1986, however, women
 reached the average European Community rate of participation
 in the labor force. Women's average wage rates in
 nonagricultural employment in 1984 amounted to 76.3 percent of
 those of men.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Dutch law provides extensive protection of health and safety
 for workers. These provisions, already adequate, are being
 
 
 982
 THE NETHERLAIDS
 strengthened by a four-phase program due for completion in
 1990. The standard workweek, before overtime, is 38 hours.
 The minimum age for full-time employment of young people is
 16. At 16 years of age, youth may work full time only if they
 have completed the mandatory 10 years of schooling. Children
 still in school at age 16 may not work more than 8 hours per
 week. Laws prohibit children under the age of 18 from working
 at night, overtime, or in areas which could be dangerous to
 their physical or mental development.
 The minimum wage for adults (23 years of age and up) is
 approximately $1,000 dollars per month. The minimum wage for
 young workers is on a sliding scale beginning at 30 percent of
 the &dult wage for 15-year-olds and increasing to 88 percent
 of the adult wage for 22-year-olds. The purpose of this
 reduced minimum wage law is to provide incentives for
 employing young people, one of the groups with the highest
 rate of unemployment.
 Workers 18 years and older receive a minimum paid vacation of
 15 days per year. Full-time workers between the ages of 16
 and 18 receive more minimum paid vacation, 20 days per year,
 as more leisure time is thought necessary for their proper
 development. Wages are sufficient to provide a decent living
 for workers and their families. An extensive system of
 unemployment benefits allows recipients to maintain an
 adequate standard of living. On January 1, 1987, the
 Unemployment Insurance Act and the Unemployment Provisions Act
 were superseded by the new Unemployment Insurance Act (NWW),
 which sets benefits at 70 percent of the last daily wage
 earned. The duration of an NWW benefit entitlement depends on
 the age and employment record of the claimant.
 
 
 983
