 THE NETHERLANDS
 The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy with a
 parliamentary legislative system. Executive authority is
 exercised by the Prime Minister and Cabinet representing the
 governing political parties (traditionally a coalition of at
 least two major parties). The bicameral Parliament, in which
 the full range of the political spectrum is represented, is
 elected through nationwide proportional voting.
 The police, Royal Constabulary, and investigative organs
 concerned with internal and external security are effectively
 subordinated to the executive and judicial authorities.
 The Netherlands has a mixed free market economy with extensive
 involvement by governmental entities. A complex social welfare
 system provides a high level of social benefits.
 The Netherlands attaches great importance to human rights in
 its foreign and domestic policies. Individual rights are
 protected by Dutch law and are widely respected in practice by
 both the State and the general public. The press, public
 interest groups, and domestic and international human rights
 organizations are quick to challenge practices which they
 believe violate established human rights norms. Such
 complaints are thoroughly discussed by the media and in
 Parliament and are often subjected to a judicial process.
 There are no significant differences in human rights practices
 between the Netherlands proper and the autonomous regions of
 the Kingdom, i.e., Aruba and the five islands of the
 Netherlands Antilles.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 No politically motivated killings by government or domestic
 political groups are known to have occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 No known abductions, secret arrests, or clandestine detention
 by police or other official security forces took place.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and cruel or inhuman punishment are prohibited by law
 and were not known to occur.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest is provided for by law and
 respected in practice. Preventive detention is permitted only
 in an emergency declared by national or municipal authorities,
 and even then the detention may be for only a limited time.
 Under normal circumstances a suspect may be held for no longer
 than 6 hours, or 9 hours if arrested at night, before charges
 must be brought. Persons suspected of. having committed serious
 crimes may be held in custody for 48 hours with the agreement
 of the public prosecutor, who is authorized to decide on an
 extension of the detention for an additional 48 hours. Any
 
 
 1184
 THE NETHERLANDS
 further decision on extending detention is made by an
 investigating judge. Search and arrest warrants issued by the
 judiciary are required in most criminal cases.
 Forced exile from the Netherlands is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Netherlands has a civil court system with the right of
 appeal. The judiciary is independent. The right to a fair
 public trial is guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Charges
 must be formally stated. Defendants have the right to counsel.
 A system of free or low-cost legal assistance exists for those
 defendants unable to pay. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a person's home or to
 monitor private correspondence or telephone conversations. The
 State respects individual freedom of choice in family matters.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 A functioning democratic political system, an independent press,
 and an effective judiciary ensure freedom of speech and press.
 Dutch media policy allocates broadcast time to a wide range of
 social, political, and ethnic groups, ensuring that minority
 viewpoints are heard. In addition, a cable system brings in
 numerous television and radio broadcasts from neighboring
 countries.
 There are no prepublication restraints on any of the media. A
 traditional consensus precludes the mainstream media from
 disseminating sensitive information involving national
 security, defense, or the royal family. Violent or sensational
 crimes are treated with discretion, with suspects and victims
 often identified only by their initials. In ongoinj
 investigations, only minimal personal data are released on
 criminal suspects, both to maintain the privacy of the suspect
 and his family and to protect the integrity of the
 investigation. Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association is virtually unrestricted.
 For large assemblies and demonstrations of a political nature,
 permits from local governmental authorities are required.
 These permits are routinely granted but may be denied when
 authorities believe that "public order and safety" cannot be
 guaranteed as a result of a rally or demonstration. Public
 meetings of extreme rightist or racist groups have been
 prohibited from time to time. The Government does not
 arbitrarily impede membership in, or the formation of,
 organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is full freedom of religion. State subsidies are provided
 to religious organizations that maintain educational facilities.
 In 1991 the Cabinet decided not to introduce new subsidies for
 
 
 1185
 THE NETHERLANDS
 minority religions to build more places of worship on the
 grounds that enough places of worship were already available.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration,-and Repatriation
 There is freedom of domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and repatriation. Due to the housing shortage in larger cities,
 there are some restrictions on the allocation of government-
 subsidized housing.
 The Netherlands has elaborate procedures for deciding asylum
 applications; these procedures respect the applicant's right to
 due process and take into account conditions in the applicant's
 country of origin. Applicants who do not meet the criteria for
 political asylum are nevertheless permitted to remain in the
 Netherlands provisionally without refugee status if conditions
 in their country of origin are so violent or unsettled that
 returning them to that country would place them in danger.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Netherlands is a functioning multiparty democracy.
 Elections are based on proportional representation. There is
 universal suffrage for citizens iged 18 and older. Foreign
 residents may vote in municipal elections after 5 years of legal
 residence in the Netherlands. Dutch citizens elect the Second
 Chamber (House of Representatives) of Parliament every 4 years
 (more frequently if a government resigns or falls due to a
 parliamentary vote of no confidence). The most recent national
 elections, held in September 1989, resulted in the formation of
 a center-left coalition, with Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers
 remaining in office. Four major and five minor political
 parties have seats in Parliament, representing the political
 spectrum from far left to far right. There are no restrictions
 in law or in practice.on the participation of women and
 minorities in government and politics.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Human rights groups, the media, and other interested parties
 are free to pursue inquiries into human rights issues, and
 Dutch authorities readily assist international and
 nongovernmental organizations in their investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Languige, or Social Status
 Integration of racial and ethnic minorities into the social and
 cultural mainstream is a difficult domestic issue. Some 264,000
 persons from the former Dutch colony of Suriname have come to
 live in the Netherlands since 1975. There are also
 approximately 85,000 persons from the Netherlands Antilles and
 Aruba in the Netherlands.
 In addition, there are about 207,000 Turkish and 168,000
 Moroccan foreign workers and family members. These groups face
 some de facto discrimination in housing and employment, as well
 as practical limits on opportunities for economic and social
 advancement as a result of educational and skill levels which
 do not compare favorably with those of the majority of Dutch
 citizens. Unemployment among large minority groups is four
 
 
 1186
 THE NETHERLANDS
 times higher than the national average. The Government,
 employers, and union leaders agreed in November 1990 on a
 series of measures designed to reduce minority unemployment
 levels to the national average. The goal was to assist 60,000
 members of minority group members to find jobs. The results
 were to be checked at the end of 1991, and additional measures
 taken if necessary. However, the Government will refrain from
 using contract compliance measures. Minorities now compose 3
 percent of the personnel employed in the national Government;
 the goal is to raise this to 5 percent by 1995.
 The National Advisory and Consultation Board on Minority Policy
 addresses the problems of minorities in the fields of health,
 education, employment, and the law. Chaired by the Minister of
 Internal Affairs, it includes representatives of seven ethnic
 minority groups and acts as a consultative body to the Cabinet
 on minority issues and as a conduit to the Government for the
 expression of minority concerns.
 Administrative tribunals have been set up for filing claims of
 discrimination both against employers and the Government and in
 housing matters. They provide a practical means of redress for
 discrimination claims.
 According to a recent study of violence against women financed
 by the Dutch Ministry of Welfare, Health, and Culture, 20.8
 percent of Dutch women in heterosexual relationships are or
 have been victims of violence. Slightly over half of these (11
 percent of women) experience repeated severe violence. The
 Government supports programs to reduce and prevent violence
 against women. Battered women find refuge in a network of
 government-subsidized women's shelters offering the services of
 social workers and psychologists. In addition, battered women
 who leave their domestic partners become eligible for social
 benefits which include an adequate basic subsidy as well as an
 allowance for dependent children. There are also organizations
 which advise and assist women who have been victims of sexual
 assault.
 Although traditional cultural factors, combined with structural
 impediments such as provisions of the tax code which penalize
 two-income families, continue to discourage women, especially
 married women and women with children, from entering or
 remaining in the labor force, the trend, especially for younger
 women, is upward. Currently 52 percent of Dutch women hold
 paid jobs, often part-time, an increase from 44 percent in
 1987. Legislation passed in 1975 mandated equal pay for equal
 work and prohibited dismissal because of marriage, pregnancy,
 or motherhood. Additional legislation was passed in 1980 to
 provide the basis for equality in other employment-related
 areas. A legislatively mandated Equal Treatment Commission
 actively pursues complaints of discrimination in these areas as
 well as allegations of pay differentials. Women have full
 legal and judicial rights and enter marriage with the option of
 choosing community property or separate regimes for their
 assets.
 Women's groups dedicated to such issues as equal rights in
 social security, the legal position of women, sexual abuse,
 taxation, education, work, and prostitution operate freely
 throughout the Netherlands. In February the Equal Rights
 Council, in a report entitled "Sexual Intimidation in Work
 Situations," called for tougher legislation to control sexual
 harassment in the workplace.
 
 
 1187
 THE NETHERLANDS
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of Dutch workers to associate freely is well
 established. The active trade union movement includes in its
 membership just under 25 percent of the employee work force.
 Members of the Dutch armed forces may belong to unions. Unions
 are entirely free of control by the Government and political
 parties. They may and do participate in political activities.
 Unions have formed several domestic confederations and maintain
 active relations with recognized international labor
 organizations.
 With the exception of most civil servants, all workers have the
 right to strike, and this right is exercised freely. Disputes
 involving civil servant complaints may be appealed to an
 arbitration panel. The Government and unions continue to
 discuss the issue of the right of civil service workers to
 strike and the definition of "essential" civil services.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain'Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is recognized
 and well established. Discrimination against workers because
 of their union membership is illegal and does not exist in
 practice. Approximately 76 percent of all paid workers are
 currently covered by collective bargaining agreements, which
 emerge out of the social partnership in industrial relations
 developed among trade unions, private employers, and the
 Government. Every year these three participants seek to
 develop a "central accord" with'agreed social and economic
 goals for the coming year. Sectoral collective bargaining then
 takes place under this umbrella agreement. A central
 tripartite body, the Labor Commission, oversees implementation
 of the industrial relations system. There are no export
 processing zones.
 There has been some controversy over the extent to which the
 Government should be involved in certain sectoral agreements.
 The trade unions (which have themselves made clear that they do
 not consider this a "worker rights" issue) allege that the
 Dutch Minister of Social Affairs, by law, is given too much
 latitude to determine wages in the government-subsidized areas
 of public health and transportation when collective bargaining
 has failed to reach a "satisfactory" agreement. The Government
 has asked the tripartite Dutch Social and Economic Council to
 recommend changes in the legislation. International Labor
 Organization bodies for a number of years have asked the
 Government to amend the so-called "WAGGS" Act, which gives the
 Government the power to freeze the terms and conditions of
 employment in the public sector in the face of compelling
 reasons of national economic interest.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution
 and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of young people is 16. At that
 age, they may work full time only if they have completed the
 mandatory 10 years of schooling. Those still in school at age
 16 may not work more than 8 hours per week. Young people under
 
 
 1188
 THE NETHERLANDS
 the age of 18 are prohibited by law from working at night,
 working overtime, or working in areas which could be dangerous
 to their physical or mental development. The laws are
 effectively enforced by the Labor Commission, a tripartite
 entity which monitors hiring practices and conducts inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The minimum wage for adult workers is established by law and is
 adjusted every 6 months for changes in the cost of living.
 There is a reduced minimum wage for workers under 23 which
 ranges from 85 percent of the adult minimum wage for workers
 aged 22 to 33 percent for those aged 16. The purpose of the
 reduced minimum wage law is to provide incentives for the
 employment of young people, one of the demographic groups with
 the highest rate of unemployment among the population. The
 legislated minimum wage, together with social benefits
 available to all minimum wage earners, provides an adequate
 living for workers and their families.
 The maximum workweek is set by collective bargaining. The
 average workweek for adults is currently 38 hours. Full-time
 workers over age 16 receive a paid vacation of at least 190
 hours per year. There are also generous welfare provisions for
 workers who become sick or disabled. For unemployed workers,
 there is an extensive system of benefits which allows
 recipients to maintain an adequate standard of living.
 Working conditions, including comprehensive occupational safety
 and health standards, are actively monitored by the Labor
 Commission. The Ministry of Social Affairs also polices
 standards through its Labor Inspectorate.
 
 
 1189
