 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy
 in which King Harald V, the titular Head of State, has a largely
 symbolic role. Norway is governed by a Prime Minister, Cabinet,
 and a 165-seat Storting (parliament) that is elected every 4
 years and cannot be dissolved.
 The police, security forces, and the military are scrupulous in
 their protection of human rights. The Government (including
 the judicial system and the Storting) exercises firm control
 over these organizations and investigates thoroughly any
 allegations of human rights violations.
 Norway.is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Personal
 freedoms, such as freedom of association and speech and the
 right to pursue private interests and to hold private property,
 are protected by the Constitution and respected in practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian
 tradition, an independent press, and highly developed
 educational and social.welfare systems have made Norway a
 leading advocate of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Such killings have not occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 Secret arrests and detentions have not.occurred.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's penal system. Generous
 furlough and visitation rights characterize the system, which
 emphasizes rehabilitation. 'The maximum sentence for any crime
 is 21 years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law requires arrest warrants, except in circumstances
 such as hot pursuit. Persons may be detained for up to 4 hours
 without being charged. A person charged with a crime has the
 right, observed in practice, to appear before a judge for
 arraignment within 24 hours. If charges are formalized at the
 arraignment, the judge then determines whether the detainee
 should be.kept in custody or released pending trial. Bail need
 not be posted. A strong case must be made to justify detention.
 Possible grounds include fear of flight, the needs of the
 investigation, and fear that a detainee-may commit further
 crimes.
 Any person held in pretrial detention appears before a judge
 every 4 weeks for a determination of the necessity of continued
 detention. There is no legal limit on the time a prisoner may
 be held before trial; however, lengthy pretrial detention is
 rare. There is no exile.
 
 
 1190
 NORWAY
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is ensured by law and honored
 in practice. Only in certain cases, including those involving
 state security or private family matters, are trials closed.
 In criminal cases, all Norwegian citizens and resident aliens
 are entitled to free counsel. Indigent persons are granted
 free counsel in certain civil cases as well.
 The judiciary is independent of both the legislative and the
 executive branches of the Government and tries military and
 security as well as civil and criminal cases. The labor court
 mediates industrial relations disputes.
 Persons refusing both military service and alternative civilian
 service have been held in prison for up to 16 months (a period
 equivalent to military service) without trial. Detention is
 based on an administrative rather than a judicial decision, and
 prisoners held in this manner receive the salary and benefits
 normally accorded to military recruits during their period of
 confinement. Administrative decisions by the Justice and
 Defense Ministries expanded the grounds for conscientious
 objector status in 1988.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and the person is free from arbitrary
 interference by the Government. Police may conduct searches of
 the home only with court approval and in instances of hot
 pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed. There
 were no allegations of forced entry into Norwegian homes in
 1991. In most cases, wiretaps are prohibited by law, but they
 may be used in cases involving state security or narcotics
 offenses when officially approved by the court within carefully
 drawn legal guidelines. Correspondence may be opened only by
 court order in cases involving state security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is protected by the Constitution
 and respected in practice. In addition to restrictions on
 slander and libel, Norwegian law forbids racist or sexist
 remarks in print or public speech, and such remarks are
 uncommon. It is forbidden to publish information concerning
 national defense which could prove damaging to Norwegian
 security.
 Norway's state broadcasting company maintains a near monopoly
 on television broadcasting and national radio stations, but the
 Government does not exercise editorial control over programming.
 Private local radio stations exist, as do privately owned local
 cable television stations. A private television network, TV
 Norge, has been available on cable throughout Norway for almost
 3 years. Norway has an active and diversified press, and many
 newspapers are sustained by government subsidies. Some
 newspapers are loosely connected to various national political
 parties.
 Certain restrictions apply to the showing of films. The
 government Film Control Board has the authority to censor or
 ban any film deemed overly violent1 pornographic, or
 blasphemous. The blasphemy clause in the censorship law,
 
 
 1191
 NORWAY
 however, has not been used in the last 20 years. There is no
 indication that films are censored because of political content..
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Norwegians exercise these freedoms without restraint. Permits
 for public demonstrations are granted routinely.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway,
 which is financially supported by the State and to which 93
 percent of the population nominally belongs. There is a
 constitutional requirement that the King and half of the
 Cabinet belong to the state church. The Workers' Protection
 and Working Environment Act permits prospective employers to
 ask job applicants in certain fields, such as education,
 whether they respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered
 members of 20 other denominations which operate freely and may
 proselytize. Foreign clergy are welcome in Norway. No
 religious community is required to register with the Government
 unless it desires state support, which is provided to all
 registered denominations on a proportional basis in accordance
 with membership.
 Although the state religion is taught in all public schools,
 children of other faiths are allowed to be absent from such
 classes upon parental request. If there are enough students of
 the same faith, the school will organize religion classes in
 that faith. Workers belonging to minority denominations are
 allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel. The
 right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed. Refugees and
 asylum seekers are provided generous benefits, including social
 services, free medical care, and education while awaiting
 decisions bn their asylum applications. Norway maintains the
 right to repatriate'refugees and asylum seekers involuntarily
 in certain situations. In practice, however, there have been
 no recent cases in which a person with a valid claim to
 persecution and fear for his or her life has been involuntarily
 repatriated from Norway.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Norway is a multiparty democracy. Seven parties are represented
 in the Storting, and the distribution of seats is based upon
 proportional representation by district. The Storting may
 reject or.modify government proposals; if a government loses a
 vote on a major issue of confidence, it resigns, and a new
 government is  formed. The minimum voting age is 18; voter
 turnout traditionally is very high. Foreigners who have
 resided in Norway for at least 3 years, and are otherwise
 eligible, have the right to vote in local elections only.
 There are no restrictions, in law or in practice, on the
 participation of women in government or in the political arena
 generally.
 
 
 1192
 NORWAY
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A number of public and private organizations monitor alleged
 human rights abuses either inside or, more often, outside the
 country. The Government cooperates with nongovernmental
 investigations of alleged violations of human rights and, in
 recent years, has cooperated with both the European Commission
 of Human Rights and the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees. Norway is an active participant in international
 human rights organizations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Government provides for
 the health, education, retirement, and other needs of its
 people regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background, or
 political opinion.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Sami (Lapp) people were
 Norway's only significant minority group until the influx of
 immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the Government
 has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of the Sami by
 providing Sami-language instruction at schools in Sami-
 inhabited areas, radio and television programs broadcast or
 subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies for the
 publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami.
 Norwegian Sami elected their own constituent assembly, the
 Sameting, for the first time in 1989. The 39-seat body is a
 consultative group which meets regularly to consider issues of
 importance to the Sami people. In 1990 the Sami population of
 Norway hosted the annual convention of the World Council of
 Indigenous Peoples in Tromso, Norway.
 There is continuing political debate on whether current
 restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975,
 are racially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups
 such as Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans are accorded
 equal rights by Norwegian authorities. The Government provides
 legal protection for the rights of all minorities and has taken
 active measures to help these groups adjust to Norwegian
 society, including free Norwegian-language instruction for any
 foreign resident.
 As a result of a dramatic increase in the number of persons
 seeking political asylum in the mid-1980's, the Storting passed
 a bill in 1988 that would no longer allow asylum applicants who
 are not bona fide refugees to remain on humanitarian grounds.
 The new law, while limiting the number of those granted asylum,
 safeguards the rights of those asylum seekers allowed to remain
 in Norway. Refugee policy continues to be a significant
 political issue; some groups call for reducing the inflow of
 refugees, while others--human rights groups and certain
 political parties--urge the Government to accept more
 refugees. Although there have been problems in dealing with
 individual refugee cases, Norway has a well-organized system
 which includes advance planning, careful dispersion of refugees
 throughout Norway, and generous welfare, educational, and
 vocational training programs. Occasional racially motivated
 
 
 1193
 NORWAY
 attacks on non-European immigrant groups are dealt with firmly
 by the police and judicial authorities.
 Women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other
 regulations. Under that law, "women and men engaged in the same
 activity shall have equal wages for work of equal value." An
 Equal Rights Council monitors enforcement of the 1978 law, and
 an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes complaints of sexual
 discrimination. The Government provides liberal maternity leave
 and time off for either parent to care for his or her children.
 Norway has an extremely low crime rate and, in that sense, crime
 against women is not widespread. A recent general increase in
 the crime rate has included the crime rate against women,
 although police authorities believe that more women are willing
 now to report rapes and incidents of wife beating than has been
 the case in the past. The police vigorously investigate and
 prosecute such crimes and have instituted special programs to
 prevent rape and domestic violence and to counsel victims.
 Public and private organizations run several free shelters
 which give battered wives an alternative to returning to a
 violent domestic situation after an incident of wife beating.-
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have and exercise the right to associate freely and to
 strike. The Government, however, has the right, with the
 approval of the Storting, to invoke compulsory arbitration
 under certain circumstances. This procedure, which was invoked
 several times in the 1980's, particularly in the oil industry,
 was criticized by the Committee of Experts of the International
 Labor Organization, which argued that the circumstances did not
 pose a sufficient threat to the public health and safety to
 justify the action.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force,
 unions play an important role in political and economic life
 and are consulted by the Government on. important economic and
 social problems. Unions are free to form federations and
 confederations and to affiliate internationally. Although the
 largest trade union federation is associated with the Labor
 Party, all unions are free of party and government control.
 Norwegian worker representatives are active in a wide variety
 of regional and international trade union activity.
 The 1991 collective bargaining negotiations between the
 national union organization CLO), Norway's largest trade union
 federation, and the employers' organization (NHO) required the
 services of a government wage mediator. The last-minute
 resolution of wage negotiations resulted in moderate wage and
 benefit increases and averted a threatened major strike.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 All workers, including government employees and military
 personnel, exercise the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. The right to organize is protected through the
 "basic agreement" negotiated between the LO and NHO, which is
 legally binding. Complaints of antiunion discrimination are
 dealt with through the labor court. Collective bargaining is
 widespread, with most wage earners covered by negotiated
 settlements, either directly or through understandings which
 extend the contract terms to workers outside of the main labor
 
 
 1194
 NORWAY
 federation and the employers' bargaining group. There are no
 export processing zones, and labor legislation and practice is
 consistent throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by law and does not exist. The
 Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children aged 13 to 18 may be employed part-time in light work
 that will not adversely affect their health, development, or
 schooling. Minimum age rules are observed in practice and
 effectively enforced by the Directorate of Labor Inspections.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Ordinary working hours are mandated by law and normally do not
 exceed 37.5 hours per week, with 25 working days of paid leave
 granted per year (31 for those aged 60 and older). A 28-hour
 rest period is legally mandated on the weekend and for holidays.
 There is no minimum wage in Norway, but wages normally fall
 within a national wage scale negotiated by labor, employers,
 and the Government. The average annual wage, not including
 extensive social benefits, is adequate to provide a family a
 decent living.
 Under the Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act of
 1977, all employed persons are assured safe and physically
 acceptable working conditions. Specific standards are set by
 the Directorate of Labor Inspections in consultation with
 nongovernmental experts. According to the Act, working
 environment committees, composed of management, workers, and
 health personnel, must be established in all enterprises with
 50 or more workers, and safety delegates mist be elected in all
 organizations. Workers enjoy strong rights to remove
 themselves from situations which endanger their health. The
 Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures effective compliance
 with-labor legislation and standards.
 
 
 1195
