 NORWAY
 Norway is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy with King
 Haraid V as the Head of State. Norway is governed by a Prime Minister, Cabinet,
 and a 165-seat Storting (parliament), which is elected every 4 years and cannot be
 
 
 990
 dissolved. The police, security forces, and the military are scrupulous in their protec-
 tion of human rights. The Government (including the judicial system and the
 Storting) exercises firm control over these organizations and investigates thoroughly
 any allegations of human rights violations.
 Norway is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy combining private
 public, and state ownership. Personal freedoms, such as freedom of association ana
 of speech and the right to pursue private interests and to hold private property, are
 protected by the Constitution and respected in practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian tradition, an independ-
 ent press, and highly developed educational and social welfare systems have made
 Norway a leading practitioner of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Such killings did not occur.
 b. Disappearance.--Secret arrests and detentions did not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment on the
 part of law enforcement or armed services personnel do not occur in Norway. Gener-
 ous furlough and visitation rights characterize the penal system, which emphasizes
 rehabilitation. The maximum sentence for any crime is 21 years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Norwe 'an law provides for arrest war-
 rants, which are used except in circumstances suer as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without 1.ing charged. A person charged with a crime
 has the right, observed in practice, to appear before the judge for arraignment with-
 in 24 hours. If charge!. are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then deter-
 mines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or released pending trial. Bail
 need not be posted. A strong case must be made to justify detention. Possible
 grounds include fear of flight, the needs of the investigation, and fear that a de-
 tainee will commit further crimes.
 Any person held in pretrial detention appears before a judge every 4 weeks for
 a determination of the necessity of continued detention. There is no legal limit on
 the time a prisoner may be held before tric-l; however, lengthy pretrial detention is
 rare. Preventive detention also exists but is used infrequently. There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The right to a fair, public trial is ensured by law
 and honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those involving state secu-
 rity or private family matters, are trials closed. In criminal cases, all Norwegian
 citizens and aliens are entitled to free counsel. Indigent persons are granted free
 counsel in certain civil cases as well.
 Norway has a three-tiered system of district and city courts, high courts, and the
 Supreme Court-all of which deal with both criminal and civil cases-as well as
 spcial courts, includ'ng the Labor Disputes Court and the Social Insurance Court.
 The judiciary is independent of both the legislative and the executive branches of
 the Government end tries military and security as well as civil and criminal cases.
 The Labor Court mediates industrial relations disputes.
 Persons refusing both military service and alternative civilian service have been
 held in prison for up to 16 months (a period equivalent to military service) without
 a trial. Detention is based on an administrative rather than a judicial decision, and
 prif-oners held in this manner receive the salary and benefits normally accorded to
 military recruits during their period of confinement.
 f. Arbitr'.y Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The pri-
 vacy of the family and the person is free from arbitrary interference by the Govern-
 ment. Police may conduct searches of the home only with court approval and in in-
 stances of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed. There were
 no allegations of forced entry into Norwegian homes in 1993. In most cases, wire-
 taps are prohibited by law, but they may be used in cases involving state security
 or narcotics offenses when officially approved by the court within carefully drawn
 legal guidelines. Correspondence may be opened only by court order in cascL- involv-
 ing state security.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is protected by the
 constitution and respected in practice. In addition to restrictions on slander and
 libel, Norwegian law forbids racist or sexist remarks in print or public speech. It
 is forbidden to publish information concerning national defense that could prove
 damaging to Norwegian security. Norway has an active and diversified press, and
 many papers are sustained by government subsidies. Some newspapers are loosely
 
 
 991
 connected to various national political parties. Norway's state broadcasting company
 is the more prominent of two national television networks (the other is private) but
 the Government does not exercise editorial control over programming. Private local
 radio stations and one private national radio station exist, as do privately owned
 local and national cable television stations. Foreign television networks are also
 available on cable throughout the country.
 Certain restrictions apply to the showing of films. The Film Control Board, ap-
 pointed by the Ministry of Culture, has the authority to censor or ban any film
 deemed overly violent, pornographic, or blasphemous. The blasphemy clause in the
 censorship law, however, has not been used in the last 20 years. There is no evi-
 dnce that any fims have been ensred because of political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Norwegians exercise these
 freedoms without restraint. Permits for public demonstrations are granted routinely.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of
 Norway, which is financially supported by the State, and to which 93 percent of the
 population nominally belongs, There is a constitutional reuirement that the King
 and half of the Cabinet belong to the state church. The WNorkers' Protection and
 Working Environment Act permits prospective employers to ask job applicants
 whether they respect Christian beliefs and principles when applying or a job in pri-
 vate, reliious-rn schools and day-care centers.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered members of 20 other de-
 nominations which operate freely and may proselytize. Foreign clergy are welcome
 in Norway. No religious community is required to reister wit the  vernment un-
 less it desires state support, whi  is rovied to all registered denominations on
 a proportional basis in accordance with membership. Although the state religion is
 taught in all public schools, children of other faiths are allowed to be absent from
 such classes upon parental request. If there are enough students of the same faith,
 the school will arrange clamss in that faith. Workers belonging to minority denomi-
 nations   allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel. The right
 to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed. Refugees and asylum seekers are provided
 generous benefits, including social services, free medical care, and education while
 awaiting decisions on their asylum applications. In 1993 Norway involuntarily repa-
 triated rejected asylum seekers from the province of Kosovo in Serbia. This caused
 protest from churches which offered "asylum" from Norwegian authorities to these
 individuals. Repatriations occur only atr asylum applications have been denied,
 and appeals and reviews have been completed. There are approximately 400 rejected
 asylum seekers in church asylum nationwide.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Norway is a multiparty democracy. Eight parties are represented in the Storting
 where distribution of seats is based upon proportional representation by district.
 The Storting may reject or modiiyi government proposals; if a government loses a
 vote on a major issue of confidence, it resigns, and a new government is formed.
 The minimum voting age is 18, and voter turnout in the 1993 parliamentary elec-
 tions was about 76 percent. Foreigners who have resided in Norway for at least 3
 yee-: , and are otherwise eligible, have e eright to vote in local elections only.
 In addition to participating reely in the national political process, Norwegian
 Sami (Lapp) elected their own constituent assembly, the Sameting, for the second
 time in 1993. The 39-seat body is a consultative group which meets regularly to con-
 sider issues of importance to the Sami people. According to the law establishing it,
 the Sameting deals with "all matters which in (its) opinion are of special importance
 to the Sami people." In practice, the Sameting has been most interested in protect-
 ing the group's language and cultural rights and in influencing decisions on re-
 sources and lands where the Sami are a majority.
 There are no restrictions, in law or in practice, on the participation of women in
 government or in the political arena generally. Norway has a female Prime Minister
 and women lead the other two most prominent political parties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of public and private organizations monitor alleged human rights
 abuses either inside or, more often, outside the country. The Government cooperates
 with nongovernmental investigations of alleged violations of human rights and, in
 recent years, has cooperated with both the European Commission of Human Rights
 
 
 992
 and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Norway is an active par-
 ticipant in international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects a long tradition of
 egalitarianism, the Government provides for the health, education, retirement, and
 other needs of its people regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background, phys-
 ical disability, or politicai opinion.
 Women.-The rights of women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978
 and other regulations. Under that law, "women and men engaged in the same activ-
 ity shall have equal wages for work of equal value." An Equal Rights Council mon-
 itors enforcement of the 1978 law and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes com-
 plaints of sexual discrimination. There were 303 complaints in 1992, and, as of No-
 vember, 213 in 1993. The Government provides liberal maternity leave and time off
 for either parent to care for their children.
 Crime against women is not widespread. Increases in the crime rate have in-
 cluded crimes against women, although police authorities believe that much of the
 increase in reported rapes and incidents of wife beating is due to a greater willing-
 ness among women to report these crimes than has been the case in the past. The
 police vigorously investigate and prosecute such crimes and have instituted special
 programs for rape and domestic violence prevention and for counseling victims. Pub-
 lic and private organizations run several free shelters which give battered wives an
 alternative to returning to a violent domestic situation after an incident of wife
 beating.
 Children.-The Government is highly committed to the welfare of children, re-
 flecting a similar profound commitment in Norwegian society. Among the many fea-
 tures of a comprehensive system of child welfare benefits are governmental mainte-
 nance of generous maternal and paternal leave policies to assure the health and
 welfare of the newborn, and provision of stipends to parents based on the number
 of children they have. An independent children's ombudsman office assures the pro-
 tection of children in law and practice.
 Indigenous People.-Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Sami (Lapp) people were Norway's only sig-
 nificant minority group until the influx of immigrants during the 1970 s. In recent
 years, the Government has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of the Sam!
 byprviding Sami-language instruction at schools in Sami- inhabited areas radio
 and television programs broadcast or subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies
 for the publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami (see also Sec-
 tion 3).
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-There is continuing political debate on
 whether current restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975, are ra-
 cially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups such as Pakistanis, Viet-
 namese, Turks, and Africans are accorded equal rights by Norwegian authorities.
 Eligibility for citizenship is based on residency. The Government provides legal pro-
 tection for the rights of all minorities and has taken active measures to help these
 gups adjust to Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language instruction
 or any foreign resident and funding of nongovernmental organizations such as the
 Anti-Racism Center.
 As the result of a decade-long parliamentary study, the Storting in 1988 signifi-
 cantly revised the Norwegian immigration law. Among the major changes was an
 effort to link refugee and asylum processing more closely to the dermitions and proc-
 esses established under the U.N. Convention on Refugees. The current law provides
 that asylum may no longer be granted solely on humanitarian grounds to those ap-
 plicants who had been determined not to have a well-grounded fear of persecution.
 The law, while limiting the number of those granted asylum, continues to safeguard
 the rights of those asylum seekers allowed to remain in Norway. Refugee policy con-
 tinues to be a significant political issue; some groups call for reducing the inflow
 of refugees and others-human rights groups and political parties--urge the Gov-
 ernment to accept more refugees. Although some individual asylum cases have
 caused problems, Norway has a well-organized system which includes advance plan-
 ning, careful dispersion of refugees throughout the populace, and generous welfare,
 educational, and vocational training programs.
 People with Disabilities.-The physically disabled are fully integrated into social,
 economic and political life, and are provided full health care and other social bene-
 fits. They are not discriminated against in employment, education or the provision
 of any state service. Accessibility is mandated in new construction. In existing build-
 ings, accessibility is mandated if the building is refitted for new uses.
 
 
 993
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The saw provides to workers the rights to associate
 freely and to strike. There were several short strikes in 1993, settled through nor-
 mal means. The Government, however, has the right, with the approval of the
 Storting, to invoke compulsory arbitration under certain circumstances. This proce-
 dure, which was invoked several times in the 1980's, particularly in the oil industry,
 was criticized repeatedly by the Committee of Experts of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), which argued that the situations were not a sufficient threat
 to public health and safety to justify the action. The Government again invoked this
 procedure in 1993 to stop an oil workers' strike. A case against Norway is pending
 in the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association, awaiting information from the
 Norwegian Government. This case is based on a strike by a small union, the Mari-
 time Engineers.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force, unions play an im-
 portant role in political and economic life, and are consulted by the Government on
 important economic and social problems. Although the largest trade union federa-
 tion is associated with the Labor Party, all unions and labor federations are free
 of party and government control. Unions are free to form federations and to affiliate
 internationally. The  maintain strong ties with such international bodies as the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All workers, including govern-
 ment employees and military personnel, exercise the right to organize and barsin
 collectively. Collective bargaining is widespread, with most wage earners cevered by
 negotiated settlements, either directly or through understandings which extend the
 contract terms to workers outside of the main labor federation and the employers'
 bargaining group. There have been no complaints of antiunion discrimination in re-
 cent years. If there were such complaints they would be dealt with by the Labor
 Court.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 law and does not exist. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children aged 13 to 18 may be
 employed part-time in light work that will not adversely affect their health, develop-
 ment, or schooling. Minimum age rules are observed in practice and enforced by the
 Directorate of Labor Inspections. Nine years of education is compulsory in Norway.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Normal working hours are mandated by law
 and do not exceed 37.5 hours per week. The law also provides for 25 working days
 of paid leave per year (31 for those over age 60). A 28-hour rest period is legally
 mandated on the weekend and for holidays. There is no minimum wage as such,
 but wages normally fall within a national wage scale negotiated by labor, employers,
 and the Government. The average annual per capita income, not including extensive
 social benefits is adecuate to provide a worker and his or her family a decent living.
 Under the Workers Protection and Working Environment Act of 1977, all em-
 ployed persons are assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions. Spe-
 cific standards are set by the Directorate of Labor Inspections in consultation with
 nongovernmental experts. According to the Act, working environment committees,
 composed of management, workers, and health personnel must be established in all
 enterprises with 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in all or-
 ganizations. Workers enjoy strong rights to remove themselves from situations
 which endanger their health. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures effective
 compliance with labor legislation and standards.
