 NORWAY
 Norway is-a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
 democracy with King Olav V, the titular Head of State, having
 a largely symbolic role. Norway is governed by a prime
 minister, cabinet, and a 165-seat Storting (parliament) that
 is elected every 4 years and cannot be dissolved.
 The police'- security forces,- and the military are scrupulous
 in-their protection of- human rights. The Government'
 (including the judicibl system and the Storting) exercises
 firm control over these organizations and investigates
 thoroughly any allegations of human rights violations:
 Norway.is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Personal
 freedoms, such as freedom of association and of speech, and
 the right to pursue private interests and to hold private
 property are protected by the Constitution and respected in
 practice.
 Deeply, rooted-democratic-principles, a strong egalitarian
 tradition, an independent-press, and highly developed-
 educational'and social welfare systems have'made Norway a
 leading-advocate of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom frbm:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Such killings have not occurred.
 - b. Disappearance
 Secret arrests and detentions have not occurred.
 .c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading -
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's penal system. Generous
 furlough and visitation rights characterize the system, which
 emphasizes rehabilitation. The maximum sentence for any crime
 is 21 years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law provides for arrest warrants, which are used
 except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without being charged. A person
 charged with a crime has the right-, observed in practice, to
 appear before a judge for arraignment within 24 hours. If
 charges are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then
 determines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or
 released (bail need not be posted) pending trial. A strong
 case must be made to justify detention. Possible grounds
 include fear of flight, the needs of the investigation, and
 fear that a detainee will commit further crimes.
 Any person held in pretrial detention appears before a judge
 every 4 weeks for a determination of the necessity of
 continued detention. There is no legal limit on the time a
 
 
 1228
 NORWAY
 prisoner may be held before trial; however, lengthy pretrial
 detention is rare. Preventive detention also exists but is
 used infrequently. There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is ensured by law and
 honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those
 involving state security or private family matters, are trials
 closed. In criminal cases, all Norwegian citizens and aliens
 are entitled to free counsel. Indigent persons are granted
 free counsel in certain civil cases as well.
 The judiciary is independent of both the legislative and the
 executive branches of the Government and tries military and
 security as well as civil and criminal cases. The labor court
 mediates industrial relations disputes.
 Persons refusing both military service and alternative
 civilian service have been held in prison for up to 16 months
 (a period equivalent to military service) without a trial.
 Detention is based on an administrative rather than a judicial
 decision, and prisoners held in this manner receive the salary
 and benefits normally accorded to military recruits during
 their period of confinement. Administrative decisions by the
 Justice and Defense Ministries expanded the grounds for
 conscientious objector status in 1988.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and the person is free from
 arbitrary interference by the Government. Police may conduct
 searches of the home only with court approval and in instances
 of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed.
 There were no allegations of forced official entry into
 Norwegian homes in 1990. In most cases, wiretaps are
 prohibited by law, but they may be used in cases involving
 state security or narcotics offenses when officially approved
 by the court within carefully drawn legal guidelines.
 Correspondence may be opened only by court order in cases
 involving state security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is protected by the Constitution
 and respected in practice. In addition to restrictions on
 slander and libel, Norwegian law forbids racist or sexist
 remarks in print or public speech. It is forbidden to publish
 information concerning national defense which could prove
 damaging to Norwegian security.
 Norway's state broadcasting company maintains a near monopoly
 on television broadcasting and national radio stations, but
 the Government does not exercise editorial control over
 programming. Private local radio stations exist as do
 privately-owned local cable stations. A private television
 network, TV Norge, has been available on cable throughout
 Norway for almost 2 years. Norway has an active and
 diversified press, and many papers are sustained by government
 subsidies. Some newspapers are loosely connected to,-various
 national political parties.
 
 
 1229
 
 NORWAY
 Certain restiictions apply to-the showing of films. The
 government Film Control Board has the authority to censor or
 ban any film deemed overly violent, pornographic, or
 blasphemous. The blasphemy clause in the censorship law,-
 however, has not been used in the last 20 years. There is no
 evidence that any films have been censored because of
 political content.
 :b. 'Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Norwegians exercise these freedoms without restraint. Permits
 for public demonstrations are granted routinely.
 c.. Preedom of Religion
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway,
 which is financially supported by the State and to which 93
 percent of the population nominally belongs. There'is a
 constitutional requirement that the King and half of the
 Cabinet belong to the state church. The Workers' Protection
 and Working Environment Act permits prospective employers to
 ask job applicants in certain fields, such as education,
 whether they respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered
 members-of*20 other denominations which-operate freely and may
 proselytize. Foreign clergy are welcome in Norway. No
 religious community is required to register with the
 Government unless it desires state support, which is provided
 to all registered denominations on a proportional basis in
 accordance'with membership.
 Although the state religion is taught in all public schools,
 children of other faiths are allowed to be absent from such
 classes upon parental request. If there are enough students
 of the same faith, the school will arrange religion classes in
 that faith. Workers belonging to minority denominations are
 allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d' Freedom of MoVement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel.
 The right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed. Refugees
 and asylum seekers are provided generous benefits, including
 social services, free medical care, and education while
 awaiting decisions on their asylum applications, Norway
 maintains the right to repatriate refugees and asylum seekers
 involuntarily in certain situations. In practice, however,
 there have beenno recent cases in which a person with a valid
 claim to persecution and fear-for his or her life has been
 involuntarily repatriated from Norway.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Norway is a multiparty democracy. Seven parties are
 represented in the Storting where distribution of seats is
 based upon proportional representation by district. The
 Storting may reject or modify government proposals; if a
 government loses a vote on a major issue of confidence, it
 resigns, and a new government is formed. The minimum voting
 age is 18, and voter turnout in the 1989 parliamentary
 elections was over 82 percent. Foreigners who have resided in
 
 
 1230
 NORWAY
 Norway for at least 3 years, and are otherwise eligible, have
 the right to vote in local elections only.
 There are no restrictions, in law or in practice, on the
 participation of women in government or in the political arena
 generally.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A number of public and private organizations monitor alleged
 human rights abuses either inside or, more often, outside the
 country. The Government cooperates with nongovernmental
 investigations of alleged violations of human rights and, in
 recent years, has cooperated with both the European Commission
 of Human Rights and the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees. Norway is itself an active participant in
 international human rights organizations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Government provides
 for the health, education, retirement, and other needs of its
 people regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background,
 or political opinion.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Sami (Lapp) people
 were-Norway's only significant minority group until the influx
 of immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the
 Government has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of
 the Sami by providing Sami-language instruction at schools in
 Sami-inhabited areas, radio and television programs broadcast
 or subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies for the
 publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami.
 Norwegian Sami elected their own constituent assembly, the
 Sameting, for the first time in 1989. The 39-seat body is a
 consultative group which meets regularly to consider issues of
 importance to the Sami people. In August 1990, the Sami
 population of Norway hosted the annual convention of the World
 Council of Indigenous Peoples in Tromso, Norway.
 There is a continuing political debate on whether current
 restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975,
 are racially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups
 such as Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans are
 accorded equal rights by Norwegian authorities. The
 Government provides legal protection for the rights of all
 minorities and has taken active measures to help these groups
 adjust to Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language
 instruction for any foreign resident.
 As a result of a dramatic increase in the number of persons
 seeking political asylum in the mid-1980's, the Storting
 passed a bill in 1988 that would no longer allow asylum
 applicants who are not bona fide refugees to remain on
 humanitarian grounds. The new law, while limiting the number
 of those granted asylum, safeguards the rights of those asylum
 seekers allowed to remain in Norway. Refugee policy continues
 to be a significant political issue; some groups call for
 reducing the inflow of refugees and others--human rights
 
 
 1231
 NORWAY
 ..roups and political'parties--urge the Government to accept
 more refugees. Although there have been problems in managing
 1individual refugee cases, Norway has a well-organized system
 which includes advance planning,- careful dispersion of
 refugees throughout Norway, and generous welfare, educational,
 and vocational training programs. Occasional racially
 motivated attacks on non-European immigrant groups are dealt
 with firmly by the police and judicial authorities.
 Women are-protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and
 other regulations. Under that law, "women and men engaged in
 the same activity shall have equal wages for work of equal
 value." An Equal Rights Council monitors enforcement of the
 1978 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes complaints
 of sexual discrimination. The Government provides .liberal
 maternity leave and time off for either parent to care for
 their children.
 Norway has an extremely low crime rate and, in that sense,
 crime against women is not widespread. A recent general
 increase in the crime rate has included crimes against women,
 although police authorities believe that much of the increase
 in reported rapes and incidents of wife beating is due to a
 greater willingness among women to report these crimes than
 has been the case in the past. The police vigorously
 investigate and prosecute cases of such crimes and have
 instituted special programs for rape and domestic violence
 prevention and for counseling of victims. Public and private
 organizations run several free shelters which give battered
 wives an alternative to returning to a violent domestic
 situation after an incident of wife beating.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to strike. The
 Government, however, has the right, with the approval of the
 Stortin, to invoke compulsory arbitration under certai
 circumstances. This procedure, which was invoked several
 times in the 1980's, particularly in the oil industry, was
 criticized by the Committee of Experts of the International
 Labor Organization, which argued that the situations were not
 a sufficient threat to the public health and safety to justify
 the action.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force,
 unions play an important role in political and economic life
 and are consulted by the Government on important economic and
 social problems. Although the largest trade union federation
 is associated with the Labor Party, all unions are free of
 party and government control. They maintain strong ties with
 such international bodies as the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions.
 The 1990 biennial collective bargaining round required the
 services of a government arbitrator, and was resolved only
 after numerous strikes in the transportation and media sectors
 as well as a threatened general strike. The eventual solution
 involved minor wage and benefit adjustments to the moderate
 wage package which the leaderships of the unions and employers
 had agreed to earlier.
 
 
 1232
 
 NORWAY
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 All workers, including government employees and military
 personnel, exercise the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. There have been no complaints of antiunion
 discrimination. Collective bargaining is widespread, with
 most wage-earners covered by negotiated settlements, either
 directly or through understandings which extend the contract
 terms to workers outside of the main labor federation and the
 employers' bargaining group. There are no export processing
 zones, and labor legislation and practice is consistent
 throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by law and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children are not permitted to work full time before the age of
 15. Minimum age rules are observed in practice.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Ordinary working hours do not exceed 37.5 hours per week, and
 25 working days of paid leave are granted per year (31 for
 those over age 60). There is no minimum wage as such in
 Norway, but wages normally fall within a national wage scale
 negotiated by labor, employers, and the Government. The
 average annual wage, not including extensive social benefits,
 is approximately $26,000, which is adequate to provide a
 family a decent living.
 Under the Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act of
 1977, all employed persons are assured safe and physically
 acceptable working conditions. According to the Act, working
 environment committees, composed of management, workers, and
 health personnel, must be established in all enterprises with
 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in
 all organizations. The Directorate of Labor Inspections
 ensures effective compliance with labor legislation.
 
 
 1233
