 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
 democracy. King Olav V, the titular Head of State, has a
 mainly symbolic role. Norway is governed by a prime minister,
 cabinet, and a 157-seat Storting (parliament) that is elected
 every 4 years and cannot be dissolved.
 The police, all security organizations, and the military are
 scrupulous in their protection of human rights. Moreover, all
 these groups operate under the control of the Government
 (including the judicial system and the Storting) which
 investigates thoroughly any allegations of human rights
 violations. Also, the Ombudsman has the power to investigate
 any complaints lodged by citizens against the police, the
 security forces, or the military.
 An advanced industrial state, Norway has a mixed economy
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Personal
 freedoms, such as freedom of association and of speech, and
 the right to pursue private interests and to hold private
 property, are protected by the Constitution and respected in
 practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian
 tradition, an independent press, and highly developed
 educational and social welfare systems have made Norway a
 leading advocate of human rights in the world.
 RESPECT FOR HUMIAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Politically motivated killings have not occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 Secret arrests and detentions have not occurred.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's humane penal system. The
 maximum sentence is 21 years. The emphasis in Norwegian
 prisons is on rehabilitation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law provides for arrest warrants, which are used
 except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without being charged. A person
 charged with a crime has the right, observed in practice, to
 appear before a judge for arraignment within 24 hours. If
 charges are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then
 determines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or
 released pending trial. A strong case must be made to justify
 detention. Possible grounds include fear of flight, the needs
 of the investigation, and fear that a detainee will commit
 further crimes.
 
 
 1142
 NORWAY
 Although a provision for bail exists in Norwegian law, it is
 rarely used. The accused is either released without bail
 pending trial or is held in pretrial detention and appears
 before a judge every 4 weeks for a determination of the
 necessity of continued detention. There is no legal limit on
 the time a prisoner may be held before trial. However,
 lengthy pretrial detention is rare. Preventive detention also
 exists but is used infrequently, as in temporary detention of
 rowdy youths by police.
 There is no exile. With regard to forced or compulsory labor,
 see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is ensured by law and honored
 in practice. Only in certain cases, including those involving
 state security or private family matters, are trials closed.
 In criminal cases, Norwegian citizens and aliens are entitled
 to free counsel of their choice, regardless of their income.
 In certain civil cases, indigent persons are guaranteed free
 counsel. Charges are stated formally and clearly. Except for
 the Labor Court, which mediates industrial relations disputes,
 the civil court is Norway's only judicial system and thus
 tries military and security cases as well. The judiciary is
 independent of both the legislative and the executive branches
 of the Government, as well as of the military.
 In recent years, the legality of imprisoning those refusing
 both military service and alternative civilian service has
 become a public issue. Persons refusing both kinds of service
 have been held in prison for up to 16 months (a period
 equivalent to military service) without a trial. Detention is
 based on an administrative decision and not on a trial.
 Persons detained in this manner are considered soldiers who
 have refused duty and thus receive salary and benefits
 normally accorded to military recruits during this period of
 confinement.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and the person is free from
 arbitrary interference by the Government. Police may conduct
 searches of the home only with court approval and in instances
 of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed.
 There were no allegations of forced official entry into
 Norwegian homes in 1988. In most cases, wiretaps are
 prohibited by law, but they may be used in cases involving
 state security or narcotics offenses, when officially approved
 by the court within carefully drawn and monitored legal
 guidelines. Correspondence may be opened only with
 authorization of the court in cases involving state security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and
 these freedoms are respected in practice. In addition to
 restrictions on slander and libel, Norwegian law forbids
 racist or sexist remarks in print or public:speech. No one
 may publish information concerning national defense which
 could prove damaging to Norwegian security.
 
 
 1143
 NORWAY
 Norway has an active and diversified press, sustained in part
 by government subsidies. Television and radio have long been
 operated by one state-owned broadcasting company, but the
 Government does not exercise direct editorial control. In
 recent years, an experimental program for local, low-power
 radio stations has been expanded throughout the country, and
 licenses have been granted to private groups to operate local
 cable television stations.
 Certain restrictions apply to the showing of films. The
 Government Film Control Board has the authority to censor or
 ban any film deemed overly violent, pornographic, or
 blasphemous. There is no evidence that any films have been
 censored because of political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Norwegians exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require advance permission, which is usually
 given routinely.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway,
 which is financially supported by the State and to which 93
 percent of the population belongs. There is a constitutional
 requirement that tle King and half of the Cabinet belong to
 the state church. In addition, the Workers' Protection and
 Working Environment Act permits prospective employers to ask
 job applicants in certain categories of work, such as
 positions which can influence child development, whether they
 respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered
 members of 20 other denominations which operate freely and may
 proselytize. No religious community is required to register
 with the Government unless it desires state support, which is
 provided to all registered denominations on a proportional
 basis in accordance with membership. Although the state
 religion is taught in all public schools, children of other
 faiths are allowed to be absent from such classes upon
 parental request. If there are enough students of the same
 faith, the school will arrange religion classes in that
 faith. Workers belonging to minority denominations are
 allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel, and
 Norwegians have full freedom of movement inside or outside
 Norway. The right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Norway is a multiparty democracy ruled by an elected
 government. Six parties are represented in the Storting;
 distribution of seats is based upon proportional representation
 by district. The Storting may reject or modify government
 proposals; if a government loses a vote on a major issue of
 confidenge, it resigns, and a new government is formed. The
 
 
 1144
 NORWAY
 minimum voting age is 18, and voter turnout in the 1985
 parliamentary elections was almost 84 percent. Foreigners who
 have resided in Norway for at least 3 years, and are otherwise
 eligible, have the right to vote in local elections only.
 While the Sami (Lapps) are the only significant minority (0.5
 percent) with long residence in Norway, the influx of refugees
 and guest workers has produced other minorities. Neither the
 Sami nor any other ethnic minority is represented at present
 in the Storting. Women hold approximately 35 percent of
 Storting seats and 44 percent of cabinet positions, and the
 Prime Minister is a woman.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Norway cooperates with nongovernmental investigations of
 alleged violations of human rights. In recent years, Norway
 has cooperated with both the European Human Rights Commission
 and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Norway
 is itself an active participant in international human rights
 organizations.
 Within Norway, the Office of the Ombudsman provides a direct
 route for individual complaints against government agencies.
 A number of organizations monitor alleged human rights abuses
 either inside or, more often, outside the country. They
 include the Equal Rights Council (concerned with women's
 rights), the Immigrant Council, the Oslo Peace Research
 Institute, and the Norwegian Human Rights Institute. An
 Advisory Council, composed of government officials, legal
 experts, and representatives from nongovernmental
 organizations, monitors human rights practices internationally.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Government provides
 for the health, education, retirement, and other needs of its
 people regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background,
 or political opinion.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Sami (Lapp) people
 were Norway's only significant minority group until the influx
 of immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the
 Government has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of
 the Sami by providing Sami-language instruction at schools in
 Sami-inhabited areas, radio and television programs broadcast
 or subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies for the
 publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami.
 There is a continuing political debate on whether current
 restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975,
 are racially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups
 such as Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans are
 treated equally by Norwegian authorities. The Government
 provides legal protection for the rights of all minorities and
 has taken active measures to help these groups adjust to
 Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language
 instruction for any foreign resident.
 
 
 1145
 NORWAY
 In recent years, Norway has experienced a dramatic increase in
 the number of persons seeking political asylum. As a result,
 the Government proposed a new bill in 1988 that would no
 longer allow asylum applicants who are not bona fide refugees
 to remain on humanitarian grounds. The bill would also,
 however, introduce new measures designed to further safeguard
 the rights of those asylum seekers allowed to remain in
 Norway. With the rise in the number of asylum seekers,
 refugee policy has become a significant political issue; one
 political party and numerous candidates campaigned in the 1987
 local elections for a reduction, or even cessation, in the
 flow of refugees to Norway. At the same time, some human
 rights groups urged the Government to accept more refugees and
 expressed concern over the adequacy of the treatment given
 those seeking political asylum in Norway. Although there have
 been problems in managing individual refugee cases, Norway has
 a well-organized system which includes advance planning,
 careful dispersion of refugees throughout Norway, and generous
 welfare, educational, and vocational training programs.
 Women form over 40 percent of the work force and are protected
 under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other regulations.
 Under that law, "women and men engaged in the same activity
 shall have equal wages for work of equal value." A state
 Equal-Rights Council monitors enforcement of the 1978 law, and
 an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes complaints of sexual
 discrimination. The Government provides liberal maternity
 leave and time off for either parent to care for their
 children.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to strike. The
 Government, however, has the right to invoke compulsory
 arbitration under certain circumstances, with the approval of
 the Storting.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force,
 unions play an important role in Norway's political and
 economic life and are consulted by the Government on important
 economic and social problems. Although the largest- trade
 union federation is associated with the Labor Party, all
 unions are free of party and government control. They
 maintain strong ties with international bodies, such as the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 All workers, including government employees and military
 personnel, have the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. Labor legislation and practice is uniform
 throughout Norway.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no compulsory labor in Norway.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children
 Children are not permitted to work full time before the age of
 15. Minimum age rules are observed in practice.
 
 
 1146
 NORWAY
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Ordinary working hours do not exceed 37.5 hours per week, and
 25 working days of paid leave are granted per year (31 for
 those over 60). All workers are assured an adequate minimum
 wage, with standards set by the Government within each
 industry.
 Under the Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act of
 1977, all employed persons are assured safe and physically
 acceptable working conditions. According to the act, working
 environment committees, composed of management, workers, and
 health personnel, must be established in all enterprises with
 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in
 all organizations. The Directorate of Labor Inspections
 ensures effective compliance with labor legislation.
 
 
 1147
