 NORWAY
 Norway is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy with King
 Harald V as the Head of State. It is governed by a prime minister, cabinet, and a
 165-seat Storting (parliament) that is elected every 4 years and cannot be dissolved.
 The judiciary is independent.
 The national police have primary responsibility for internal security, but in times
 of crisis, such as internal disorder or natural catastrophe, the police may call on the
 military forces for assistance. In such circumstances, the military forces are always
 under police authority. The civilian authorities maintain effective control of the se-
 curity forces.
 Norway is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy combining private
 and public ownership that provides a high standard of living for residents. The key
 industries are oil and gas, metals, engineering, shipbuilding, fishing, and manufac-
 turing (including fish processing equipment). The leading exports are oil and gas,
 
 
 1209
 manufactured goods, fish, and metals. This year 72 percent of the labor force was
 in the service sector (including public service), and 15 percent was in the manufac-
 turing sector.
 The Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, and the law and judi-
 ciary provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exvile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciar, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The court system consists of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court Appellate
 Court (committee), superior courts, county courts for criminal cases, magistrate
 courts for civil cases, and claims courts. Special courts are the Impeachment Court
 (made up of parliamentarians), the Labor Court, Trusteeship Courts, Fishery
 Courts, and land ownership severance courts. There are no religious, political, or se-
 curity courts. All courts, which date to laws passed in the 11th century, meet inter-
 nationally accepted standards for fair trials, including providing counsel to the indi-
 gent. The law provides for the right to a fair trial, and an independent judiciary
 vigorously enforces this right.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Both
 the Constitution and law prohibit such practices, government authorities generally
 respect these prohibitions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. An independent press, an
 effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system, combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway, which is finan-
 cially supported by the State, and to which 93 percent of the population nominally
 belong. There is a constitutional requirement that the King and one-half of the Cab-
 inet belong to this church. The Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act
 permits prospective employers to ask job applicants in private or religious schools,
 or in day care centers, whether they respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 Other denominations operate freely. A religious community is required to register
 with the Government only if it desires state support, which is provided to all reg-
 istered denominations on a proportional basis in accordance with membership. Al-
 though the state religion is taught in all public schools, children of other faiths are
 allowed to be absent from such classes upon parental request. Workers belonging
 to minority denominations are allowed leave for their religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 m pactice.
 e Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. The Government provides first asylum and provided it to six applicants in
 1996. Norway also has agreed to resettle a quota of 1,000 persons identified by the
 UNHCR. Norway granted asylum to 788 refugees in this category in 1996. In addi-
 tion it provided residence permits on humanitarian grounds to asylum seekers in
 the first instance to 610 persons in 1996. Norway granted residence to 255 addi-
 tional individuals who had appealed their cases to the Ministry of Justice. In 1996
 the Government announced that all of the approximately 12,000 Bosnian refugees
 
 
 1210
 already in the country would be granted permission to stay. During the first half
 of the year, the Government granted political asylum to 10 persons and provided
 residence permits to 679 persons. There were no reports of forced expulsion of those
 having a valid claim to refugee status or of persons forcibly returned to countries
 where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The law provides citizens with the right to change their Government peacefully,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections
 held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions, in law or practice, on the participation of women in gov-
 ernment or in the political arena generally. Norway had a female prime minister
 who served for 9 of 10 years between 1986 and 1996. The current prime minister
 has appointed women to lead 9 of the 18 ministries. Women hold 60 out of the 165
 seats in parliament (36.4 percent), chair 4 of 12 standing committees, and lead 3
 of the 6 main political parties.
 In addition to participating freely in the national political process in 1997, Nor-
 wegian Sami (formerly known as Lapps) elected their own constituent assembly, the
 Sameting, for the third time. Under the law establishing the 39-seat body, it is a
 consultative group which meets regularly to deal with 'all matters which in [its]
 opinion are of special importance to the Sari people." In practice the Sameting has
 been most interested in protecting the group's language and cultural rights and in
 influencing decisions on resources and lands where Sami are a majority.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their indings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are very cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, religion, disability,
 language, or social status, and the Government enforces this prohibition in practice.
 Women.-In 1995 there were 16,314 contacts by women with crisis action centers
 and 2,380 overnight stays by women at shelters. Police authorities believe that in-
 creases in reported rapes and wife beatings in recent years have been largely due
 to greater willingness among women to report these crimes. The police vigorously
 investigate and prosecute such crimes. They have also instituted special programs
 to prevent rape and domestic violence and to counsel victims. Public and private or-
 ganizations run several shelters which give battered wives an alternative to return-
 ing to a violent domestic situation.
 The rights of women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other
 regulations. According to that law, "women and men engaged in the same activity
 shall have equal wages for work of equal value." An Equal Rights Council monitors
 enforcement of the 1raw, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes complaints of
 sexual discrimination. There were 89 written complaints in 1996 and 284 by tele-
 phone. Of all complaints handled by the ombudsman, 43.5 percent were fied by
 women, 21 percent by men, and 27.5 percent by organizations; in the latter cases,
 it is not clear whether the organizations represented men or women (8 percent of
 the complaints were made anonymously.)
 In 1995 the Parliament adopted a harassment amendment to the Working Envi-
 ronment Act, which states that "employees shall not be subjected to harassment or
 other unseemly behavior."
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of education and medical care.
 The Government provides education for children through the post-secondary level.
 There is no difference in the treatment of girls and boys in education or health care
 services. An independent Children's Ombudsman Office, within the Ministry of Chil-
 dren and Families, assures protection of children in law and in practice. There is
 no societal pattern of abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. The law man-
 dates access to buildings for people with disabilities, and the Government enforces
 these provisions in practice.
 Indigenous People.-Apart from a tiny Finnish population in the northeast, the
 Sami constituted the only significant minority group until the influx of immigrants
 during the 1970's. In recent years, the Government has taken steps to protect Sami
 
 
 1211
 
 cultural rights by providing Sami language instruction at schools in their areas,
 radio and television programs broadcast or subtitled in Sami, and subsidies for
 newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami. In a rare political statement in
 October at the opening of the third Sami Parliament, King Harald V publicly apolo-
 gized to the Sami people for repression under Norwegian rule. In 1996 the Govern-
 ment appointed a state secretary in the Ministry of Local Government and Regional
 Affairs to deal specifically with Sami issues.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides workers with the right to associate
 freely and to strike. The Government changed its wage negotiating process for 1996,
 shifting negotiations from the national to the local and company level. This change
 resulted in a substantially higher number of strikes. There were 18 strikes in 1996
 at the national, regional, local, and company levels, involving 53,257 workers. Al-
 most all strikes were settled through negotiations.
 The Government has the right, with the approval of the Storting, to invoke com-
 pulsory arbitration under certain circumstances. The Government came under in-
 creasing criticism in 1995 for resorting to compulsory arbitration too quickly during
 strikes. In addition this procedure, which was also invoked several times in the
 1980's, particularly in the oil industry, was criticized repeatedly by the Committee
 of Experts of the International Labor Organization, which argued that the situations
 were not a sufficient threat to public health and safety to justify invoking compul-
 sory arbitration. The Supreme Court is reviewing a case that will allow it to rule
 on whether the national process in this regard violates the country's international
 commitments.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force, unions play an im-
 portant role in political and economic life and are consulted by the Government on
 important economic and social problems. Although the largest trade union federa-
 tion is associated with the Labor Party, all unions and labor federations are free
 of party and government control. Unions are free to form federations and to affiliate
 internationally. The maintain strong ties with such international bodies as the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All workers, includinggovern-
 ment employees and mlitary personnel, exercise the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. Collective bargaining is widespread, with most wage earners covered by
 negotiated settlements, either directly or through understandings which extend the
 contract terms to workers outside of the main abor federation and the employers'
 bargaining group. Any complaint of antiunion discrimination would be dealt with by
 the Labor Court, but there have been none in recent years.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Corpulsory Labor.-The Government prohibits forced
 and bonded labor by children, and there were no reports that it occurred. Compul-
 sory labor is prohibited by law and does not exist. The Directorate of Labor Inspec-
 tions ensures compliance. Domestics, children, or foreign workers are not required
 to remain in situations amounting to coerced or bonded labor.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, and there were no reports
 that it occurred (see Section 6.c.). Children 13 to 18 years of age may be employed
 part-time in light work that will not adversely affect their health, development, or
 schooling. Minimum age rules are observed in practice and enforced by the Direc-
 torate of Labor Inspections. Education is compulsory for 9 years. Children are nor-
 mally in school until the age of 16.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Normal working hours are mandated by law
 and limited to 3722 hours per week. The law also provides for 25 working days of
 paid leave per year (31 days for those over age 60). A 28-hour rest period is legally
 mandated on weekends and holidays. There is no specified minimum wage, but
 wages normally fall within a national scale negotiated by labor, employers, and the
 Government. Average income, not including extensive social benefits, is adequate to
 provide a worker and family a decent living.
 Under the Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act of 1977, all em-
 ployed persons are assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions. Spe-
 cific standards are set by the Directorate of Labor Inspections in consultation with
 nongovernmental experts. According to the Act, working environment committees
 composed of management, workers, and health personnel must be established in all
 enterprises with 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in all or-
 ganizations. Workers have the right to remove themselves from situations which en-
 danger their health. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures effective compli-
 ance with labor legislation and standards.
 
 
 1212
