 NORWAY
 Norway is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy with King
 Harald V as the Read of State. It is governed by a Prime Minister, Cabinet, and
 a 165-seat Storting (Parliament) which is elected every 4 years and cannot be dis-
 solved.
 The police, security forces, and the military scrupulously protect human rights.
 Civilian authorities effectively control these organizations, and investigate thor-
 oughly any allegations of human rights violations.
 Norway is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy combining private,
 public, and state ownership. Personal freedoms, such as freedom of association and
 of speech and the right to pursue private interests and to hold private property, are
 protected by the Constitution and respected in practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian tradition, an independ-
 ent press, and highly developed educational and social welfare systems have made
 Norway a notable practitioner of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of such
 killin ..
 b. 1isappearance.-There were no reports of disapearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment
 or punishment on the part of law enforcement or armed services personnel. Gener-
 ous furlough and visitation rights characterize the penal system, which emphasizes
 rehabilitation. The maximum sentence for any crime is 21 years.
 
 
 908
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Norwegian law provides for arrest war-
 rants, which are used except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without being charged. A person charged with a crime
 has the right observed in practice, to appear before the judge for arraignment with-
 in 24 hours. If charges are sustained at the arraignment, the judge then determines
 whether the detainee should be kept in custody or released pending trial. Bail need
 not be posted. A strong case must be made to justify detention. Possible grounds
 include fear of flight, the needs of the investigation, and fear that a detainee will
 commit further crimes.
 Any person held in pretrial detention appears before a  dge every 4 weeks for
 a determination of the necessity of continued detention. There is no legal limit on
 the time a prisoner may be held before trial; however, lengthy pretrial detention is
 rare. Preventive detention also exists but is used infrequently. There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law
 and honored in practice. Only in certain cases, incluing those involving state secu-
 rity or private family matters, are trials closed. In criminal cases, all Norwegian
 citizens and aliens are entitled to free counsel Indigent persons are granted free
 counsel in certain civil cases as well.
 Norway has a three-tiered system of district and city courts, high courts, and the
 Supreme Court-all of which deal with both criminal and civil cases-as well as
 special courts, including the Labor Disputes Court and the Social Insurance Court.
 The judiciary is independent of beth the legislative and the executive branches of
 the Government and tries military and security as well as civil and criminal cases.
 Persons refusing both military service and alternative civilian service have been
 held in rison for up to 16 months (a period equivalent to military service) without
 a trial. Detention is based on an administrative rather than a judicial decision, and
 throughout such detention the prisoner receives the salary and benefits normally ac-
 corded to a military recruit.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The pri-
 vacy of the family and the person is free from arbitrary interference by the Govern-
 ment. Police may conduct searches of the home only with court approval and in in-
 stances of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed. There were
 no allegations of forced entry into homes in 1994. In most cases, wiretaps are pro-
 hibited by law, but they may be used in cases involving state security or narcotics
 offenses when officially approved by the court within carefully drawn legal guide-
 lines. Correspondence may be opened only by court order in cases involving state
 security.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is protected by the
 Constitution and respected in practice. In addition to restrictions on slander and
 libel, the law forbids racist or sexist remarks in print or public speech, and it also
 prohibits publication of sensitive information concerning national defense.
 Norway has an active and diversified press, and many papers are sustained by
 government subsidies. Some newspapers are loosely connected to various national
 political parties. Norway's state broadcasting company is the more prominent of two
 national television networks (the other is private) but the Government does not ex-
 ercise editorial control over programming.
 Private local radio stations and one private national radio station exist, as do pri-
 vately owned local and national cable television stations. Forei  television net-
 works are also available on cable throughout Norway. The Film  owntrol Board, ap-
 pointed by the Ministry of Culture, has authority to censor or ban any flm deemed
 overly violent, pornographic, or blasphemous. The law on blasphemy, however, has
 not been invoked in over 20 years. There is no evidence that any flms have been
 censored because of political content.
 b. Freedom  of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Norwegians exercise these
 freedoms without restraint. Permits for public demonstrations are granted routinely.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of
 Norway, which is financially supported by the State, and to which some 93 perent
 of the population nominally belongs. There is a constitutional requirement that the
 King andhalf of the Cabinet belong to this church. The Workers' Protection and
 Worig Environment Act permits prospective employers to ask applicants for jobs
 in private or religious schools, or in day-care centers, whether they respect Chris-
 tian beliefs and principles.
 Other denominations operate freely. A religious community is required to register
 with the Government only if it desires state support, which is provided to all reg-
 istered denominations on a proportional basis in accordance with membership. Al-
 though the state religion is taught in all public schools, children of other faiths are
 
 
 allowed to be absent from such classes upon parental request. If there are enough
 students of the same faith, the school will arrange classes in that faith. Workers
 belonging to minority denominations are allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d.Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel. The right
 to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed. Refugees and asylum seekers are provided
 generous benefits, including social services, free medical care, and education while
 awaiting decisions on their asylum applications. A thorny issue in Norway has been
 the Government's treatment of rejected asylum seekers from the province of Kosovo
 in Serbia. Some were involuntarily repatriated; others were expelled to a prior coun-
 try of first asylum; and many who were denied asylum sought and found sanctuary
 in the Norwegian Lutheran churches.
 In 1994 the Government began implementing an agreement, announced by the
 Minister of Justice in November 1993, whereby it would review the cases of the ap-
 proximately 2,500 Kosovans in Norway whose applications had previously been re-
 jected, including some 650 who had taken sanctuary in Lutheran churches. By
 year's end about 1,500 of these cases had been reviewed, and all of these were
 granted asylum on humanitarian grounds except 50 or so who had criminal records
 or had made serious misrepresentations or fraudulent claims. After Norway's No-
 vember 1993 announcement a separate group of 2,500 Kosvans, whose asylum re-
 quests had been denied by Sweden, entered Norway from there; but, with the Swed-
 Government's consent, Norwegian authorities started returning them to Sweden,
 and by the end of 1994 few were still in Norway.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights:- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Norway is a multiparty democracy. Members of the Storting are elected on the
 basis of universal suffrage, and secret balloting, for citizens over age 18. If a govern-
 ment loses a vote on a major issue of confidence, it resigns and a new government
 is formed, without resort to dissolution of the Parliament and the holding of new
 elections. Elections are regularly held every 4 years.
 Foreigners who have resided in Norway for at least 3 years, and are otherwise
 eligible, have the right to vote in local elections only.
 In addition to participating freely in the national political process, Norwegian
 Sani (Lapps) elected their own constituent assembly the Sameting, in 1993 for the
 second time. Under the law establishing the 39-seat body, it is a consultative group
 which meets regularly to deal with "all matters which in (its) opinion are of special
 importance to the Sani people." In practice, the Sameting has been most interested
 in protecting the group's language and cultural rights and in influencing decisions
 on resources and lands where Sani are a majority.
 There are no restrictions, in law or in practice on the participation of women in
 government or in the political arena generally. Norway has a female Prime Min-
 ister, and a woman leads the principal opposition party.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of public and private organizations monitor alleged human rights
 abuses either inside or, more often, outside the country. The Government cooperates
 with nongovernmental investigations of alleged violations of human rights and, in
 recent years, has cooperated with both the European Commission of Human Rights
 and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Norway is an active par-
 ticipant in international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects a long tradition of
 egalitarianism, the Government provides for the health, education, retirement, and
 other needs of its people regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background, phys-
 ical disability, or political opinion.
 Women.-The rights of women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978
 and other regulations. Under that law, "women and men engaged in the same activ-
 ity shall have equal wages for work of equal value." An Equal Rights Council mon-
 itors enforcement of the 1978 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes com-
 plaints of sexual discrimination. There were 277 complaints in 1993 and 233 in 1994
 as of November.
 Crimes against women are not widespread. Police authorities believe that in-
 creases in reported rapes and wife beatings in recent years have been largely due
 to greater willingness among women to report these crimes. The police vigorously
 investigate and prosecute such crimes, and have instituted special programs to pre-
 
 
 vent rape and domestic violence and to counsel victims. Public and private organiza-
 tions run several free shelters which give battered wives an alternative to returning
 to a violent domestic situation.
 Children.-The Government is highly committed to the welfare of children, re-
 flecting a similarly profound commitment in Norwegian society. An independent
 Children's Ombudsman Office assures the protection of children in law and practice.
 Indigenous People.-Apart from a tiny Finnish population in the northeast, the
 Sami constituted Norway's only significant minority group until the influx of immi-
 grants during the 1970's. In recent years, the Government has taken steps to pro-
 tct the Samis' cultural rights by providing Sami-language instruction at schools in
 their areas, radio and television programs broadcast or subtitled in Sami, and sub-
 sidies for newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami (see Section 3).
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minoities.-There is continuing political debate on
 whether current restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975, are ra-
 cially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups such as Pakistanis, Viet-
 nsmese, Turks, and Africans are accorded equal rhts by Norwegian authorities.
 Eligibility for citizenship is based on residency. The Government provides legal pro-
 tection for the rights of all minorities and has taken active measures to help these
 groups adjust to Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language instruction
 for any foreign resident and funding of nongovernmental organizations such as the
 Antiracism Center.
 The Storting in 1988 significantly revised the immigration law in order, among
 other things, to make the processing of refugee and asylum cases more consistent
 with the provisions of the U.N. Convention on Refugees. The current law provides
 that asylum may no longer be granted solely on humanitarian grounds to those ap-
 plicants who had been determined not to have a well-grounded fear of persecution.
 elaw, while limiting the number of those granted asylum, continues to safeguard
 the rights of those asylum seekers allowed to remain in Norway. Refugee policy con-
 tinues to be a significant political issue; some groups call for reducing the inflow
 of refugees and others-human rights groups and political parties-urge the Gov-
 ernment to accept more refugees.
 Some asylum cases have caused problems, but Norway has a well-organized sys-
 tem which includes advance planning, careful dispersion of refugees throughout the
 populace, and generous welfare, educational, and vocational training programs.
 People With Disabilities.-The physically disabled are fully integrated into society,
 and are protected from discrimination in employment, education, and the provision
 of any state service. Accessibility is mandatory in new construction. In existing
 buildings accessibility is mandatory if the building is refitted for new uses.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides workers the right to associate free-
 Fyand to strike. Strikes in 1994 were few brief and settled through negotiations.
 lie Government has the right, with the approval of the Storting, to invoke compul-
 sory arbitration under certain circumstances. This procedure, which was invoked
 several times in the 1980's, particularly in the oil industry, was criticized repeatedly
 by the Committee of Experts of the International Labor Organization (ILO), which
 argued that the situations were not a sufficient threat to public health and safety
 to justify the actions. At year's end the ILO had before it a case in which the Sea-
 men's Union and offshore workers accused the Government of ordering compulsory
 arbitration without the required justification.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force, unions play an im-
 portant role in political andeconomic life, and are consulted by the Government on
 important economic and social problems. Although the largest trade union federa-
 tion is associated with the labor party, all unions and labor federations are free of
 party and government control. Unions are free to form federations and to affiliate
 internationally. They maintain strong ties with such international bodies as the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All workers, includinggovern-
 ment employees and military personnel, exercise the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. Collective bargaining is widespread, with most wage earners covered by
 negotiated settlements, either directly or through understandings which extend the
 contract terms to workers outside of the main labor federation and the employers'
 bargaining group. Any complaint of antiunion discrimination would be dealt with by
 the Labor Court, but there have been none in recent years.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 law and does not exist. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures compliance.
 
 
 911
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.--Children aged 13 to 18 may be
 employed part-time in light work that will not adversely affect their health, develop-
 ment, or schooig. Minimum-age rules are observed in practice and enforced by the
 Directorate of Labor Inspections. Nine years of education is compulsory in Norway.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Normal working hours are mandated by law
 and limited to 37  hours per week. The law also provides for 25 working days of
 paid leave per year (31 days for those over age 60). A 28-hour rest period is legally
 mandated on weekends and holidays. There is no minimum wage as such, but
 wages normally fall within a national wag   e negotiated by labor, employers,
 and the Government. The veerage annual per capita income, not including extensive
 social benefits, is adequxate to provide a worker and family a decent living.
 Under the Workers  roteion and Working Environment Act of 1977, all em-
 ployed persons are assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions. Spe-
 cific standards are set by the Directorate of Labor  spions in consultation with
 nongovernmental experts. According to the Act, wor    environment committees
 composed of management, workers, and health personnel must be established in all
 enterprises with 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in all or-
 ganizations. Workers enjoy strong rights to remove themselves from situations
 which endange r     health. The Dcrate of Labor Inspections ensures effective
 compliance with labor legislation and standards.
