 NORWAY
 Norway is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy with King
 Harald V as the Head of State. It is governed by a prime minister, cabinet, and a
 165-seat Storting (parliament) which is elected every 4 years and cannot be dis-
 solved.
 The national police have primary responsibility for internal security, but in times
 of crisis, such as internal disorder or natural catastrophe, the police may call on the
 military forces for assistance. In such circumstances, the military forces are always
 under police authority. The civilian authorities maintain effective control of the se-
 curity forces.
 Norway is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy combining private
 and public ownership that provides a high standard of living for residents. The key
 industries are oil and gas, metals, engineering, shipbuilding, fishing, and manufac-
 turing including of fish processing equipment. The leading exports are oil and gas,
 manufactured goods, fish, and metals. Between 60 and 70 percent of the labor force
 is in the service sector (including public service), and up to 15 percent is in the man-
 ufacturing sector.
 The Government fully respects the rights of its citizens, and the law and judiciary
 provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse.
 
 
 1052
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kdling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The law provides for the right to a fair trial, and
 an independent judiciary vigorously enforces this right.
 The court system consists of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court Appellate
 Court (committee), superior courts, county courts for criminal cases, magistrate
 courts for civil cases, and claims courts. Special courts are the Impeachment Court
 (made up of Parliamentarians), the Labor Court, Trusteeship Courts, Fishery
 Courts, and something similar to land ownership severance courts. There are no re-
 ligious, political, or security courts. All courts, which date back to laws passed in
 the eleventh century, meet internationally accepted standards for fair trials.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Both
 the Constitution and law prohibit such practices, government authorities generally
 respect these prohibitions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. An independent press, an
 effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system, combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religon.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway, which is finan-
 cially supported by the State, and to which 93 percent of the population nominally
 belong. There is a constitutional requirement that the King and one-half of the Cab-
 inet belong to this church. The Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act
 permits prospective employers to ask job applicants in private or religious schools,
 or in day care centers, whether they respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 Other denominations operate freely. A religious community is required to rgister
 with the Government only if it desires state support, which is provided to all reg-
 istered denominations on a proportional basis in accordance with membership. Al-
 though the state religion is taught in all public schools, children of other faiths are
 allowed to be absent from such classes upon parental request. Workers belonging
 to minority denominations are allowed leave for religious holidays.
 & Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 Government provides first asylum and provided it to 29 persons in 1995. (Statistics
 for 1996 are not available.) Overall, it provided residence permits on humanitarian
 grounds to asylum seekers in the first instance to 913 persons in 1995. There were
 no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status or to
 countries where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The law provides citizens with the right to change their Government peacefully,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections
 held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions, in law or practice, on the participation of women in gov-
 ernment or in the political arena generally. Norway's female Prime Minister retired
 in October after 6 years in office. Her successor has appointed women to lead 8 of
 
 
 1053
 
 the 18 ministries. Women constitute 65 of the 165 members of parliament (39.4 per-
 cent), chair 5 of 15 standing committees, lead 2 of the 6 main political parties.
 In addition to participating freel ele  the  on   ontitprocess, Notregian
 Sami (formerly Ynown as Lapps) elected their own constituent assembly the
 Sameting, in 1993 for the secon~i time. Under the law establishing the 39-seat body,
 it is a consultative group which meets regularly to deal with "all matters which in
 (its) opinion are of special importance to the Sami people." In practice the Same"
 has been most interested in protecting the group's language and cultural rights and
 in influencing decisions on resources and lands *here Sami are a majority.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are very cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, religion, disability,
 language, or social status, and the Government enforces this prohibition in practice.
 Women.-In 1995 there were 16,314 contacts by women with crisis action centers
 and 2,380 overnight stays by women at shelters. Police authorities believe that in-
 creases in reported rapes and wife beatings in recent years have been largely due
 to greater willingness among women to report these crimes. The police vigorously
 investigate and prosecute such crimes. They have also instituted special programs
 to prevent rape and domestic violence and to counsel victims. Public and private or-
 ganizations run several shelters which give battered wives an alternative to return-
 ing to a violent dermestic situation.
 The rights of women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other
 regulations. According to that law, "women and men engaged in the same activity
 shal have equal wages for work of equal value." An Equal Rights Council monitors
 enforcement of the 1978 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes com-
 plaints of sexual discrimination. There were 209 written complaints in 1995 and 399
 by telephone. There had been 97 written complaints as of August. On average 55
 percent of all complaints of sexual discrimination are filed by women, 19 percent
 men, and 26 percent by organizations; in the latter cases, it is not clear whether
 the organizations represented men or women.
 In 1995 the Parliament adopted a harassment amendment to the Working Envi-
 ronment Act, which states that "employees shall not be subjected to harassment or
 other unseemly behavior."
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of education and medical care.
 The Government provides education for children through the post-secondary level.
 There is no difference in the treatment of girls and boys in education or health care
 services. An independent Children's Ombudsman Office, within the Ministry of Chil-
 drn and Families, assures protection of children in law and practice. There is no
 societal pattern of abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the prvision of other state services. The law man-
 dates access to buildings for people with disabilities, and the Government enforces
 these provisions in practice.
 Indigenous People.-Apart from a tiny Finnish population in the northeast, the
 Sami constituted-Norways only significant minority group until the influx of immi-
 grants during the 1970's. In recent years the Government has taken steps to protect
 Sami cultural rights by providing Sami language'instruction at schools in their
 areas, radio and television programs broadcast or subtitled in Sami, and subsidies
 for newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami (see Section 3).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assocation.-The law provides workers with the right to associate
 freely and to strike. Norway changed its wage negotiating process for 1996, shifting
 negotiations from the national to the local and company level. This change resulted
 in a substantially higher number of strikes. There were 10 nationwide strikes in
 1996, and many smaller ones at regional, local, and company levels. Almost all have
 been settled through negotiations.
 The Government has the right, with the approval of the Storting, to invoke com-
 pulsory arbitration under certain circumstances. The Government came under in-
 creasing criticism in 1995 for resorting to compulsory arbitration too quickly during
 stries. In addition this procedure, which was also invoked several times in the
 
 
 1054
 1980's, particularly in the oil industry, was criticized repeatedly by the Committee
 of Experts of the International Labor Organization, which argued that the situations
 were not a sufficient threat to public health and safety to justify invoking compul-
 sory arbitration. The Supreme Court is reviewing a case at will allow it to rule
 on whether the Norwegian process in this regard violates the country's international
 commitments.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force, unions play an im-
 portant role in political and economic life and are consulted by the Government on
 important economic and social problems. Although the largest trade union federa-
 tion is associated with the Labor Party, all unions and labor federations are free
 of party and government control. Unions are free to form federations and to afllliate
 internationally. They maintain strong ties with such international bodies as the
 International Coeeration of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All workers, including govern-
 ment employees and military personnel, exercise the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. Collective bargaining is widespread, with most wage earners covered by
 negotiated settlement, either directly or through understandings which extend the
 contract terms to workers outside of the main labor federation and the employers'
 b     i    *      Any complaint of antiunion discrimination would be dealt with by
 h L    r   u   but there have been none in recent years.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 law and does not exist. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures compliance.
 Domestics, children, or foreign workers are not required to remain in situations
 amounting to coerced or bonded labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children 13 to 18 years of age
 may be employed part-time in light work that will not adversely affect their health,
 development, or schooling. Minimum age rules are observed in practice and enforced
 by the Directorate of Labor Inspections. Education is compulsory for nine years.
 drenareorma       in school up to the age of 16.
 e. Acceptable C=   ions of Work.-Normal working hours are mandated by law
 and limited to 37  hours per week. The law also provides for 25 working days of
 paid leave per year (31 days for those over age 60). A 28-hour rest period is legally
 mandated on weekends and holidays. There is no specified minimum wage, but
 wages normally fall within a national scale negotiated by labor, employers, and the
 Government. Average income, not including extensive social benefits, is adequate to
 provide a worker and family a decent living.
 Under the Workers' Protection and Working Environment Act of 1977, all em-
 ployed persons are assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions. Spe-
 cific standards are set by the Directorate of Labor Inspections in consultation with
 nongovernmental experts. According to the Act, working environment committees
 composed of management, workers, and health personnel must be established in all
 enterprises with 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in all or-
 ganizations. Workers eijoy strong rights to remove themselves from  situations
 which endanger their health. The Directorate of Labor Inspections ensures effective
 compliance with labor legislation and standards.
