 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
 democracy.   Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong
 egalitarian tradition, a lively press, and highly developed
 educational and social welfare systems have made Norway a
 leading defender of human rights in the world.
 King Olav V is the titular head of state, but his role is
 mainly symbolic. Norway is governed by a Prime Minister,
 Cabinet, and a 155-seat Parliament (Storting), which is elected
 every four years and cannot be dissolved. The minority
 Conservative government that took office in 1981 formed a
 coalition with the Christian Peoples' and Center Parties in
 1983. Conservative leader Kaare Willoch remains Prime Minister.
 Respect for and protection of human rights is high in Norway.
 New laws have established special oversight commissions to
 protect enhanced rights for women and minorities. Norway is an
 active participant in international human rights organizations
 and has contributed to refugee work. Private groups focus
 attention at home and abroad on human rights issues.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Politically motivated killings do not occur in Norway.
 b. Disappearances
 Secret arrests and detentions do not occur in Norway. The
 citizen's right to question and oppose the Government is
 vigorously defended.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's humane penal system. The
 maximum sentence was reduced to 21 years in 1982. The emphasis
 in Norwegian prisons is on rehabilitation, and there has been
 great success in returning criminals to a law-abiding life.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law provides for arrest warrants, which are used
 except when circumstances make it impossible. Persons can be
 detained for up to four hours without being charged. A person
 charged with a crime has the right, observed in practice, to
 appear before a judge for arraignment within 24 hours. If
 charges are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then
 determines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or
 released pending trial. A strong case must be made to justify
 detention. Possible grounds include fear of flight, needs of
 the investigation, and fear that a detainee will commit crimes.
 Although a provision for bail exists in Norwegian law, it is
 not used. A person in pretrial detention generally appears
 before a judge every four weeks for a new determination of the
 necessity of continued detention. There is no legal limit on
 
 (1053)
 
 
 1054
 the time a prisoner can be held before trial, but detention for
 over a year is rare. The judge also determines any
 restrictions on mail privileges or prison visits at the
 arraignment. It is common in narcotics cases that a detainee
 is prohibited from receiving or sending mail (unless read by
 the judge) or having visitors (other than his lawyer) for a
 specified period of time (usually during the investigation).
 People are not generally held in preventive detention. There
 was one well-publicized case in 1983, however, in which police
 arrested 200-300 youths in an effort to prevent violence on the
 eve of May Day. They were held overnight under the law
 allowing police detention for up to four hours without charges.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is guaranteed by law and
 honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those
 involving state security or private family matters, are trials
 closed. In criminal cases, Norwegian citizens and aliens are
 entitled to free counsel of their choice, regardless of their
 income. In certain civil cases, indigent persons are
 guaranteed free counsel. Charges are stated formally and
 clearly. Except for the labor court, which mediates industrial
 relations disputes, the civil court is Norway's only judicial
 system, and thus tries military and security cases as well.
 Crimes carrying a sentence of five years or more are heard
 first in the District Appeals Court, while less serious crimes
 are heard first in a local court. The judiciary is independent
 of both the military and the executive.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and individual is free from arbitrary
 interference by the state. Police may conduct searches of the
 home only with court approval and in instances of hot pursuit
 when they fear evidence is being destroyed. There have been no
 allegations of forced official entry into Norwegian homes in
 1983. Wiretapping is prohibited by law, but it can be used in
 state security cases or narcotics offenses when officially
 approved by the Court, within carefully drawn and monitored
 legal guidelines. Correspondence may be opened only with
 authorization of the Court in cases involving state security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Norway's Constitution guarantees freedoms of speech and the
 press, and those freedoms are respected in practice. Critics
 of the Government express themselves fully and freely. No one,
 however, may publish information concerning national defense
 which could prove damaging to Norwegian security. In addition
 to restrictions on slander or libel, Norwegian law forbids
 racist or sexist remarks in printed matter or public speech.
 Norway has an active and diversified print media. Government
 subsidies help sustain papers throughout the country,
 representing diverse views. Television and radio have long
 been operated by one state-owned broadcasting company (NRK),
 but the Government does not exercise direct editorial control.
 For the past year, Norwegian groups have been able to apply for
 
 
 1055
 permission to transmit local low-wattage, noncommercial radio
 broadcasts on an experimental basis. Seven companies have
 received licenses to operate experimental cable TV stations.
 Absolute freedom of public expression does not apply to films
 shown in Norway, which must be reviewed by the Norwegian State
 Film Control Board. It has the authority to censor in part, or
 forbid completely, any film that is overly violent,
 pornographic, or blasphemous. There is no evidence that any
 films have been censored because of political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings of every type are common. Peaceful
 demonstrations organized by political groups of any persuasion
 are permitted, subject only to the organizing group's obtaining
 permission in advance, which is routinely given.
 Unions have the right to organize, negotiate, and strike.
 Because 70 percent of the Norwegian work force belongs to
 unions, they play an important role in Norway's political and
 economic life and are recognized by the Government as a force
 to be consulted before taking decisions on important economic
 and social problems. Unions are free of party and government
 control. They maintain strong ties with international bodies,
 such as the International Labor Organization and International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions, which held its 1983
 Conference in Oslo. There is no governmentally endorsed or
 sanctioned intimidation of unions, employer associations, or
 professional groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Norway has a state church, the Lutheran Church of Norway, to
 which 88 percent of the population belong. While religious
 belief plays no official role in secular life, there is a
 constitutional requirement that half of the Cabinet belong to
 the state church.
 Approximately four percent of the population are registered
 members of other denominations, which operate freely. No
 religious community is required to register with the Government
 unless it desires state support, which is provided to all
 registered denominations on a proportional basis in accordance
 with membership. There are more than 20 registered
 denominations outside the state church, and missionaries and
 clergy of all faiths are permitted to proselytize.
 While the state religion is taught in all public schools,
 children of other faiths are allowed to be absent from such
 classes upon parental request. If a sufficient number of
 students belong to the same faith, the school will arrange
 religion classes in that faith. Workers belonging to minority
 denominations are allowed leave for religious holidays.
 In a widely publicized case in 1983, a Church of Norway
 clergyman refused to carry out the specifically governmental
 functions involved in his work, as a protest against a
 government decision to legalize abortion on demand (up to the
 12th week of pregnancy). The state charged him with neglect of
 duty, and, on appeal from a lower court, the Supreme Court
 found him guilty and dismissed him from his position. While
 the case has led to renewed discussion of the relationship of
 
 
 1056
 church and state, it is unlikely that it will lead to any
 serious consideration of separating the two. Opinion polls
 show that the large majority of Norwegians favor a state church.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel, and
 Norwegians have full freedom of movement inside or outside
 Norway. The right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed.
 Since 1945, the Norwegian authorities have granted asylum to
 more than 9,000 persons, about half of them Vietnamese. Asylum
 or refugee status was granted to over 800 persons in 1982
 alone. Eastern Europeans who do not meet the requirements for
 refugee status are often granted residence permits in Norway,
 even though they do not qualify for ordinary immigration.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Norway is a multiparty democracy ruled by a freely elected
 government. Seven parties are represented in the Storting
 (Parliament); distribution of seats is based upon proportional
 representation. The party (or parties) which can fashion a
 parliamentary majority after national elections governs the
 country. There is active opposition in Norway. The Storting
 may reject or modify government proposals; if a government
 loses a vote on a major issue of confidence, it resigns and a
 new government is formed. The minimum voting age is 18, and
 voter turnout runs about 80 percent in parliamentary
 elections. In 1983, the right to vote in local or provincial
 elections was extended to foreigners who have resided in Norway
 for at least three years and are otherwise eligible. Citizens
 and foreign residents also speak out through public meetings,
 the media, and occasional peaceful demonstrations.
 While the Lapps are the only sizable minority with long
 residence in Norway, other minorities are appearing now as a
 result of recent guest-worker programs and a liberal refugee
 policy. Neither the Lapps nor any other minority ethnic group
 is represented in the Storting; their numbers are so small,
 however, that this does not indicate underrepresentation.
 Women hold approximately 25 percent of Storting seats and 22
 percent of Cabinet positions. Some political parties have set
 goals of 40 percent representation for women for elective
 positions. In the 1983 local elections, however, about two
 percent fewer women were elected than in the previous local
 elections, despite the fact that more women were on the ballot.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No human rights group has charged Norway with violating human
 rights or requested visits to investigate alleged violations.
 Norway is itself an active participant in international human
 rights organizations and is a signatory to international
 agreements on the subject.
 An allegation by a small number of Norway's Lappish minority
 that a planned dam and hydroelectric power plant along the Alta
 
 
 1057
 River in northern Norway would adversely affect their way of
 life led Norway to delay construction. The Lapps appealed to
 an international audience through hunger strikes and appeals to
 the United Nations and the Pope. The Government in no way
 obstructed these appeals, but decided to resume construction
 after further study determined that the project would not have
 serious negative effects. There were isolated protests in
 1983, but it appears that there is no longer major opposition
 to the project.
 A number of organizations in Norway monitor alleged human
 rights abuses, either inside or, more often, outside the
 country. They include the Norwegian Office of Amnesty
 International, the Equal Rights Council (concerned with women's
 rights), the Immigrant Council, the Norwegian Red Cross, the
 Oslo Peace Research Institute, and the state-supported Human
 Rights Project. The Office of the Ombudsman provides a direct
 route for individual complaints against government agencies.
 Amnesty International's 1983 report does not include Norway;
 Freedom House rates it "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 An advanced industrial state, Norway has a mixed economy,
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Its population
 of 4,131,000 (with a 0.4 percent growth rate) had a pet capita
 gross national product of $13,640 in 1982.  Life expectancy in
 Norway is 75.2 years, and infant mortality is 7.5 per 1,000
 live births. One hundred percent of Norwegian children of
 primary school age are in school, and adult literacy is 99
 percent. The average Norwegian receives 119 percent of the
 required calories and 97.5 percent of Norwegians have access to
 safe drinking water.
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Norwegian Government
 meets the health, educational, retirement, and other needs of
 its people, regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic
 background, or political opinion. The Government has virtually
 eliminated poverty through redistribution of income by
 subsidies, progressive income taxes, and other means.
 Women and Lapps are overrepresented in lower income groups.
 They have enjoyed above-average pay increases in recent years,
 however, owing to wage settlements aimed at giving lower income
 workers larger percentage increases. These settlements reflect
 Norway's resolve to narrow remaining gaps between rich and
 poor. Women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978
 and other regulations. A state Equal Rights Council monitors
 enforcement of the 1978 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman
 processes complaints of sexual discrimination. The Government
 provides for liberal maternity leave and time off for mothers
 to nurse their children and care for them when sick.
 Norwegian society has been largely homogeneous for many
 centuries. The Lapps were the only significant minority group
 until the 1970's, and, because of their concentration in remote
 northern areas, there has never been a great problem with
 conflict of cultures. Lappish protests over the Alta River
 project, however, have increased Norwegian awareness that the
 20,000 Lapps are at a disadvantage in a variety of economic,
 educational, and cultural ways. The Government has made a
 determined effort to protect the Lapps' rights. Lappish is
 
 
 1058.
 taught in some Norwegian schools, especially in areas where
 there are concentrations of Lapps. Books and radio news
 programs are available in Lappish.
 The number of foreign citizens living in Norway has risen
 rapidly in recent years to over 90,000, including growing
 populations of Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans. To
 ease assimilation problems, immigration was virtually halted in
 1975. With few exceptions, only close relatives of Norwegian
 citizens or residents and persons deemed vital for Norwegian
 enterprises (usually the oil industry) may now immigrate.
 (Refugees are still accepted.) Besides providing legal
 protection of these minorities' rights, the Government has
 taken active measures to help these groups adjust to Norwegian
 society, including providing free Norwegian-language
 instruction for any foreign resident.
 
 
 1059
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NORWAY
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID  ....  ............. .....  0.0    0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST,...,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL .......i..       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY.  IN  $-LOANS .....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 A. AAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-ExCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IlI.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ----..-----------------.-.--.--.------.--..--.------..-.--
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     60.3     31.1      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......     60.3     31.1      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL ........     0.0      0.0      0.0    145.1
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0    145.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 1DB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ACS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
