 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
 democracy.   Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong
 egalitarian tradition, a lively press, and highly developed
 educational and social welfare systems have made Norway a
 leading defender of human rights in the world.
 King Olav V is the titular head of state, but his role is
 mainly symbolic. Norway is governed by a Prime Minister,
 Cabinet, and a 155-seat Parliament (to be increased to 157
 seats after fall 1985) which is elected every 4 years and
 cannot be dissolved. The minority Conservative Government
 that took office in 1981 formed a coalition with the Christian
 Peoples' and Center Parties in 1983. Conservative leader
 Kaare Willoch remains Prime Minister.
 Respect for and protection of human rights are high in
 Norway. Norway is an active participant in international
 human rights organizations and has contributed to refugee
 work. Private groups focus attention at home and abroad on
 human rights issues. During 1984, major domestic human rights
 issues concerned the rights of immigrants and those who object
 to military service on political grounds, as well as
 continuing concern on expanding opportunities for women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS.
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Politically motivated killings do not occur in Norway.
 b. Disappearance
 Secret arrests and detentions do not occur in Norway.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's humane penal system. The
 maximum sentence is 21 years. The emphasis in Norwegian
 prisons is on rehabilitation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law provides for arrest warrants, which are used
 except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons can be
 detained for u  to 4 hours without being charged. A person
 charged with a crime has the right, observed in practice, to
 appear before a judge for arraignment within 24 hours. If
 charges are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then
 determines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or
 released pending trial. A strong case must be made to justify
 detention. Possible grounds include fear of flight, needs of
 the investigation, and fear that a detainee will commit
 further crimes. During 1984, this provision was used on
 occasion to detain foreigners found in violation of immigrant
 regulations, including a well-publicized case in which a
 Tunisian citizen was detained on grounds that he lost his
 residence permit when his Norwegian wife filed for divorce.
 He was held for over a month, but was subsequently released
 
 
 1051
 NORWAY
 after agreeing to leave Norway upon completion of divorce
 proceedings.
 Although a provision for bail exists in Norwegian law, it is
 not used. A person in pretrial detention generally appears
 before a judge every 4 weeks for a new determination of the
 necessity of continued detention. There is no legal limit on
 the time a prisoner can be held before trial. In one case
 brought to trial in 1984, two men accused of narcotics
 offenses were held in pretrial detention for over one and a
 half years, but detention for more than a year is rare. The
 judge also determines any restrictions on mail privileges or
 prison visits at the arraignment. It is common in narcotics
 cases and state security cases that a detainee is prohibited
 from receiving or sending mail (unless read by a judge) or
 having visitors (other than his lawyer) for a specified period
 of time (usually during the investigation). Preventive
 detention exists but is used infrequently, as in the temporary
 detention of rowdy youth by the police.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is guaranteed by law and
 honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those
 involving state security or private family matters, are trials
 closed. In criminal cases, Norwegian citizens and aliens are
 entitled to free counsel of their choice, regardless of their
 income. In certain civil cases, indigent persons are
 guaranteed free counsel. Charges are stated formally and
 clearly. Except for the labor court, which mediates
 industrial relations disputes, the civil court is Norway's
 only judicial system and thus tries military and security
 cases as well. The judiciary is independent of both the
 military and the executive.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and individual is free from
 arbitrary interference by the state. Police may conduct
 searches of the home only with court approval and in instances
 of hot pursuit when they fear evidence is being destroyed.
 There have been no allegations of forced official entry into
 Norwegian homes in 1984. In most cases, wiretapping is
 prohibited by law, but it can be used in state security cases
 or narcotics offenses when officially approved by the court,
 within carefully drawn and monitored legal guidelines.
 Correspondence may be opened only with authorization of the
 court in cases involving state security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Norway's Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and press,
 and those freedoms are respected in practice. In addition to
 restrictions on slander and libel, Norwegian law forbids
 racist or sexist remarks in printed or public speech. During
 1984, three leaders of the small neo-Nazi Party were sentenced
 to short periods of imprisonment for having published and
 distributed racist tracts at Norwegian schools. No one may
 publish information concerning national defense which could
 prove damaging to Norwegian security. A police raid in late
 1983 on a leftist journal was based on this provision of law.
 
 
 1052
 
 NORWAY
 Although the raid sparked public criticism that the Government
 may have violated freedom of the press, a district appeals
 court during 1984 upheld the charge that one issue of the
 paper contained information that was potentially harmful to
 the security of the state.
 Norway has an active and diversified press sustained in part
 by government subsidies. Television and radio have long been
 operated by one state-owned broadcasting company, but the
 Government does not exercise direct editorial control. During
 1984, an experimental program for local, low-wattage radio
 stations was expanded throughout the country, and licenses
 have been granted to over 100 groups to operate local cable
 television stations, several dozen of which began broadcasting
 during 1984.
 Certain limitations apply to freedom of public expression with
 respect to the showing of films in Norway. Films must be
 reviewed by the Norwegian State Film Control Board, which has
 the authority to censor or ban any film that is overly
 violent, pornographic, or blasphemous. There is no evidence
 that any films have been censored because of political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Norwegians exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require advance permission which is routinely
 given.
 Unions have the right to organize, negotiate, and strike.
 However, the Government has the right to invoke compulsory
 arbitration under certain circumstances and did so during
 1984. The Norwegian Federation of Oil Workers (NFOW)
 presented a complaint to the International Labor Organization
 in 1984 alleging that the Government's past invocation of
 compulsory arbitration in specific strikes had violated
 freedom of association and that the committee having
 responsibility for arbitration was not impartial. After
 studying the issue, the International Labor Organization
 concluded that compulsory arbitration had been invoked in a
 manner inconsistent with freedom of association, but that
 there was no reason to call into question the composition or
 procedures of the arbitration board.
 With about 60 percent of the Norwegian work force, unions play
 an important role in Norway's political and economic life, and
 are consulted by the Government on important economic and
 social problems. Although most unions are associated with the
 Labor Party, they are free of party and government control.
 They maintain strong ties with international bodies, such as
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway,
 to which 93 percent of the population belong. There is a
 constitutional requirement that the King and half of the
 Cabinet belong to the state church. In addition, the
 Norwegian Work Environment Act permits prospective employers
 to ask job applicants in certain categories of work, such as
 positions which can influence child development, whether they
 respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered
 
 
 1053
 NORWAY
 members of 20 other denominations, which operate freely and
 may proselytize. No religious community is required to
 register with the Government unless it desires state support,
 which is provided to all registered denominations on a
 proportional basis in accordance with membership.
 While the state religion is taught in all public schools,
 children of other faiths are allowed to be absent from such
 classes upon parental request. If a sufficient number of
 students belongs to the same faith, the school will arrange
 religion classes in that faith. Workers belonging to minority
 denominations are allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel, and
 Norwegians have full freedom of movement inside or outside
 Norway. The right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed.
 Since 1945, the Norwegian authorities have granted asylum to
 approximately 10,000 persons, about half of them Vietnamese.
 Asylum or refugee status was granted to 879 persons in 1983.
 Eastern Europeans who do not meet the requirements for refugee
 status are often granted residence permits in Norway, even
 though they do not qualify for ordinary immigration.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Norway is a multfparty democracy ruled by a freely elected
 government. Seven parties are represented in the Parliament
 (Storting); distribution of seats is based upon proportional
 representation. After national elections, the party (or
 parties) obtaining support from a parliamentary majority
 governs the country. The Storting may reject or modify
 government proposals; if a government loses a vote on a major
 issue of confidence, it resigns and a new government is
 formed. The minimum voting age is 18, and voter turnout runs
 at about 80 percent in parliamentary elections. Foreigners
 who have resided in Norway for at least 3 years and are
 otherwise eligible have the right to vote.
 While the Same (Lapps) are the only significant minority (0.5
 percent) with long residence in Norway, the influx of refugees
 and guest workers has produced other minorities. Neither the
 Same nor any other ethnic minority is presently represented in
 the Storting. Women hold approximately 25 percent of Storting
 seats and 22 percent of Cabinet positions. Some political
 parties have set goals of 40 percent representation for women
 for elective positions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Norway cooperated during 1984 with the International Labor
 Organization when it investigated a complaint of violations of
 the freedom of association. In response to a comment during
 1984 by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees that certain
 Norwegian legal provisions do not conform with international
 refugee policy, the Government announced that it would
 consider necessary steps to address those concerns. Norway is
 
 
 1054
 NORWAY
 itself an active participant in international human rights
 organizations which investigate alleged human rights abuses.
 An Office of the Ombudsman provides a direct route for
 individual complaints against government agencies. A number
 of organizations in Norway monitor alleged human rights
 abuses, either inside or, more often, outside the country.
 They include the Equal Rights Council (concerned with women's
 rights), the Immigrant Council, the Oslo Peace Research
 Institute, and the state-supported Human Rights Project.
 During 1984, the local branch of Amnesty International adopted
 as a prisoner of conscience a Norwegian who served 90 days'
 imprisonment for refusing military service on political
 grounds. Also, the Norwegian Helsinki Committee complained to
 the police in 1984 about the treatment of a Turkish student by
 the Aliens Registration Office, noting that the Committee had
 a responsibility to monitor human rights in Norway as well as
 abroad. Amnesty International's 1984 Report does not include
 Norway; Freedom House rates it 'free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 An advanced industrial state, Norway has a mixed economy,
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Its
 population of 4,145,000 (in 1984) had a per capita gross
 national product of $14,280 (as of 1982). Life expectancy in
 Norway is 75.8 years, and infant mortality is 7.6 per 1,000
 live births.
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Norwegian Government
 meets the health, educational, retirement, and other needs of
 its people, regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic
 background, or political opinion. The Government has
 virtually eliminated poverty through redistribution of income
 by subsidies, progressive income taxes, and other means.
 Women and minorities are overrepresented in lower income
 groups. Lower income workers have, however, enjoyed above-
 average pay increases in recent years, owing to wage
 settlements aimed at giving them larger percentage increases.
 These settlements reflect Norway's resolve to narrow remaining
 gaps between rich and poor. Women are protected under the
 Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other regulations. A state Equal
 Rights Council monitors enforcement of the 1978 law, and an
 Equal Rights Ombudsman processes complaints of sexual
 discrimination. The Government provides for liberal maternity
 leave and time off for either parent to care for their
 children.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Same (Lapp) people
 were Norway's only significant minority group until the influx
 of immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the
 Government has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of
 the Same by providing Same language instruction at schools in
 Same-inhabited areas, radio and television programs broadcast
 or subtitled in the Same language, as well as subsidies for
 the publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the
 Same.
 
 
 1055
 NORWAY
 There is a lively political debate on whether current
 restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975,
 are racially motivated and whether minority groups, such as
 Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans, are in practice
 treated equally by Norwegian authorities. Besides providing
 legal protection for all minorities' rights, the Government
 has taken active measures to help these groups adjust to
 Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language
 instruction for any foreign resident.
 
 
 1056
