 NORWAY
 
 There is broad public support and consensus for strong
 human rights policies in Norway. Human rights are an
 integral part of public policy.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Freedom from torture is guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment is guaranteed by law and respected in prac-
 tice.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is
 guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Fair public trial is guaranteed and provided.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Freedom from invasion of the home is guaranteed by law
 and respected in practice.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Major objectives of Norwegian Government policies re-
 late directly to fulfilling the basic needs of the
 population for food, shelter, health care and
 education. These policies include full consideration
 for less privileged elements of the society.
 (304)
 
 
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 These freedoms are in effect.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 Citizens have freedom of movement within the country,
 foreign travel and emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The labor movement, a dominant social and political
 force within the country, fully guarantees the rights
 of all workers, a policy backed up by advanced and
 comprehensive public welfare legislation. Democratic
 processes exist at all levels, assuring the freedom
 to participate in the political process.
 Respect for civil and political liberties in Norway is
 outstanding, both on a theoretical level and in prac-
 tice.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government is open-minded and certainly prepared
 to consider any allegations of human rights violations
 in Norway by an independent investigative authority,
 although this is an extremely unlikely eventuality in
 light of Norway's exemplary human rights record. -
 Norway is party to the International Covenant on Civil
 and Political Rights and the Covenant on Economic,
 Social and Cultural Affairs.
 
 
