 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
 democracy. King Olav V is the titular Head of State, but his
 role is mainly symbolic. Norway is governed by a Prime
 Minister, Cabinet, and a 157-seat Parliament (Storting) which
 is elected every 4 years and cannot be dissolved.
 An advanced industrial state, Norway has a mixed economy
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Individual
 freedoms, such as freedom of association and of speech, and
 the right to pursue private interests and to hold private
 property, are guaranteed by the Constitution and respected in
 practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian
 tradition, a lively press, and highly developed educational
 and social welfare systems have made Norway a leading defender
 of human rights in the world. During 1986, domestic human
 rights issues included the rights of new immigrants, of those
 seeking political asylum, and of those who object to military
 service on political grounds. There was also a continuing
 concern for expanding opportunities for women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political killing
 Politically motivated killings have not occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 Secret arrests and detentions have not occurred.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's humane penal system. The
 maximum sentence is 21 years. The emphasis in Norwegian
 prisons is on rehabilitation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law provides for arrest warrants, which are used
 except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without being charged. A person
 charged with a crime has the right, observed in practice, to
 appear before a judge for arraignment within 24 hours. If
 charges are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then
 determines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or
 released pending trial. A strong case must be made to justify
 detention. Possible grounds include fear of flight, the needs
 of the investigation, and fear that a detainee will commit
 further crimes.
 Although a provision for bail exists in Norwegian law, it is
 rarely, if ever, used. A person in pretrial detention
 generally appears before a judge every 4 weeks for a new
 determination of the necessity of continued detention.
 There is no legal limit on the time a prisoner can be held
 before trial. Pretrial detention of more than a year is,
 however, rare. Preventive detention exists but is used
 
 
 988
 NORWAY
 infrequently, as in the temporary detention of rowdy youth by
 police.
 Forced or compulsory labor is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is guaranteed by law and
 honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those
 involving state security or private family matters, are trials
 closed. In criminal cases, Norwegian citizens and aliens are
 entitled to free counsel of their choice, regardless of their
 income. In certain civil cases, indigent persons are
 guaranteed free counsel. Charges are stated formally and
 clearly. Except for the Labor Court, which mediates
 industrial relations disputes, the Civil Court is Norway's
 only judicial system and thus tries military and security
 cases as well. The judiciary is independent of both the
 legislative and the executive branches of government, as well
 as of the military.
 During 1985 and 1986, the legality of imprisoning those
 refusing both military service and alternative civilian
 service became a public issue. Persons refusing both kinds of
 service have been held in prison for up to 16 months (a period
 equivalent to military service) without a trial. Detention is
 based on an administrative decision and not on a trial.
 Persons detained in this manner are considered soldiers who
 have refused duty and thus receive salary and benefits
 normally accorded to military recruits during this period of
 confinement.
 In 1985 one case of a person detained without trial for
 refusing both military and alternative service was brought
 before the European Human Rights Commission which held a
 hearing for admissibility in the fall of 1985 and decided not
 to hear the case. In a similar case in 1986, one such
 objector was designated a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty
 International.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and individual is free from
 arbitrary interference by the State. Police may conduct
 searches of the home only with court approval and in instances
 of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed.
 There were no allegations of forced official entry into
 Norwegian homes in 1986. In most cases wiretapping is
 prohibited by law, but it can be used in state security cases
 or narcotics offenses when officially approved by the court
 within carefully drawn and monitored legal guidelines.
 Correspondence may be opened only with authorization of the
 court in cases involving state security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Norway's Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and press,
 and these freedoms are respected in practice. In addition to
 restrictions on slander and libel, Norwegian law forbids
 racist or sexist remarks in printed or public speech. No one
 may publish information concerning national defense which
 could prove damaging to Norwegian security.
 
 
 989
 NORWAY
 Norway has an active and diversified press sustained in part
 by government subsidies. Television and radio have long been
 operated by one state-owned broadcasting company, but the
 Government does not exercise direct editorial control. In
 recent years an experimental program for local, low-power
 radio stations has been expanded throughout the country, and
 licenses have been granted to private groups to operate local
 cable television stations.
 Certain limitations apply to freedom of public expression with
 respect to the showing of films. Films must be reviewed by
 the Norwegian State Film Control Board, which has the authority
 to censor or ban any film that is deemed overly violent,
 pornographic, or blasphemous. There is no evidence that any
 films have been censored because of political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Norwegians exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require advance permission which is routinely
 given.
 Unions have the right to organize, negotiate, and strike.
 Government, however, has the right to invoke compulsory
 arbitration under certain circumstances, with the approval of
 the Storting (Parliament).
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the Norwegian
 work force, unions play an important role in Norway's
 political and economic life and are consulted by the Government
 on important economic and social problems. Although the
 largest trade union federation is associated with the Labor
 Party, all unions are free of party and government control.
 They maintain strong ties with international bodies such as
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway,
 which is financially supported by the State and to which 93
 percent of the population belongs. There is a constitutional
 requirement that the King and half of the Cabinet belong to
 the state church. In addition, the Norwegian Work Environment
 Act permits prospective employers to ask job applicants in
 certain categories of work, such as positions which can
 influence child development, whether they respect Christian
 beliefs and principles.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered
 members of 20 other denominations which operate freely and may
 proselytize. No religious community is required to register
 with the Government unless it desires state support, which is
 provided to all registered denominations on a proportional
 basis in accordance with membership. Although the state
 religion is taught in all public schools, children of other
 faiths are allowed to be absent from such classes upon
 parental request. If there are enough students of the same
 faith, the school will arrange religion classes in that faith.
 Workers belonging to minority denominations are allowed leave
 for religious holidays.
 
 
 990
 NORWAY
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel, and
 Norwegians have full freedom of movement inside or outside
 Norway. The right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed.
 Since 1945 the Norwegian authorities have granted asylum to
 over 12,000 persons, about half of them Vietnamese. During
 1986 several human rights groups expressed concern over the
 adequacy of treatment given those seeking political asylum in
 Norway. Despite concerns caused by some individual cases,
 Norway has a well-organized system for managing refugee
 affairs--which includes advance planning, careful dispersion
 of refugees throughout Norway, and generous welfare, education,
 and vocational training programs.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Norway is a multiparty democracy ruled by an elected
 government. Six parties are represented in the Storting;
 distribution of seats is based upon proportional representation
 by district. The Storting may reject or modify government
 proposals; if a government loses a vote on a major issue of
 confidence, it resigns and a new government is formed. The
 minimum voting age is 18, and voter turnout in the 1985
 parliamentary elections was almost 84 percent. Foreigners who
 have resided in Norway for at least 3 years and are otherwise
 eligible have the right to vote in local elections only.
 While the Sami (Lapps) are the only significant minority (0.5
 percent) with long residence in Norway, the influx of refugees
 and guest workers has produced other minorities. Neither the
 Sami nor any other ethnic minority is represented at present
 in the Storting. Women hold approximately 35 percent of
 Storting seats and 44 percent of cabinet positions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Norway cooperates with nongovernmental investigation of
 alleged violations of human rights. In recent years, Norway
 has cooperated with both the European Human Rights Commission
 and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Norway
 is itself an active participant in international human rights
 organizations.
 Within Norway, an Office of the Ombudsman provides a direct
 route for individual complaints against government agencies.
 A number of organizations monitor alleged human rights abuses
 either inside or, more often, outside the country. They
 include the Equal Rights Council (concerned with women's
 rights), the Immigrant Council, the Oslo Peace Research
 Institute, and the state-supported Human Rights Project.
 During 1985 an advisory council composed of government
 officials, legal experts, and representatives from
 nongovernmental organizations was formed to monitor human
 rights practices internationally.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Government provides
 
 
 991
 NORWAY
 for the health, educational, retirement, and other needs of
 its people regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic
 background, or political opinion.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Sami (Lapp) people
 were Norway's only significant minority group until the influx
 of immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the
 Government has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of
 the Sami by providing Sami language instruction at schools in
 Sami-inhabited areas, radio and television programs broadcast
 or subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies for the
 publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami.
 There is a lively political debate on whether current
 restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975,
 are racially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups
 such as Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans are in
 practice treated equally by Norwegian authorities. The
 Government provides legal protection for the rights of all
 minorities and has taken active measures to help these groups
 adjust to Norwegian society, including free Norwegian language
 instruction for any foreign resident.
 Women form over 40 percent of the work force and are protected
 under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other regulations. A
 state Equal Rights Council monitors enforcement of the 1978
 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes complaints of
 sexual discrimination. The Government provides liberal
 maternity leave and time off for either parent to care for
 their children.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Under the Working Environment Act, all employed persons are
 assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions.
 Children are not permitted to work full time before the age
 of 15. Ordinary working hours do not exceed 40 hours per
 week, and 25 working days of paid leave is granted per year
 (31 for those over 60). All workers are assured an adequate
 minimum wage, with standards set by the Government within each
 industry.
 
 
 992
