 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
 democracy. King Olav V is the titular Head of State, but his
 role is mainly symbolic. Norway is governed by a Prime
 Minister, Cabinet, and a 157-seat Parliament which is elected
 every 4 years and cannot be dissolved. At present, the
 Conservative, Christian People's, and Center Parties form a
 coalition government with Conservative leader Kare Willoch as
 Prime Minister.
 An advanced industrial state, Norway has a mixed economy
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Individual
 freedoms, such as freedom of association and speech, and the
 right to pursue private interests and hold private property
 are guaranteed by Norway's Constitution and respected in
 practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian
 tradition, a lively press, and highly developed educational
 and social welfare systems have made Norway a leading defender
 of human rights in the world. During 1985 major domestic
 human rights issues included the rights of immigrants, those
 seeking political asylum, and those who object to military
 service on political grounds, as well as continuing concern on
 expanding opportunities for women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Politically motivated killings have not occurred in Norway.
 b. Disappearance
 Secret arrests and detentions have not occurred in Norway.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's humane penal system. The
 maximum sentence is 21 years. The emphasis in Norwegian
 prisons is on rehabilitation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law provides for arrest warrants, which are used
 except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without being charged. A person
 charged with a crime has the right, observed in practice, to
 appear before a judge for arraignment within 24 hours. If
 charges are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then
 determines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or
 released pending trial. A strong case must be made to justify
 detention. Possible grounds include fear of flight, the needs
 of the investigation, and fear that a detainee will commit
 further crimes.
 Although a provision for bail exists in Norwegian law, it is
 not used. A person in pretrial detention generally appears
 
 
 1048
 NORWAY
 before a judge every 4 weeks for a new determination of the
 necessity of continued detention.
 There is no legal limit on the time a prisoner can be held
 before trial. Considerable concern was expressed during 1985
 over some cases of extended pretrial detention. In one case,
 a recent immigrant accused of narcotics offenses was held in
 pretrial detention for over 7 months before a court reached a
 verdict of innocence. In another case, an individual accused
 of crimes of moral turpitude was held in detention for 1-1/2
 years before being sentenced to only 90 days' imprisonment.
 Pretrial detention for more than a year is, however, rare.
 Preventive detention exists but is used infrequently, as in
 the temporary detention of rowdy youth by the police.
 Forced or compulsory labor does not exist in Norway.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is guaranteed by law and
 honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those
 involving state security or private family matters, are trials
 closed. In criminal cases, Norwegian citizens and aliens are
 entitled to free counsel of their choice, regardless of their
 income. In certain civil cases, indigent persons are
 guaranteed free counsel. Charges are stated formally and
 clearly. Except for the labor court, which mediates
 industrial relations disputes, the civil court is Norway's
 only judicial system and thus tries military and security
 cases as well. The judiciary is independent of both the
 legislative and the executive branches og government, as well
 as of the military.
 During 1985, the legality of imprisoning those refusing both
 military service and alternative civil service became a public
 issue. Persons refusing both kinds of service have been held
 in prison for up to 16 months (the equivalent period of
 military service) without a trial. Detention is based on an
 administrative decision and not a judicial one. To date, 150
 Norwegians refusing both military and civil service have been
 held in prison on administrative decisions only, although they
 have received the salary and benefits normally accorded to
 military recruits during this period of confinement. During
 1985, one person imprisoned without trial brought his
 complaint before the European Human Rights Commission, which
 accepted his case for hearing, marking only the third time the
 Commission has agreed to hear a complaint against Norway.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and individual is free from
 arbitrary interference by the State. Police may conduct
 searches of the home only with court approval and in instances
 of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed.
 There have been no allegations of forced official entry into
 Norwegian homes in 1985. In most cases wiretapping is
 prohibited by law, but it can be used in state security cases
 or narcotics offenses when officially approved by the court
 within carefully drawn and monitored legal guidelines.
 Correspondence may be opened only with authorization of the
 court in cases involving state security.
 
 
 1049
 NORWAY
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Norway's Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and press,
 and these freedoms are respected in practice. In addition to
 restrictions on slander and libel, Norwegian law forbids
 racist or sexist remarks in printed or public speech. No one
 may publish information concerning national defense which
 could prove damaging to Norwegian security. During 1985 eight
 journalists were tried and found guilty of publishing
 information on secret Norwegian military installations. The
 journalists explained that their goal was to promote a defense
 policy debate on the locations of these installations and not
 to serve the interests of foreign powers. The cases initiated
 an active debate concerning the need for greater freedom of
 information and freedom of expression on political/military
 matters.
 Norway has an active and diversified press sustained in part
 by government subsidies. Television and radio have long been
 operated by one state-owned broadcasting company, but the
 Government does not exercise direct editorial control. In
 recent years an experimental program for local, low-power
 radio stations has been expanded throughout the country, and
 licenses have been granted to private groups to operate local
 cable television stations.
 Certain limitations apply to freedom of public expression with
 respect to the showing of films. Films must be reviewed by
 the Norwegian State Film Control Board, which has the
 authority to censor or ban any film that is overly violent,
 pornographic, or blasphemous. There is no evidence that any
 films have been censored because of political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Norwegians exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require advance permission which is routinely
 given.
 Unions have the right to organize, negotiate, and strike. The
 Government, however, has the right to invoke compulsory
 arbitration under certain circumstances.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the Norwegian
 work force, unions play an important role in Norway's
 political and economic life and are consulted by the
 Government on important economic and social problems.
 Although the largest trade union federation is associated with
 the Labor Party, all unions are free of party and government
 control. They maintain strong ties with international bodies
 such as the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway,
 to which 93 percent of the population belongs. There is a
 constitutional requirement that the King and half of the
 Cabinet belong to the state church. In addition, the
 Norwegian Work Environment Act permits prospective employers
 to ask job applicants in certain categories of work, such as
 positions which can influence child development, whether they
 respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 
 
 1050
 NORWAY
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered
 members of 20 other.denominations which operate freely and may
 proselytize. No religious community is required to register
 with the Government unless it desires state support, which is
 provided to all registered denominations on a proportional
 basis in accordance with membership.
 Although the state religion is taught in all public schools,
 children of other faiths are allowed to be absent from such
 classes upon parental request. If a sufficient number of
 students belongs to the same faith, the school will arrange
 religion classes in that faith. Workers belonging to minority
 denominations are allowed leave for religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel, and
 Norwegians have full freedom of movement inside or outside
 Norway. The right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed.
 Since 1945, the Norwegian authorities have granted asylum to
 approximately 11,000 persons, about half of them Vietnamese.
 During 1985, several nongovernmental organizations and human
 rights groups expressed concern about the treatment of those
 seeking political asylum in Norway, focusing on the
 well-publicized case of eight Iranians who arrived from Turkey
 and were sent back, although their acceptance as refugees by
 the Turkish authorities was not assured. The Norwegian
 Government later allowed the Iranians to return to Norway
 after consulting with the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees. Also in 1985, human rights groups and the press
 paid considerable attention to 3 Vietnamese children whose
 parents were refused immigration because the children were
 beyond the legal age limit of 15 qualifying for family
 reunification. Upon reconsideration, the Government changed
 the legal limit to 18 and granted asylum to the parents.
 The status of immigrants under Norwegian law surfaced over the
 proposed deportation of certain immigrants with longstanding
 residence in the country (over 7 years) upon separation or
 divorce from their Norwegian spouses. One person won his
 appeal of this decision and was allowed to remain in Norway,
 while the other cases are still pending.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Norway is a multiparty democracy ruled by a freely elected
 government. Six parties are represented in the Parliament
 (Storting); distribution of seats is based upon proportional
 representation by district. The Storting may reject or modify
 government proposals; if a government loses a vote on a major
 issue of confidence, it resigns and a new government is
 formed. The minimum voting age is 18, and voter turnout in
 the 1985 parliamentary elections was almost 84 percent.
 Foreigners who have resided in Norway for at least 3 years and
 are otherwise eligible have the right to vote in local
 elections.
 While the Sami (Lapps) are the only significant minority (0.5
 percent) with long residence in Norway, the influx of refugees
 and guest workers has produced other minorities. Neither the
 Sami nor any other ethnic minority is represented at present
 
 
 1051
 NORWAY
 in the Storting. Women hold approximately 35 percent of
 Storting seats and 22 percent of Cabinet positions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Norway cooperated during 1985 with the European Human Rights
 Commission when it investigated a complaint by a prisoner of
 conscience concerning his imprisonment without trial. It also
 consulted with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees with
 regard to the Iranians seeking political asylum in Norway from
 a third country where their safety might be in question, and
 accepted the advice of the High Commissioner on a case-by-case
 basis. Norway is itself an active participant in
 international human rights organizations which investigate
 alleged human rights abuses.
 Within Norway, an Office of the Ombudsman provides a direct
 route for individual complaints against government agencies.
 A number of organizations monitor alleged human rights abuses
 either inside or, more often, outside the country. They
 include the Equal Rights Council (concerned with women's
 rights), the Immigrant Council, the Oslo Peace Research
 Institute, and the state-supported Human Rights Project.
 During 1985, an advisory council composed of government
 officials, legal experts, and representatives from
 nongovernmental organizations was formed to monitor human
 rights practices internationally.
 In its 1985 Report, Amnesty International did not mention
 Norway. Freedom House rated Norway "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Norway's population in 1985 was 4,152,000, growing at an
 annual rate of 0.3 percent. Norway's per capita gross
 national product was $14,020 in 1983. The Government has
 virtually eliminated poverty through redistribution of income
 by subsidies, progressive income taxes, and other means.
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Government meets the
 health, educational, retirement, and other needs of its people
 regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background, or
 political opinion. Life expectancy at birth was 76.1 years,
 while the infant mortality rate was 7.5 per 1,000 live
 births. Education at all levels is free. There are 9 years
 of compulsory schooling, and the primary school enrollment
 ratio (as of 1982) was 101.7 percent.
 Under the Working Environment Act, all employed persons are
 assured safe and physically acceptable working conditions.
 Children are not permitted to work full-time before the age of
 15. Ordinary working hours do not exceed 40 hours per week,
 and 25 working days of paid leave is granted per year (31 for
 those over 60). All workers are assured an adequate minimum
 wage, with standards set by the Government within each
 industry.
 Women form over 40 percent of the work force and are protected
 under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and other regulations. A
 State Equal Rights Council monitors enforcement of the 1978
 law, and an equal rights ombudsman processes complaints of
 
 
 1052
 NORWAY
 sexual discrimination! The Government provides for liberal
 maternity leave and time off for either parent to care for
 their children.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Sami (Lapp) people
 were Norway's only significant minority group until the influx
 of immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the
 Government has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of
 the Sami by providing Sami language instruction at schools in
 Sami-inhabited areas, radio and television programs broadcast
 or subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies for the
 publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami.
 There is a lively political debate on whether current
 restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975,
 are racially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups,
 such as Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans, are in
 practice treated equally by Norwegian authorities. The
 government provides legal protection for all minorities'
 rights and has taken active measures to help these groups
 adjust to Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language
 instruction for any foreign resident.
 
 
 1053
