 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
 democracy with King Olav V, the titular Head of State, having
 *a largely symbolic role. Norway is governed by a prime
 minister, cabinet, and a 165-seat Storting (parliament) that
 is elected every 4 years and cannot be dissolved.
 The police, security forces, and the military are scrupulous
 in their protection of human rights. The Government
 (including the judicial system and the Storting) exercises
 firm control over these organizations and investigates
 thoroughly any allegations of human rights violations.
 Norway is an advanced industrial state with a mixed economy
 combining private, public, and state ownership. Personal
 freedoms, such as freedom of association and of speech, and
 the right to pursue private interests and to hold private
 property, are protected by the Constitution and respected in
 practice.
 Deeply rooted democratic principles, a strong egalitarian
 tradition, an independent press, and highly developed
 educational and social welfare systems have made Norway a
 leading advocate of human rights in the world.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Such killings have not occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 Secret arrests and detentions have not occurred.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment do not exist in Norway's penal system. Generous
 furlough and visitation rights characterize the system, which
 emphasizes rehabilitation. The maximum sentence for any crime
 is 21 years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Norwegian law provides for arrest warrants, which are used
 except in circumstances such as hot pursuit. Persons may be
 detained for up to 4 hours without being charged. A person
 charged with a crime has the right, observed in practice, to
 appear before a judge for arraignment within 24 hours. If
 charges are formalized at the arraignment, the judge then
 determines whether the detainee should be kept in custody or
 released <bail need not be posted) pending trial. A strong
 case must be made to justify detention. Possible grounds
 include fear of flight, the needs of the investigation, and
 fear that a detainee will commit further crimes.
 Any person held in pretrial detention appears before a judge
 every 4 weeks for a determination of the necessity of
 continued detention. There is no legal limit on the length of
 
 
 1204
 NOQRWAYL
 time a prisoner may be held before trial; however, lengthy
 pretrial detention is rare. Preventive detention also exists
 but is used infrequently.
 There is no exile. With regard to forced or compulsory labor,
 see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is ensured by law and
 honored in practice. Only in certain cases, including those
 involving state security or private family matters, are trials
 closed.  In criminal cases, all Norwegian citizens and aliens
 are entitled to free counsel. Indigent persons are granted
 free counsel in certain civil cases as well.
 The judiciary is independent of both the legislative and the
 executive branches of the Government and tries military and
 security as well as civil and criminal cases. The Labor Court
 mediates industrial relations disputes.
 In recent years, the legality of imprisoning those refusing
 both military service and alternative civilian service has
 become a public issue. Persons refusing both kinds of service
 have been held in prison for up to 16 months (a period
 equivalent to military service) without a trial. Detention is
 based on an administrative rather than a judicial decision,
 and prisoners held in this manner receive salary and benefits
 normally accorded to military recruits during their period of
 confinement. Recent administrative decisions by the Justice
 and Defense Ministries have expanded the grounds for
 conscientious objector status.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the family and the person is free from
 arbitrary interference by the Government. Police may conduct
 searches of the home only with court approval or in instances
 of hot pursuit or when they fear evidence is being destroyed.
 There were no allegations of extralegal official entry into
 Norwegian homes in 1989. In most cases, wiretaps are
 prohibited by law, but they may be used in cases involving
 state security or narcotics offenses and when officially
 approved by the court pursuant to carefully drawn legal
 guidelines. Correspondence may be opened only by court order
 in cases involving state security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is protected by the Constitution
 and- respected in practice. In addition to restrictions on
 slander and libel, Norwegian law forbids racist or sexist
 remarks in print or public speech. It is forbidden to publish
 information concerning national defense which could prove
 damaging to Norwegian security.
 Norway's state broadcasting company maintains a near monopoly
 on television broadcasting and nationwide radio programming,
 but the Government does not exercise editorial control over
 programming. Private local radio stations exist throughout
 the country, and licenses have been granted to private groups
 to operate local cable stations. A private television
 
 
 1205
 network, TV Norge, has been on the air for almost 1 year. It
 broadcasts in the Olso area and is available on cable
 throughout Norway. Norway has an active and diversified
 press, and many papers are sustained by government subsidies.
 Some newspapers are loosely connected to various national
 political parties.
 Certain restrictions apply to the showing of films. The
 government Film Control Board has the authority to censor or
 ban any film deemed overly violent, pornographic, or
 blasphemous. The blasphemy clause in the censorship law has,
 however, not been used in the last 20 years. There is no
 evidence that any films have been censored because of
 political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Norwegians exercise these freedoms without restraint. Permits
 for public demonstrations are granted routinely.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom-of Religion
 The state church is the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway,
 which is financially supported by the State and to which 93
 percent of the population nominally belongs. There is a
 constitutional requirement that the King and half of the
 Cabinet belong to the state church. The Workers' Protection
 and Working Environment Act permits prospective employers to
 ask job applicants in certain fields, such as education,
 whether they respect Christian beliefs and principles.
 Approximately 4 percent of the population are registered
 members of 20 other denominations which operate freely and may
 proselytize. Foreign clergy are welcome in Norway. No
 religious community is required to register with the
 Government unless it desires state support, which is provided
 to-all registered denomiinations on a proportional.basis in
 accordante with membership. Although the state religiofi is
 taught in all public schools, children of other faiths are
 allowed to be absent from such classes upon parental request.
 If there are enough students of the same faith, the school
 will arrange religion classes in that faith. Workers
 belonging to minority denominations are allowed leave for
 religious holidays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Government does not impede foreign or domestic travel.
 The right to voluntary repatriation is guaranteed. Refugees
 and asylum seekers are provided generous benefits, including
 social services, free medical care, and education while
 awaiting decisions on their asylum applications.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Norway is a multiparty democracy. Seven parties are
 represented in the Storting where distribution of seats is
 based upon proportional representation by district. The
 Storting may reject or modify government proposals; if a
 government loses a vote on a major issue of confidence, it
 
 
 1206
 resigns, and a new government is formed. The minimum voting
 age is 18, and voter turnout in the 1989 parliamentary
 elections was over 82 percent. Foreigners who have resided in
 Norway for at least 3 years, and are otherwise eligible, have
 the right to vote in local elections only.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Norway cooperates with nongovernmental investigations of
 alleged violations of human rights. In recent years, Norway
 has cooperated with both the European Commission of Human
 Rights and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
 Norway is itself an active participant in international human
 rights organizations. A number of public and private
 organizations monitor alleged human rights abuses either
 inside or, more often, outside the country.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Through a highly developed social welfare system that reflects
 a long tradition of egalitarianism, the Government provides
 for the health, education, retirement, and other needs of its
 people regardless of race, religion, sex, ethnic background,
 or political opinion.
 Apart from an extremely small Finnish population in the
 northeastern corner of the country, the Sami (Lapp) people
 were Norway's only significant minority group until the influx
 of immigrants during the 1970's. In recent years, the
 Government has taken steps to protect the cultural rights of
 the Sami by providing Sami-language instruction at schools in
 Sami-inhabited areas, radio and television programs broadcast
 or subtitled in the Sami language, and subsidies for the
 publication of newspapers and books oriented toward the Sami.
 Norwegian Samis elected their own constituent assembly, the
 Sameting, for the first time in 1989. The 39-seat body is a
 consultatlve group which will meet regularly to consider
 issues of importance to the Sami people. Various Sami and
 other leaders have raised the possibility that the Sameting
 could eventually be transformed into a constitutional
 law-making body within certain territorial and functional
 boundaries.
 There is continuing political debate on whether current
 restrictions on non-Nordic immigration, in effect since 1975,
 are racially motivated and whether immigrant minority groups
 such as Pakistanis, Vietnamese, Turks, and Africans are
 treated equally by Norwegian authorities. The Government
 provides legal protection for the rights of all minorities- and
 has taken active measures to help these groups adjust to
 Norwegian society, including free Norwegian-language
 instruction for any foreign resident.
 In recent years, Norway has experienced a dramatic increase in
 the number of persons seeking political asylum- As a result,
 the Storting passed a bill in 1988 that would no longer allow
 asylum applicants who are not bona fide refugees to remain on
 humanitarian grounds. The new law (expected to be fully
 operational by early 1990) introduces new measures, however,
 designed further to safeguard the rights of those asylum
 seekers allowed to remain in Norway. With the rise in the
 
 
 1207
 number of asylum seekers, refugee policy has become a
 significant political issue; reducing or ending the inflow of
 refugees remains-the single most visible issue for the
 -Progress Party, which posted big gains in the 1989
 parliamentary elections. At the same time, some human rights
 groups and politieal parties urged the Government to accept
 -more refugees and expressed concern over the adequacy of the
 treatment given those seeking political asylum in Norway.
 Although there have been problems in dealing.with individual
 refugee cases, Norway has a well-organized system which
 includes advance planning, careful-dispersion of refugees
 throughout Norway, and generous welfare, educational, and
 vocational training programs. The current backlog of refugee
 cases pending judicial processing is expected to ease
 significantly as the new procedures mandated by the 1988 law
 are implemented fully.
 Women are protected under the Equal Rights Law of 1978 and
 other regulations. Under that-law, "women and men engaged in
 the same activity shall have equal wages for work of equal
 valea." A state Equal Rights Council monitors enforcement of
 -the .1978 law, and an Equal Rights Ombudsman processes
 complaints of-sexual discrimination.-The Government provides
 liberal maternity leave and time off for either parent to care
 for their children.'
 Norway has an extremely low crime rate, and, in that sense,
 -crime against women is not widespread. A recent general
 increase in the crime rate has included crimes against women,
 .although police authorities believe that much of the increase
 in-reported rapes.and incidents of wife beating is due to a
 greater willingness among women to report these crimes than
 has been the case in the past. The police vigorously
 -investigate and prosecute such crimes and have instituted
 special programs for rape and domestic violence prevention and
 for counseling of victims. Public and private organizations
 run several free shelters which give battered wives an
 aternative to-retusning to a violent domestic situation after
 an. incident of wife beating.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 -a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to strike. The
 Government, however, has the right to invoke compulsory
 ,arbitration under certain circumstances, vith the approval of
 the Storting. This procedure, which has been invoked several
 times in the 1980's, particularly in the oil industry, has
 been criticized by the expert committees of the International
 Labor Organization, which are of the opinion that the
 situations were not a sufficient threat to public health and
 safety to justify the action.
 With membership totaling about 60 percent of the work force,
 unions play an important role in political and economic life
 and are consulted by the Government on important economic and
 social problems. Although the largest trade union federation
 is associated with the Labor Party, all unions are free of
 party and government control. They maintain strong ties with
 international bodies, such as the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions. There were several small but no major
 strikes in 1989.
 
 
 1208
 14ORWAY
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 All workers, including government employees and military
 personnel, have the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. There are no export processing zones, and labor
 legislation and practice is uniform throughout Norway.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by law and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children
 Children are not permitted to work full time before the age of
 15. Minimum age rules are observed in practice.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Ordinary working hours do not exceed 37.5 hours per week, and
 25 working days of paid leave are granted per year (31 for
 those over 60). There is no minimum wage as such in Norway,
 but wages normally fall within a "national wage scale"
 negotiated by labor, employers, and the Government. The
 average annual wage, not including extensive social benefits,
 is approximately $26,000, which is adequate to provide a
 family a decent living.
 Under the Workers, Protection and Working Environment Act of
 177, all employed persons are assured safe and physically
 acceptable working conditions. According to the Act, working
 environment committees, composed of management, workers, and
 health personnel, must be established in all enterprises with
 50 or more workers, and safety delegates must be elected in
 all organizations. The Directorate of Labor Inspections
 ensures effective compliance with labor legislation.
 
 
 1209
