 NORWAY
 Norway is a constitutional monarchy with a long demo-
 cratic tradition. There is broad public support and
 consensus for strong human rights policies in Norway.
 Human rights are an integral part of public policy.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Freedom from torture is guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment is guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is guaran-
 teed by law and respected in practice.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Fair public trial is guaranteed.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Freedom from invasion of the home is guaranteed by law
 and respected in practice.
 
 (480)
 
 
 481
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Norwegian Government's policies relate directly to
 fulfilling the basic needs of the population for food,
 shelter, health care and education. These policies
 include full consideration for less privileged elements
 of the society. A comprehensive social welfare policy
 includes provisions for health and medical services,
 welfare services, various family benefits, and
 disability and unemployment insurance.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 These freedoms are in effect.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Citizens have freedom of movement within the country and
 are free to travel abroad and to emigrate.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The labor movement, a dominant social and political
 force, fully guarantees the rights of all workers of
 both sexes, a policy backed up by advanced and comprehen-
 sive public welfare legislation. Democratic processes
 exist at all levels, assuring the freedom to participate
 in the political process. Women play an active role in
 Norway's political life. Respect for civil and political
 liberties is outstanding.
 
 
 482
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 No such investigations have been requested. Norway is
 party to the International Covenant on Civil and
 Political Rights and the Covenant on Economic, Social
 and Cultural Affairs.
 
 
