NEPAL
 Nepal is nominally a constitutional monarchy and the
 Constitution of 1961, as amended, provides for many
 internationally recognized human rights. In practice
 the King is the sole source of authority for all gov-
 ernmental institutions in a highly traditional society.
 1. Respect'for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is not condoned by the Government nor apparently
 practiced in Nepal.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
 ment
 Capital punishment is seldom imposed in Nepal. Nepalese
 prison conditions reflect the general standard of living
 in one of the world's poorest countries, but political
 prisoners have usually received better treatment than
 those convicted of criminal acts, in terms of visitors,
 reading and writing materials, and meals from home.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Public Security Act of 1961 provides for preventive
 detention and "other measures" as may be required to
 "maintain peace and security". Opponents of the monarchy
 have in the past been jailed for long periods of time
 without charges or access to the'courts. Our information
 is that as many as 12 people continue to be held under
 the Security Act, but about 40 detainees have been re-
 leased within the past few months. Between 100 and 200
 prisoners currently held under criminal statues may
 have been arrested for politically-inspired actions.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Nepal has a well-organized system of courts, but judges
 are beholden to the Government and it would be highly
 unlikely that a judge would rule against the Government
 either on a politically-inspired prosecution or an
 appeal for the release of prisoners detained without
 specific charges.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 
 (391)
 
 
 392
 Arbitrary search and seizure has not been a significant
 human rights problem in Nepal. Except in the few in-
 stances where the police are relieved of such obligations
 by specific laws, including the recently enacted narco-
 tics control legislation, arrest or search warrants are
 required prior to search and seizure.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education.
 The Government of Nepal attempts to use its scarce re-
 sources to meet the basic needs of its people by in-
 creasing the economic growth rate and building the
 communication and transportation networks required to
 integrate isolated areas of the country. Nepalese de-
 cision makers have, however, in the past few years re-
 oriented their development programs to deal more directly
 with poverty. The King has assumed the leadership of
 the economic development effort and his insistence that
 programs be spread among the four development regions,
 rather than concentrated in Kathmandu and the lowlands,
 tends to benefit the poorer areas of the country.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Inclu-
 ding:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Loyalty to the King and the "Panchayat" system of elec-
 tions is a prerequisite for legal political activity.
 Political parties are prohibited and the Government exer-
 cises considerable influence over the selection of cand-
 idates for the villages, district, zonal, and national
 Panchayats (assemblies). Other than at the village level,
 elections are indirect, i.e., members are chosen by the
 immediately lower level. The Government, however, will
 probably soon accept direct elections from the district
 level to the national Panchayat. Freedom of speech and
 of the press in Nepal is restricted by the principle that
 the monarchy as an institution and the royal family in
 their persons are above criticism. The Government con-
 
 
 393
 trols the principal English and Nepali daily newspapers,
 but numerous newspapers carry on a sometimes spirited
 critique of government (as distinguished from palace)
 actions. Foreign publications are banned in Nepal if they
 publish articles that the Government regards as too offen-
 sive. All associations, including the ineffective, gov-
 ernment-sponsored labor union, are directly influenced by
 the Government. Although Nepalese law prohibits religious
 proselytizing, the Nepalese are proud of their long tradi-
 tion of religious tolerance, exemplified by Hindus and
 Buddhists worshipping in each others' shrines.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no restrictions on movement within the country
 or abroad.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Political parties were banned in 1960 and replaced by
 the Panchayat system, which is designed to involve the
 people in public affairs while protecting the crown's
 authority. The Government allows some prominent opposi-
 tion leaders to criticize the system privately. B.P.
 Koirala, Nepal's former Prime Minister and primary oppo-
 sition figure, was detained from 1960 to 1968 and again
 in December 1976. In accordance with the conditions set
 by the King prior to his temporary release in June for
 medical treatment in the United States, Koirala returned
 to detention when he came back to Nepal in December 1977.
 Although Koirala faces criminal charges, his supporters
 maintain that he has been detained for political reasons.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Interna-
 tional and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The Government of Nepal allowed representatives of
 Amnesty International to visit the country in late 1977
 to report on human rights violations. In the past,
 Amnesty International has expressed concern about the
 human rights situation and the arrest of specific in-
 dividuals. Several of these individuals have recently
 been released. We know of no other recent occasion on
 which an international body has sought to visit Nepal
 to investigate human rights conditions.
 
 
