 NEPAL
 In May, 1980, Nepal's citizens were allowed their first
 opportunity since 1959 to participate directly in deter-
 mining their political future. They were given a choice
 in a national referendum between continuing but reforming
 Nepal's "Panchayat" system (which allows indirect popular
 participation in the national government, but bans political
 parties) or adopting a multi-party parliamentary system.
 The referendum was ordered by King Birendra following stu-
 dent demonstrations in 1979. By a margin of 54.8 percent
 to 45.2 percent, the voters chose to continue the partyless
 system with reforms. On December 15, the King promulgated
 a constitutional amendment which provides for direct elec-
 tion of most members of the National Panchayat, empowers
 the National Panchayat to name the Prime Minister, and makes
 the government responsible both to the monarch (as was pre-
 viously the case) and to the National Panchayat.
 Supporters of the two systems were allowed considerable
 freedom during the pre-referendum campaign which included
 speeches, mass meetings, demonstrations, and posters.
 Opposition leaders were released from jail and returned
 from exile. Following the referendum the King proclaimed
 a new Speech and Press Act which provides for free speech
 and assembly, except when local authorities rule that such
 activities threaten the general good. To date, enforcement
 practices have tended to maintain freedoms enjoyed during
 the referendum campaign, but the potential for restrictions
 exists. The Nepalese Constitution of 1962 specified that
 citizens have the right to many of the internationally
 recognized human rights, but emergency powers vested in the
 government allow for suspension of these rights whenever an
 external or internal threat is perceived. The King remains
 a constitutional monarch, with the present constitution
 naming him as the source of all government authority.
 In July, 1980, Nepal began its sixth development plan empha-
 sizing agricultural production, employment opportunities,
 and fulfillment of basic needs. The fifth plan began the
 shift from emphasis on infrastructural development (trans-
 portation, communication, and power) to agricultural produc-
 tion and social services. It succeeded in maintaining high
 public investments and in surpassing educational enrollment
 goals, but there were serious shortfalls in agricultural
 production, population control, and in health services. The
 new plan provides for more decentralized decision-making and
 greater popular participation with increased expenditures for
 agriculture and social services. Priority targets are food
 grain production, cottage and small industries, minimum trans-
 portation to villages, and family planning.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited inplicitly by the Prison Act. Unsubstan-
 tiated allegations of torture of prisoners during the first
 days of incarceration have been made in the past by political
 associates and fellow inmates, but the practice does not appear
 
 
 1059
 to be frequent or widespread. Close scrutiny of police prac-
 tices is lacking and no known punishment has resulted from
 alleged acts of police brutality.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Capital Punishment, having been abolished for lesser crimes
 in 1963, can be imposed only.for treason and crimes against
 the monarchy. Two executions in 1979 were the first since
 1962. Police brutality and disappearances while in custody
 have been alleged, but no summary executions have been con-
 firmed. Places of detention reflect the general standard of
 living in one of the poorest developing nations. Jail con-
 .ditions vary-according to the crime committed and the person's
 status, but all prisoners have access to medical attention and
 to the traditional Nepalese diet as well as being permitted
 visitors and goods from the outside. Generally, political pri-
 soners have fared better than those convicted of criminal acts.
 Separate facilities are maintained for women and for the
 criminally insane.
 c. Disappearances
 Opposition members have charged that some persons have dis-
 appeared during custody, but these changes have not been con-
 firmed. The Public Security Act of 1961 permits six months
 preventive detention before charges must be filed. In April,
 1980, prior to the national referendum, King Birandra issued
 a general amnesty to those accused of political crimes; approx-
 imately 100 were released. In addition, 28 opposition leaders
 returned from exile. Opposition critics claim that about 50
 political prisoners remained in prison following the amnesty,
 although most of those were being held on criminal charges.
 About 70 political activists remain in exile.
 d. Arbitrary-Arrest and Imprisonment
 According to the constitution, a suspect must be brought before
 a court within twenty-four hours and must be provided with the
 general grounds for the arrest. An extension of seven days may
 be granted for completion of the police investigation. Those
 held in preventive detention are not accorded these rights, but
 must be charged within six months. Strict adherence to these
 principles is not practiced.
 e. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for a right to a fair public trial in most
 cases (some security and customs cases excepted), and this right
 is generally honored in practice. Except for those held in
 preventive detention,- constitutional guarantees exist for the
 right to counsel and protection from double jeopardy and ex post
 facto laws. There are military and civilian courts with provi-
 sions for appeal. Civilians are not tried by military courts,
 although special courts may be established to try specific cases.
 Judges are appointed by the government and decisions in political
 and security cases can be expected-to reflect the opinion of the
 government.
 
 
 1060
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Except for those suspected of narcotic or security violations,
 search warrants issued by central district officers are required
 before search and seizure. Nepalese law and tradition bolsters
 privacy of the home.
 2. Government   Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and fducatior
 Nepal's economic development has been hampered by geographic
 and demographic problems following its self-imposed isolation
 until the 1950s. These problems are offset only partially by
 the country's major potential resources -- labor, tourist
 attractions, and hydroelectric power. Eighty percent of Nepal's
 land is very hilly or mountainous, creating high population
 density on its arable land and resulting in rapid deforestation,
 erosion, and loss of soil fertility. Population growth remains
 at 2.5 percent annually, adding to demands on food supply and
 social services.
 Nepal is one of the world's poorest countries with a per capita
 income of around $110. Most government services rank with the
 lowest in Asia, and even with the best intentions, the govern-
 ment's ability to improve the people's economic condition is
 very limited.
 Nepal's gross domestic product declined slightly in the fiscal
 year 1979-80, as the result of a substantial drop in grain
 production stemming from a bad monsoon.- Industrial production
 consists of sugar refining and jute processing in addition to
 various import substitution industries. Inflation was a major
 problem during the past fiscal year and was, in effective terms,
 much worse than the twelve percent official rate.
 The right to own property is protected in Section 15 of the
 Nepalese constitution. Government expropriation must follow
 legal procedures. The major threats to private ownership are
 the increasing concentration of land holdings and the loss of
 land itself through erosion. Recent figures show that 60 percent
 of all agricultural land is held by 10 percent of the rural popu-
 lation and that 54 percent control less than 11 percent. Over
 25 percent of those engaged in agriculture in the Terai (major
 producing area along the Indian border) are employed in a ten-
 ancy relationship which requires at least 50 percent of their
 produce be paid as rent. Nepal's development programs have
 concentrated on improving the land and increasing production.
 Unemployment levels are estimated to be 5.6 percent and 5.9
 percent in rural and urban regions respectively. It is reported
 that 63 percent of rural workers are under-employed during some
 part of the year. Researchers have defined Nepal's subsistence
 level to be approximately 19 cents per day. Current per capita
 annual income levels average $80 (rural) and $176 (urban), placing
 approximately 52 percent of the population below the subsistence
 level. The government has passed comprehensive safety and working
 condition codes, but these are seldom enforced and are seen by
 many as a threat to industrial development and to employment.
 Health statistics for Nepal reflect the economic and geographic
 problems. Life expectancy for men in 1976 was 43.4 years and
 
 
 1061
 for women 41.2. Infant mortality rates remain high with the
 number of deaths per 1,000 live births, 133.6 in rural areas
 compared to 52.8 in urban regions. Relatively safe drinking
 water is accessible to 81 percent of the urban population but
 to only 5 percent in rural areas. Nationally, only 3 percent
 have electricity. Per capita protein intake is estimated at
 50 grams per day with 95 percent of caloric intake requirements
 being met. Health facilities and manpower are lacking with one
 doctor per 39,000 people and one hospital bed for every 6,630.
 Early health programs emphasized curative systems and malaria
 eradication, then expanded to preventive programs and targeted
 specific diseases for attention. The fourth and fifth plans
 added maternal and child care along with family planning to com-
 bat the high birth'and infant mortality rates. The sixth plan
 aims at expanding the integrated health services plan to all
 districts with goals of one hospital per district and one village
 health worker in each village Panchayat. While these programs
 have resulted in dramatic successes in the eradication of the
 targeted diseases, they have fallen short of providing the needed
 personnel and medicines to carry out the integrated health care
 program.
 Despite the establishment of a national commission on population,
 family planning programs remain underfunded and understaffed and
 there is low awareness of and low accessibility to contraceptive
 methods. Thebirth rate remains high at 2.5 percent annually.
 Access to education has been greatly expanded in Nepal since the
 early 1950's when the literacy rate was less than 2 percent.
 Nationwide enrollment in the primary schools includes 95 percent
 of all males and 25 percent of females. Secondary school enroll-
 ments have risen to 12 percent. .Public expenditure for education
 now absorbs 1.5 percent of GDP. Development in the fifth plan
 exceeded goals raising the literacy rate to 19 percent and primary
 enrollments from 43 percent in 1974 to 78 percent in 1979. Sixth
 plan goals have not been announced, but are expected to include
 targets of an 85-90 percent primary enrollment with a reduction
 of    dropouts and increased    female enrollment and curriculum
 relevancy. The secondary education goals are expected to empha-
 size vocational and technical training.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedoms of speech and assembly are guaranteed by the constitution
 provided that they are not in support of a political party or are
 not judged by local authorities to be detrimental to the common
 -good, the monarchy or members of the royal family. Journals and
 newspapers which overstep these guidelines are suspended from
 publication. This penalty was applied to three newspapers in
 September, 1980, for their criticism of the monarchy. Others
 carry on spirited criticism of the government, as distinguished
 from the monarchy. The two principal dailies in English and
 Nepalese are government organs, but carry reports of opposition
 activities.
 Following the referendum, King.Birendra proclaimed new regulations
 concerning press and speech which were revised and passed into law
 in August. They provide for mass meetings and the display of pos-
 ters at any time except when prohibited by local authorities. The
 grounds for prohibition are defined as "for the convenience or
 good of the general public." Meetings, speeches, and posters
 
 
 1062
 may not be in support of a political party or detrimental to
 the monarchy, relations among the people, or national security.
 Enforcement practices have tended to maintain freedoms enjoyed
 during the referendum campaign, but the potential for misuse
 by the local authorities exists. Pre and post-referendum
 demonstrations in Kathmandu proceeded peacefully while there
 was some violence in other regions of the country. Unions
 are not allowed, although associations approaching union status
 have been formed and have staged several group actions. Despite
 government and business opposition, they resulted in some worker
 gains.
 Religious toleration is a Nepalese tradition even though offi-
 cially the country is a Hindu kingdom. Conversion from Hinduism
 or Buddhism is against the law, but any religion may be practiced
 in Nepal. Legally, the caste system has been eliminated, but
 social and religious traditions persist despite government efforts
 to avoid caste discrimination.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration and Repatriation
 There are no general restrictions on travel within the country.
 The government tightly controls passport issuance by means of
 slow processing, short validity, and country restrictions. Visas
 are required for all but Indian citizens. Tourist visa rates
 were doubled during 1980, primarily as a revenue measure.
 Twelve thousand Tibetans are estimated to have entered Nepal since
 the 1950's. Most have settled in camps throughout the country
 with the largest settlements located near Kathmandu and Pokhara.
 The government of Nepal, the United Nations, and foreign govern-
 ments have assisted in their resettlement. The government esti-
 mates that 400 Nepalese families have returned from the state of
 Assam in India where anti-foreign sentiment recently has prevailed,
 but the number is probably much larger. The government has neither
 encouraged nor discouraged this movement, and most people have
 been resettled with the assistance of their families.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Citizen participation in the referendum was high with approxi-
 mately 74 percent voting. The December 15 constitutional reforms
 enable broadening the scope of popular participation to include
 direct election of most members of the various panchayats (local
 and national councils of government) who under the previous
 constitution were popularly elected only at the village level.
 However, this will depend upon inplementing legislation which
 has not yet been announced. Political parties are banned by
 the constitution, although opposition groups exist and publicize
 their opinions in the press and in mass meetings.
 Women's legal and social status in Nepal is a reflection of the
 conflict between modern and traditional ideologies. The consti-
 tution prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, but
 supports the role of tradition and laws based on its values.
 Nepalese women made legal gains during the International Women's
 Year when the national government liberalized divorce and child
 custody laws, and strengthened protection of women's inheri-
 tance and property disposal rights. But the gap between legal
 documents and reality persists with women unaware of their rights
 and with continuing inequities, especially in family law, the
 
 
 1063
 area most resistant to legislative change. New development
 plans stress increasing female primary school enrollments
 from their present 25 percent. The government further intends
 that cottage industry, family planning, and health service
 goals should improve the lives of rural women. 9.5 percent
 of the members of local Panchayats were women.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No international human rights organization is known to have
 asked or requested permission to come to Nepal since the visit
 of Amnesty International representatives in 1977. Amnesty
 International has expressed concern in the past about the state
 of human rights in Nepal and has sponsored political prisoners,
 some of whom were subsequently released.
 There are two human rights organizations in Nepal who work
 with Amnesty International,    regional human rights groups,
 and other minor groups.         They disseminate their views
 in public meetings, newspapers and pamphlets. There has been
 no report of attempts to suppress them.
 
 
 1064
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS'AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NEPAL
 1978     1979     1980
 ------------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..         13.4     16.8     20.6
 LOANS........ 0.0              0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..........          13.4      16.8     20.6
 A.A......................... 10.3      12.4     13.4
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............         10.3     12.4     13.4
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......          1.6      2.7      5.7
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          1.6      2.7      5.7
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........          1.6      2.7      5.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,          1.6      2.7      5.7
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          1.5      1.7      1.5
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          1.5      1.7      1.F
 CONTR. TO IFI..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS,...           1.5      1.7      1.5
 OTHER............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.TOTAL .          0.1       0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.1      0.1      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS..            0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEOTRNG.,            0.1      0.1      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK .           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS,.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & IL,.         13.5      16.9     20.6
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       13.5      16.9     20.6
 ----      --------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ------------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ----     -------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........    68.5     70.3     115.1    519.8
 IBRD               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      3.1
 IDA               b0.2     39.8     60.0     261.4
 ID8                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AD8               17.5     25.0      42.7    193.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.8      5.5       8.0     47.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      4.4     15.0
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 1065
