 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government and
 an independent judiciary. In 1990 the King, formerly an absolute monarch, legalized
 politicalparties after which an interim government promulgated a new constitution.
 The King retains important residual powers, but has dissociated himself from direct
 day-to-day government activities. The democratically elected Parliament consists of
 the House of Representatives (lower house) and the National Council (upper house).
 Since 1990 Nepal has held three national elections, two for the Parliament and one
 for local officials. International observers considered these elections to be generally
 free and fair. The Government changed in September 1995 and the transfer of
 power to the new coalition was peaceful and orderly. However, in February the lead-
 ers of the United People's Front launched a "People's War" in central Nepal, which
 has been waged through killings and bombings involving both soldiers and civilians.
 The National Police Force maintains internal security, assisted as necessary by
 the Royal Nepalese Army. Police reaction to the insurgency led to allegations that
 unwarranted force was used against prisoners and noncombatants. The army is tra-
 ditionally loyal to the King and avoids overt involvement in domestic politics. The
 police are subject to civilian control, but local officials have wide discretion in main-
 taining law and order. The police committed human rights abuses.
 Nepal is an extremely poor country, with an annual per capita gross domestic
 product of approximately $200. Over 80 percent of its 20 million eople support
 themselves through subsistence agriculture. Principal crops include rice, wheat,
 maize, jute, and potatoes. Tourism and the export of carpets and garments are the
 major sources of foreign exchange. Foreign aid accounts for more than half the de-
 velopment budget. The economy is mixed with 54 public sector firms. Eight former
 government firms have been privatized since 1992.
 Since political reform began in 1990, Nepal has made progress in its transition
 to a more open society with greater respect for human rights. However, problems
 remain, and the Government fails to enforce all the Constitution's provisions. The
 police continue to abuse detainees, using torture as punishment or to extract confes-
 sions. The Government rarely investigates allegations of police brutality or takes ac-
 tion. There were also allegations that police killed unarmed civilians in the course
 of operations against the insurgents, and while in custody. The authorities use arbi-
 trary arrest and detention, and prison conditions remain poor. Judicial susceptibility
 to political pressure and corruption, long delays before trial, and lengthy pretrial de-
 tention remain problems. The Government continues to impose some restrictions on
 freedom of religion and expression. Lower castes and women suffer widespread dis-
 crimination. Trafficking in women and girls, violence against women, forced labor,
 and child labor also remain serious problems.
 In July Parliament unanimously enacted a bill to establish a permanent human
 rights commission with the authority to investigate human rights abuses.
 The insurgents committed numerous human rights abuses, including killings,
 bombings, and mutilations.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-On a number of occasions, the Gov-
 ernment is alleged to have used unwarranted lethal force against persons suspected
 of involvement in the "People's War" in central Nepal. Some human rights groups
 have reported several instances of police killings in the districts affected by the un-
 rest. Some of these incidents occurred during armed combat, but several allegedly
 involved unarmed civilians. An investigation team of prominent human rights
 groups reported that Tilak Ram Budha, the elected village development committee
 chairman of Kot Gaon in Rolpa district and political representative of the United
 
 
 1457
 
 People's Front (UPF), was shot by the police on April 12, reportedly while in custody
 after arrest. The team also reported that iman Singh Rokka of Uwa village in Rolpa
 died while being transferred to a jail under police custody. In this case a medical
 doctor reportedly stated that the cause of death was chronic jaundice. he general
 perception, given the the brutality of insurgent attacks against civilians, is that the
 police have shown restraint.
 The insurgents were responsible for numerous human rights abuses. Launched in
 February by UPF leaders Baburam Bhattarai and Pushpa Kamal Dahal, the "Peo-
 ple's War' is a self-declared Maoist insurgency. Guerrillas, usually armed with
 homemade guns, explosives, knives, and sticks, attacked landowners, government
 officials, and government facilities in a number of districts. The Government re-
 spondedf to the insurgency by sending more than 1,500 police to the affected dis-
 tricts. Fifty-five persons died in the subsequent violence, most of them killed by the
 insurgents.
 Two Dstudentranc.-tisthat thre nopoleto oitcstoy miv9ad 1994peans
 Twostuentactvits  hatthepoicetoo ino ustdy n 193and 199  remain
 missing. The Supreme Court has investigated these disappearances, but the police
 maintain that they are not holding the students.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution and criminal law prohibit torture; however, the police often use
 beatings and torture to punish suspects or to extract confessions. The Government
 has failed to conduct thorough and independent investigations of reports of police
 brutality and has refused to take significant disciplinary action against officers in-
 volved. Police are often unwilling to investigate and discipline fellow officers, and
 people are afraid to bring cases against police for fear of reprisals. The Constitution
 provides for compensation for victims of torture, and a bill providing for such com-
 pensation was passed by Parliament in September. The Government has begun
 human rights education or the police force.
 Human rights groups have reported instances of torture in areas affected by the
 "People's War." On March 7, Jhakku Prasad Subedi, the elected UPF chairman of
 the Rolpa District Development Committee, was reportedly so severely beaten while
 in police custody that he was unable to walk for 25 days. Dozens of other male de-
 tainees reported torture inflicted on them by police. Women in these areas have re-
 ported instances of rape and sexual abuse by the police.
 Human rights groups have also documented Maoist violence in these areas, in-
 cluding the severing of arms and limbs. The Maoists have specifically targeted oppo-
 sition political leaders, local elites, and suspected informers. On February 25, four
 persons shouting Maoist slogans seriously assaulted Communist Party of Nepal-
 United Marxist Ueninist (UML) worker Bhim Bahadur Bhandari. On February 27,
 Maoist activists cut off the left hand and right hand fingers of Narajit Basnet, the
 brother of the Nepali Congress Party (NCP) president of his village development
 committee.
 Prison conditions are poor. Overcrowding is common in prisons and authorities
 sometimes handcuff or fetter detainees. Women are normally incarcerated sepa-
 rately from men, but in similar conditions. The Government has not implemented
 a provision in the 1992 Children's Act calling for the establishment of a juvenile
 home and juvenile court. Consequently, children are sometimes incarcerated with
 adults-either as criminals or with an incarcerated parent. The Department of Pris-
 ons says that 75 noncriminal dependent children remain in prison, but the number
 of child prisoners charged or convicted of a crime is unknown.
 There has been some improvement in prison conditions. The authorities are more
 likely to transfer sick prisoners to hospitals than they were in the past. Due to the
 inadequacy of medical facilities in the country, the authorities sometimes place the
 mentally ill in jails under inhumane conditions. The Government permits local
 human rights groups to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that the au-
 thorities must arraign or release a suspect within 24 hours of arrest, but the police
 often violate this provision. Under the Public Offenses Act of 1970, the police must
 obtain warrants for an arrest unless a person is caught in the act of committing
 a crime. For many offenses, the case must be filed in court within 7 days of arrest.
 If the court upholds the detention, the law authorizes the police to hold the suspect
 for 25 days to complete their investigation, with a possible extension of 7 days. How-
 ever, the police often hold prisoners longer. The Supreme Court has on occasion or-
 dered the release of detainees held longer than 24 hours without a court appear-
 ance.
 Detainees do not have the legal right to receive visits by family members and they
 are permitted access to lawyers only after the authorities file charges. In practice
 the police grant access to prisoners on a basis that varies from prison to prison. Per-
 
 
 1458
 sons have a right to legal representation and a court appointed lawyer, but govern-
 ment lawyers or access to private attorneys is provided only on request. Con-
 sequently, those unaware of their rights may not have legal representation. There
 is a system of bail, but bonds are usually too expensive for most citizens. According
 to the Department of Prisons, over half of the 6,000 people imprisoned are awaiting
 trial. Due to court backlogs, a slow appeals process, and poor access to legal rep-
 resentation, it is common for persons to be held for periods longer than their sen
 tences after conviction.
 Under the Pubic Security Act, the authorities may detain persons who allegedly
 threaten domestic security and tranquility, amicable relations with other states, and
 relations between citizens of different classes or religions. Persons whom the Gov-
 ernment detains under the Act are considered to be in preventive detention and are
 not brought to trial.
 The 1991 amendments to the Public Security Act allow the authorities to extend
 periods of detention after submitting written notices to the Home Ministry. The o
 lice must notify the district court of the detention within 24 hours, and it may or er
 an additional 6 months of detention before authorities file official charges.
 Other laws, including the Public Offenses Act, permit arbitrary detention. This
 Act and its many amendments cover such crimes as disturbing the peace, vandal-
 ism, rioting, and fighting. Under this Act, the Government detalned hundreds of
 civil servants during a 55-day antigovernment strike in 1991. Human rights mon-
 itrs express concern that the Act vests too much discretionary power in the Chief
 District Officer (CDO), the higheat ranking civil servant in each of the country's 75
 districts. The Act authorizes the CDO to order detentions, to issue search warrants,
 and to specify fines and other punishments for misdemeanors without judicial re-
 view.
 Under the Public Offenses Act hundreds of people were arrested on March 18 for
 staging a peaceful protest of the human rights situation organized by Amnesty
 International (Al) in Kathmandu in China. Athough most were released the same
 day, several Al officers and 14 Tibetans were held in jail for up to 7 days, some
 without chatre.
 Human rights grups allege that the police have used arbitrary arrest and deten-
 tion during the "People's War" to intimidate communities considered sympathetic to
 the Maoists. In one example, Jun Maya Rokaya, a UPF representative in the Uwa
 Village Development Committee, was reportedly arrested without a warrant on
 March 14 and kept in police custody for 2 months before being presented before a
 court.
 The Constitation prhibits exile; it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciaiy and the Supreme Court has demonstrated independence. However, lower level
 courts remain vulnerable to political pressure. In addition, bribery of lower level
 judges and court staff is endemic.
 The Supreme Court has ruled that important provisions in the 1992 Labor Act
 and in the 1991 Nepal Citizenship Act are unconstitutional. In 1995 the Court also
 decided that the dissolution of the Parliament at the request of a former Prime Min-
 ister was unconstitutional, and ordered the body restored.
 Appellate and district courts have become increasingly independent, although
 they sometimes bend to political pressure. In Rolpa, one of the districts most af-
 fected by the "People's War, human rights groups have accused the district courts
 of acting in complicity with CDO's in violating detainees' rights. These groups allege
 that arrest without a warrant, prolonged detention without trial, and police torture
 occur in these areas.
 The judicial system consists of three levels: district courts, appellate courts, and
 the Supreme Court. The King appoints judges on the recommendation of the Judi-
 cial Council, a constitutional body chaired by the Chief Justice. The Council is also
 responsible for the assignment of judges, disciplinary action, and other administra-
 tive matters. Judges decide cases; there is no jury system.
 Delays in the administration of justice are a severe problem. The Supreme Court
 has a backlog of approximately 11,000 cases, which it expects will take 5 years to
 clear. A case appealed to the Supreme Court may take more than 10 years to con-
 clude.
 The Constitution provides for the right to counsel, equal protection under the law,
 protection from double jeopardy, protection from retroactive application of the law,
 and for public trials, except in some security and customs cases. All lower court de-
 cisions, including acquittals, are subject to a ppeal. The Supreme Court is the ourt
 of last appeal, but the King may grant par dons. The King can also suspend, com-
 mute, or remit any sentence. On the recommendation of the Government, the King
 
 
 1459
 
 often pardons up to 12 prisoners-if they have served 75 percent of their sentence
 and shown good behavior-on national holidays.
 Military courts adjudicate cases concerning military personnel, who are immune
 from prosecution in civilian courts. In 1992 the Supreme Court ruled that military
 courts may no longer try civilians for crimes involving the military services.
 The authorities may prosecute terrorism or treason cases under the Treason Act.
 Specially constituted tribunals hear these trials in closed sessions. No such trials
 took place during the past 2 years.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government generally respected the privacy of the home and family. Search war-
 rants are required before search and seizure except in cases involving suspected se-
 curity and narcotics violations. As amended, the Police Act of 1955 empowers the
 police to issue warrants for search and seizure in criminal cases upon receipt of in-
 formation about criminal activities. Within 24 hours of their issuance, warrants in
 misdemeanor cases must be approved by the CDO. Court judges must approve them
 in felony cases.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall
 have freedom of thought and expression and that the Government may not censor
 any news item or other reading material. Nevertheless, the Constitution prohibits
 speech and writing that would threaten the sovereignty and integrity of the King-
 dom; disturb the harmonious relations among people of different castes or commu-
 nities; promote sedition, defamation, contempt of court, or crime; or contradict de-
 cent public behavior or morality.
 The Press and Publications Act provides for the licensing of publications and the
 granting of credentials to journalists. The Act includes penalties for violating these
 requirements. The Act aIso prohibits publication of material that, among other
 things, promotes disrespect toward the King or royal family; that undermines secu-
 rity, peace, order, the dignity of the King, and the integrity or sovereignty of the
 Kingdom; that creates animosity among people of different castes and religions; or
 that adversely affects the good conduct or morality of the public. The regulation also
 provides a basis for banning foreign publications. However, foreign publications are
 now widely available.
 There are hundreds of independent vernacular and English newspapers represent-
 ing various political points of view, most have a small circulation and limited im-
 pact. The Government owns the daily Nepali Language newspaper with the largest
 circulation. Editors and writers at the Government newsaper practice self-censor-
 ship and generally reflect government policy. Ruling poitical parties have influ-
 enced the editorial policy of the government newspaper to their advantage. How-
 ever, despite the sensitivity of the Government to the "People's War," the press has
 not faced overt pressure to report on it in a particular way. Views of human rights
 groups, the statements of the police, and the press relcases of UPF leader Bhattarai
 have all been reported in the local press.
 The Government owns and controls the major radio and television stations. Radio
 reaches the greatest number of people and has the largest influence. Programming
 currently reflects a broader range of interests and political viewpoints than prior to
 the political transformation in 1990, but still closely follows the government line.
 The Government does not restrict access to foreign radio broadcasts or to thepfur-
 chase of television satellite dishes that can access international news from the rit-
 ish Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and the Cable News Network (CNN). A small
 but growing number of Nepalis have access to foreign news.
 The Broadcast Act of 1993 allows private parties to broadcast television and FM
 radio, but implementation by the Government has been slow. Private broadcasters
 sometimes waited years for the Government to assign them a bandwidth and issue
 the operating license. There are two private television stations (cable and micro-
 wave), which have been operating for over a year in the Kathmandu valley. They
 provide mainly entertainment programming and do no local research or reporting.
 There has been much debate about liberalizing the media and privatizing govern-
 ment-owned media. This debate has put pressure, so far successfully resisted, on
 successive governments to open the air waves and divest government-controlled
 printing operations.
 The Government limits academic freedom to the same extent as the media. No
 overt efforts to enforce these limitations were reported this year.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although the Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly, this right may be restricted by law on vague grounds
 such as undermining the sovereignty and integrity of the State or disturbing law
 
 
 1460
 and order. Persons protesting Chinese human rights policy were arrested and de-
 tained in March before and during peaceful protests (see Section l.d.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution describes Nepal as a Hindu Kingdom,
 although it does not establish Hinduism as the state religion. The majority of citi-
 zens are Hindu. The Constitution permits the practice of all religions and prohibits
 discrimination on the basis of caste except for traditional religious practices at
 Hindu temples.
 Although the Government has generally not interfered with the practice of other
 religions, conversion is prohibited and punishable with fines or imprisonment, the
 police occasionally harass members of minority religions. Some groups are concerned
 that the ban on proselytizing limits the expression of non-Hindu religious belief.
 Foreigners convicted of proselytizing can be expelled from the country.
 Eleven Christians were arrested in September 1994 for proselytizing. They were
 convicted by the 11am district court and sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment in Au-
 gust 1995. The case received considerable international attention. The 11 were held
 in prison until they were pardoned by the King and released unconditionally in No-
 vember 1995.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement and residence, and
 the Government generally does not restrict travel abroad. However, the Government
 restricts travel to some areas near the Chinese border for foreign tourists and for
 foreign residents, such as Tibetans residing in Nepal. The Government allows citi-
 zens abroad to return, and is not known to revoke citizenship for political reasons.
 The Government has no official refugee policy and is party to neither the 1951
 U.N. Convention relating to the Status of Refugees nor the 1967 Protocol. However
 it does provide asylum for refugees and has cooperated with the office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (NHCR), and with other humanitarian
 organizations, in assisting refugees from Bhutan and Tibet (China). The UTNHCR
 has maintained an office in Kathmandu since 1989. Since 1959 the Government has
 accepted approximately 20,000 Tibetan refugees, many of whom still reside in the
 country. Since 1991 it has  so provided asylum to more than 90,000 Bhutanese ref-
 ugees, the grat majority of whom are now living in UNHCR-administered camps
 in eastern Nepal.
 In the mid-1960's, the Government suspended issuance of identification cards to
 Tibetans. Undocumented Tibetan residents face difficulties in obtaining basic citi-
 zens' rights and are unable to travel abroad or access such services as banking. The
 UNHCR donates blank resident identification cards to the Government for Tibetans.
 In early 1995, the Government reversed this policy and resumed issuance of identi-
 fication cards to Tibetans. By mid-July issuance of identification cards to virtually
 all 7,300 Tibetan residents outside the Kathmandu valley was completed. However,
 approximately 4000 Tibetan refugees within the Kathmandu valley still remain
 without identification cards.
 China and the Government of Nepal tightened control of movement across their
 border in 1986, but both sides have enforced these restrictions haphazardly. Police
 and customs officials occasionally harass Tibetan asylum seekers who cross the bor-
 der from China. Border police often extort money from Tibetans in exchange for pas-
 sage. With the change from a Communist Party government to a coalition govern-
 ment headed by the Nepal Congress Party, the former practice of forcibly returning
 asylum seekers to China has stopped, and there were no reports of forced expulsion
 of Tibetan asylum seekers in 1996. -
 There are approximately 91,000 ethnic Nepali refugees from Bhutan in UNHCR-
 administered camps in southeastern Nepal. An additional 15,000 to 20,000 refugees
 reside outside the camps in either Nepal or India. The total represents approxi-
 mately one-sixth of Bhutan's estimated pre-1991 population.
 The UNHCR monitors the condition of the Bhutanese refugees and provides for
 their basic needs. The Government accepts the refugee presence as temporary, on
 humanitarian grounds, but offers little more than a place to stay. The Government
 officially restricts refugee freedom of movement and work, but does not strictly en-
 force its policies. Living conditions in the camps have improved dramatically since
 1992. Adequate clean water is available and health, sanitation, and nutrition stand-
 ards are acceptable. Violence has sometimes broken out between camp residents and
 the surrounding local population. The UNHCR and other donors and relief organiza-
 tions have defused tensions through a refugee affected areas assistance plan aimed
 at imprving conditions in communities adjacent to the camps.
 In 1993 the Governments of Nepal and Bihutan formed a joint committee to re-
 solve the refugee problem and to determine different categories of refugees in prepa-
 ration for future repatriation. Seven rounds of bilateral talks have been held, ut
 with little concrete progress. The Government expressed concern during the latest
 
 
 1461
 
 round of talks in April that many refugees would become stateless if Bhutan refuses
 to take them back. The lack of progress in bilateral negotiations has led to increased
 frustration in the camps, and to a recent campaign of "peace marches" by refugees
 seeking to return to Bhutan.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens, through their elected representatives, have the right to amend the Con-
 stitution with the exception of certain basic principles that they may not change-
 sovereignty vested in the people, the multiparty system, fundamental rights, and
 the constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections are scheduled at least every 5 years. Midterm elections
 may be called if the ruling party loses its majority, loses a vote of no confidence
 or calls for elections. The Constitution grants suffrage to all citizens of age 18 and
 over.
 A three-party coalition which now has a majority in Parliament, passed a no-con-
 fidence motion against the previous minority government in September 1995. That
 coalition formed a new government later that same month.
 The House of Representatives, or lower house, may send legislation directly to the
 King by majority vote. The National Council, or upper house, may amend or reject
 lower house legislation, but the lower house can overrule its objections. The upper
 house may also introduce legislation and send it to the lower house for consider-
 ation.
 The King exercises certain powers with the advice and consent of the Council of
 Ministers. These include exclusive authority to enact, amend, and repeal laws relat-
 ing to succession to the throne. The King's income and property are tax-exempt and
 inviolable, and no question may be raised in any court about any act performed by
 the King. The Constitution also permits the King to exercise emergency powers in
 the event of war, external aggression, armed revolt, or extreme economic depression.
 In such an emergeny, the King may suspend without judicial review many basic
 freedoms, including the freedoms of expression and assembly, freedom from censor-
 ship, and freedom Irom preventive detention. However, he may not suspend habeas
 corpus or the right to form associations. The King's declaration of a state of emer-
 gency must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the lower house of the Par-
 liament. If the lower house is not in session, the upper house exercises this power.
 A state of emergency may be maintained for up to 3 months without legislative ap-
 proval and up to 6 months, renewable only once for an additional 6 months, if the
 legislature grants approval.
 The Constitution tars the registration and participation in elections of any politi-
 cal party that is based on "religion, community, caste, tribe, or region," or that does
 not operate openly and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women, indigenous peoples, or minorities
 from participating in the Government or in political parties. Conservative traditions
 limit the roles of women and of some castes and tribes in the political process. The
 Constitution requires that women constitute 5 percent of each party's candidates for
 the House of Representatives. Seven of the 205 members of the lower house of the
 current Parliament are women. In the upper house, 4 of the 60 members are
 women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are a dozen nongovernmental (NGO) human rights organizations. These in-
 clude the Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON), the Informal Sector Serv-
 ices Center (INSEC, the International Institute for Human Rights, Environment,
 and Development (INHURED), and the Forum for the Protection of Human Rights
 (FOPHUR). The Nepal Law Society also monitors human rights abuses and a num-
 ber of NGO's focus on specific areas such as torture, child laboi, women's rights,
 or ethnic minorities. Groups are free to publish reports on human rights abuses.
 The Government has also allowed groups to visit prisons and prisoners. The Govern-
 ment rarely arrests or detains those rporting on human rights problems. However,
 one worker for FOPHUR was reportediy arrested on February 18 without warrant
 or charge and held incommunicado for 6 days before release.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution specifies that the State shall not discriminate against citizens
 on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology. However, there is still a caste
 system. Discrimination against lower castes and women remains common, especially
 in rural areas.
 
 
 1462
 Women.-There is no law against domestic violence, which is widespread. In one
 study, 50 percent of the respondents said that they know someone who was the vic-
 tim of domestic violence. Little public attention is given to violence against women
 in the home the Government makes no special effort to combat it. Rape and incest
 are also problems, particularly in rural areas. There is a law agnst rape of non-
 prstitute women which imposes sentences of from 3 to 5 years.In the case of rape
 of prostitutes, sentences range from a fre of 500 rupees ($9.00) to 1 year's imprison-
 ment.
 The dowry tradition is strong, with greater prevalence in the Terai region. Killing
 of brides because of defaults on dowry payments is rare, but does occur. More com-
 mon is the physical abuse of wives by the husband and the husband's family to ob-
 tain additional dowry or to force the woman to leave to enable the son to remarry.
 Trafficking in women and girls remains a deeply ingrained social problem in sev-
 eral of the country's poorest areas. Estimates of the number of girls and women
 working as prostitutes in India range between 40,000 and 100,000. The best avail-
 able data suggest that approximately 5,000 to 7,000 girls between the ages of 10
 and 18 are lured or abducted into prostitution each year. Prostitution is also a prob-
 lem in the Kathmandu valley. A children's human rights group in Nepal states that
 20 percent of prostitutes are younger than 16 years old. In many cases, parents or
 relatives sell women and young girls into sexual slavery. Among the Badini and
 Devaki of western Nepal, religious prostitution remains a problem.
 There is legislation to protect women from coercive trafficking, but it is not well
 enforced. The fear of the spread of AIDS by returning prostitutes has discouraged
 the Government from promoting the rehabilitation of prostitutes. Government ef-
 forts focus more on preventing voluntary prostitution. 'Me Ministry of Labor and
 Social Welfare sponsors job and skill traimng proerams in severai poor districts
 known for sending prostitutes to India. Several NGO s have similar programs.
 Although the Constitution provides protections for women, including equal pay for
 equal work, the Government has not taken significant action to implement its provi-
 sions. Women face discrimination, particularly in rural areas, where religious and
 cultural tradition, lack of education and ignorance of the law remain severe inpedi-
 ments to their exercise of basic rights such as the right to vote or to hold property
 in their own names.
 Women have benefited from changes in marriage and inheritance laws. In 1994
 the Supreme Court struck down provisions of the Citizenship Law that discrimi-
 nated against foreign spouses of Nepalese women. However, many other discrimina-
 tory laws still remain. According to legal experts, there are more than 20 laws that
 discriminate against women. For example, the law grants women the right to di-
 vorce, but on narrower grounds than those applicable to men. The law on property
 rights also favors men in its provisions for inheritance, land tenancy, and the divi-
 sion of family property. In August 1995, the Supreme Court also ordered the Council
 of Ministers to enact legislation within 1 year giving women property rights in re-
 gard to inheritance and land tenancy equal of those of men. As of year's end, how-
 ever, such legislation had not been introduced in Parliament.
 According to the 1991 census, the female literacy rate is 26 percent, compared
 with 57 percent for men. Human rights groups report that girls attend secondary
 schools at a rate half that of boys. There are now many NGO s focused on integrat-
 ing women into society and the economy. These NGO's work in the areas of literacy,
 small business, skills transfer, and against trafficking in women and girls.
 There are a growing number of women's advocacy groups and nearly all political
 parties have their own women's group. Members of Parliament have begun working
 or the passage of tougher laws or crimes of sexual assault, but have had little suc-
 cess so far.
 Children.-The Government provides free primary education for children of ages
 6 to 12, but many families cannot afford school supplies or clothing. Schools charge
 fees for further education. Free health care is provided through government clinics,
 but they are poorly equipped and too few in number to meet the demand. Commu-
 nity-based health programs assist in the prevention of childhood diseases and pro-
 vide primary health care services. Due to poor or nonexistent sanitation in rural
 areas many children are at risk from severe and fatal illnesses.
 The Child Act of 1992 provides legal protection for children in the workplace and
 in criminal proceedings. Although it calls for the establishment of child welfare com-
 mittees and orphanages the Government has established few such facilities. The
 Labor Act of 1992 prohibits employment of minors under 14 years of age, but em-
 ployers, particularly in the informal sector or agriculture, widely ignore the law.
 M        under te age of 16 work in all sectors of the economy. Children's rights
 groups estimate that up to half of all children work. As recently as early 1994, the
 carpet industry employed large numbers of children, an estimated 23,000, nearly
 
 
 1463
 one-third of all workers in that industry. Due to negative publicity in consumer na-
 tions, children now account for approximately 5 percent of the carpet industry's em-
 ployees, about 6,000 workers (see Section 6.d.). A consortium of carpet manufactur-
 ers is moving to establish a certification system for carpets made without child
 labor. The Ministry of Labor is increasing its efforts to monitor the use of child
 labor.
 Prostitution and trafficking in young girls remain serious problems (see above).
 Approximately 75 innocent children under the age of 12 are incarcerated with
 their parents because the Government has not established juvenile homes (see Sec-
 tion 1.c.).
 People With Disabilities.-The disabled face widespread discrimination. Families
 often are stigmatized by and ashamed of disabled family members, who may be hid-
 den away or neglected. Economic integration is further hampered by the general
 view that the disabled are unproductive. The mentally retarded are associated with
 the mentally ill. Sometimes, mentally ill and retarded persons are placed in prisons
 due to the lack of facilities or support.
 The Government has long been involved in providing for the disabled, but the
 level of government assistance has not met the needs of the disabled. The 1982 Dis-
 abled Persons Protection and Welfare Act and additional 1994 rules mandate acces-
 sibility to buildings, transportation, employment, education, and other state serv-
 ices. However, despite government funding for special education programs, the Gov-
 ernment does not implement or enforce laws regarding the disabled. A number of
 NGO's working with the disabled receive significant funding from the Government,
 but persons who are physically or mentally disabled rely almost exclusively on fam-
 ily members to assist them.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Nepal has over 75 ethnic groups speaking
 50 languages. The Constitution provides that each community "shall have the right
 to preserve and promote its language, script, and culture." It further specifies that
 each community has the right to operate schools up to the primary level in its moth-
 er tongue.
 Discrimination against lower castes is especially common in the rural areas of
 western Nepal. Although the Government has outlawed the public shunning of "un-
 touchables, an exception was retained for traditional practices at Hindu religious
 sites. Economic, social, and educational advancement tend to be a function of histor-
 ical patterns, geographic location, and caste. Better education and higher levels of
 prosperity, especially in the Kathmandu valley, are slowly reducing caste distinc-
 tions and increasing opportunities for lower socioeconomic groups. Better educated
 urban-oriented castes (Brshmin, Chhetri, and certain elements of the Newar com-
 munity traditionally dominant in the Kathmandu valley) continue to dominate poli.
 tics, senior administrative and military positions, and to control a disproportionate
 share of natural resources in their territories.
 In remote areas, school lessons and national radio broadcasts are often in the
 local language. However, in areas with nearby municipalities, education at the pri-
 mary, secondary, and university levels is conducted almost exclusively in Nepali.
 Human rights .gr.ups report that the languages of the small Kusunda, Dura, and
 Meche communities are nearly extinct and that non.Hindu peoples are losing their
 culture.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assoiation.-The Constitution provides for the freedom to estab-
 lish and join unions and associations. It permits restriction of unions only in cases
 of subversion, sedition, or similar conditions. Despite the political transformation in
 1990, trade unions are still developing their administrative structures to organize
 workers, bargain collectively, and conduct worker education programs. Theprior
 UML government "automatically" registered its own affiliated unions but interfered
 in the registration of unions associated with the Nepali Congress Party's labor orga-
 nization.
 Union participation in the formal sector is significant, but it accounts for only a
 small portion of the labor force. In 1992 Parliament passed the Labor Act and the
 Trade Union Act, and formulated enabling regulations. However, the Government
 has not yet fully implemented the laws. The Trade Union Act defines procedures
 for establishing trade unions, associations, and federations. It also protects unions
 and officials from lawsuits arising from actions taken in the discharge of union du-
 ties, including collective bargaining.
 The law permits strikes, exceptby employees in essential services such as water
 supply, electricity, and telecommunications. The law empowers the Government to
 halt a strike or suspend a union's activities if the union disturbs the peace or if it
 adversely affects the nation's economic interests. Under the Labor Act, 60 percent
 
 
 1464
 of a union's membership must vote in favor of a strike in a secret ballot for the
 strike to be legal.
 The Trade Union Act prohibits employers from discriminating against trade union
 members or organizers. There have been few reports of discrimination against union
 members.
 The Government does not restrict unions from joining international labor bodies.
 Several trade federations and union organizations maintain a variety of inter-
 national affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Act provides for
 collective bargaining, although the organizational structures to implement the Acts
 provisions have not been established. Collective bargaining agreements cover an es-
 timated 20 percent of wage earners in the organized sector. However, labor remains
 widely unable to use collective bargaining effectively due to inexperience and em-
 player reluctance to bargain.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery,
 serfdom, forced labor, or traffic in human beings in any form. The Department of
 Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the small formal sector, but remains un-
 able to enforce the law outside that sector.
 Large numbers of women are still forced to work against their will as prostitutes
 (see Section 5). Bonded labor is a continuing problem, especially in agricultural
 work. Bonded laborers are usually members of lower castes. Over 25,000 ethnic
 Thara families are estimated to be under the "Kamaiya" or bonded labor system in
 the southern Terai region. The Government has not yet enacted legislation or taken
 other significant steps to address the problem.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution stipulates that
 children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or similar hazardous work. The
 law also establishes a minimum age for employment of minors at 16 years in indus-
 try and 14 years in agriculture. The Constitution limits children between the ages
 of 14 and 16 years to a 36-hour work week. Despite the law, child wbrkers are found
 in many sectors of the economy (see section 5).
 Up to half of all children work, mostly in agriculture. A consortium of carpet fac-
 tory owners are moving to establish a certification system for carpets made without
 child labor (see Section 5). Partially as a result of this initiative, and of consumer
 pressure, children now reportedly constitute only 5 percent of the workforce in the
 export-oriented carpet industry. Few or no children work in the garment industry.
 The Ministry of Labor's enforcement record is improving. In the urban formal sec-
 tor, it has had some success in enforcing laws relating to tenure, minimum wage,
 and holidays. Government inspectors are also increasing their monitoring of the use
 of child labor in carpet factories.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Act sets a minimum wage of $23
 (1,150 rupees) per month for unskilled workers in factories and in the organized
 labor sector. This wage is sufficient only for the most minimal standard of living.
 Wages in the unorganized service sector and in agriculture are often as much as
 50 percent lower.
 The Labor Act calls for a 48-hour work week, with 1 day off per week, and limits
 overtime to 20 hours per week. Health and safety standards and other benefits such
 as a provident fund and maternity benefits are also established in the act. Imple-
 mentation of the new Labor Act has been slow, as the Government has not created
 the necessary regulatory or administrative structures to enforce its provisions.
 Workers do not have the right to remove themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions. Although the law authorizes labor officers to order employers to rectify unsafe
 conditions, enforcement of safety standards remains minimal.
