 NEPAL
 Nepal is a small, landlocked country strategically situated
 between India and China. The world's only Hindu Kingdom, it
 maintained a self-imposed isolation until 1951. Economic
 development and efforts to establish some form of democratic
 practice have been government objectives only since that
 time. Nepal ranks among the world's poorest countries, and it
 has a largely illiterate population dependent on subsistence
 agriculture.
 Nepal's Constitution specifies that the King (chief of state)
 is the sole source of authority for all government
 institutions. Although there are traditional and
 constitutional restraints on the King's powers, he effectively
 rules as well as reigns.
 The National Panchayat (legislature) consists of 112
 representatives elected directly on the basis of universal
 suffrage and 28 appointed by the King. Legislation passed by
 the Panchayat is sent to the King for his approval without
 which it cannot become law. The Panchayat is empowered to
 select a prime minister from among its members, provided a
 candidate is able to win the support of 60 percent of the
 members. If no candidate receives that support, it provides
 the King with a list of three names from which to choose the
 Prime Minister. The Prime Minister appoints the Council of
 Ministers (Cabinet). The Council of Ministers, answerable
 both to the Panchayat and the King, manages day-to-day
 government operations and provides the King policy advice. In
 1983, for the first time the Panchayat passed a vote of no
 confidence that led to the resignation of the Prime Minister
 and the speedy election of his successor. During 1984, an
 attempt to repeat this process failed when the chairman ruled
 that the petition against the current Prime Minister did not
 comply with assembly rules.
 Internal security is maintained in the first instance by the
 national police force and as necessary by the army. Owing to
 Nepal's very limited communications facilities, local
 officials have a large degree of autonomy and wide discretion
 in how they deal with law and order issues. This has led to
 varied patterns of government reaction to opposition actions.
 Opposition views, including those of the banned political
 parties, are openly expressed and normally tolerated unless
 they touch upon the institution of the monarchy or the royal
 family personally. The press is increasingly active, and
 scores of independent newspapers are published, expressing a
 wide variety of views on political, social, and economic
 topics.
 Yet significant restrictions on political activity still
 exist. Political parties, trade unions, and trade
 associations remain illegal. Several attempts by political
 and student groups to organize public meetings were not
 permitted and organizers and participants were arrested, most
 of whom have been released. Other opposition groups, however,
 were permitted to stage public demonstrations, and university
 students were allowed to select their campus leaders in free,
 open, and lively elections.
 
 
 1345
 NEPAL
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no political killings in 1984.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no allegations of disappearances during 1984.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Prison Act governs the welfare and treatment of
 prisoners. While there have been no allegations of torture,
 close scrutiny of police practices is lacking and occasional
 instances of police brutality are believed to occur. Nepal's
 inherent communications problems result in considerable local
 autonomy and lack of accountability for local law enforcement
 officials.
 Places of detention reflect the low standard of living in this
 extremely poor country. Jail conditions vary according to the
 crime committed and the person's status, but all prisoners
 have access to medical attention and to the traditional
 Nepalese diet. They are permitted visitors and goods from the
 outside. Generally, political prisoners have fared better
 than those convicted for criminal acts. Separate facilities
 are maintained for women and for the criminally insane.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Nepal does not have the right of habeas corpus but, according
 to the Constitution, a suspect must be brought before a court
 within 24 hours and must be informed of the general grounds
 for the arrest or be released. A seven-day extension may be
 granted for the completion of the police investigation.
 Strict adherence to these principles is not the norm. The
 Public Security Act permits six months of preventive detention
 before charges must be filed.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial in most
 cases (some security and customs cases excepted), and this
 right is usually honored. Except for those held in preventive
 detention, the Constitution guarantees the right to counsel
 and protection from double jeopardy and ex post facto laws.
 These rights are not always respected and their nationwide
 implementation remains an unrealized goal. There are separate
 military and civilian courts, and military courts generally
 deal only with military personnel, but civilians may be tried
 in military courts for crimes involving the military. Judges
 are appointed by the Government, and decisions in political
 and security cases sometimes reflect the Government's view.
 All lower court decisions are subject to appeal, and the
 Supreme Court is the court of last appeal. The King may grant
 pardons and set aside judgments.
 In mid-1983, the new Government of Prime Minister Chand
 released approximately 40 persons the Government described as
 
 
 1346
 NEPAL
 political prisoners. This sparked numerous appeals in the
 press for the release of other alleged political detainees,
 continuing into 1984, but no further releases have occurred.
 In 1984, a committee was formed by representatives of banned
 political parties to press for release of "political
 prisoners." One of the cases the committee has highlighted is
 that of a man who has allegedly served his full prison
 sentence and paid his fine but still has not been released.
 Most of the 128 cases the committee has listed as "political
 prisoners," however, appear to be people serving long
 sentences for criminal acts such as murder or armed robbery.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Nepalese law and tradition bolster privacy of the home and
 family, which the Government generally respects. People are*
 free to meet with whom they please and express political or
 other views freely. Except for those suspected of narcotic or
 security violations, search warrants issued by central
 District officers are required before search and seizure.
 There have been no reports of monitoring of personal
 correspondence, although all merchandise imported through the
 mail undergoes a vigorous customs examination, and banned
 items like pornography or beef are seized.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under the Constitution, freedoms of speech and the press may
 not be exercised in support of a political party or to the
 detriment of the common good, the monarch, or members of the
 royal family. In practice, this rule is widely interpreted to
 permit criticism of the Government, but not the monarch or the
 royal family. The number of independent newspapers and
 journals continued to grow during the past year and there is
 wide tolerance of frank criticism of the Government in the
 press. Journals and newspapers which overstep the established
 guidelines may be suspended from publication. However, there
 were no such suspensions in 1984 and a Communist newspaper
 which had previously been suspended resumed publication. The
 two largest circulation dailies are government organs, but
 they carry reports of opposition activities and criticism of
 the Government. Following a liberalization of government
 policy governing the licensing of new newspapers in 1982, an
 estimated 150 papers began publishing. Although many of these
 papers have a very small circulation (less than 100 copies),
 this development demonstrates a growing government acceptance
 of a broader role for the press in Nepalese society.
 International news magazines are generally available in Nepal,
 but they are occasionally banned for articles considered
 derogatory to the Government or to the monarchy. No such
 bannings occurred in 1984. Large numbers of travelers to and
 from India and the West make effective control of foreign
 reading material impossible.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Regulations permit local authorities to prohibit meetings,
 speeches, and posters if they are found not to be "for the
 convenience or good of the general public." The law forbids
 activities which are detrimental to the monarchy, relations
 
 
 1347
 NEPAL
 among the people, or national security. All political parties
 are officially banned under the Panchayat system, although in
 practice political party members are generally permitted to
 assemble privately and express their views in the unofficial
 press. Regulations governing political activities are
 interpreted differently by local authorities in different
 areas of the country. The decision whether to permit a
 political meeting is made on an ad hoc basis. In August 1984,
 a permitted memorial service for a deceased Congress Party
 leader became a major platform for four hours of opposition
 speeches. But Congress spokesmen have alleged that the
 Government hired goons to break up a meeting in the village of
 Surajpur, resulting in the deaths of two party members.
 During 1984, the Government frequently refused permission for
 student groups to hold public off-campus meetings and, in
 several instances when the groups persisted, authorities
 stopped the-activities and detained the participants for a
 short period.
 Labor is not a significant factor in Nepal. The Government of
 Nepal banned trade unions in 1960; however, associations which
 function like trade unions do exist. The Nepal Labor
 Organization, a creation of the Government, is the only
 organization officially permitted to perform trade union-like
 functions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Nepal is officially a Hindu Kingdom and the vast majority of
 Nepalese are Hindus. Religious tolerance is traditional and
 the Constitution provides that 'every person, having regard to
 the traditions, may profess and practice his own religion as
 handed down from ancient times." However, the Constitution
 also provides that 'no person shall be entitled to convert
 another person from one religion to another.' The legal code
 provides a maximum penalty of one year in prison for any Hindu
 who converts to another religion and three to six years in
 prison for any person who seeks to proselytize a Hindu.
 During 1984, some 40 Nepali Christians were arrested, mostly
 in western Nepal, for conversion and/or proselytization. They
 are currently free on bail awaiting trial and reportedly have
 the assistance of counsel.
 Numerous Christian voluntary organizations operate
 educational, medical, and social service facilities in Nepal,
 most of which are officially sanctioned by the Government. In
 addition, foreign clergy are permitted to live and work in
 Nepal to serve the expatriate community. However, the
 Government has made clear that open proselytizing by
 foreigners would result in their expulsion from the country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within the country for
 Nepalese citizens, although several border areas have been
 restricted for travel by foreigners. Nepalese abroad are free
 to return home.
 Passports are normally available to virtually all applicants.
 Issuance, however, is hindered by slow processing, short
 validity, and country limitations. Allegations were made in
 past years by opposition members that the Government limited
 their travel outside Nepal but no instances were reported in
 
 
 1348
 NEPAL
 1984. There are no known cases of revocation of citizenship
 for political reasons.
 Nepal has no stated refugee policy. In the past it has
 accepted and assimilated approximately 12,000 Tibetan refugees
 and, according to immigration officials, no refugee has ever
 been forced to return to Tibet. Today, travelers from Tibet
 travel freely in both directions across the border.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Nepal is an absolute monarchy; political legitimacy flows from
 the King, not from the people. Most Nepalese accept and
 support this central role of the monarchy. Some parts of the
 population do so for both religious reasons (the King is
 regarded as a reincarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu) and out
 of respect for tradition. Most Westernized Nepalese do so
 because they see the monarchy as the symbol of Nepalese
 nationalism and a factor that unifies a nation of disparate
 ethnic and linguistic communities.
 Accompanying this respect for the monarchy is substantial
 public support for the concept that Nepal's future political
 development should follow democratic lines. The King's public
 statements stress the plight of the common citizen and the
 national duty to overcome the nation's backwardness. In the
 1980 constitutional reforms, he restructured the nation's
 formal political framework to make officials more answerable
 to the voting public. Certain elements of representative
 government exist and the trend is toward even greater
 political participation. National Panchayat representatives
 pay far more attention to their constituents since the 1980
 reforms, because they are elected directly. Nevertheless, the
 ban on political parties makes it difficult for public opinion
 to be represented or mobilized systematically.
 In July 1983, the National Panchayat passed a vote of no
 confidence against Prime Minister Thapa, which in turn led to
 his resignation. Although Thapa's resignation had to be
 approved by the King, it was the first removal of a prime
 minister from office by the Panchayat. Thapa's ouster
 introduced the concept that the prime minister was answerable
 to the Panchayat as well as to the King. The activity of the
 Thapa group during the 1984 Panchayat session, when it tried
 to similarly oust the Government which had replaced it, gave
 further substance to the concept of an active, loyal
 opposition within the Nepalese political context.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No international human rights organization is known to have
 requested permission to come to Nepal since the visit of
 Amnesty International representatives in 1977. In its 1984
 report Amnesty International expressed its continuing concern
 about the arrest and imprisonment of opponents of the
 Government as well as about severe restrictions on political
 activity and religious freedom in Nepal. Freedom House
 regards Nepal as "partly free."
 There are two human rights organizations in Nepal which work
 with Amnesty International, regional human rights groups, and
 
 
 1349
 NEPAL
 other groups. Activists disseminate their views in public
 meetings, newspapers, and pamphlets. There have been no
 reports of attempts to suppress them. The office concerned
 with international organizations at the Ministry of Foreign
 Affairs is responsible for dealing with international human
 rights organizations and issues. The Government has expressed
 its concern about human rights violations in Cambodia,
 Afghanistan, and southern Africa.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Nepal remains a traditional rural Hindu society with over 90
 percent of the population engaged in subsistence agriculture.
 Nepal did not open its doors to the outside world and start
 modernizing until 1951. Until then, there were virtually no
 schools, roads, or public health services. Communication
 facilities are still limited, and.the radio remains most
 Nepalis' only contact with the outside world. Most of the
 population lives without electricity and has no access to
 adequate medical care. Although the large towns and cities
 have modernized, life in the remote villages has not changed
 in millennia.
 Nepal's economic development has been hampered by geographical
 and demographic problems compounded by its isolation until
 1951. These problems are offset only partially by the
 country's major resources--cheap labor, tourism, and potential
 hydroelectric power. Eighty percent of Nepal's land is hilly
 or mountainous, creating a high population density on its
 arable land. Population pressure on the country's limited
 resources has resulted in recent years in rapid deforestation,
 serious erosion, and loss of soil fertility.
 Nepal's population is approximately 16.5 million, and its
 population growth is estimated at 2.5 percent annually,
 increasing the pressure on food supplies and social services.
 Its ratio of population to arable land is one of the world's
 highest. The per capita income is approximately $167 a year.
 Life expectancy is estimated at 46.2 years with the average
 for women slightly lower. Infant mortality is estimated at a
 relatively high 108 deaths per 1,000 live births.
 Of the total population, only an estimated nine percent has
 access to relatively safe drinking water. The ratio of
 calorie supply available for consumption relative to
 nutritional requirements is estimated at about 91 percent.
 Approximately 60 percent of the population is believed to live
 below the absolute poverty level. Over 90 percent of the
 population lives in rural areas where many of the economic and
 social indicators referred to above are less favorable.
 The literacy rate is approximately 20 percent. This figure
 has increased in conjunction with the increased enrollment in
 primary schools, which is currently estimated at 88 percent of
 school-aged children. However, the overall literacy rate for
 women is only 5 percent (compared to 33 percent for men).
 This is primarily because female access to basic education has
 been extremely limited. Nationwide, less than 25 percent of
 all primary school students are female and the majority of
 these are girls living in urban or semiurban areas; this
 figure drops to about 12 percent in secondary schools.
 What legal rights women have, as a result of national
 legislation, are irrelevant to the vast majority of Nepal's
 
 
 1350
 NEPAL
 women. Lack of education, formidable communications
 obstacles, and communal and tribal customs which dictate a
 secondary role for women combine to make it virtually
 impossible for women to achieve the equal status with men
 which is granted them under Nepalese law. As a result, rights
 are conferred on women--or denied them--on the basis of
 community and ethnic tradition. An AID/Nepal-financed study
 of eight rural villages showed that women in these areas have
 no personal right to landed property or inheritance, but can
 gain access through marriage or male progeny. In the
 Kathmandu Valley, on the other hand, women can hold land in
 their own right.
 
 
 1351
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NEPAL
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       18.9     18.5     17.5
 LOANS ................. 0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............     .  18.9   18.5     17.5
 A.AID ..... ...............   15.5     13.8     14.1
 LOANS ................. 0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       15.5    13.8     14.1
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        1.7     2.8      1.3
 LOANS ................. 0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.7     2.8      1.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  1I-TOTAL .........       1.7     2.8      1.3
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        1.7      2.8      1.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.7     1.9      2.1
 LOANS ................. 0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............       1.7     1.9      2.1
 PEACE CORPS ......        1.7      1.9      2.1
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............  ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............        0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS*-.              0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....       0.1      0.1      0.1
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       19.0     18.6     17.6
 LOANS ....... o   ......  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       19.0    18.6     17.6
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 TOTAL ........   111.7     77.7   217.8   1041.1
 IBRD              0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                6.2     0.0      3.0     12.3
 IDA               30.0    28.0    148.8    520.7
 IDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB               36.9     48.4    66.0    391.1
 AFOB               0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP              25.9      1.3     0.0     85.8
 OTHER-UN          12.7     0.0      0.0     31.2
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 86
 
 
 1352
