Nepal
The brutal eight-year civil war between rebels of the Communist Party
of Nepal (Maoist) and government security forces raged on in 2004.
Several serious encounters led to significant casualties on both sides.
Both sides spoke publicly about resuming negotiations, without any real
impact on the fighting.
Under intense international pressure to improve its human rights
record, the Nepali government acknowledged “occasional aberrations”
in 2004 and publicly renewed its pledge to abide by its human rights
and humanitarian law obligations. In spite of this pledge, the government
has not improved its conduct of the war. Its commitment to support
the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has similarly
gone unfulfilled. The government and its agencies continue to discount
human rights workers as either pro-Maoist or naïve.
As the result of months of “anti-regression” demonstrations in
Kathmandu, the highly unpopular government directly appointed by
the king gave way to an unelected multi-party cabinet in June 2004.
The government’s vague promises about holding elections soon were
not satisfied as of this writing, and no election date had been
announced.
The conflict and the political stalemate have had a devastating impact
on the already desperately poor rural population. Nepal is among the
poorest countries in Asia. Almost 40 percent of Nepal’s twenty-three
million people live below the poverty line. Life expectancy at birth is
just 59.6 years and infant and maternal mortality rates are among the
highest in the region. The literacy rate is only 44 percent. The government’s
limited capacity to provide essential health and education services
has been severely curtailed by lack of access to Maoist controlled
areas.
Abuses Associated with the Civil War
Civilians in Nepal are all too often caught in the middle of the civil war.
Refusing to provide shelter to the rebels puts villagers at risk from
Maoists who are ruthless in their punishments; providing such support,
however, leaves them vulnerable to reprisal attacks from the state security
forces. Human Rights Watch documented widespread abuses by
both sides in 2004.
Summary executions of captured combatants and detained civilians are
common in Nepal. According to the NHRC and other human rights
organizations, government security forces have been responsible for
approximately 2000 extrajudicial killings since 2001. In 2004, Human
Rights Watch documented an ongoing pattern of killings which confirms
these reports.
When people are killed during security operations, government security
forces (operating in a joint structure as the Unified Command) almost
always issue a statement identifying the dead as Maoist rebels killed
during exchange of gunfire. Investigations into the circumstances of the
deaths have often revealed that many individuals were already in the
custody of the armed forces at the time they were killed.
According the U.N. Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary
Disappearances, Nepal has the largest number of enforced disappearances
in the world. The NHRC, which closely monitors enforced disappearances,
documented 662 cases of enforced disappearances involving
Nepali security forces between November 2000 and November 2003. If
anything, the crisis of disappearances in Nepal has become more severe
since the breakdown of the last ceasefire on August 27, 2003—hundreds
have been detained or abducted since then, and many remain missing.
Disappearances are reported throughout the country. In almost all
cases, the disappeared persons were last seen in the custody of government security forces. Those detained are held in informal places of
detention: tents, government buildings, containers, and army training
centers, making it virtually impossible for family members and lawyers
to learn their fate or locate and gain access to them. The army’s disregard
of Supreme Court habeas corpus orders and its blatant lies to the
courts have seriously undermined judicial oversight of detentions, one
of the most important legal protections against “disappearances.”
The Maoists also perpetrate serious abuses. The brutal summary execution
of civilians is a favored tactic of the Maoists. Often, the executions
are preceded by torture, in many cases in front of villagers and family
members. The Maoists have assassinated or executed suspected government
informants, local political activists or non-Maoist party officials,
local government officials and civil servants, and individuals who refuse
extortion demands from the Maoists. The Maoists also have executed
off-duty army and police officers, often capturing them when they go to
their villages to visit family members. In the vast majority of cases, the
Maoists claim responsibility for the killings, explaining that the executed
individuals are “informers,” a vague charge which encompasses any
act which defies Maoist dictates. Typically, the Maoists return to the village
of their victim, informing the family or villagers of the killing.
The Maoists clearly use targeted killings to intimidate local villagers,
ensuring that villagers know that deviance from Maoist demands will
result in a brutal death.
Use of Children
Accounts gathered by Human Rights Watch indicate that the Maoists
recruit children, making them carry ammunition and supplies to the
front lines, and using them as cooks and porters.
Because of security concerns and difficulties in gaining access to
Maoist-controlled areas, both government and international aid workers have limited capacity to gather facts, provide protection, and assist former
child soldiers with reintegration into society. While some child soldiers
reportedly returned home after a ceasefire was declared on January
29, 2003, they were not officially demobilized. At the time, these children
told journalists they were afraid that they could be re-recruited if
the conflict resumed; what has happened to them since the breakdown
of talks in August 2003 is unknown.
In addition to the use of children in combat, the Maoists have forcibly
abducted students from schools for political indoctrination. This practice
is well-reported and is readily admitted by the Maoists. Children
and adults who have been abducted describe being given lectures on
Maoism and on their rights as citizens, and being taught Maoist songs
and dances. While most abducted children are returned days or weeks
later, others remain unaccounted for. Some of the girls released after
such abductions have reported sexual abuse to human rights groups.
The Maoist practice of calling either nationwide or regional “bandhs”
(strikes) has had a paralyzing impact on most businesses and operations.
Of particular concern are the forced closures of schools on strike days,
which results in children missing an inordinate amount of school time.
Violence and Discrimination Based on Gender and Sexual
Orientation
Gender-based violence—including domestic violence, sexual assault, and
trafficking into forced labor and forced prostitution—remains pervasive
and deeply entrenched in Nepal. Despite some positive legislative
changes in 2002 providing women with improved rights to obtain abortions
and to inherit parental property, legal discrimination prevents
women from equal rights in passing citizenship to their children or to
foreign spouses, from equal property rights, and from equal rights in
marriage and divorce. There is no domestic violence law, and several
limitations in the rape and sexual offense laws prevent victims from seeking redress through the justice system. Despite the legalization of
abortion, some women remain imprisoned on abortion-related offenses.
Nepali authorities continue to turn a blind eye to a persistent pattern of
police abuse of metis (biological males who cross-dress); men suspected
of having sex with men; women suspected of having sex with women;
and HIV/AIDS outreach workers. In other cases, police have deliberately
failed to protect such individuals against abuses. These abuses violate
both Nepalese and international law, which protect the dignity and
equality of all human beings. They also heighten the risk of HIV/AIDS
for people and communities already marginalized and made vulnerable
by social stigma.
Key International Actors
The government of Nepal has refused any international or foreign
mediation of the civil war against the Maoists, and resisted strong pressure
to allow a joint national and international commission to monitor
human rights conditions in the country. It dangerously stereotypes
human rights workers as leftists and therefore anti-government. When
senior commissioners at the NHRC have received death threats, the
government has provided little or no protection or cooperation.
During the February-August 2003 ceasefire, the international community
increased its pressure on the government to respect human rights.
The most significant international actors in Nepal are India, the United
States, the United Kingdom, and the European Union. India has
opposed a larger international monitoring or mediation role in Nepal
because it opposes a similar international role in Kashmir. India is also
battling its own insurgent Maoist groups. The United States has continued
its policy of refusing to negotiate with Maoist organizations, and
has cast Nepal’s Maoists as enemies in the “war on terror.” More
recently, the U.S. passed a bill conditioning military assistance on the
government’s compliance with a commitment to cooperate with the NHRC to resolve “disappearances.” The U.K. has continued its long
tradition of military cooperation with Nepal, a relationship strengthened
by the recruitment of Nepali “Gurkha” soldiers into the U.K. military.
The international community has supported the NHRC in its appeal to
both the government and Maoists to agree to independent human
rights monitoring in conflict zones. The two sides have agreed to neutral
monitoring as a matter of principle, but neither side has signed a
human rights accord allowing for such monitoring. On February 2,
2004, the E.U. issued a demarche to the Nepali government urging it to
take the deteriorating human rights situation seriously. In March 2004,
the government publicly pledged to abide by its obligations under
human rights and humanitarian law. The pledge came days before anticipated
condemnation of Nepal at the sixtieth session of the United
Nations High Commission for Human Rights in Geneva. Although
welcome, the timing of the pledge aroused serious suspicion, as it
appeared to be timed to ward off a critical Item 9 resolution at the
CHR hearings. Since then, the government has done little to fulfill its
commitments.
Nepal continues to host over 100,000 refugees from Bhutan and has
failed to make progress in finding a durable solution to the fifteen-year
impasse. UNHCR is planning to withdraw assistance in 2005, leaving
the fate of the refugees uncertain. This population is at high risk of
statelessness.