 NEPAL
 
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy in which the king is
 dominant.
 For the first time since 1959, Nepal's citizens directly
 elected members of the Rastriya Panchayat (national
 assembly) in May 1981. The 1959 assembly was disbanded by
 the late King Mahendra in 1960 and replaced with the
 partyless panchayat system in which the king reigned as both
 a constitutional and ruling monarch. In that system, the
 prime minister (appointed by the king), his ministers and
 the indirectly-elected panchayats at local, district, and
 national levels served to advise the king. In 1980, the
 people participated in a referendum and chose to continue
 the panchayat system with reforms rather than to adopt a
 multiparty parliamentary system. The reforms were
 announced by King Birendra in December 1980 in a third
 amendment to the constitution, providing for a 104-member
 assembly with all but 28 members directly elected. The king
 may appoint the remaining members and has the residual power
 to appoint the prime minister if a candidate cannot obtain
 60 percent of the votes of the members of the Rastriya
 Panchayat. The government was made responsible to the
 Rastriya Panchayat as well as to the monarch. The assembly
 may be disbanded by order of the king at any time.
 A spirited campaign took place with 1,096 recognized
 candidates for the 112 seats in 75 districts. The leading
 opposition groups (the banned Nepali Congress Party and the
 pro-Chinese faction of the Communist Party of Nepal)
 boycotted the election. The Speech and Press Act
 promulgated in 1980 after the referendum extended the
 freedoms enjoyed during the referendum campaign. Speeches,
 posters, mass meetings, and demonstrations received little
 interference from the local authorities, although there are
 unconfirmed reports of a number of arrests of political
 activists.
 The Nepalese constitution of 1962 specifies that citizens
 have the right to many of the internationally recognized
 human rights, but emergency powers vested in the government
 allow for suspension of these rights whenever an external or
 internal threat is perceived. The king remained the source
 of all government authority.
 In July 1980 Nepal began its sixth development plan,
 emphasizing agricultural production, employment
 opportunities, and fulfillment of basic needs. The fifth
 plan began the shift from emphasis on infrastructural
 development (transportation, communications, and power) to
 agricultural production and social services. It succeeded
 in maintaining high public investments and in surpassing
 educational enrollment goals, but there were serious
 shortfalls in agricultural production, population control,
 and in health services. The new plan provides for more
 decentralized decision-making and greater popular
 participation, with increased expenditures for agriculture
 and social services. Priority targets are food grain
 production, cottage and small industries, minimum
 transportation to villages, and family planning.
 
 (1061)
 
 
 1062
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited implicitly by the Prison Act.
 Unsubstantiated allegations of torture of prisoners during
 the first days of incarceration have been made in the past
 by friends or fellow inmates. Close scrutiny of police
 practices is lacking and no known punishment has resulted
 for alleged acts of police brutality.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Police brutality and disappearances while in custody have
 been alleged, but no summary executions have been
 confirmed. Places of detention reflect the general standard
 of living in one of the poorest developing nations. Jail
 conditions vary according to the crime committed and the
 person's status, but all prisoners have access to medical
 attention and to the traditional Nepalese diet as well as
 being permitted visitors and goods from outside. Generally,
 political prisoners have fared better than those convicted
 of criminal acts. Separate facilities are maintained for
 women and for the criminally insane.
 c. Disappearances
 Opposition members have charged that some persons have
 disappeared during custody, but these charges have not been
 confirmed. The Public Security Act of 1961 permits six
 months preventive detention before charges must be filed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 According to the constitution, a suspect must be brought
 before a court within twenty-four hours and must be provided
 with the general grounds for the arrest. An extension of
 seven days may be granted for completion of the police
 investigation. Those held in preventive detention under the
 Public Security Act are not accorded these rights, but must
 be charged within six months. Strict adherence to these
 principles is not practiced. In April 1980, prior to the
 national referendum, King Birendra issued a general amnesty
 to those accused of political crimes; approximately 100 were
 released. In addition, 28 opposition leaders returned from
 exile. Some opposition critics remained in prison following
 the amnesty, although most of those had been charged with
 criminal acts. About 70 political activists remain in exile.
 e. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for a right to a fair public trial in most
 cases (some security and customs cases excepted), and this
 right is generally honored in practice. Except for those
 held in preventive detention, constitutional guarantees
 exist for the right to counsel and protection from double
 jeopardy and ex post facto laws. There are military and
 civilian courts with provisions for appeal. Civilians are
 not tried by military courts, although special courts may be
 established to try specific cases. Judges are appointed by
 the government and decisions in political and security cases
 can be expected to reflect the opinion of the government.
 
 
 1063
 f. Invasion of The Home
 Except for those suspected of narcotic or security
 violations, search warrants issued by central district
 officers are required before search and seizure. Nepalese
 law and tradition bolsters privacy of the home.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech and assembly are guaranteed by the
 constitution, provided that they are not in support of a
 political party or are not judged by local authorities to be
 detrimental to the common good, the monarch or members of
 the royal family. Journals and newspapers which overstep
 these guidelines are suspended from publication. During the
 past two years, ten publications have been suspended,
 ostensibly for licensing violations or irregular appearance,
 but generally for the political content of their news or
 editorials. One publication under different names accounted
 for four of the suspensions. The courts have upheld the
 appeals of three newspapers which have resumed publication.
 Most newspapers have been allowed to carry on spirited
 criticism of the government, as distinct from the monarch.
 The two princial dailies in English and Nepali are
 government organs, but carry reports of opposition
 activities and viewpoints. Although international news
 magazines are banned occasionally for the articles
 considered derogatory to the government or to the monarch,
 the number of travelers to and from India and the West makes
 effective control of foreign reading material impossible.
 The new regulations promulgated in 1980 by King Birendra to
 govern press and speech freedoms provide greater power to
 local authorities to prohibit meetings, speeches, and
 posters if they are not found to be "for the convenience or
 good of the general public," or if they are in support of a
 political party or detrimental to the monarchy, relations
 among the people, or national security. Enforcement
 procedures have tended to preserve the freedoms which were
 enjoyed during the 1980 referendum campaign. The 1981
 election campaign for the national assembly included large
 numbers of speeches, rallies, and posters with little
 interference by local officials.
 Trade unions are not allowed, although associations
 approaching union status have been formed and have staged
 several group actions. A widespread strike by elementary
 and secondary school teachers resulted in the arrest of a
 number of participants. Despite government and business
 opposition, however, these groups have achieved some gains.
 Religious toleration is a Nepalese tradition even though
 officially the country is a Hindu kingdom. Conversion from
 Hinduism or Buddhism is against the law, but any religion
 may be practiced in Nepal. Non-indigenous religious
 literature is confiscated if distributed without charge.
 Legally the caste system has been abolished, but social and
 religious traditions persist despite ostensible government
 efforts to avoid caste discrimination.
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 68
 
 
 1064
 
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 There are no general restrictions on travel within the
 country for Nepalese citizens, although several areas have
 been restricted on national security grounds for travel by
 foreigners. Voluntary repatriation is not hampered by
 government interference. Passport issuance is tightly
 controlled by means of slow processing, short validity, and
 country restrictions. Visas are required for all but Indian
 citizens. Tourist visa rates for stays of more than one
 month remain among the highest in the world, primarily as a
 revenue-raising measure.
 Twelve thousand Tibetans are estimated to have entered Nepal
 since the 1950s. Most have settled in camps throughout the
 country, with the largest located near Kathmandu and
 Pokhara. The government of Nepal, the United Nations and
 foreign governments assisted in their resettlement. Many
 have met the twelve-year residency requirement for Nepalese
 citizenship, but the number acquiring citizenship remains
 small, and those who have acquired it continue to complain
 that they are discriminated against, particularly in the
 issuance of travel documents.
 -Repatriation of families who had settled in the Indian state
 of Assam continued during 1981 as the anti-foreign feeling
 there became more strident. The government has neither
 encouraged nor discouraged this movement, which approximated
 400-500 families during the past year. Most have been
 resettled with the assistance of their relatives only.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Nearly 53 percent of eligible voters cast their ballots in
 the first election of national assembly members since 1959.
 Heeding the results of the 1980 national referendum which
 endorsed continuation with reforms of the partyless
 panchayat system, the king annouced a third amendment to the
 constitution allowing voters to select 112 members of the
 Rastriya Panchayat (national assembly and the king to
 appoint an. additional 28). Electoral districts are based on
 geographical divisions, providing over representation for
 the hill districts in comparison with the more populous
 Kathmandu valley and Terai (southern) districts.
 Political parties are banned by the constitution, although
 opposition groups exist and publicize their opinions in the
 press.   The largest opposition groups (the Nepali Congress
 Party and the pro-Chinese faction of the Nepal Communist
 Party) boycotted the recent election. women's legal and
 social status in Nepal is a reflection of the conflict
 between modern and traditional ideologies. Unexpectedly
 large numbers of women cast votes in the general election,
 but only two of thirty-four women candidates were elected to
 the Rastriya Panchayat. The only woman minister holds the
 portfolio of minister of state for labor and social
 welfare. Over nine percent of the members of the local
 panchayats are women. Women's limited participation in
 politics seems to be a result of social values and lack of
 education and time rather than of direct repression or
 discrimination.
 
 
 1065
 The constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis or
 sex, but supports the role of tradition and laws based on
 its value. Nepalese women made legal gains during the
 International Women's Year when the national government
 liberalized divorce and child custody laws and strengthened
 protection of women's inheritance and property disposal
 rights. The third amendment to the constitution provided
 for naturalization of foreign spouses of Nepali men for the
 first time. The gap between legal documents and reality
 persists, with women unaware of their rights and with
 continuing inequities, especially in family law - the area
 most resistant to legislative change. New development plans
 stress increasing the enrollment of females at primary
 schools from the present 25 percent. The government further
 intends that cottage industry, family planning and health
 service goals should improve the lives of rural women.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-governmental Investigation
 of Alleged Violation of Human Rights
 No international human rights organization is known to have
 requested permission to come to Nepal since the visit of
 Amnesty International representatives in 1977. Amnesty
 International has expressed concern about the state of human
 rights in Nepal and has sponsored political prisoners, some
 of whom were subsequently released.
 There are two human rights organizations in Nepal which work
 with Amnesty International, regional human rights groups,
 and other minor groups. They disseminate their views in
 public meetings, newspapers and pamphlets. There has been
 no report of attempts to suppress them. A newly-formed
 group, the "Political Prisoners Release Committee" has been
 actively engaged in drawing attention to the plight of
 political prisoners without interference.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Nepal's economic development has been hampered by geographic
 and demographic problems following its self-imposed
 isolation until the 1950s. These problems are offset only
 partially by the country's major potential resources:
 labor, tourist attractions, and hydroelectric power. Eighty
 percent of Nepal's land is very hilly and mountainous,
 creating high population density on its arable land and
 resulting in rapid deforestation, erosion and loss of soil
 fertility. Population growth remains at 2.2 percent
 annually, adding to demands on food supply and social
 services.
 Health statistics for Nepal reflect the economic and
 geographic problems. Life expectancy has risen to an
 average of 43 years, with that of men at 45 and women at
 42. Infant mortality rates remain high with the number of
 deaths per 1,000 live births amounting to 133.6 in rural
 areas. Nationally, only three percent of homes have
 electricity. Per capita daily protein and calorie intake
 has declined to 47.0 grams and 1954 calories respectively in
 1979, compared with highs of 51.1 grams and 2,123 calories
 earlier in the 1970s. Health facilities and manpower are
 lacking with one doctor per 39,000 people and one hospital
 bed for every 5,800. Early health programs emphasized
 curative systems and malaria eradication, then they expanded
 
 
 1066
 to preventive programs and targeted specific diseases. The
 fourth and fifth development plans added maternal and child
 care along with family planning to combat the high birth and
 infant mortality rates. The sixth plan aims at expanding
 integrated health services to all districts, with goals of
 one hospital per district and one village health worker in
 each village.panchayat. While these programs have resulted
 in dramatic successes in the eradication of the targeted
 diseases, they have fallen short of providing the needed
 personnel and medicines to carry out the integrated health
 care schemes.
 Despite the establishment of a national commission on
 population, family planning programs remain underfunded and
 understaffed and there is low awareness of and low
 accessibility to contraceptive methods. The population
 growth rate remains high at 2.2 percent annually.
 Access to education has been greatly expanded in Nepal since
 the early 1950s, when the literacy rate was less than two
 percent. Nationwide enrollment in the primary schools
 includes 95 percent of all males and 25 percent of females.
 Secondary enrollments have risen to 34 percent of eligible
 students. Public expenditure for education absorbs 1.5
 percent of gross domestic product. Development in the fifth
 plan exceeded goals and raised the literacy rate to 19
 percent; primary enrollments went from 43 percent in 1974 to
 78 percent in 1979. Sixth plan goals of expanded primary
 enrollments, reduction of dropouts, increased female
 enrollments, and emphasis on vocational and technical
 training at the secondary level have been hampered by
 student and teacher strikes, inadequate funding, and the
 lack of trained personnel.
 Nepal is one of the world's poorest countries, with a per
 capita income of $130. Most government services rank with
 the lowest in Asia and, even with the best intentions, the
 government's ability to improve the people's economic
 situation has proved very limited. Researchers have defined
 Nepal's subsistence level to be approximately 19 cents per
 capita per day. Current per capita income levels of $80
 (rural) and $176 (urban) place nearly 52 percent of the
 population below the absolute poverty level. Inflation was
 a major problem during the fiscal year, with an average
 increase in prices of 18 percent. Ninety-three percent of
 the economically active population is engaged in
 agriculture. The major threats to rural income are the
 concentration of the land holdings and the loss of the land
 itself through erosion. Despite efforts at land reform,
 sixty percent of all agricultural land is believed to be
 owned by ten percent of the rural population, while 54
 percent of the people control less than eleven percent.
 Development planning has been concentrated on improving the
 land and increasing production. Industrial production
 consists of sugar refining and jute processing in addition
 to various import substitution industries. Unemployment is
 estimated at 5.6 percent in rural areas and 5.9 percent in
 urban regions.
 
 
 1067
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GkANT%- UODLIGAIION ANU LUAN AUriUKILA1IUNS
 WU.S.#-ISCAL YLA,; - MILLIONo( OF OLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NEPAL
 191.    1980     19d I
 I.ECON. ASSIS.-TUTAL...         16.8     20.6     19.8
 LUANS................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.. ............. .  1b.6     20.6    1.o
 A.AIO. ..................     12.'.    13.4     14.0
 LOANS ..............      . .0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............        12.4     13.4     14.0
 ISEL.SUPP.ASS1T.)...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 8.FOUO F-OR PEACE .....2..        .7      5.7      4.3
 LUANS ................. ... U.0      0.0      0(
 GRANTS............. 2.               5.7      4.3
 TITLE -107AL ......0.0..        .0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANs .....         o.       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FUR. RUkR;I....        (.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TLTAL .........         1.7      5.7      4.3
 E.RELIfF.LC.DLV G WFP.          2.7      5.1      4.3
 VOjL.RELIEf- AGFNLY ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHEK ECON. ASSISI...          1.7      1.5      1.5
 LOANS............... O.U             0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. .... .1.1     1.5      1.5
 PEACE CORPS......          1.1      1.5      1.5
 NARCUTIC S ........       (0.c      0.p      0.0
 OTHER.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIS.-TTAL�..          0.1      0.0      0.1
 LOANS...............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............      0.1      0.0      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.(l    (1.0      ,.o
 6.CREUIT SALES-IMS... *         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INIL MIL.FEU.TNG....         0.1      0.0      0.1
 0.TRAN-EXLESS SIOLK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHEK GANTS ......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 1II.10TAL ELON. G MIL...         lb.9     Zr,.6    19.9
 LGANS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANI S............        16.9     20.6     19.9
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      (.0
 EX-4   ANK LUANS .......       0.0      0.0      V. V
 ALL  OTH R .............. 0.0           G.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE i-RUM INIERNAIIUNAL AGE.NCI.S
 .147-i    I ? 80   lc'b I   I  046-b  I
 TOF.L ........    70.3     11.1    123.d    643.6
 IBRU               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      3.1
 IDA               39.8      6U.0     62.2    323.6
 108                0.0       (1.0     0.0      0.0
 ADB               z.O       4Z.?    '.6.d    239.8
 AFDt                C.u      0.0      0.0      0.6
 UNOP                5.5      b .0    11.3     58.6
 OTHER-UN            0.U     -+.4      3i    I.5
 EEC                0.0       C.0      0.0      (1.0
 
 
