 NEPAL
 Nepal is the world's only Hindu Kingdom. Its Constitution
 specifies that the King (chief of state) is the sole source of
 authority for all government institutions. Although there are
 traditional and constitutional restraints on the King's powers,
 he effectively rules as well as reigns.
 The National Panchayat (legislature) consists of 112
 representatives elected directly on the basis of universal
 adult suffrage and 28 appointed by the King. Legislation
 passed by the Panchayat is sent to the King for his approval,
 without which it cannot become law. The Panchayat selects the
 Prime Minister from its ranks. In turn, he appoints the
 Council of Ministers (Cabinet). The Council of Ministers,
 answerable to both the Panchayat and the King, manages
 day-to-day government operations and advises the King. In
 1983, for the first time, the Prime Minister was changed by a
 vote of no confidence.
 Nepal ranks among the world's poorest countries. Over 90
 percent of its traditional and rural population is engaged in
 subsistence agriculture. Nepal maintained a self-imposed
 isolation until 1951; economic development and the broadening
 of political participation have been government objectives only
 since that time. Communications facilities are still limited
 and the radio remains, for most Nepalese, the only contact with
 the outside world.
 Internal security is maintained in the first instance by the
 national police and as necessary by the army. Owing to Nepal's
 limited communications facilities, local officials have a large
 degree of autonomy and exercise wide discretion in dealing with
 law and order issues.
 In 1985 the Government demonstrated a growing tendency to
 respond with force to control or prevent the expression of
 opposition views. Riot police were used extensively to prevent
 public demonstrations by school teachers, students, and banned
 political parties. Several thousand opposition political
 activists were kept in preventive detention for several months
 after attempting to stage a civil disobedience campaign in May
 1985. Reportedly as many as 20 newspaper editors were arrested
 during the year, apparently for publishing articles critical of
 the King or the royal family. Allegations of police brutality
 were common.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 On June 20, 1985, 5 terrorist bombs exploded in Kathmandu,
 killing 5 people and injuring 20. Responsibility for this
 unprecedented act of political violence was claimed by an
 antimonarchist group. The Government has set up a special
 court to try those charged with this act.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no allegations of disappearances during 1985.
 
 
 1338
 NEPAL
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are persistent reports, particularly from remote areas,
 that police regularly use brutal methods to interrogate or
 intimidate prisoners, both criminal and political. An
 unusually explicit example was provided by two teachers who
 alleged that in January 1985, they were stripped, beaten,
 kicked, and humiliated by senior officers in Bhaktapur, near
 Kathmandu, after being arrested in connection with the teachers
 strike. The Government has not actively investigated
 allegations of police brutality or acknowledged public concerns
 about its prevalence.
 Places of detention reflect the low standard of living in this
 extremely poor country. Jail conditions vary according to the
 crime committed and the person's status, but all prisoners have
 access to medical attention and to the traditional Nepalese
 diet. They are permitted visitors and goods from the outside.
 Generally, political prisoners have fared better than those
 convicted of criminal acts. Separate facilities are maintained
 for women and for the criminally insane.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Public Security Act permits six months of preventive
 detention before charges must be filed. In May 1985, several
 thousand leaders and supporters of the banned Nepali Congress
 Party and Nepali Communist Party were detained without trial
 for attempting to hold public meetings or picket government
 offices in support of their demands for greater political
 freedom. Most of them were not released until mid-October.
 Detention without charge was also apparently widely used in the
 investigation of the terrorist bombings of June 1985. There
 have also been reports of teachers and students in various
 areas of the country being detained by authorities to prevent
 their participating in demonstrations.
 For common crimes, a suspect must be brought before a court
 within 24 hours and must be informed of the general grounds for
 the arrest or be released. A seven-day extension may be
 granted for the completion of the police investigation. Strict
 adherence to these principles is not the norm. The writ of
 habeas corpus is recognized by the Supreme Court and has been
 effective in several cases. Neither official exile nor forced
 labor is practiced in Nepal.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial in most
 cases (some security and customs cases excepted), and this
 right is usually honored. Except for those held in preventive
 detention, the Constitution guarantees the right to counsel and
 protection from double jeopardy and ex post facto laws. These
 rights are not always respected. There are separate military
 and civilian courts. Military courts generally deal only with
 military personnel, but civilians may be tried in these courts
 for crimes involving the military. Judges are appointed by the
 Government, and decisions in political and security cases
 sometimes reflect the Government's view. All lower court
 decisions (including acquittals) are subject to appeal, and the
 Supreme Court is the court of last appeal. The King may grant
 pardons and set aside judgments.
 
 
 1339
 NEPAL
 The Government has in the past admitted holding "political
 prisoners." In 1984, a committee was formed by representatives
 of banned political parties to press for the release of
 political prisoners. Most of the 128 cases the committee has
 listed as political prisoners, however, appear to involve
 people serving long sentences for criminal acts such as murder
 or armed robbery.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Nepalese law and tradition bolster privacy of the home and
 family, which the Government generally respects. Except for
 those suspected of narcotics or security violations, search
 warrants issued by chief district officers are required before
 search and seizure. Correspondence of some foreigners and
 domestic nonconformists is opened with little attempt at-
 concealment.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under the Constitution, freedom of speech and of the press may
 not be exercised in support of a political party or "to the
 detriment of the common good," the monarch, or members of the
 royal family. In practice, this rule is widely interpreted to
 permit criticism of the Government but not the monarch or the
 royal family. Journals and newpapers which overstep the
 established guidelines may be suspended from publication. In
 1985, over 20 editors were arrested and their papers suspended,
 mostly for lese majeste. Foreign publications are seized or
 banned when deemed to carry articles unfavorable to the
 Government or monarchy. In 1985, several Indian newspapers
 were banned for months, following the bombing incidents in
 June, apparently for their coverage of that event as well as
 their general editorial policy toward Nepal.
 The two largest circulation dailies are government organs, but
 they carry some reports of opposition activities and criticism
 of the Government, as well as extensive coverage of the debates
 in the National Panchayat. A major complaint of the
 independent newspapers is that government advertising (and most
 private advertising) goes only to the two semiofficial papers.
 Nevertheless, the independent press continues to be fairly
 vigorous and candid in its criticism of government policies and
 motives. Radio Nepal is operated by the Government and its-
 news reports are closely controlled.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Regulations permit local authorities to prohibit meetings,
 speeches, and posters if they are found not to be "for the
 convenience or good of the general public." The law forbids
 activities detrimental to the monarchy, to relations among the
 people, or to national security. All political parties are
 banned under the panchayat system, although in practice
 political party members are generally permitted to assemble
 privately and to express their views in the unofficial press.
 Regulations governing political activities are interpreted
 differently by local authorities in different areas of the
 country, and the decision whether to permit a political meeting
 is made on an ad hoc basis. In March 1985, the Nepali Congress
 Party (NCP)held a national meeting in Kathnandu with over 1,000
 
 
 1340
 NEPAL
 participants. The Government allowed the meeting to take
 place, on the tacit understanding that the NCP would not use
 loudspeakers or stage processions.
 Student groups, including those openly affiliated with the
 banned political parties, are allowed to contest campus
 elections and did so in 1985. However, they are typically
 prevented from holding meetings or demonstrations off campus,
 and a number of student leaders are usually in jail at any
 given time.
 The Government banned trade unions in 1960. The Nepal Labor
 Organization, a creation of the Government, is the only
 organization officially permitted to perform trade union-like
 functions. There are some independent worker's associations
 which are repressed by the Government when they become too
 active. In early 1985, school teachers staged a determined
 strike demanding pay parity with civil servants and recognition
 of their assocation. The Government made concessions on pay
 but refused to grant official recognition of the teachers'
 association. Many teachers were placed under preventive
 detention and their attempted demonstrations were broken up.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The vast majority of Nepalese are Hindus. Religious tolerance
 is traditional and the Constitution provides that "every
 person, having regard to the traditions, may profess and
 practice his own religion as handed down from ancient times."
 However, the Constitution also provides that "no person shall
 be entitled to convert another person from one religion to
 another." The legal code provides a maximum penalty of one
 year in prison for any Hindu who converts to another religion
 and three to six years in prison for any person who seeks to
 proselytize a Hindu.
 In 1985, 9 new cases were registered in which 46 people were
 charged with conversion or proselytizing. In contrast to
 statements by official government spokesmen that any adult
 Nepali is free to change his religion, there were 18
 convictions during 1985 for simple conversion from Hinduism to
 Christianity, with sentences from 3 months to 1 year. All are
 under appeal. In addition, two Christian pastors were
 convicted of proselytizing for preaching within their own
 churches and each sentenced to the maximum six years. Five
 other individuals convicted of proselytizing were each
 sentenced to three years. All these cases are also under
 appeal. There were 18 acquittals in religion cases during
 1985, all of which are being appealed by the Government.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within the country for
 Nepalese citizens, although several border areas have been
 restricted for travel by foreigners. Nepalese abroad are free
 to return home. There are no known case of revocation of
 citizenship for political reasons.
 Nepal has no stated refugee policy. In the past it has
 accepted and assimilated approximately 12,000 Tibetan refugees
 and, according to immigration officials, no refugee has ever
 been forced to return to Tibet. Today, travelers from Tibet
 travel freely in both directions across the border.
 
 
 1341
 NEPAL
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Nepal is an absolute monarchy; political legitimacy flows from
 the King, not from the people. Most Nepalese accept and
 support a central role for the monarchy, either for religious
 reasons (the King is regarded as a reincarnation of the Hindu
 god Vishnu) or out of respect for tradition. Many Nepalese
 also view the monarchy as the symbol of Nepalese nationalism
 and a force that unifies a nation of disparate ethnic and
 linguistic communities. There is also substantial public
 support for the view that Nepal's future political development
 should follow democratic lines.
 The 1980 constitutional reforms restructured the nation's
 formal political framework to make officials more answerable to
 the voting public. Direct election by universal adult suffrage
 was intended to make National Panchayat members more sensitive
 to the need to be seen as representing the interests of their
 constitutents vis-a-vis the Government. The accountability of
 the Prime Minister to the House has made for lively debate of
 many issues. However, the ban on political parties makes it
 difficult for public opinion to be represented and mobilized
 systematically. In the absence of political parties, the Palace
 still effectively dominates the legislature; politics within
 the National Panchayat sometimes appear to be little more than
 a struggle for ministerial office.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No international human rights organization is known to have
 requested permission to visit Nepal since Amnesty International
 did so in 1977.  In its 1985 Report, Amnesty International
 expressed its continuing concern about the arrest and
 imprisonment of opponents of the Government, as well as about
 severe restrictions on political activity and religious freedom
 in Nepal. Freedom House rates Nepal as "partly free."
 There are two human rights organizations in Nepal which work
 with Amnesty International and regional human rights groups.
 Human rights activists disseminate their views in public
 meetings, newspapers, and pamphlets. There have been no
 reports of attempts to suppress them. The Government has
 expressed its concern about human rights violations in
 Cambodia, Afghanistan, and South Africa.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Nepal's population is approximately 17 million, and its
 population growth rate is estimated at 2.5 percent annually,
 increasing the pressure on food supplies and social services.
 The per capita income is approximately $160 per year.
 Nepal's economic development has been hampered by geographic
 and demographic problems compounded by its isolation until
 1951. These problems are offset only partially by the
 country's major resources--cheap labor, tourism, and vast
 hydroelectric potential. Eighty percent of Nepal's land is
 hilly or mountainous, creating a high population density on its
 arable land. Population pressure on the country's limited
 resources has resulted in recent years in rapid deforestation,
 serious erosion, and loss of soil fertility.
 
 
 1342
 NEPAL
 Life expectancy is estimated at 46.8 years, with the average
 for women slightly lower. Infant mortality is estimated at a
 relatively high 106.5 deaths per 1,000 live births. An
 estimated 14 percent of the population has access to relatively
 safe drinking water, up from 9 percent last year due to
 extensive efforts by the Government and aid donors to build
 village water systems. The ratio of calorie supply available
 for consumption relative to nutritional requirements is
 estimated at about 90 percent. Approximately 60 percent of the
 population is believed to live below the absolute proverty
 level.
 The literacy rate for Nepal is approximately 20 percent
 overall, with men (34 percent) leading women (5 percent) by a
 substantial margin due to traditional attitudes toward
 schooling for girls. School enrollment has been increasing,
 with 1982 figures showing 83.6 percent of school-age males and
 33 percent of school-age females enrolled in primary school;
 the overall average is 58.8 percent.
 The industrial sector is small, accounting for little more than
 1 percent of gross domestic product. The Nepal Factories and
 Factory Workers Act of 1959, as amended, sets minimum wage
 rates and working conditions, including special rules for women
 and a minimum age of 14 years. Enforcement is spotty, however,
 and there have been reports of child labor being used in match
 and bidi (country cigarette) factories.
 Women in Nepal have the right to vote and to hold property in
 their own name. Women's property rights have been enforced by
 the courts when cases are brought to them, especially in the
 Kathmandu area. However, women have yet to enjoy their rights
 fully in many rural areas, where lack of knowledge or
 understanding of the law is common and the weight of
 traditional practice and attitudes is great.
 
 
 1343
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NEPAL
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON.  ASSIST.-TOTAL  ..      18.5    17.5     20.6
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS..    . ..........   18.5     17.5    20.6
 A.AID  ......    ...........   13.8     14.1    18.4
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............   ...  13.8    14.1    18.4
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..,         0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.FOD  FOR  PEACE .......      2.8      1.3     2.2
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    2.8      1.3     2.2
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       2.8     1.3      2.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV  &  WFP.       2.8     1.3      2.2
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER  ECON.  ASSIST.        1.9      2.1     0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.9      2.1     0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.9      2.1     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.1     0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1      0.1     0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.1      0.1     0.1
 0.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL...     18.6    17.6     20.7
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............   ...  18.6   17.6     20.7
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0     0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER. ...............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL .........   77.7    220.3    153.3  1196.9
 IBRO               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      3.0      0.0    12.3
 IDA               28.0    148.8     92.6   613.3
 108                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AOB               48.4     66.0     60.7   451.8
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNOP               1.3      2.5      0.0    88.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0    31.2
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
 1344
