 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government. In
 1990 the King, formerly an absolute monarch, legalized political parties after which
 an interim government promulgated a new constitution. The King retains important
 residual powers, but has dissociated himself from direct day-to-day government ac-
 tivities. The democratically elected Parliament consists of the House of Representa-
 tives (lower house) and the National Council (upper house). Since 1990, Nepal has
 held four national elections, two for the Parliament and two nationwide elections
 for local government offices. International observers considered these elections to be
 generally free and fair. In February 1996, the leaders of the Maoist United People's
 Front (UPF) launched a "People's War" in mid-western Nepal, which has produced
 incidents in 27 of 75 districts. The insurrection has been waged through torture,
 killings, and bombings involving civilians, and public officials. The Constitution pro-
 vides for an independent judiciary, however, the courts are susceptible to political
 pressure and corruption.
 The National Police Force maintains internal security, assisted as necessary by
 the Royal Nepalese Army (RNA). Police reaction to the "People's War" insurgency
 led to incidents of unwarranted force against prisoners and noncombatants. The
 army is traditionally loyal to the King and has avoided involvement in domestic pol-
 itics. However, with the continued threat from the Maoist insurgents, the RNA may
 take on a more active security role. The police are subject to civilian control, but
 local officials have wide discretion in maintaining law and order. The police commit-
 ted human rights abuses.
 Nepal is an extremely poor country, with an annual per capita gross domestic
 product of approximately $200. Over 80 percent of its 21 million people sup port
 themselves through subsistence agriculture. Principal crops include rie, wheat,
 maize, jute, and potatoes. Tourism and the export of carpets and garments are the
 major sources of foreign exchange. Foreign aid accounts for more than half the de-
 velopment budget. The economy is mixed with approximately 50 public sector firms.
 Many former government firms have been privatized since 1992.
 Since political reform began in 1990, Nepal has made progress in its transition
 to a more open sciety with   reater respect for human rights. However, problems
 remain, and the Governmenthas no t enforced all the Constitution's provisions re-
 garding basic human rights. The police continue to abuse detainees, using torture
 as punishment or to extract confessions. The Government rarely investigates allega-
 tions of police brutality or takes action against accused police officers. There were
 also allegations that police killed unarmed civilians in the course of operations
 against the insurgents, and while these persons were held in custody. The authori-
 ties use arbitrary arrest and detention, and prison conditions remain poor. Judicial
 susceptibility to political pressure and corruption, long delays before trial, and
 
 
 1663
 lengthy pretrial detention remain problems. The Government continues to impose
 some restrictions on freedom of religion and expression. Lower castes and women
 suffer widespread discrimination. Trafficking in women and girls, violence against
 women, forced labor, and child labor also remain serious problems.
 In July 1996, Parliament unanimously enacted a bill to establish a permanent
 human rights commission with the authority to investigate human rights abuses.
 However, the commission has not yet been established.
 The Maoist insurgents continued to commit numerous abuses, including killings
 and bombings. They also forced the postponement of local elections in several mid-
 western districts.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-On a number of occasions, the Gov-
 ernment is alleged to have used unwarranted lethal force against persons suspected
 of involvement in the "People's War" in central Nepal. Launched in February 1996
 by UPF leaders Baburam Bhattarai and Pushpa Kamal Dahal, the "People's War"
 is a self-declared Maoist insurgency.
 In March Amnesty International (Al reported that in 1996 that police "have re-
 peatedly resorted to the use of lethal force in situations where such force was clearly
 unjustified." AI's statement was based on an investigation of 50 killings committed
 by police, mostly in 1996.
 Violence declined somewhat in 1997. A local nongovernmental organization (NGO)
 reported that the police killed 19 persons in Maoist-related encounters during the
 year. Several of these incidents reportedly involved unarmed civilians, but others oc-
 curred during armed conflict. In August, for example, four men were killed when
 a police patrol came under attack. The national police department issued strict in-
 structions to its officers not to use excessive force after some of these incidents were
 reported. The police conducted an inquiry into the killings, but concluded that the
 officers were acting within their rights. According to a local human rights NGO,
 three persons died during the year as a result of police torture (see Section 1.c.).
 The insurgents were responsible for numerous abuses. Guerrillas, usually armed
 with homemade guns, explosives, knives, and sticks, attacked landowners, civilians,
 government officials, and government facilities in a number of districts. For exam-
 ple, on January 11, Balaram Pokharel of the Chhoparak village development com-
 mittee was attacked in his house by 10 suspected Maoists, who afterward dragged
 him outside and stabbed him to death in public. In Rolpa district a police oficer
 was attacked and killed in front of his wife and child in October. In 1996 the Gov-
 ernment responded to the insurgency by sending contingents of police to the affected
 districts. A total of 113 persons died in the violence since November 1995, most of
 them killed by the insurgents.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 Two student activists that the police took into custody in 1993 and 1994 remain
 missing.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution and criminal law prohibit torture; however, the police often use
 beatings and torture to punish suspects or to extract confessions. According to a
 local human rights NGO, three persons died during the year as a result of police
 torture (see Section L.a.). For example, in February Til Bahadur Bhujel died after
 being beaten by police who arrested him for illegally cutting wood in Jhapa district.
 In Kathmandu Balajiu, a woman died of wounds inflited by the police who came
 to arrest her son. The Government has failed to conduct thorough and independent
 investigations of reports of police brutality and has refused to take significant dis-
 ciplinary action against officers involved. Police are often unwilling to investigate
 and discipline fellow officers, and people are afraid to bring cases against police for
 fear of reprisals. The Constitution provides for compensation for victims of torture,
 and a bill providing for such compensation was passed by Parliament in September
 1996. The Government has begun human rights education for the police force.
 Human rights groups have reported instances of torture in areas affected by the
 "People's War." Dozens of male detainees reported torture inflicted on them by po-
 lice, while women in these areas have reported instances of rape and sexual abuse
 by the police. For example, in Kavre district, according to a local human rights
 NGO, five people were arrested in early October after a prominent politician was
 murdered in a suspected Maoist attack. These people were reportedly severely tor-
 tured while in police custody. They remained in jail at year's end.
 Local and international human rights groups have also documented Maoist vio-
 lence in these areas, including the severing of arms and limbs. The Maoists have
 
 
 1664
 most often targeted political leaders, local elites, and suspected informers, including
 representatives of the more moderate Communist Party of Nepal-the United Marx-
 ist Leninist party (UML). A village development leader from the UML was attacked
 in his house in January (see Section L.a.), and on July 9, approximately nine
 Maoists tied and seriously assaulted six UML workers in Sindhuli district.
 Prison conditions are poor. Overcrowding is common in prisons and authorities
 sometimes handcuff or fetter detainees. Women are normally incarcerated sepa-
 rately from men, but in similar conditions. The Government still has not imple-
 mented a provision in the 1992 Children's Act calling for the establishment of a ju-
 venile home and juvenile court. Consequently, children are sometimes incarcerated
 with adults-either as criminals or with an incarcerated parent. The Department
 of Prisons says that there are 174 cases of children in jailfcustody; approximately
 30 of these persons are non-criminal dependent children of adult inmates (also see
 Section 5). In Rukum district, a 13-year-old boy was arrested and accused of being
 a Maoist. He was held for 6 months with 54 adults in a cell designed for only 15
 persons, before a trial date was scheduled.
 There has been some improvement in prison conditions. The authorities are more
 likely to transfer sick prisoners to hospitals than they were in the past. Due to the
 inadequacy of medical facilities in the country, the authorities sometimes place the
 mentally ill in jails under inhumane conditions. The Government permits local
 human rights groups to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that the au-
 thorities must arraign or release a suspect within 24 hours of arrest, but the police
 often violate this provision. Under the Public Offenses Act of 1970, the police must
 obtain warrants or an arrest unless a person is caught in the act of committing
 a crime. For many offenses, the case must be filed in court within 7 days of arrest.
 If the court upholds the detention, the law authorizes the police to hold the suspect
 for 25 days to complete their investigation, with a possible extension of 7 days. How-
 ever, the police often hold prisoners longer. The Supreme Court has on occasion or-
 dered the release of detainees held longer than 24 hours without a court appear-
 ance.
 Detainees do not have the legal right to receive visits by family members and they
 are permitted access to lawyers only after the authorities file charges. In practice
 the police grant access to prisoners on a basis that varies from prison to prison. Per-
 sons have a right to legal representation and a court appointed lawyer, but govern-
 ment lawyers or access to private attorneys is provided only on request. Con-
 sequenty, those unaware of their rights may not have legal representation. There
 is a system of bail, but bonds are usually too expensive for most citizens. According
 to the Department of Prisons, over half of the 6,000 people imprisoned  a awaiting
 trial. Due to court backlogs, a slow appeals process, and poor access to legal rep-
 resentation, it is common for persons to be held for periods longer than their sen-
 tences after conviction.
 Under the Public Security Act, the authorities may detain persons who allegedly
 threaten domestic security and tranquillity, amicable relations with other states,
 and relations between citizens of different classes or religions. Persons whom the
 Government detains under the act are considered to be in preventive detention and
 can be held for 6 months without being charged with a crime. As of August, 38 peo-
 ple had been placed under detention in accordance with provisions of the Public Se-
 curity Act as a result of Maoist-rlated activities. Human rights grousw allege that
 the police have used arbitrary arrest and detention during the "People s War to in-
 timidate communities cnsidered sympathetic to the Maists. Since the insurgents
 began their terrorist campaigns" 1,661 Maoist-related arrests have been made. Of
 those arrested approximately 930 persons have been released, while 731 have been
 charged with crimes and are awaiting trial. Of those charged, 246 are still being
 held in jail.
 The 1991 amendments to the Public Security Act allow the authorities to extend
 periods of detention after submitting written notices to the Home Ministry. The in-
 lice must notify the district court of the detention within 24 hours, and it may order
 an additional 6 months of detention before authorities file official charges.
 Other laws, including the Public Offenses Act, permit arbitrary detention. This
 Act and its many amendments cover such crimes as disturbing the peace, vandal-
 ism, rioting, and fighting. Under this Act, the Government detained hundreds of
 civil servants during a 55-day antigovernment strike in 1991. Human rights mon-
 itor express concern that the Act vests too much discretionary power in the Chief
 District Officer (CDO), the highest ranking civil servant in each of the country's 75
 districts. The Act authorizes the CDO to order detentions, to issue search warrants,
 and to specify fines and other punishments for misdemeanors without judicial re-
 view. Few recent instances of use of the Public Offenses Act have come to light,
 
 
 1665
 since it has become more common, particularly with the Maoists, to arrest people
 under the Public Security Act.
 Under the Public Offenses Act hundreds of people were arrested on March 18
 1996 for staging a peaceful protest of the human rights situation in China organized
 by Amnesty International (Al) in Kathmandu. Although most were released the
 same day, several AI officers and 14 Tibetans were held in jail for up to 7 days,
 some without charge.
 The Constitutionprohibits exile; it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and the Supreme Court has demonstrated independence. However, lower level
 courts remain vulnerable to political pressure. In addition, bribery of lower level
 judges and court staff is endemic.
 The Supreme Court has the right to review the constitutionality of legislation
 passed by Parliament. It has ruled that provisions in the 1992 Labor Act and in
 the 1991 Nepal Citizenship-Act are unconstitutional. In 1995 the Court also decided
 that the dissolution of the Parliament at the request of a former Prime Minister was
 unconstitutional, and ordered the body restored.
 Appellate and district courts have become increasingly independent, although
 they sometimes bend to political pressure. In Rolpa, one of the districts most af-
 fected by the "People's War," human rights groups have accused the district courts
 of acting in complicity with CDO's in violating detainees' rights. These groups allege
 that arrest without a warrant, prolonged detention without trial, and police torture
 occur in these areas.
 The judicial system consists of three levels: district courts, appellate courts, and
 the Supreme Court. The Kin ap points judges on the recommendation of the Judi-
 cial Council, a constitutional body chaired by the Chief Justice. The Council is also
 responsible for the assignment of judges, disciplinary action, and other administra-
 tive matters. Judges decide cases; there is no jury system.
 Delays in the administration of justice are a severe problem. According to the lat-
 est statistics, 145,354 cases active throughout the country. The Supreme Court has
 a backlog of approximately 8,950 cases, which it expects to take 4 years to clear.
 A case appealed to the Supreme Court may take more than 10 years to conclude.
 The Constitution provides for the right to counsel, equal protection under the law,
 protection from double jeopardy, protection from retroactive application of the law,
 and for public trials, except in some security and customs cases. All lower court de-
 cisions, including acquittals, are subject to appeal. The Supreme Court is the court
 of last appeal, but the King may grant pardons. The King can also suspend, com-
 mute, or remit any sentence. On the recommendation of the Government, the King
 often pardons up to 12 prisoners-if they have served 75 percent of their sentence
 and shown goodbehavior--on national holidays.
 Military courts adjudicate cases concerning military personnel, who are immune
 from prosecution in civilian courts. In 1992 the Supreme Court ruled that military
 courts may no longer try civilians for crimes involving the military services.
 The authorities may prosecute terrorism or treason cases under the Treason Act.
 Specially constituted tribunals hear these trials in closed sessions. No such trials
 took place during the past 2 years.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government generally respected the privacy of the home and family. Search war-
 rants are required before search and seizure except in cases involving suspected se-
 curity and narcotics violations. As amended, the Police Act of 1955 empowers the
 police to issue warrants for search and seizure in criminal cases upon receipt of in-
 formation about criminal activities. Within 24 hours of their issuance, warrants in
 misdemeanor cases must be approved by the CDO. Court judges must approve them
 in felony cases.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall
 have freedom of thought and expression and that the Government may not censor
 any news item or other reading material. Nevertheless, the Constitution prohibits
 speech and writing that would threaten the sovereignty and integrity of the King-
 dom; disturb the harmonious relations among people of different castes or commu-
 nities; promote sedition, defamation, contempt of court, or crime; or contradict de-
 cent public behavior or morality.
 The Press and Publications Act provides for the licensing of publications and the
 granting of credentials to journalists. The Act includes penalties for violating these
 requirements. The Act also prohibits publication of material that, among other
 things, promotes disrespect toward the King or royal family; that undermines secu-
 
 
 1666
 rity, peace, order, the dignity of the King, or the integrity or sovereignty of the
 Kingdom; that creates animosity among people of different castes and religions; or
 that adversely affects the good conduct or morality of the public. The regulation also
 provides a basis for banning foreign publications. However, foreign publications are
 now widely available.
 There are hundreds of independent vernacular and English newspapers represent-
 ing various political points of view, most have a small circulation and limited im-
 pact. The Government owns the daily Nepali Language newspaper with the largest
 circulation. Editors and writers at the Government newspaper practice self-censor-
 ship and generally reflect government policy. Ruling political parties have influ-
 enced the editorial policy of the government newspaper to their advantage. How-
 ever, despite the sensitivity of the Government to the "People's War," the press has
 not faced overt pressure to report on it in a particular way. Views of human rights
 groups, the statements of the police, and the press releases of UPF leader Bhattarai
 have all been reported in the local press.
 The Government owns and controls the most radio and television stations, al-
 though there is now an operating private radio station, Radio Sagamatha. Television
 time on the government-owned television station is regularly leased to private pro-
 ducers. Radio reaches the greatest number of people and has the largest influence.
 Programming currently reflects a broader range of interests and political viewpoints
 than prior to the political transformation in 1990. The Government does not restrict
 access to foreign radio broadcasts or to the purchase of television satellite dishes
 that can access international news from the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
 and the Cable News Network (CNN). A small but growing number of Nepalese also
 have access to foreign news through private cable networks.
 The Broadcast Act of 1993 allowsprivate parties to broadcast television and FM
 radio, but implementation by the Government has been slow. There are two private
 cable television networks, which have been operating for close to 2 years in the
 Kathmandu valley. They provide mainly entertainment programming, but com-
 mentary critical of government policies occurs occasionally during publicly broadcast
 discussion programs.
 There has been much debate about liberalizing the media and privatizing govern-
 ment-owned media. This debate has put pressure, so far successfully resisted, on
 successive governments to open the air waves and divest government-controlled
 printing operations.
 The Government limits academic freedom to the same extent as the media. No
 overt efforts to enforce these limitations were reported this year.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although the Constitution pro-
 vides-for freedom of assembly, this right may be restricted by law on vague grounds
 such as undermining the sovereignty and integrity of the State or disturbing law
 and order. Persons protesting Chinese human rights policy were arrested and de-
 tained in March before and during peaceful protests (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution describes Nepal as a Hindu Kingdom,
 although it does not establish Hinduism as the state religion. The majority of citi-
 zens are Hindu. The Constitution permits the practice of all religions and prohibits
 discrimination on the basis of caste except for traditional religious practices at
 Hindu temples, where, for example, members of the lowest caste are not permitted.
 Although the Government has generally not interfered with the practice of other
 religions, conversion is prohibited and punishable with fines or imprisonment, the
 police occasionally harass members of minority religions. Some groups are concerned
 that the ban on proselytizing limits the expression of non-Hindu religious belief.
 Foreigners convicted of proselytizing can be expelled from the country.
 Arrests for proselytizing are rare. The only incident to occur in the past few years
 was in September 1994 when 11 Christians were sentenced to 2 years in jail The
 King pardoned them after they had served 3 months of their sentence.
 A Seventh Day Adventist aid organization came under government scrutiny in
 August after a disgruntled employee reportedly spread rumors to the press and
 Hindu organizations that the group was proselytizing. For a period of approximately
 a month, the organization was the subject of slanderous and vituperative attacks
 by Hindu organizations. The Government convened a committee that asked Advent-
 ist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) to confine itself to relief and welfare ac-
 tivities for which it was registered While ADRA denied that it had proselytized, in
 did have links to an Adventist school (established for the children of Adventist
 workers in Nepal), which also had been accused of proselytizing. To clarify its func-
 tion and role, ADRA severed all official ties with the school. The school continues
 to operate normally.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement and residence, and
 
 
 1667
 the Government generally does not restrict travel abroad. However, the Government
 restricts travel to some areas near the Chinese border for foreign tourists and for
 foreign residents, such as Tibetans residing in Nepal. The Government allows citi-
 zens abroad to return, and is not known to revoke citizenship for political reasons.
 The Government has no official refugee policy and is party to neither the 1951
 U.N. Convention relating to the Status of Refugees nor the 1967 Protocol. However,
 it does provide asylum for refugees and has cooperated with the office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and with other humanitarian
 organizations, in assisting refugees from Bhutan and Tibet (China). The UNHCR
 has maintained an office in Kathmandu since 1989. Since 1959 the Government has
 accepted approximately 20,000 Tibetan refugees, many of whom still reside in the
 country. Since 1991 it has also provided asylum to more than 90,000 Bhutanese ref-
 ugees, the great majority of whom are now living in UNHCR-administered camps
 in eastern Nepal.
 Although in 1995 the Government reversed a 1960's decision to suspended the is-
 suance of identification cards to Tibetans, there remain many Tibetans with no form
 of identification and no permanent status. Undocumented Ti betan residents face dif-
 ficulties in obtaining basic citizens' rights and are unable to travel abroad or access
 such services as banking. The UNHCR donates blank resident identification cards
 to the Government for Tibetans, but as of August 1997, approximately 4,000 Tibetan
 refugees within the Kathmandu valley remained without identification cards.
 China and the Government of Nepal tightened control of movement across their
 border in 1986, but both sides have enforced these restrictions haphazardly. Police
 and customs officials occasionally harass Tibetan asylum seekers who cross the bor-
 der from China. Border police often extort money from Tibetans in exchange for pas-
 sage. With the change from a Communist Party government to a coalition govern-
 ment headed by the Nepal Congress Party in September 1995, the former practice
 of forcibly returning asylum seekers to China has stopped. There were no reports
 of forced expulsion of Tibetan asylum seekers in 1997.
 There are approximately 92,000 ethnic Nepali refugees from Bhutan in UNHCR-
 administered camps in southeastern Nepal. An additional 20,000 refugees reside
 outside the camps in either Nepal or India. The total represents approximately one-
 sixth of Bhutan's estimated pre-1991 population.
 The UNHCR monitors the condition of the Bhutanese refugees and provides for
 their basic needs. The Government accepts the refugee presence as temporary, on
 humanitarian grounds, but offers little more than a place to stay. The Government
 officially restricts refugee freedom of movement and work, but does not strictly en-
 force its policies. Living conditions in the camps have improved dramatically since
 1992. Adequate clean water is available and health, sanitation, and nutrition stand-
 ards are acceptable. Violence has sometimes broken out between camp residents and
 the surrounding local population. The UNHCR and other donors and relief organiza-
 tions have defused tensions through a refugee affected areas assistance plan aimed
 at improving conditions in communities adjacent to the camps.
 In 1993 the Governments of Nepal and Bhutan formed a joint committee to re-
 solve the refugee problem and to determine different categories of refugees in prepa-
 ration for future repatriation. Seven rounds of bilateral talks have been held, but
 with little concrete progress. A visit to Bhutan by the Nepali acting Foreign Sec-
 retary in August led to speculation that a resolution might be in sight, but no agree-
 ments were reached and no breakthrough occurred. The lack of significant progress
 in bilateral negotiations has led to increased frustration in the camps, and to a re-
 cent campaign of "peace marches" by refugees seeking to return to Bhutan.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens, through their elected representatives, have the right to amend the Con-
 stitution with the exception of certain basic principles that they may not change-
 sovereignty vested in the people, the multiparty system, fundamental rights, and
 the constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections are scheduled at least every 5 years. Midterm elections
 may be called if the ruling party loses its majority, loses a vote of no confidence,
 or calls for elections. The Constitution grants suffrage to all citizens of age 18 and
 over.
 The House of Representatives, or lower house, may send legislation directly to the
 King by majority vote. The National Council, or upper house, may amend or reject
 lower house legislation, but the lower house can overrule its objections. The upper
 house may also introduce legislation and send it to the lower house for consider-
 ation.
 
 
 1668
 The King exercises certain powers with the advice and consent of the Council of
 Ministers. These include exclusive authority to enact, amend, and repeal laws relat-
 ing to succession to the throne. The King's income and property are tax-exempt and
 inviolable, and no question may be raised in any court about any act performed by
 the King. The Constitution also permits the King to exercise emergency powers in
 the event of war, external aggession, armed revolt, or extreme economic depression.
 In such an emergency, the    g may suspend without judicial review many basic
 freedoms, including the freedoms of expression and assembly, freedom from censor-
 ship, and freedom from preventive detention. However, he may not suspend habeas
 corpus or the right to form associations. The King's declaration of a state of emer-
 gency must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the lower house of the Par-
 liament. If the lower house is not in session, the upper house exercises this power.
 A state of emergency may be maintained for up to 3 months without legislative ap-
 proval and up to 6 months, renewable only once for an additional 6 months, if the
 legislature grants approval.
 The Constitution bars the registration and participation in elections of any politi-
 cal party that is based on "religion, community, caste, tribe, or region," or that does
 not operate openly and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women, indigenous peoples, or minorities
 from participating in the Government or in political parties. Conservative traditions
 limit the roles of women and of some castes and tribes in the political process. The
 Constitution requires that women constitute 5 percent of each party's candidates for
 the House of Representatives. A royal ordinance, which has since been ratified by
 Parliament, also requires that 20 percent of all village and municipal level seats be
 reserved for female candidates. Currently, 7 of the 205 members of the lower house
 are women and 5 of the 60 members of the upper house are women.
 In March, when local elections were scheduled across the country, Maoist violence
 and threats forced the postponement of voting in parts of 15 of the 75 electoral dis-
 tricts. Officials recorded 16 deaths, mostly civilians, from election-related violence
 during these elections. The Maoists' efforts to disrupt the elections caused some can-
 didates to withdraw and voters to avoid polling stations. Since no one was elected
 to office in these areas, they remain without elected beards to manage district gov-
 ernance.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are a dozen nongovernmental (NGO) human rights organizations. These in-
 clude the Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON), the Informal Sector Serv-
 ices Center (INSECY, the International Institute for Human Rights, Environment,
 and Development (INHURED), and the Forum for the Protection of Human Rights
 (FOPHUR). The Nepal Law Society also monitors human rights abuses and a num-
 ber of NGO's focus on specific areas such as torture, child labor, women's rights,
 or ethnic minorities. Groups are free to publish reports on human rights abuses.
 The Government has also allowed groups to visit prisons and prisoners. The Govern-
 ment rarely arrests or detains those reporting on human rights problems.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution specifies that the State shall not discriminate against citizens
 on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology. However, there is still a caste
 system. Discrimination against lower castes and women remains common, especially
 in rural areas.
 Women.-Violence against women is a serious problem and effects almost every
 citizen. There is no law against domestic violence, which is widespread. In one
 study, 50 percent of the respondents said that they know someone who was the vic-
 tim of domestic violence. In another survey, respondents listed the perpetrators of
 violence in 77 percent of incidents as family members, and 58 percent reported that
 it is a daily occurrence. Little public attention is given to violence against women
 in the home; the Government makes no special effort to combat it.
 Rape and incest are also problems, particularly in rural areas. There is a law
 against rape of non-prostitute women which imposes sentences of from 3 to 5 years.
 In the case of rape of prostitutes, sentences range from a fine of 500 rupees ($9.00)
 to 1 year's imprisonment.
 There is a general unwillingness among citizens, particularly government figures,
 to recognize violence against women as a problem. In a survey conducted by Saathi,
 a local NGO, 42 percent of the respondents said that in their experience medical
 practitioners were uncooperative or negligent in cases of violence against women
 and girls. This unwillingness to recognize violence against women and girls as unac-
 
 
 1669
 ceptable in daily life is seen not just in the medical profession, but among the police
 and politicians as well.
 The police department has a "women's cell" in five cities, including Kathmandu.
 These cells are made up entirely of female officers, who receive special training in
 handling victims. The police have also sent out directives instructing all officers to
 treat domestic violence as a criminal offense that should be prosecuted. However,
 according to a police official, this type of directive is difficult to enforce because of
 entrenched social attitudes. Even though the police may arrest a man, further pros-
 ecution is seldom pursued by the woman or by the Government.
 A large number of NGO's in Kathmandu work on the problem of violence against
 women. Saathi's assistance program includes a women's shelter and a suicide inter-
 vention center. The shelter provides housing, medical attention, counseling, and
 legal advocacy for the victims of violence.
 Two conferences were held in the fall that focused on the problem violence against
 women. One was a national conference of NGO's, government officials, and par-
 liamentarians organized by the NGO Saathi. The Government announced new ini-
 tiatives at the meeting, including the formation of a new National Women's Com-
 mission to help guide government policy. The conference participants also formu-
 lated a common strategy to unite NGO efforts in the field. There was also an inter-
 national conference organized by the UNICEF regional office for South Asia.
 The dowry tradition is strong, with greater prevalence in the Terai region. Killing
 of brides because of defaults on dowry payments is rare, but does occur. More com-
 mon is the physical abuse of wives by the husband and the husband's family to ob-
 tain additional dowry or to force the woman to leave to enable the son to remarry.
 Trafficking in women and girls remains a deeply ingrained social problem in sev-
 eral of the country's poorest areas. Estimates of the number of girls and women
 working as prostitutes in India range between 40,000 and 100,000. The best avail-
 able data suggest that approximately 5,000 to 7,000 girls between the ages of 10
 and 18 are lured or abducted into prostitution each year. Prostitution is also a prob-
 lem in the Kathmandu valley. A children's human rights goup in Nepal states that
 20 percent of prostitutes are younger than 16 years old. In many cases, parents or
 relatives sell women and young girls into sexual slavery.
 There is legislation to protect women from coercive trafficking, but it is not well
 enforced. The fear of the spread of AIDS by returning prostitutes has discouraged
 the Government from promoting the rehabilitation of prostitutes. Government ef-
 forts focus more on preventing prostitution and trafficking in women. The Ministry
 of Labor and Social Welfare sponsors job and skill trainingprograms in several poor
 districts known for sending prostitutes to India. Svera7 NGO's have similar pro-
 grams.
 Although the Constitution provides protections for women, including equal pay for
 equal work, the Government has not taken significant action to implement its provi-
 sions. Women face discrimination, particularly in rural areas, where religious and
 cultural tradition, lack of education, and ignorance of the law remain severe impedi-
 ments to their exercise of basic rights such as the right to vote or to hold property
 in their own names.
 Women have benefited from changes in marriage and inheritance laws. In 1994
 the Supreme Court struck down provisions of the Citizenship Law that discrimi-
 nated against foreign spouses of Nepalese women. However, many other discrimina-
 tory laws still remain. According to legal experts, there are more than 20 laws that
 discriminate against women. For example, the law grants women the right to di-
 vorce, but on narrower grounds than those applicable to men. The law on property
 rights also favors men in its provisions for inheritance, land tenancy, and the div.
 sion of family property. In August 1995, the Supreme Court also ordered the Council
 of Ministers to enact legislation within 1 year giving women property rights in re-
 gard to inheritance and land tenancy equal of those of men. Legislation addressing
 women's issues, including property rights and rape, was introduced into the Par-
 liament, but has not yet been passed.
 According to the 1991 census, the female literacy rate is 26 percent, compared
 with 57 percent for men. Human rights groups report that qirls attend secondary
 schools at a rate half that of boys. There are now many NGO s focused on integrat-
 ing women into society and the economy. These NGO's work in the areas of literacy,
 small business, skills transfer, and against trafficking in women and girls.
 There are a growing number of women's advocacy groups and nearly all political
 parties have their own women's group. Members of Parliament have begun working
 or the passage of tougher laws for crimes of sexual assault, but have had little suc-
 cess so far.
 Children.-Although education is not compulsory, the Government provides free
 primary education for all children between the ages 6 and 12, but many families
 
 
 1670
 cannot afford school supplies or clothing. Schools charge fees for further education.
 Free health care is provided through government clinics, but they are poorly
 equipped and too few in number to meet the demand. Community-based health pro-
 grams assist in the prevention of childhood diseases and provide primary health
 care services. Due to poor or nonexistent sanitation in rural areas many children
 are at risk from severe and fatal illnesses.
 The Child Act of 1992 provides legal protection for children in the workplace and
 in criminal proceedings. I though it calls for the establishment of child welfare com-
 mittees andorphanages, the Government has established few such facilities. The
 Labor Act of 1992 prohibits employment of minors under 14 years of age, but em-
 ployers, particularly in the informal sector or agriculture, widely ignore the law.
 Children under the age of 16 work in all sectors of the economy. Children's rights
 groups estimate that up to half of all children work. As recently as early 1994, the
 carpet industry employed large numbers of children, an estimated 23,000, nearly
 one-third of all workers in that industry. Due to negative publicity in consumer na-
 tions, children now account for approximately 5 percent of the carpet industry's em-
 ployees, about 6,000 workers (see Section 6.d.). In 1996 a consortium of carpet man-
 ufacturers is moving to establish a certification system for carpets made without
 child labor. The Ministry of Labor is increasing its efforts to monitor the use of child
 labor.
 Prostitution and trafficking in young girls remain serious problems.
 Social attitudes view a female child as a commodity, to be bartered off in mar-
 riage, or as burden. Some people, in fact, consider marrying a girl before menarche
 an honorable, sacred act that increases one's chances of a better afterlife. As a re-
 sult, child-brides are common. According to the UNICEF's Regional Office for South
 Asia, 40 percent of all marriages are consummated with a girl under 14 years of
 age. The age difference in marriage is often cited as one cause of domestic violence.
 Approximately 140 to 144 children considered delinquents or accused for public
 offenses are incarcerated with adults because the Government has not established
 juvenile homes. Another 30 children are in jails as non-criminal dependents of incar-
 cerated adults. Some of the allegedly delinquent children are as young as 9 years
 old, even though, under the law, children under 18 cannot be charged with crimes
 (see Section 1.c.).
 People With Disabilities.-The disabled face widespread discrimination. Families
 often are stigmatized by and ashamed of disabled family members, who may be hid-
 den away or neglected. Economic integration is further hampered by the general
 view that the disabled are unproductive. The mentally retarded are associated with
 the mentally ill. Sometimes, mentally ill and retarded persons are placed in prisons
 due to the lack of facilities or support.
 The Government has long been involved in providing for the disabled, but the
 level of government assistance has not met the needs of the disabled. The 1982 Dis-
 abled Persons Protection and Welfare Act and additional 1994 rules mandate acces-
 sibility to buildings, transportation, employment, education, and other state serv-
 ices. However, despite government funding for special education programs, the Gov-
 ernment does not implement or enforce laws regarding the disabled. A number of
 NGO's working with the disabled receive significant funding from the Government,
 but persons who are physically or mentally disabled rely almost exclusively on fam-
 ily members to assist them.
 National /Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-Nepal has over 75 ethnic groups speaking
 50 languages. The Constitution provides that each community "shall have the right
 to preserve and promote its language,  script, and culture." It further specifies that
 each community has the right to operate schools up to the primary level in its moth-
 er tongue.
 Discrimination against lower castes is especially common in the rural areas of
 western Nepal. Although the Government has outlawed the public shunning of "un-
 touchables, an exception was retained for traditional practices at Hindu religious
 sites. Economic, social, and educational advancement tend to be a function of histor-
 ical patterns, geographic location, and caste. Better education and higher levels of
 prosperity, especially in the Kathmandu valley, are slowly reducing caste distinc-
 tions and increasing opportunities for lower socioeconomic groups. Better educated
 urban-oriented castes (Brahmin, Chhetri, and certain elements of the Newar com-
 munity traditionally dominant in the Kathmandu valley) continue to dominate poli-
 tics, senior administrative and military positions, and to control a disproportionate
 share of natural resources in their territories.
 In remote areas, school lessons and national radio broadcasts are often in the
 local language. However, in areas with nearby municipalities, education at the pri-
 mary, secondary, and university levels is conducted almost exclusively in Nepali,
 which is constitutionally mandated as the official language of the State. Human
 
 
 1671
 rights groups report that the languages of the small Kusunda, Dura, and Meche
 communities are nearly extinct and that non-Hindu peoples are losing their culture.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the freedom to estab-
 lish and join unions and associations. It permits restriction of unions only in cases
 of subversion, sedition, or similar conditions. Despite the political transformation in
 1990, trade unions are still developing their administrative structures to organize
 workers, bargain collectively, and conduct worker education programs. The prior
 UML government "automatically" registered its own affiliated unions but interfered
 in the registration of unions associated with the Nepali Congress Party's labor orga-
 nization.
 Union participation in the formal sector is significant, but it accounts for only a
 small portion of the labor force. In 1992 Parliament passed the Labor Act and the
 Trade Union Act, and formulated enabling regulations. However, the Government
 has not yet fully implemented the laws. The Trade Union Act defines procedures
 for establishing trade unions, associations, and federations. It also protects unions
 and officials from lawsuits arising from actions taken in the discharge of union du-
 ties, including collective bargaining.
 The law permits strikes, except by employees in essential services such as water
 supply, electricity, and telecommunications. The law empowers the Government to
 halt a strike or suspend a union's activities if the union disturbs the peace or if it
 adversely affects the nation's economic interests. Under the Labor Act, 60 percent
 of a union's membership must vote in favor of a strike in a secret ballot for the
 strike to be legal.
 The Trade Union Act prohibits employers from discriminating against trade union
 members or organizers. There have been few reports of discrimination against union
 members.
 The Government does not restrict unions from joining international labor bodies.
 Several trade federations and union organizations maintain a variety of inter-
 national affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Act provides for
 collective bargaining, although the organizational structures to implement the Act's
 provisions have not been established. Collective bargaining agreements cover an es-
 timated 20 percent of wage earners in the organizedsector. However, labor remains
 widely unable to use collective bargaining effectively due to inexperience and em-
 player reluctance to bargain.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery,
 serfdom, forced labor, or traffic in human beings in any form. The Department of
 Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the small formal sector, but remains un-
 able to enforce the law outside that sector.
 Large numbers of women are still forced to work against their will as prostitutes
 (see Section 5). Bonded labor is a continuing problem, especially in agricultural
 work. Bonded laborers are usually members of lower castes. An estimated 100,000
 persons are forced to work under the "Kamaiya" or bonded labor system in the
 southern Terai region. These "Kamaiyas" generally are agricultural workers who
 work for the same landlords their family may have served for many generations.
 The Government has not yet enacted legislation or taken other significant steps to
 address the problem.
 The Nepal Labor Act specifically prohibits forced or bonded child labor, but en-
 forcement of this law is inadequate. Forced child labor exists in many sectors of the
 economy.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution stipulates that children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or simi-
 lar hazardous work. The law also establishes a minimum age for employment of mi-
 nors at 16 years in industry and 14 years in agriculture. The Constitution limits
 children between the ages of 14 and 16 years to a 36-hour work week. The law also
 mandates acceptable working conditions for children. However. Both the resources
 and the commitment devoted to the enforcement of these provisions are limited and
 child workers are found in many sectors of the economy (see section 5). Although
 the law prohibits forced or bonded labor children, it exists in many sectors (see Sec-
 tion 6.c.).
 Up to half of all children work, mostly in agriculture. In 1996 a certification s s-
 tem for carpets made without child labor was established. Of the 207 carpet ac-
 tories that export, approximately 30 have signed on to this or a similar agreement
 (see Section 5). Partially as a result of this initiative, and of consumer pressure,
 children now reportedly constitute only 10 percent of the work force in the export-
 
 
 1672
 oriented carpet industry. However, children's rights activists say that, in the smaller
 factories, children are still a large part of the work force. Few or no children work
 in the garment industry.
 The Ministry of Labor's enforcement record is improving. In the urban formal sec-
 tor, it has had some success in enforcing laws relating to tenure, minimum wage,
 and holidays. Government inspectors are also increasing their monitoring of the use
 of child labor in carpet factories.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In August legislation was passed that raised
 the minimum wage for unskilled labor to $22 (1,300 rupees) per month up from $19
 (1,150 rupees). The law also defined monthly minimum wages for semi-skilled labor
 at $23 (1,350 rupees), skilled labor at $25 (1,460 rupees), and highly-skilled labor
 at $ 28 (1,650 rupees). The minimum wage for children ages 14 to 16 was set at
 $17 (1,025 rupees). These wages are sufficient only for the most minimal standard
 of living. Wages in the unorganized service sector and in agriculture are often as
 much as 50 percent lower.
 The Labor Act calls for a 48-hour work week, with 1 day off per week, and limits
 overtime to 20 hours per week. Health and safety standar  and other benefits such
 as a provident fund and maternity benefits are also established in the act. Imple-
 mentation of the new Labor Act has been slow, as the Government has not created
 the necessary regulatory or administrative structures to enforce its provisions.
 Workers do not have the right to remove themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions. Although the law authorizes labor officers to order employers to rectify unsafe
 conditions, enforcement of safety standards remains minimal.
