 NEPAL
 Nepal is the world's only Hindu Kingdom. Its Constitution
 specifies that the King (chief of state) is the sole source of
 authority for all government institutions. Although there are
 traditional and constitutional restraints on the King's
 powers, he effectively rules as well as reigns. Political
 parties are formally banned and elections are contested on an
 individual basis. Nevertheless, parties do exist and function
 more or less openly.
 The National Panchayat (legislature) consists of 112
 representatives elected directly on the basis of universal
 adult suffrage and 28 appointed by the King. Legislation
 passed by the National Panchayat is sent to the King for his
 approval, without which it cannot become law. The Supreme
 Court can invalidate laws which it finds to be inconsistent
 with the Constitution.
 The National Panchayat selects the Prime Minister from its
 ranks. In turn, he appoints the Council of Ministers
 (cabinet). The Council, answerable to both the National
 Panchayat and the King, manages day-to-day government
 operations and advises the King. In 1983, for the first time,
 the Prime Minister was changed by a vote of no confidence. In
 1986 elections were held for a new 5-year term of the National
 Panchayat, and in June a new Prime Minister was named
 unopposed.
 Nepal ranks among the world's poorest countries. Over
 90 percent of its traditional and rural population is engaged
 in subsistence agriculture. Nepal maintained a self-imposed
 isolation until 1951; economic development and the broadening
 of political participation have been government objectives
 only since that time. Communications facilities are still
 limited and the radio remains, for most Nepalese, the only
 contact with the outside world.
 Internal security is maintained in the first instance by the
 national police and as necessary by the army. Owing to
 Nepal's limited communications facilities, local officials
 have a large degree of autonomy and exercise wide discretion
 in dealing with law and order issues.
 Compared to the situation in previous years, and particularly
 to 1985 when large numbers of people were jailed without trial
 in response to teachers' strikes, an opposition civil
 disobedience campaign, and terrorist bombings, the human
 rights situation in Nepal improved somewhat in 1986. The
 elections for the national legislature were relatively
 peaceful and fair, and the major concern was over the
 Government's repressive actions against the private press.
 However, the smaller number of arbitrary detentions in 1986
 appeared to be due more to opposition restraint than to a
 change in basic policy on the part of the Government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no political killings reported. In September an
 outspoken critic of the Government and the political
 establishment, as well as of narcotics trafficking, was
 
 
 1252
 NEPA
 seriously wounded by a gunman in what appeared to be an
 assassination attempt. The Government paid for part of his
 medical treatment, announced arrests, and instituted an
 investigation which is still continuing. There are various
 possible motives for the shooting and the victim has been
 unable to identify his assailant; it may therefore prove
 impossible to determine who was responsible for the attack.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no allegations of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are persistent reports, particularly from remote areas,
 that police regularly use brutal methods to interrogate or
 intimidate prisoners, both criminal and political. In a
 special report on Nepal issued in May 1986, Amnesty
 International expressed concern about reports of torture of
 political and criminal detainees. Rarely has the Government
 actively investigated allegations of police brutality or
 acknowledged public concerns about its prevalence. Some
 officials privately admit that they are unable to control
 police excesses.
 Places of detention reflect the low standard of livii.g in this
 extremely poor country. Jail conditions vary according to the
 crime committed and the person's status, but all prisoners
 have access to medical attention and to the traditional
 Nepalese diet. They are usually permitted visitors and goods
 from the outside. Generally, political prisoners have fared
 better than those convicted of criminal acts. Separate
 facilities are maintained for women and for the criminally
 insane.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Public Security Act permits 6 months of preventive
 detention before charges must be filed. There were
 allegations that some prisoners were released and immediately
 rearrested for another 6 months without charges being filed.
 There were also reports that some people were held in prison
 after completion of their sentences and, in some cases, in
 defiance of Supreme Court orders.
 For common crimes, a suspect must be brought before a court
 within 24 hours and must be informed of the general grounds
 for the arrest or be released. A 7-day extension may be
 granted for the completion of the police investigation.
 Strict adherence to these principles is not the norm.
 Neither official exile nor forced labor is practiced in Nepal.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for the right to a public trial in most cases
 (some security and customs cases excepted) and this right is
 usually honored. Except for those held in preventive
 detention, the Constitution guarantees the right to counsel
 and protection from double jeopardy and ex post facto
 application of the law. These rights are not always respected.
 There are separate military and civilian courts. Military
 courts generally deal only with military personnel, but
 
 
 1253
 NEPAL
 civilians may be tried in these courts for crimes involving
 the military. Lower court judges are appointed by the
 Government on the recommendation of the Judicial Service
 Commission, and higher court judges are appointed by the King
 on the recommendation of the Chief Justice of the Supreme
 Court.
 The judiciary is legally independent but generally not
 assertive in challenging the executive. All lower court
 decisions (including acquittals) are subject to appeal, and
 the Supreme Court is the court of last appeal. The King may
 grant pardons and set aside judgments.
 The Government has acknowledged holding "political prisoners,"
 but there is no agreement on the definition of the term, which
 in opposition usage may include a range from student activists
 to convicted murderers. During 1986 the Political Prisoners
 Release Committee, composed of leftists and other opposition
 figures, claimed that there were more than 250 political
 prisoners in Nepal's jails.
 In its special report on Nepal issued in May 1986, Amnesty
 International expressed concern about laws passed in 1985
 which expand secret trials.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Nepalese law and tradition bolster privacy of the home and
 family, which the Government generally respects. Except for
 those suspected of narcotics or security violations, search
 warrants issued by Chief District Officers are required before
 search and seizure. The correspondence of some foreigners and
 domestic nonconformists is opened with little attempt at
 concealment.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under the Constitution, the freedom of speech and of the press
 may not be exercised in support of a political party or "to
 the detriment of the common good," the monarch, or members of
 the royal family. In practice, this rule is widely interpreted
 to permit criticism of the Government but not of the monarch or
 of the royal family. Journals and newspapers which overstep
 the established guidelines may be required to suspend
 publication. In addition, journalists or editors may be
 detained under the Public Security Act or even the Treason
 Act. In 1986 the Government closed 20 papers for printing
 objectionable material, and arrested 6 editors and 2 reporters
 for material they had written. In October a member of the
 Panchayat wrote a satirical poem critical of Nepal's system of
 government which was published in a prominent newspaper. Both
 the author and the editor were arrested and jailed for
 violating the Press Act by publishing anticonstitutional and
 objectionable material. Journalist groups have complained of
 the uncertainty surrounding what may be found objectionable at
 any given time.
 The two dailies with the largest circulation are government
 organs, but they carry some reports of opposition activities
 and criticism of the Government, as well as extensive coverage
 of the debates in the National Panchayat. A major complaint
 of the independent newspapers is that government advertising
 
 
 1254
 NEPAL
 (and most private advertising) goes only to the two
 semiofficial papers. Nevertheless, the independent press
 continues to be fairly vigorous and candid in its criticism of
 government policies and motives.
 Foreign publications are seized or banned when deemed to carry
 articles unfavorable to the Government or the monarchy.
 Several Indian newspapers were banned for varying periods
 during 1986.
 The single radio service in Nepal, and the sole television
 station in Kathmandu (which began broadcasting in 1986), are
 run by quasi-public boards and avoid controversial topics.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Regulations permit local authorities to prohibit meetings,
 speeches, and posters if they are found not to be "for the
 convenience or good of the general public." The law forbids
 activities detrimental to the monarchy, to relations among the
 people, or to national security. All political parties are
 banned under the Panchayat system, although in practice
 political party members are generally permitted to assemble
 privately and to express their views in the independent press.
 Regulations governing political activities are interpreted
 differently by local authorities in different areas of the
 country, and the decision whether to permit a political
 meeting is made on an ad hoc basis. Student groups, including
 those openly affiliated with the banned political parties, are
 allowed to contest campus elections. However, they are
 typically prevented from holding meetings or demonstrations off
 campus, and a number of student leaders are usually in jail at
 any given time.
 The Government banned trade unions in 1960. The Nepal Labor
 Organization (NLO), a creation of the Government, is the only
 organization officially permitted to perform trade union-like
 functions. There are some independent worker's associations
 which are repressed by the Government when they become too
 active. Despite reports during 1986 of meetings between the
 Education Minister and teacher representatives, the Government
 continued to withhold recognition of the National Teachers
 Association.
 There is a legal right to strike, provided that the strike is
 authorized by the NLO. In practice, the few strikes which are
 held are illegal wildcat actions. The NLO has not called a
 legal strike within the last 2 years. The NLO, however,
 typically becomes involved in mediating between strikers and
 employers after illegal strikes have begun.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The vast majority of Nepalese are Hindus. Religious tolerance
 is traditional, and the Constitution provides that "every
 person, having regard to the traditions, may profess and
 practice his own religion as handed down from ancient times."
 However, the Constitution also provides that "no person shall
 be entitled to convert another person from one religion to
 another." The legal code provides a maximum penalty of 1 year
 in prison for any Hindu who converts to another religion and 3
 to 6 years in prison for any person who seeks to proselytize a
 Hindu. In 1986, 9 new cases were registered in which 27
 people were charged with conversion and 17 with proselytizing.
 
 
 1255
 NEPAL
 In the past, there have been occasional allegations from some
 members of Nepal's small Christian minority of harassment
 which inhibited the free practice of their religion, even when
 they were not engaged in proselytizing. This charge was
 renewed in 1986 when a Catholic priest and two nuns, all
 Indian nationals, and several Nepali Catholic laymen were
 arrested at Sirsia and charged under the laws against
 proselytization and conversion. They claimed that they were
 only ministering to Catholics in the vicinity, and complained
 of maltreatment during their arrest and transfer to the
 district capital. A police officer involved in the incident
 was later transferred, apparently as a disciplinary measure.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within the country for
 Nepalese citizens, although several border areas have been
 restricted for travel by foreigners. Nepalese abroad are free
 to return home. There are no known cases of revocation of
 citizenship for political reasons.
 Nepal has no stated refugee policy. In the past it has
 accepted and assimilated approximately 12,000 Tibetan refugees
 and, according to immigration officials, no refugee has ever
 been forced to return to Tibet. Today, travelers from Tibet
 travel freely in both directions across the border.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political legitimacy in Nepal flows from the King, not from
 the people, since the Constitution is bestowed by the monarch
 rather than adopted by the citizenry. Most Nepalese accept
 and support a central role for the monarchy, either for
 religious reasons (the King is regarded as a reincarnation of
 the Hindu god Vishnu) or out of respect for tradition. Many
 Nepalese also view the monarchy as the symbol of Nepalese
 nationalism and a force that unifies a nation of disparate
 ethnic and linguistic communities. At the same time, there is
 substantial public support for the view that Nepal's future
 political development should follow democratic lines.
 The 1980 constitutional reforms restructured the nation's
 formal political framework to make officials more answerable
 to the voting public. Direct election by universal adult
 suffrage was intended to make National Panchayat members more
 sensitive to the need to be seen as representing the interests
 of their constituents in relation to the Government. That
 imperative was reinforced by the electorate in the 1986
 election, when nearly two-thirds of the incumbents seeking
 reelection to the National Panchayat were defeated. The
 elections appear to have been generally free and fair, despite
 some allegations of attempts at official manipulation.
 The accountability of the Prime Minister to the National
 Panchayat has made for lively debate of many issues. However,
 the ban on political parties makes it difficult for public
 opinion to be represented and mobilized systematically. In
 the absence of political parties, the Palace still effectively
 dominates the legislature.
 
 
 1256
 NEPAL
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A British/American human rights group visited Nepal in early
 1986 to look into reports of persecution of Christians.
 Government officials met with the group and offered to
 investigate specific allegations of abuse but staunchly
 defended the laws against conversion and proselytizing.
 Noting that the information received from Christian groups
 omits the names of the alleged victims, the Government has not
 proceeded with an investigation of the cases examined by the
 British/American group, but the later incident at Sirsia was
 investigated. The Government did not cooperate with an
 inquiry by the International Labor Organization into complaints
 of unfair treatment of the teachers organization.
 There are several human rights organizations in Nepal which
 work with Amnesty International and with regional human rights
 groups. Human rights activists disseminate their views in
 public meetings, newspapers, and pamphlets. There have been
 no reports of attempts to suppress them. The Government has
 expressed its concern about human rights violations in
 Kampuchea, Afghanistan, and South Africa.
 Amnesty International issued a special report on Nepal in May
 1986, expressing concern about the continuing imprisonment of
 persons without formal charge or trial, about reports of
 torture of political and criminal detainees, and about laws
 passed in 1985 which expand secret trials and extend the death
 penalty. There has been no indication of any official or
 unofficial response to the report by the Government. The
 Government's normal practice is to ignore foreign references
 to human rights in Nepal and avoid public statements on the
 subject.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women in Nepal have the right to vote and to hold property in
 their own name. Women's property rights have been enforced by
 the courts when cases are brought to them, especially in the
 Kathmandu area. However, women have yet to enjoy their rights
 fully in many rural areas, where lack of knowledge or
 understanding of the law is common and the weight of
 traditional practice and attitudes is great.
 As a Hindu nation which began the development and modernization
 process barely 35 years ago, Nepalese society is suffused and
 shaped by the traditional caste system. However, public
 discrimination on the basis of caste, and particularly the
 practice of untouchability, has been outlawed and is officially
 discouraged. The spread of education is slowly reducing caste
 distinctions and increasing opportunities for lower
 socioeconomic groups. Politics, as reflected by national
 election results, continues to be dominated by the traditional
 higher castes (Brahmins, Chetris, Newars) but the
 representation of other castes is increasing.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The industrial sector is small, accounting for little more than
 1 percent of Nepal's gross domestic product. The Nepal
 Factories and Factory Workers Act of 1959, as amended, sets
 minimum wage rates and working conditions, including special
 
 
 1257
 NEPAL
 rules for women and a minimum working age of 14 years.
 Enforcement is spotty, however, and there have been reports of
 child labor in match and cigarette factories.
 
 
 1258
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NEPAL
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL.         17.5     23.1     19.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   17.5     23.1     19.0
 A.AIO ..... ...............   14.1     18.4     16.7
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       14.1     18.4     16.7
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        1.3      2.2      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         1.3      2.2      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........0.0             0.0      D.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........       1.3      2.2      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV  &  WFP,       1.3      2.2      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,.          2.1      2.5      2.3
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....      2.1      2.5      2.3
 PEACE  CORPS ......       2.1      2.5      2.3
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....      0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.NAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 :.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.1      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 iII.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL...     17.6     23.2     19.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   17.6     23.2     19.1
 OTHER US LOANS                   0.0      0.0      O.0-
 EX-IM BANK LOANS......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER .................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........   220.3    154.7    102.8   1301.1
 IBRD               9.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                3.0      0.0      0.0     12.3
 IDA              148.8     92.6     34.5    647.8
 I03                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AD3               66.0     60.7     68.3    520.1
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UN)P               2.5      1.4      0.0     89.7
 OTIER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     31.2
 EE:                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 1259
