 NEPAL
 The Constitution of Nepal--the world's only Hindu Kingdom--
 provides that the King is the sole source of authority for all
 government institutions. Traditional and constitutional
 restraints limit the King's powers, but he rules as well as
 reigns. Political parties are formally banned but are
 permitted to exist and to function more or less openly.
 However, elections are officially contested on an individual
 basis. The National Panchayat (legislature) consists of 112
 representatives elected directly on the basis of universal
 adult suffrage and 28 representatives appointed by the King.
 Legislation passed by the National Panchayat must have the
 King's approval to become law. The Supreme Court can
 invalidate laws which it finds to be inconsistent with the
 Constitution. Officially, the National Panchayat selects the
 Prime Minister from its ranks; in practice, he must also be
 acceptable to the King. The Prime Minister appoints the
 Council of Ministers (cabinet), which is answerable both to
 the National Panchayat and to the King. The Council manages
 day-to-day government operations and advises the King. In
 1983, for the first time, a Prime Minister was changed by a
 vote of no confidence.
 Internal security in Nepal is maintained by the National
 Police and, as necessary, by the Army. Because communication
 links in Nepal are limited, local officials have a great deal
 of autonomy and exercise wide discretion in handling law and
 order issues.
 Nepal is one of the world's poorest countries. Over 90
 percent of its 18 million people are engaged in subsistence
 agriculture. Economic development varies widely: the
 Kathmandu valley and the Terai (the lowland area adjacent to
 India) are being developed more rapidly, but population
 pressures and environmental degradation in the hills between
 the Terai and the Himalaya mountain range in the north keep
 that area the poorest region of the country.
 There were increased reports of human rights abuses in 1988.
 Physical mistreatment of prisoners, particularly political
 prisoners, reportedly increased, and disappearances of
 prisoners and detainees continued. There were more arbitrary
 arrests and detentions. The Government did not close down any
 newspapers in 1988--an improvement over 1987--but arrests of
 journalists continued, and prepublication censorship of
 newspapers was introduced. Repression of an independent
 teachers' association continued with the arrest, transfer, and
 dismissal of many association members. There were also signs
 of greater government zeal in prosecuting individuals
 suspected of religious proselytization or conversion, both of
 which are illegal under Nepalese law.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no proven instances of political killing, but the
 Government claims that the August death of a controversial
 leftist politician (and former member of the National
 Panchayat) was politically motivated. He was attacked by a
 mob while distributing earthquake relief supplies.
 
 
 1447
 NEPAL
 b. Disappearance
 The local press and private human rights organizations
 reported that four political prisoners arrested in the past 4
 years had disappeared. The Nepal National Teachers'
 Association also reported the disappearance in August of a
 teacher who was arrested earlier in the year. The Government
 has not accounted for four men reported by Amnesty
 International in 1987 to have disappeared after being arrested
 in 1985.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There have been persistent reports in the past, particularly
 from remote areas, that police regularly used brutal methods
 to interrogate or intimidate prisoners, whether criminal,
 political, or religious. There were new reports in 1988 that
 prisoners--particularly political prisoners--had been beaten
 in the two main Kathmandu jails. Many observers attribute the
 widespread use of beatings to the fact that the police,
 especially in rural areas, are poorly equipped to carry out
 investigative work, and instead use force to obtain
 confessions.
 As in past years, a small number of prisoners (under 10) was
 reported to have died in police custody as a result of
 torture, sometimes inflicted by other prisoners given
 disciplinary powers by officials. The Government has rarely
 conducted active investigations into allegations af police
 brutality or acknowledged public concerns about its
 prevalence, but some officials privately admit that they are
 unable to control police excesses. In its 1988 Report,
 covering 1987, Amnesty International (AI) reported allegations
 of torture similar in pattern to those of other years.
 Victims included students arrested for participating in
 political protests, and the offices of the police at one
 facility were cited repeatedly as a place where torture took
 place.
 Places of detention reflect the country's basic poverty and
 low standard of living. The sum alloted to prisoners for food
 is often insufficient to meet their needs, and portions of
 that allowance are often siphoned off by guards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Public Security Act (PSA) permits 9 months' preventive
 detention before charges must be filed if the detention order
 is issued by a local or regional official, and up to 18
 months' detention if the order is imposed by the central
 Government. PSA detention orders can be, and often are,
 renewed for up to 3 years. Some individuals have remained in
 custody for several years without charges being filed or their
 cases coming to trial. There are reports that some people are
 held in prison after completion of their sentences and, in
 some cases, in defiance of a Supreme Court order for their
 release. In addition, the Public Offenses Act permits a
 district official to issue an order for up to 6 months'
 detention, or a sizable fine, and was used in 1988 to detain
 several persons who spoke critically of earthquake relief
 operations or who were engaged in relief activities outside
 the officially'designated procedures.
 
 
 1448
 NEPAL
 Persons detained or punished for the expression of views
 critical of or different from the Government's are often
 charged under the Treason Act, instead of being detained under
 one of the above acts. Persons are often detained without
 warrants, and are permitted access to a lawyer of their
 choosing only after they are no longer technically in police
 custody. This can be up to 25 days in criminal cases. Those
 detained under the PSA are formally presented with a document
 stating that they are being held under that Act when they are
 moved to jail. For common crimes, the law provides that a
 suspect must be brought before a court within 24 hours, and
 must be informed of the general grounds for the arrest or be
 released. A 7-day extension may be granted for the completion
 of the police investigation. In most cases, local law does
 provide a person in detention with the right to a judicial
 determination of the legality of the detention, but this right
 is often disregarded.
 There is a functioning system of bail, but bail levels were
 substantially increased in 1987, making bail too high for most
 Nepalese. Legal sources also report a growing tendency over
 the past 2 years for judges not to set bail, and many accused
 are held throughout their trial period.
 Arbitrary arrests and detention are common, and although exact
 numbers are difficult to determine, it is reliably estimated
 that several hundred such arrests and detentions took place in
 1988. On the national level, short term arrests and
 detentions, sometimes without the issuance of any order, may
 be used as a political weapon. On the local level, they are
 used as a form of simple harassment.
 In February up to 150 workers of an outlawed opposition party
 and some students were detained when they organized a general
 strike. One of the detainees, the former Vice Mayor of
 Kathmandu, remains in jail. Over 100 persons were detained in
 March when they attempted to organize rallies in several
 cities protesting the mishandling of a stampede of soccer fans
 at the national stadium that took 79 lives, and over 50 people
 were arrested in July when they attempted to plant trees or
 donate blood on the anniversary of the death of a prominent
 opposition leader.
 Official exile is not practiced in Nepal. With regard to
 forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for the right to a public trial except in
 some security and customs cases; it is usually honored.
 Except for those held in preventive detention, the
 Constitution provides for the right to counsel and protection
 from double jeopardy and retroactive application of the law.
 These rights are not always respected, however.
 Military and civilian courts are separate. Military courts
 generally deal only with military personnel, but civilians may
 also be tried for crimes involving the military. Lower court
 judges are appointed by the Government on the recommendation
 of the Judicial Service Commission. Higher court judges are
 appointed by the King on the recommendation of the Chief
 Justice of the Supreme Court. In cases of terrorism or
 treason, the Destructive Crimes Act and the State Offenses and
 Punishment Act provide for closed trials before specially
 constituted tribunals.
 
 
 1449
 NEPAL
 The judiciary is legally independent, but is generally not
 assertive in challenging the Executive. Law enforcement
 officials frequently ignore even writs and orders issued by
 the Supreme Court, or reply that the person in question is not
 in their custody. There is no mechanism for courts to follow
 up their writs and orders. All lower court decisions,
 including acquittals, are subject to appeal. The Supreme
 Court is the court of last appeal, but the King may grant
 pardons and set aside judgments.
 The Government has acknowledged holding political prisoners,
 but there continues to be no agreement in Nepal on what this
 term means. In opposition usage, it can include a wide
 variety of offenders, ranging from editors and student
 activists to convicted murderers. Current estimates of the
 number of political prisoners range from 157 to more- than 248,
 a significant increase over estimates in 1987.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government generally respects the privacy of the home and
 family, principles which are bolstered by Nepalese law and
 tradition. Except for those suspected of narcotics or
 security violations, search warrants issued by Chief District
 Officers are required before search and seizure. The
 correspondence of some individuals, both Nepalese and foreign,
 is opened with little attempt at concealment.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under the Constitution, freedom of speech and of the press may
 not be exercised in support of a political party or "to the
 detriment of the common good, the monarch, or members of the
 royal family." In practice, this rule is widely interpreted
 to permit criticism of the Government but not of the monarch
 or of the royal family. However, in 1988, criticism of the
 Government concerning especially sensitive topics, such as a
 stadium disaster and earthquake relief efforts, also prompted
 restrictions on freedom of speech and press. The travel of
 journalists to earthquake-affected regions was reportedly
 restricted, and the Government threatened to take severe
 action against newspapers seeking "to distort facts about the
 relief operations."
 The sole radio service and television station in Nepal are run
 by quasi-public bodies and avoid controversial topics.
 The Government did not close any newspapers in 1988, a major
 improvement over 1987 when 19 were closed. This may have been
 due to the fact that almost all such attempts in the past were
 eventually overturned in court. However, prepublication
 censorship of papers was instituted for the first time in
 1988. At least five publications in the Kathmandu valley had
 to provide draft copies of their issues to local authorities
 for approval. All copies of one publication were seized
 before release, despite the editor's compliance with the
 authorities' censorship instructions. Journalists' groups
 continued to complain of the uncertainty surrounding what may
 be found objectionable at any given time.
 Four journalists were arrested in 1988. In September the
 editor of a weekly paper was arrested after publishing an
 
 
 1450
 NEPAL
 article critical of the Government's role in the death of a
 former Panchayat member mentioned earlier. He was
 subsequently served with a 9-month detention order under the
 PSA. An editor of another weekly was also jailed in September
 in connection with his authorship of a book claiming that
 certain castes received privileges and favors to the detriment
 of his own and others.
 The two dailies with the largest circulation are government
 organs. They carry some reports of opposition activities and
 criticism of the Government, as well as extensive coverage of
 the debates in the National Panchayat. A major complaint of
 the independent newspapers is that government advertising (and
 most private advertising) goes only to the two semiofficial
 newspapers. They also complain that access to paper supplies,
 controlled by a government business, is sometimes manipulated
 for political reasons, and that other facilities are sometimes
 denied them by the Government. Nevertheless, the independent
 press continues to be fairly vigorous and candid in its
 criticism of government policies and motives.
 Foreign publications are seized or banned when deemed to carry
 articles unfavorable to the Government or the monarchy.
 Circulation of banned or proscribed articles can lead to
 arrest and imprisonment, and several persons were arrested for
 possessing or circulating articles unfavorable to the Crown
 Prince, which had been published in the British press.
 Academic freedom is limited. There is only one university in
 Nepal. All professors are essentially civil servants and
 therefore have limited autonomy. Self-censorship is a
 phenomenon throughout the university system, especially at
 campuses outside Kathmandu, where awareness of official
 monitoring is great and teachers are careful not to get
 involved in politics. A few respected professors can publish
 articles in foreign journals about Nepalese politics that are
 somewhat critical of the Government, but are careful to avoid
 involvement in politics and publishing similar articles
 domestically.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Regulations permit local authorities to prohibit meetings,
 speeches, and posters if they are found not to be "for the
 convenience or good of the general public." These regulations
 are frequently invoked. The law also forbids activities
 detrimental to the monarchy, to relations among people, or to
 national security. All political parties are banned under the
 partyless panchayat (council) system, although, in practice,
 political party members are generally permitted to assemble
 privately and to express their views in the independent press.
 Regulations governing political activities are interpreted
 differently by local authorities in different areas of the
 country, and the decision whether to permit a political
 meeting is made on an ad hoc basis. The Organizations and
 Associations Control Act requires that all organizations be
 registered with the Government and stipulates that members of
 applying organizations must receive a police report stating
 that they are not "antisystem." Approval of registration
 applications is often denied, but many groups do meet without
 seeking approval, or after approval is denied. Student
 groups, including those openly affiliated with the banned
 political parties, are allowed to contest campus elections.
 However, they are usually prevented from holding meetings or
 
 
 1451
 NEPAL
 demonstrations off-campus, and a number of student leaders are
 usually in jail at any given time.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The great majority of Nepalese are Hindus. There is a sizable
 minority of Buddhists and small numbers of Christians and
 Muslims. A certain measure of religious tolerance is
 traditional. The Constitution provides that "every person,
 having regard to the traditions, may profess and practice his
 own religion as handed down from ancient times." The
 Constitution also provides that 'no person shall be entitled
 to convert another person from one religion to another." The
 legal code provides a maximum penalty of 1 year in prison for
 any Hindu who converts to another religion and 3 to 6 years
 for any person who seeks to proselytize a Hindu.
 Five new cases were registered in which 6 people were charged
 with proselytization and 37 with conversion--double last
 year's total indictments. Including cases fnitiated in prior
 years, approximately 156 persons remained under indictment in
 49 separate cases. Approximately 70 defendants have been
 convicted but remain free on bail pending appeal. Although no
 one is currently serving a sentence for either offense, 1988
 was the first year in which bail was refused for the
 defendants in one new case. Also for the first time, the
 Government appealed the granting of bail in another case. In
 August seven people in Hetauda were charged with conversion,
 including a 16-year-old boy whose family reportedly had been
 Christian since his grandfather was converted in India. While
 judicial interpretation has been that conversion outside of
 Nepal is not illegal, in practice, some defendants have been
 charged if they could not provide proof, often unavailable, of
 conversion outside Nepal.
 In 1986 two Roman Catholic nans, a priest (all Indian
 nationals), and a Nepalese citizen were arrested and, they
 claimed, tortured. All four were convicted in December 1987
 of proselytization and sentenced to 6 years in prison. The
 case has been on appeal since December 1987. All four
 defendants have been out on bail since their release in 1986.
 The three Indian nationals have returned to India but plan to
 return to appear in court when a reporting date is set.
 There were also articles in the vernacular press attacking the
 spread of Christianity in Nepal. In September, the official
 press reported a speech by the Minister of Home Affairs in
 which he highlighted the Government's policy of taking "strong
 action" against persons spreading, or converting to,
 Christianity. Some Nepalese Christians continued to allege
 that harassment inhibited the free practice of their religion,
 even when they were not engaged in proselytizing, and some
 also claimed to have experienced difficulties obtaining
 citizenship documents and passports. Customs officials
 reportedly began to impound Bibles being brought into Nepal by
 travelers or returning citizens.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within the country for
 Nepalese citizens, although foreigners and journalists are
 
 
 1452
 NEPAL
 restricted from traveling to several border areas. Nepalese
 abroad are free to return home. There are no known cases of
 revocation of citizenship for political reasons.
 Nepal has no stated refugee policy. In the past, it has
 accepted and assimilated approximately 12,000 Tibetan
 refugees. However, for the first time, a total of 26 newly
 arrived undocumented Tibetans were detained for several months
 and were eventually returned to China in September. Senior
 government officials stated that new arrivals from Tibet
 lacking proper Chinese documentation would not be considered
 refugees and would be turned back at the border if caught.
 However, government officials have stated that individual
 requests for asylum will be considered.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political legitimacy in Nepal flows from the King, who is
 revered as an incarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu and who
 plays the dominant role in the political system. The
 Constitution is bestowed by the King, not adopted by the
 citizens of Nepal, and there is no mechanism by which they can
 legally change the political system. Most Nepalese accept and
 support a central role for the King, seeing the monarchy as
 the symbol of Nepalese nationalism and a force which binds
 together the disparate ethnic and linguistic communities of
 Nepal. At the same time, however, there is substantial
 support, especially among educated Nepalis, for broader
 participation in the political system.
 Within the National Panchayat, there is lively debate on many
 issues, but not on the monarchy itself, which cannot be
 criticized in the legislature or in print. The continued ban
 on political parties makes it difficult for public opinion to
 be mobilized and represented outside the strict confines of
 Nepal's panchayat (council) system. The outlawed Nepali
 Congress Party and a variety of disunited Communist groups,
 however, try to criticize the Government on some issues and to
 serve as sounding boards for popular feelings. In the absence
 of recognized political parties, however, the Palace still
 effectively dominates the legislature.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are several unregistered human rights organizations in
 Nepal which address domestic human rights issues, and there is
 an unregistered branch of AI. Human rights activists
 disseminate their views in public meetings, newspapers, and
 pamphlets. The 1988 celebration of the anniversary of United
 Nations International Human Rights Day in December was the
 focal point for multiple nationwide campaigns to bring
 attention to human rights concerns.
 Members of international human rights groups, including AI in
 1987 and Asia Watch in 1988, have visited Nepal, though not
 always with the foreknowledge of the Government. Occasionally
 such visitors have felt that they were the object of
 officially sanctioned surveillance and intimidation.
 The Government has supplied only limited replies to the
 International Labor Organization's requests for information on
 a complaint filed by the World Confederation of Organizations
 
 
 1453
 NEPAL
 of the Teaching Profession on behalf of the Nepal National
 Teachers' Association--see Section 6.a. The Government's
 general practice has been to avoid public statements on
 foreign references to its human rights practices.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women in Nepal have the right to vote and to hold property in
 their own names. Women's property rights have been enforced
 by the courts when cases have been brought to them, especially
 in the Kathmandu area. However, women still do not enjoy
 their rights fully in many rural areas, where the weight of
 tradition, lack of education, and ignorance of the law remain
 severe impediments to the exercise of these rights. Women's
 literacy rates continue to be far lower than those for men,
 and the participation of women in government and private
 business is still limited. Awareness of the problem is
 growing, however, and the Government is slowly recognizing the
 need for changes in policy and practice that will improve the
 situation. The Queen's support for women's legal services has
 been helpful in this regard. There are a number of women
 active in political life, including the Minister of Health and
 the Ambassador to India.
 Still largely a traditional society in terms of religion and
 social structure, Nepal remains wedded to the caste system.
 However, public discrimination on the basis of caste,
 particularly the public shunning of "untouchables," has been
 outlawed and is officially discouraged. The spread of
 education and higher levels of prosperity, especially in the
 Kathmandu valley, are slowly reducing caste distinctions and
 increasing ppportunities for lower socioeconomic groups.
 Politics in Nepal continues to be dominated by higher castes
 (Brahmins, Chetris, and certain elements of the Newar
 community), but representation of other castes is slowly
 increasing.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Although workers do not enjoy the right to form associations
 independent of the Government, their interests are considered
 by the Government to be fully represented through the Nepal
 Labor Organization (NLO). The Government banned trade unions
 in 1960. In 1963 the NLO was established by the Constitution
 as one of the "class organizations" to reflect the interests
 of various classes of Nepalese society. All factory, mill,
 and other wage earners, including those in the transportation
 sector, are eligible for membership in the NLO, but membership
 is not mandatory. In addition, under the provisions of the
 Nepal Factories and Factory Workers' Act of 1959, as amended,
 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), factory managers are
 directed to form committees representing both management and
 labor "to encourage friendly and amicable relations." The
 committees are supposed to meet once a month. The number of
 members of each committee is not to exceed 20, with cqual
 participation by management and labor.
 There is a legal right to strike, provided that the strike is
 authorized by the NLO. In practice, the few strikes which
 have been held in recent years have been illegal wildcat
 actions, undertaken without the blessing of the NLO. However,
 
 
 1454
 NEPAL
 the NLO has become involved in mediating between strikers and
 employers after illegal strikes have begun.
 After originally approving the constitution of the Nepal
 National Teachers Association (NNTA), the Government has
 refused to register it. It has reacted severely to NNTA
 agitation for better working conditions, higher salaries, and
 increased government support for education. Since the NNTA's
 first meeting in 1979, hundreds of teachers have been
 imprisoned for periods as long as 2 years in connection with
 nationwide strikes, congresses, or other NNTA activities.
 Over 70 teachers were dismissed from their jobs, over 100 were
 transferred to remote areas, and 7 are reported to have died
 as a result of unsolved murders or while in police custody.
 Subsequently, in 1987 the Government succeeded, after several
 failed attempts, in forming two alternative
 government-sponsored teachers organizations. In 1988 several
 teachers were dismissed after refusing to support the new
 organizations.
 Nepal is currently the subject of a complaint filed at the ILO
 concerning allegations that the Government has repressed the
 NNTA. The Government has supplied only abbreviated replies to
 the ILO's requests for information concerning the case, and it
 refused to issue passports to NNTA leaders who attempted to
 travel to an August conference of the World Confederation of
 Organizations of the Teaching Profession, which filed the
 complaint.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers do not enjoy the right to organize and bargain
 collectively.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Act is silent on the question of the use of any form of
 forced or compulsory labor. Forced or compulsory labor is not
 practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Act sets the minimum employment age for children at 14,
 but according to many sources, child labor is common in
 privately owned factories and in the service sector where the
 Act is not rigorously enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Act sets conditions of work with respect to minimum wages,
 a 44-hour workweek, and standards for occupational safety and
 health, but implementation is uneven and the Act is not
 rigorously enforced. The few large factories in Nepal, i.e.,
 those with 100 or more workers, are thought to be in better
 compliance with these regulations than the more numerous small
 enterprises. Minimum wages are set for four categories of
 employment as follows: unskilled--approximately $21 per
 month; semiskilled--$23 per month; skilled--$27 per month;
 highly skilled--$34 per month. These wages are considered
 sufficient only for the most minimal standard of living.
 
 
 1455
