 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government. In
 1990 the King, formerly an absolute monarch, legalized political parties, after which
 an interim government promulgated a new Constitution. The King retains impor-
 tant residual powers, but has dissociated himself from direct day-to-day government
 activities. The democratically elected Parliament consists of the House of Represent-
 atives (lower house) and the National Council (upper house). Since 1990, Nepal has
 held four national elections; two for the Parliament, and two nationwide elections
 for local government offices. International observers considered these elections to be
 generally free and fair. In February 1996, the leaders of the Maoist United People's
 Front (UPF) launched a "People's War" in midwestern Nepal, which has led to vio-
 lence in 27 of 75 districts. The insurrection has been waged through torture,
 killings, and bombings involving civilians and public officials. The Constitution pro-
 vides for an independent judiciary; however, the courts are susceptible to political
 pressure and corruption.
 The National Police Force maintains internal security, assisted as necessary by
 the Royal Nepalese Army (RNA). Police reaction to the People's War insurgency led
 to incidents of unwarranted force against prisoners and noncombatants. The army
 is traditionally loyal to the King and has avoided involvement in domestic politics.
 The police are subject to civilian control, but local officials have wide discretion in
 maintaining law and order. The police committed numerous human rights abuses.
 Nepal is an extremely poor country, with an annual per capita gross domestic
 product of approximately $200. Over 80 percent of its 21 million people support
 themselves through subsistence agriculture. Principal crops include rice, wheat,
 maize, jute, and potatoes. Tourism and the export of carpets and garments are the
 major sources of foreign exchange. Foreign aid accounts for more than half of the
 development budget. The economy is mixed, with approximately 50 public sector
 firms. Many former government firms have been privatized since 1992.
 The Government generally respected citizen's human rights, but serious problems
 remain. The Government has not enforced all of the Constitution's provisions re-
 garding basic human rights, and its record in some areas worsened during the year.
 There were also credible allegations that police killed unarmed civilians in the
 course of operations against the insurgents, or while these persons were in custody.
 The police continue to abuse detainees, using torture as punishment or to extract
 confessions. The Government rarely investigates allegations of police brutality or
 punishes police officers that commit abuses. The authorities use arbitrary arrest
 and detention. Prison conditions remain poor, and lengthy pretrial detention, judi-
 cial susceptibility to political pressure and corruption, and long delays before trial
 remain problems. The Government continues to impose some restrictions on freedom
 expression and of religion. Women and lower castes suffer from widespread discrimi-
 nation. Violence against women, trafficking in women and girls for prostitution,
 forced labor, and child labor, including forced child labor, also remain serious prob-
 lems.
 In 1996 Parliament unanimously enacted a bill providing for a permanent human
 rights commission with the authority to investigate human rights abuses. However,
 the commission still has not been established.
 The Maoist insurgents continued to commit numerous abuses, including killings
 and bombings.
 
 
 1923
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Klling.-On a number of occasions, the Gov-
 ernment used unwarranted lethal force against persons suspected of involvement in
 the People's War in central Nepal. Launched in 1996 by UPF leaders Baburam
 Bhattarai and Pushpa Kamal Dahal, the People's War is a self-declared Maoist in-
 surgency.
 In 1997 Amnesty International (AI) reported that police "have repeatedly resorted
 to the use of lethal force in situations where such force was clearly unjustified." AI's
 statement was based on an investigation of 50 killings committed by police, mostly
 in 1996.
 During 1998 the Government increased its efforts to combat the Maoist insur-
 gency. In May the police began a sweep in the mid-western districts. According to
 press reports, 139 UPF insurgents and 8 police officers were killed during the oper-
 ation, and there were widespread allegations of police abuses in connection with the
 sweep. Official sources admitted that more than 3,000 persons were arrested during
 police operations aimed at locating UPF members. In June, 14 Nepalese human
 rights organizations conducted a tour of the affected areas, and submitted a joint
 declaration of protest to the Government in which it was reported that the police
 had killed at least 33 villagers in May and June. The groups also alleged that the
 Government was responsible for the extrajudicial killings of suspected UPF mem-
 bers. On April 4, police allegedly killed 3 students in Salyan district who were con-
 ducting a peaceful Maoist rally. In July Amnesty International reported that 9 civil-
 ians were killed by police in Sakla village in Jajarkot district during a religious fes-
 tival on June 6. The police allegedly surrounded the area and shot randomly into
 a crowd of unarmed civilians. Also in June, police Inspector General Kharel stated
 that 20 to 30 police officers had been charged with abuses against the public in con-
 nection with their actions during the sweep.
 On June 29, Mirza Dilshad Beg, a Member of Parliament, was shot and killed as
 he arrived home. However, at year's end, there was no evidence to suggest that he
 had been killed for political reasons; credible press reports stated that Indian crimi-
 nal elements claimed credit for the killing.
 The insurgents were responsible for numerous abuses. Guerrillas, usually armed
 with homemade guns, explosives, knives, and sticks, attacked landowners, civilians,
 government officials, and government facilities in a number of districts. A govern-
 ment newspaper reported that in March, two police officers were killed by land
 mines planted by the UPF in Rolpa district. On May 31, an agricultural develop-
 ment worker was killed in Salyan district, most likely by the UPF. However, it is
 * unclear if he was merely a random victim or was the target of UPF violence. In late
 October, UPF insurgents mounted a series of attacks against police stations in
 Rukum, Rolpa, Kavre, Jajarkot, Liamjun, Tenahu, and Salyan districts..Five civil-
 ians and two police officers were killed in the attacks. According to government fig-
 ures, the insurgency has resulted in the deaths of 35 police officers, 111 civilians,
 and over 498 insurgents since 1995. More than half of the insurgents killed by secu-
 rity forces since 1995 were killed between May and September, during Operation
 Sierra Kilo Two.
 b. Disappearance.-In July Amnesty International reported that Mohan Prasad
 Ali, a teacher from Dhakeri village in Banke district, was apprehended by police on
 June 12, and has not been seen since. Two men injured in the incident at Sakla
 village on June 6, Lal Bahadur Puma and Hari Narayan Sham, were evacuated by
 helicopter and are also reported to have disappeared (see Section l.a.). In November
 AI reported that government officials told members of a delegation that it sent to
 Nepalthat UPF militants had abducted Mohan Prasad All. Two student activists
 taken into custody in 1993 and 1994 remain missing.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution and criminal law prohibit torture; however, the police often use
 torture and beatings to punish suspects or to extract confessions. According to Am-
 nesty International, torture methods include ear boxing, beating of the feet, and the
 rolling of weights over the thighs. The Government has failed to conduct thorough
 and independent investigations of reports of police brutality and has refused to take
 significant disciplinary action against officers involved. Police often are unwilling to
 investigate and to discipline fellow officers, and persons are afraid to bring cases
 against police for fear of reprisals. The Constitution provides for compensation for
 victims of torture, and a bill providing for such compensation was passed by Par-
 liament in 1996. The Government has begun human rights education for the police
 force.
 
 
 1924
 Human rights groups have reported instances of torture in areas affected by the
 "People's War." Dozens of male detainees reported having torture inflicted on them
 by the police, while women in these areas have reported instances of rape and sex-
 ual abuse by the police. Representatives of Amnesty International who visited Nepal
 after the May UPF sweeps began reported that they found evidence of "the system-
 atic use of severe torture" by police. AI also raised its concerns over the relative im-
 punity of the police for such actions.
 Local and international human rights groups also have documented Maoist vio-
 lence in areas affected by the "People's War," including the severing of arms and
 limbs. The Maoists most often have targeted political leaders, local elites, and sus-
 pected informers, including representatives of the more moderate Communist Party
 of Nepal-the United Marxist Leninist party (UML) and of the Nepali Congress
 Party (NPC). A government newspaper reported that in March UPF members at-
 tacked the land revenue office in the Chabil district of Kathmandu and attempted
 to burn it down. On May 21, UPF members destroyed a telephone repeater station
 on the border of Rolpa and Rukum districts, cutting off all telephone service to
 Rolpa, Rukum, and Jajarkot districts. Also in May, the UPF attacked a the office
 of a nongovernmental organization (NGO) in Salyan. In Augst a group of 10 to 12
 insurgents clubbed and injured a teacher at a local secondary school in
 Isahaneshwor village. In late October, the UPF bombed local government buildings,
 cut power lines, and looted businesses and NGO offices. On October 28, there was
 a failed bombing attempt at the Ilam district home of the Minister of Health; in No-
 vember, the home of the Congress Party District President in Dhanusha was
 bombed; and on December 15, the Kathmandu home of the Minister for Land Re-
 forms and Management Chiranjivi Wagle was damaged by a bomb, although no one
 was hurt.
 According to AI, relatives of torture victims who file petitions under the Torture
 Compensation Act and lawyers who defend suspected UPF members were threat-
 ened by police.
 Prison conditions are poor. Overcrowding is common in prisons and authorities
 sometimes handcuff or fetter detainees. Women are normally incarcerated sepa-
 rately from men, but in similar conditions. The Government still has not imple-
 mented a provision in the 1992 Children's Act calling for the establishment of a ju-
 venile home and juvenile court. Consequently, children are sometimes incarcerated
 with adults-either with an incarcerated parent, or, as one local NGO reports, as
 criminal offenders. The Department of Prisons states that there are no cases of chil-
 dren in jail or custody for offenses they have committed; approximately 85 noncrimi-
 nal dependent children, however, are incarcerated along with their parents (see Sec-
 tion 5). In Rukum district, a 13-year-old boy was arrested in 1997 and accused of
 being a Maoist. He was held for 6 months with 54 adults in a cell designed for only
 15 persons, before a trial date was scheduled.
 There has been some improvement in prison conditions. The authorities are more
 likely to transfer sick prisoners to hospitals than they were in the past. However,
 due to the inadequacy of medical facilities in the country, the authorities sometimes
 place the mentally ill in jails under inhumane conditions.
 The Government permits local human rights groups to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that the au-
 thorities must arraign or release a suspect within 24 hours of arrest, but the police
 often violate this rovision. Under the Public Offenses Act of 1970, the police must
 obtain warrants or an arrest unless a person is caught in the act of committing
 a crime. For many offenses, the case must be filed in court within 7 days of arrest.
 If the court upholds the detention, the law authorizes the police to hold the suspect
 for 25 days to complete their investigation, with a possible extension of 7 days. How-
 ever, the police often hold prisoners longer. The Supreme Court has on occasion or-
 dered the release of detainees held longer than 24 hours without a court appear-
 ance.
 Detainees do not have the legal right to receive visits by family members and they
 are permitted access to lawyers only after the authorities file charges. In practice
 the police grant access to prisoners on a basis that varies from prison to prison. Per-
 sons have a right to legal representation and a court appointed lawyer, but govern-
 ment lawyers or access to private attorneys is provided only on request. Con-
 sequently, those unaware of their rights may not have legal representation. There
 is a system of bail, but bonds are too expensive for most citizens. According to the
 Department of Prisons, over half of the 6,000 people imprisoned are awaiting trial.
 Due to court backlogs, a slow appeals process, and poor access to legal representa-
 tion, pretrial detention often exceeds the period to which persons subsequently are
 sentenced after a trial and conviction.
 
 
 1925
 
 Under the Public Security Act, the authorities may detain persons who allegedly
 threaten domestic security and tranquillity, amicable relations with other states,
 and relations between citizens of different classes or religions. Persons whom the
 Government detains under the act are considered to be in preventive detention and
 can be held for up to 6 months without being charged with a crime. In April the
 police used the powers granted under the act to arrest 55 suspected UPF sympathiz-
 ers during a nationwide general strike. All subsequently were released and the
 charges against them were dismissed. In October at least 300 persons were arrested
 in connection with a general strike called in Kathmandu by a communist group to
 protest efforts by police to flush out suspected UPF insurgents. In June the police
 arrested a human rights activist for alleged collaboration with the UPF (see Section
 4). Human rights groups allege that the police have used arbitrary arrest and deten-
 tion during the People's War to intimidate communities considered sympathetic to
 the Maoists. Since the insurgents began their terrorist campaigns, 4,669 Maoist-re-
 lated arrests had been made through September. Of those arrested approximately
 2,605 persons had been released, while 1,518 had been charged with crimes and
 were awaiting trial. Of those charged, 546 were still incarcerated and under inves-
 tigation.
 The 1991 amendments to the Public security Act allow the authorities to extend
 periods of detention after submitting written notices to the Home Ministry. The po-
 lice must notify the district court of the detention within 24 hours, and it may order
 an additional 6 months of detention before authorities file official charges. In 1997
 the police asked the Government to enact legislation that would extend the maxi-
 mum time of detention under the act to between 2 and 10 years.
 Other laws, including the Public Offenses Act, permit arbitrary detention. This act
 and its many amendments cover crimes such as disturbing the peace, vandalism,
 rioting, and fighting. Under this act, the Government detained hundreds of civil
 servants during a 55-day antigovernment strike in 1991. Human rights monitors ex-
 press concern that the act vests too much discretionary power in the Chief District
 Officer (CDO), the highest ranking civil servant in each of the country's 75 districts.
 The act authorizes the CDO to order detentions, to issue search warrants, and to
 specify fines and other punishments for misdemeanors without judicial review. Few
 recent instances of the use of the Public Offenses Act have come to light, since it
 has become more common, particularly with the Maoists, to arrest people under the
 Public Security Act.
 Under the Public Offenses Act hundreds of persons were arrested on March 18,
 1996 for staging a peaceful protest of the human rights situation in China organized
 by Amnesty International in Kathmandu. Although most were released the same
 day, several AI officers and 14 Tibetans were held in jail for up to 7 days, some
 without being charged.
 The Constitution prohibits exile; it is not used.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and the Supreme Court has demonstrated independence. However, lower level
 courts remain vulnerable to political pressure. In addition, bribery of lower level
 judges and court staff is endemic.
 The Supreme Court has the right to review the constitutionality of legislation
 passed by Parliament. It has ruled that provisions in the 1992 Labor Act and in
 the 1991 Nepal Citizenship Act are unconstitutional. In 1995 the Court also decided
 that the dissolution of the Parliament at the request of a former Prime Minister was
 unconstitutional, and ordered the body restored.
 Appellate and district courts have become increasingly independent, although
 they sometimes bend to political pressure. In P.olpa, one of the districts most af-
 fected by the "People's War," human rights groups have accused the district courts
 of acting in complicity with CDO's in violating detainees' rights. These groups allege
 that arrest without a warrant, prolonged detention without trial, and police torture
 occur in these areas.
 The judicial system consists of three levels: District courts, appellate courts, and
 the Supreme Court. The King appoints judges on the recommendation of the Judi-
 cial Council, a constitutional body chaired by the Chief Justice. The Council is also
 responsible for the assignment of judges, disciplinary action, and other administra-
 tive matters. Judges decide cases; there is no jury system.
 Delays in the administration of justice are a severe problem. According to the lat-
 est statistics, approximately 150,000 cases are active throughout the country. The
 Supreme Court has a backlog of a p proximately 15,000 cases, which it expects to
 take 4 years to clear. A case appealed to the Supreme Court may take more than
 10 years to conclude.
 The Constitution provides for the right to counsel, equal protection under the law,
 protection from double jeopardy, protection from retroactive application of the law,
 
 
 1926
 and for public trials, except in some security and customs cases. All lower court de-
 cisions, including acquittals, are subject to appeal. The Supreme Court is the court
 of last appeal, but the King may grant pardons. The King can also suspend, com-
 mute, or remit any sentence. On the recommendation of the Government, the King
 often pardons up to 12 prisoners-if they have served 75 percent of their sentence
 and shown good behavior--on national holidays.
 ,Military courts adjudicate cases concerning military personnel, who are immune
 from prosecution in civilian courts. In 1992 the Supreme Court ruled that military
 courts may no longer try civilians for crimes involving the military services.
 The authorities may prosecute terrorism or treason cases under the Treason Act.
 Specially. constituted tribunals hear these trials in closed sessions. No such trials
 took place during the past 3 years.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government generally respected the privacy of the home and family. Search war-
 rants are required before searches and seizures may be carried out, except in cases
 involving suspected security and narcotics violations. As amended, the Police Act of
 1955 empowers the police to issue warrants for searches and seizures in criminal
 cases upon receipt of information about criminal activities. Within 24 hours of their
 issuance, warrants in misdemeanor cases must be approved by the CDO. Court
 judges must approve them in felony cases.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall
 have freedom of thought and expression and that the Government may not censor
 any news item or other reading material; however, the Government imposes some
 restrictions on these rights. The Constitution prohibits speech and writing that
 would threaten the sovereignty and integrity of the Kingdom; disturb the harmo-
 nious relations among persons of different castes or communities; promote sedition,
 defamation, contempt of court, or crime; or contradict decent public behavior or mo-
 rality.
 The Press and Publications Act provides for the licensing of publications and the
 granting of credentials to journalists. The act includes penalties for violating these
 requirements. The act also prohibits publication of material that, among other
 things, promotes disrespect toward the King or the royal family; that undermines
 security, peace, order, the dignity of the King, or the integrity or sovereignty of the
 Kingdom; that creates animosity among people of different castes and religions; or
 that adversely affects the good conduct or morality of the public. The regulation also
 provides a basis for banning foreign publications. However, foreign publications are
 now widely available.
 There are hundreds of independent vernacular and English newspapers available.
 Although these newspapers represent various political points of view, most have a
 small circulation and limited impact. The Government owns the daily Nepali-lan-
 guage newspaper with the largest circulation. Editors and writers at the Govern-
 ment newspaper practice self-censorship and generally reflect government policy.
 Ruling political parties have influenced the editorial policy of the government news-
 paper to their advantage. However, despite the sensitivity of the Government to the
 "People's War," the press has not faced overt pressure to report on it in a particular
 way. Views of human rights groups, the statements of the police, and the press re-
 leases of UPF leader Bhattarai have all been reported in the local press.
 Nevertheless, journalists are detained on occasion. On January 19, newspaper edi-
 tor Ashok Subedi was detained in Ramechchap, and on January 20 editor Matrika
 Pradel was arrested in Udaypur district. Both were charged with participating in
 Maoist activities, charges that both of their newspapers claim are false. Another
 journalist was arrested on January 7 in Janakpurdham after reporting on corrup-
 tion sanctioned by local authorities. He was beaten and held incommunicado, and
 his press accreditation was revoked. In June several newspapers that printed infor-
 mation about abuses committed by security forces were confiscated by authorities
 prior to distribution. There were also reports that articles supporting the insurgents
 were banned. There were allegations that on July 2, police instructed transport com-
 panies not to do business with newspapers that published information about anti-
 insurgent operations, and that police seized and burned such newspapers, which
 they found on buses and trucks. On August 17 in Kathmandu, Judge Ishwor Prasad
 Khatiwada sentenced reporter I.P. Gautam to 5 days' imprisonment for printing an
 article on a report on judicial corruption that had been released by the Parliament
 Economic Committee. Judge Khatiwada was one of the judges implicated in the re-
 port.
 
 
 1927
 The Government owns the only television station. The Government also owns and
 controls one radio station that broadcasts on both AM and FM. There are three pri-
 vate or community-run radio stations; Radio Sagamatha, Kantipur FM, and FM
 97.7. Television time on the government-owned television station is regularly leased
 to private producers. Radio reaches the greatest number of people and has the larg-
 est influence. Programming currently reflects a broader range of interests and politi-
 cal viewpoints than prior to the political transformation in 1990. The Government
 does not restrict access to foreign radio broadcasts or to the purchase of television
 satellite dishes that can access international news from the British Broadcasting
 Corporation (BBC) and the Cable News Network (CNN). A small but growing num-
 ber of Nepalese also have access to foreign news through private cable networks.
 Indian broadcast television is also readily available in many parts of Nepal.
 The Broadcast Act of 1993 allows private television and FM radio broadcasts, but
 implementation by the Government has been slow. There are two private cable tele-
 vision networks, which have been operating for close to 2 years in the Kathmandu
 valley. They provide mainly entertainment programming, but commentary critical
 of government policies occurs occasionally during publicly broadcast discussion pro-
 grams.
 There has been much debate about liberalizing the media and privatizing govern-
 ment-owned media. This debate has put pressure, so far successfully resisted, on
 successive governments to open the airwaves and divest government-controlled
 printing operations.
 The Government limits academic freedom to the same extent as it limits the
 media. No overt efforts to enforce these limitations were reported this year.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although the Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly, this right may be restricted by law on vague grounds
 such as undermining the sovereignty and integrity of the State or disturbing law
 and order. Persons protesting Chinese human rights policy were arrested and de-
 tained in 1996 before and during peaceful protests (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution describes Nepal as a Hindu Kingdom,
 although it does not establish Hinduism as the state religion. The majority of citi-
 zens are Hindu. The Constitution permits the practice of all religions and prohibits
 discrimination on the basis of caste except for traditional religious practices at
 Hindu temples, where, for example, members of the, lowest caste are not permitted.
 Although the Government generally has not interfered with the practice of other
 religions, conversion is prohibited and punishable with fines or imprisonment, and
 members of minority religions occasionally complain of police harassment. Some
 groups are concerned that the ban on proselytizing limits the expression of non-
 Hindu religious belief. Foreigners convicted of proselytizing can be expelled from the
 country.
 Arrests for proselytizing are rare. The only incident of arrest to occur in the past
 few years was in September 1994 when 11 Christians were sentenced to 2 years in
 jail. The King pardoned them after they had served 3 months of their sentence.
 In August an Internet service provider warned a group of foreigners to stop a reli-
 giously oriented electronic discussion group because the content of the discussions
 violated laws against proselytizing. In 1997 a Seventh Day Adventist aid organiza-
 tion came under government scrutiny after a disgruntled employee reportedly
 spread rumors to the press and Hindu organizations that the group was proselytiz-
 ing. For a period of approximately 1 month, the organization was the subject of
 slanderous and vituperative attacks by Hindu organizations. The Government con-
 vened a committee that asked Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) to
 confine itself to relief and welfare activities for which it was registered. While ADRA
 denied that it had proselytized, it did have links to an Adventist school (established
 for the children of Adventist workers in Nepal), which also had been accused of
 proselytizing. To clarify its function and role, ADRA severed all official ties with the
 school. The school continues to operate normally.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement and residence, and
 the Government generally does not restrict travel abroad. However, the Government
 restricts travel to some areas near the Chinese border for foreign tourists and for
 foreign residents, such as Tibetans residing in Nepal. The Government allows citi-
 zens abroad to return, and is not known to revoke citizenship for political reasons.
 The Government has no official refugee policy. However, it does provide asylum
 for refugees and has cooperated with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (TNHCR), and with other humanitarian organizations, in assist-
 ing refugees from Bhutan and Tibet (China). The UNHCR has maintained an office
 in Kathmandu since 1989. Since 1959 the Government has accepted approximately
 20,000 Tibetan refugees, many of whom still reside in the country. Since 1991 it has
 
 
 1928
 also provided asylum to more than 90,000 Bhutanese refugees, the great majority
 of whom are now living in UNHCR-administered camps in eastern Nepal.
 In 1995 the Government reversed a 1960's decision to suspend the issuance of
 identification cards to Tibetans, and again began to them issue identification cards.
 However, later that year the program was again suspended in connection with a
 change in government, and there remain many Tibetans with no form of identifica-
 tion and no permanent status. Undocumented Tibetan residents face difficulties in
 obtaining basic rights and are unable to travel abroad or to access such services as
 banking. The UNHCR donates blank resident identification cards to the Govern-
 ment for Tibetans, but a pproximately 4,000 Tibetan refugees within the Kathmandu
 valley remain without identification cards. During the year, the Government reac-
 tivated the program and planned to finish issuing identification cards to the remain-
 ing undocumented Tibetans by 1999.
 China and the Government of Nepal tightened control of movement across their
 border in 1986, but both sides have enforced these restrictions haphazardly. Police
 and customs officials occasionally harass Tibetan asylum seekers who cross the bor-
 der from China. Border police often extort money from Tibetans in exchange for pas-
 sage. With the change from a Communist Party government to a coalition govern-
 ment headed by the Nepal Congress Party in September 1995, the former practice
 of forcibly returning asylum seekers to China has stopped. There were no reports
 of forced expulsion of Tibetan asylum seekers during the year.
 There are approximately 95,000 ethnic Nepali refugees from Bhutan in UNHCR-
 administered camps in southeastern Nepal. An additional 15,000 refugees reside
 outside the camps in either Nepal or India. The total represents approximately one-
 sixth of Bhutan's estimated pre-1991 population.
 The UNHCR monitors the condition of the Bhutanese refugees and provides for
 their basic needs. The Government accepts the refugee presence as temporary, on
 humanitarian grounds, but offers little more than a place to stay. The Government
 officially restricts refugee freedom of movement and work, but does not strictly en-
 force its policies. Living conditions in the camps have improved dramatically since
 1992. Adequate clean water is available and health, sanitation, and nutrition stand-
 ards are acceptable. Violence has sometimes broken out between camp residents and
 the surrounding local population. The UNHCR and other donors and relief organiza-
 tions have defused tensions through a refugee-affected areas assistance plan aimed
 at improving conditions in communities adjacent to the camps.
 In 1993 the Governments of Nepal and Bhutan formed a joint committee to re-
 solve the refugee problem and to determine different categories of refugees in prepa-
 ration for future repatriation. Seven rounds of bilateral talks have been held, but
 with little concrete progress. A visit to Bhutan by the Nepali acting Foreign Sec-
 retary in August led to speculation that a resolution might be in sight, but no agree-
 ments were reached and no breakthrough occurred. The lack of significant progress
 in bilateral negotiations has led to increased frustration in the camps and to a re-
 cent campaign of "peace marches" by refugees seeking to return to Bhutan.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens, through their elected representatives, have the right to amend the Con-
 stitution with the exception of certain basic principles that they may not change-
 sovereignty vested in the people, the multiparty system, fundamental rights, and
 the constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections are scheduled at least every 5 years. Midterm elections
 may be called if the ruling party loses its majority, loses a vote of no confidence,
 or calls for elections. The Constitution grants suffrage to all citizens aged 18 and
 over.
 The House of Representatives, or-lower house, may send legislation directly to the
 King by majority vote. The National Council, or upper house, may amend or reject
 lower house legislation, but the lower house can overrule its objections. The upper
 house may also introduce legislation and send it to the lower house for consider-
 ation.
 The King exercises certain powers with the advice and consent of the Council of
 Ministers. These include exclusive authority to enact, amend, and repeal laws relat-
 ing to succession to the throne. The King's income and property are tax-exempt and
 inviolable, and no question may be raised in any court about any act performed by
 the King. The Constitution also permits the King to exercise emergency powers in
 the event of war, external aggression, armed revolt, or extreme economic depression.
 In such an emergency, the King may suspend without judicial review many basic
 freedoms, including the freedoms of expression and assembly, freedom from censor-
 ship, and freedom from preventive detention. However, he may not suspend habeas
 
 
 1929
 corpus or the right to form associations. The King's declaration of a state of emer-
 gency must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the lower house of the Par-
 liament. If the lower house is not in session, the upper house exercises this power.
 A state of emergency may be maintained for up to 3 months without legislative ap-
 proval and up to 6 months, renewable only once for an additional 6 -months, if the
 legislature grants approval.
 The Constitution bars the registration and participation in elections of any politi-
 cal party that is based on "religion, community, caste, tribe, or region," or that does
 not operate openly and democratically.
 On December 10, the coalition government of Prime Minister G.P. Koirala of the
 Nepali Congress Party (NCP), which came to power after the resignation of Prime
 Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa of the Rastriya Prajanta Party (RPP) on April 10,
 lost the support of its coalition partner, the Communist Party of Nepal-Marxist Len-
 inist (CPN-ML). Under the threat of a no confidence motion, Prime Minister Koirala
 resigned on December 21. On December 23, Prime Minister Koirala was reappointed
 as the head of a new coalition government that would hold office until nationwide
 elections were held. Elections were tentatively scheduled for May 3, 1999.
 In March 1997, when local elections were scheduled across the country, Maoist
 violence and threats forced the postponement of voting in parts of 15 of the 75 elec-
 toral districts. Officials recorded 16 deaths, mostly civilians, from election-related vi-
 olence during these elections. The Maoists' efforts to disrupt the elections caused
 some candidates to withdraw and voters to avoid polling stations. Since no one was
 elected to office in these areas, they remain without elected boards to manage dis-
 trict governance. On November 16, elections were held in several midwestern dis-
 tricts to elect district development committees; although some candidates were in-
 timidated by the Maoists and withdrew, the elections apparently were otherwise
 free and fair. Elections were also held on December 18 to select new elected boards
 to manage villages in Rolpa, Rukum, Salyan, and Jajarkot districts. UPF leader
 Baburam Bhattarai called for a boycott of the December elections. Due to intimida-
 tion by the Maoists, some would-be candidates withdrew, which meant that in a few
 cases candidates ran unopposed.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women, indigenous people, or minorities
 from participating in the Government or in political parties. Tradition limits the
 roles of women and of some castes and tribes in the political process. However, the
 Constitution requires that women constitute 5 percent of each party's candidates for
 the House of Representatives. A royal ordinance, which since has been ratified by
 Parliament, also requires that 20 percent of all village and municipal level seats be
 reserved for female candidates. Currently, 7 of the 205 members of the lower house
 are women and 5 of the 60 members of the upper house are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are approximately 10 nongovernmental (NGO) human rights organizations.
 These include the Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON), the Informal
 Sector Services Center (INSEC), the International Institute for Human Rights, En-
 vironment, and Development (INHURED), and the Forum for the Protection of
 Human Rights (FOPHUR). The Nepal Law Society also monitors human rights
 abuses and a number of NGO's focus on specific areas such as torture, child labor,
 women's rights, or ethnic minorities. On April 22, Amnesty International launched
 a week-long program on the rights of the child to highlight the lack of government
 action to protect the rights of the child. The program was part of a regional effort
 to encourage the protection of children's rights, and included a signature campaign
 and public awareness and lobbying events. AI sought to encourage the Government
 to create separate courts for children and a national monitoring committee on the
 rights of children. Groups are free to publish reports on human rights abuses. The
 Government has also allowed groups to visit prisons and prisoners, and in late No-
 vember allowed a visit by an Amnesty International delegation. The Government
 rarely arrests or detains those reporting on human rights problems, but in June the
 police arrested Gopal Siwakoti Chintan, a human rights activist, for alleged collabo-
 ration with the UPF. The police also confiscated audiotapes and videotapes of inter-
 views with victims of human rights violations from Chintan's office. The police later
 released Chintan due to a lack of evidence that he had collaborated with the UPF.
 There were reports that the Government and UPF militants limited the activities
 of human rights activists.
 
 
 1930
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution specifies that the State shall not discriminate against citizens
 on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology.- However, there is still a caste
 system. Discrimination against lower castes, women, and the disabled remains com-
 mon, especially in rural areas.
 Women.-Violence against women is a serious problem. There is no law against
 domestic violence, which is widespread. In one study, 50 percent of the respondents
 said that they know someone who was the victim of domestic violence. In another
 survey, respondents listed the perpetrators of violence in 77 percent of incidents as
 family members, and 58 percent reported that it is a daily occurrence. Little public
 attention is given to violence against women in the home; the Government makes
 no special effort to combat it.
 Rape and incest are also problems, particularly in rural areas. There are laws
 against rape which impose prison sentences of 3 to 5 years, and of 1 year or a fe
 for the rape of a prostitute.
 There is a general unwillingness among citizens, and particularly among govern-
 ment figures, to recognize violence against women as a problem. In a survey con-
 ducted by Saathi, a local NGO, 42 percent of the respondents said that in their ex-
 perience medical practitioners were uncooperative or negligent in cases of violence
 against women and girls. This unwillingness to recognize violence against women
 and girls as unacceptable in daily life is seen not just in the medical profession, but
 among the police and politicians as well.
 The police department has a "women's cell" in five cities, including Kathmandu.
 These cells are made up entirely of female officers, who receive special training in
 handling victims of domestic violence. The police have also sent out directives in-
 structing all officers to treat domestic violence as a criminal offense that should be
 prosecuted. However, according to a police official, this type of directive is difficult
 to enforce because of entrenched discriminatory attitudes. Even though the police
 may make an arrest, further prosecution is seldom pursued by the victim or by the
 Government.
 At least six NGO's in Kathmandu work on the problem of violence against women
 and on women's issues in general. Saathi's assistance program includes a women's
 shelter and a suicide intervention center. The shelter provides housing, medical at-
 tention, counseling, and legal advocacy for the victims of violence.
 Two conferences were held in 1997 that focused on the problem violence against
 women. One was a national conference of NGO's, government officials, and parlia-
 mentarians organized by the NGO Saathi. The Government announced new initia-
 tives at the meeting, including the formation of a new National Women's Commis-
 sion to help guide government policy. The conference participants formulated a com-
 mon strategy to unite NGO efforts in the field, as well. There was also an inter-
 national conference organized by the UNICEF regional office for South Asia.
 The dowry tradition is strong, with greater prevalence in the Tera region. The
 killing of brides because of defaults on dowry payments is rare, but does occur. More
 common is the physical abuse of wives by the husband and the husband's family
 to obtain additional dowry or to force the woman to leave to enable the son to re-
 marry.
 Trafficking in women and girls remains a deeply ingrained social problem in sev-
 eral of the country's poorest areas. Estimates of the number of girls and women
 working as prostitutes in India range between 40,000 and 100,000. The best avail-
 able data suggest that approximately 5,000 to 7,000 girls between the ages of 10
 and 18 are lured or abducted into prostitution each year. Prostitution is also a prob-
 lem in the Kathmandu valley. A children's human rights group in Nepal states that
 20 percent of prostitutes are younger than 16 years old. In many cases, parents or
 relatives sell women and young girls into sexual slavery. Every year, it is estimated
 that hundreds of girls and women return to Nepal after having worked as pros-
 titutes in India. Most are destitute, and it is estimated that over 65 percent of such
 women are HIV-positive when they return. There is legislation to protect women
 from coercive trafficking, including a ban on female labor leaving Nepal to work in
 Saudi Arabia and other countries in the Gulf. According to press reports, in August
 the police arrested four men from the Butwal region on charges of attempting to
 smuggle three women into Mumbai, India, with the intention of selling them into
 forced prostitution. The men had lured the women by telling them that they would
 be taken to Saudi Arabia for legitimate employment. However, despite the existence
 of antitrafficking legislation and recent attempts to increase the imposition of pen-
 alties on traffickers, antitrafficking legislation is not well enforced. The fear of the
 spread of AIDS by returning prostitutes has discouraged the Government from pro-
 moting the rehabilitation of prostitutes. Government efforts focus more on prevent-
 
 
 1931
 ing prostitution and trafficking in women. The Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare
 sponsors job and skill trainingprograms in several poor districts known for sending
 prostitutes to India. Several NGQ's have similar programs, in addition to rehabilita-
 tion and training programs for former prostitutes.
 Although the Constitution provides protections for women, including equal pay for
 equal work, the Government has not taken signfcant action to implement its provi-
 sions. Women face discrimination, particulary in rur  areas, where religious and
 cultural tradition, lack of education, and ignorance of the law remain severe impedi-
 ments to their exercise of basic rights such as the right to vote or to hold property
 in their own names.
 Women have benefited from changes in marriage and inheritance laws. In 1994
 the Supreme Court struck down provisions of the Citizenship Law that discrimi-
 nated against foreign spouses of Nepalese women. However, many other discrimina-
 tory laws still reman. According to legal experts, there are more than 20 laws that
 discriminate against women. For example, the law grants women the right to di-
 vorce, but on narrower grounds than those applicable to men. The law on property
 rights also favors men in its provisions for inheritance, land tenancy, and the divi-
 sion of family property. In 1995 the Supreme Court also ordered the Council of Min-
 isters to enact legislation within 1 year giving women property rights in regard to
 inheritance andfland tenancy that were equal to those of men. To comply with this
 order, the Government introduced an amendment to the Civil Code in April that
 would have allowed daughters to inherit parental property, but only if they re-
 mained unmarried until the age of 35. Moreover, if a woman married after age 35,
 the amendment stipulated that she would be obliged to return the inherited prop-
 erty. At year's end, this amendment, which would appear to only partially meet the
 requirements of the Supreme Court, remained stalled in Parliament.
 Accor  g to the 1991 census, the female literacy rate is 26 percent, compared
 with 57 percent for men. Human rights groups report that girls attend secondary
 schools at a rate half that of boys. There are now many NGOs focused on integrat-
 ing women into society and the economy. These NGO's work in the areas of literacy,
 small business, skills transfer, and against trafficking in women and girls.
 There are a growing number of women's advocacy groups and nearly all political
 parties have women's groups. Members of Pariament have beun working for the
 passage of tougher laws for crimes of sexual assault, but have had little success so
 pecetcopae
 Children.-Although education is not compulsory, the Government provides free
 primary education for all children between the ages of 6 and 12, but many families
 cannot afford school supplies or clothing. Schools charge fees for further education.
 Free health care is provided through government clinics, but they are poorly
 equipped and too few in number to meet the demand. Community-based health pro-
 grams assist in the prevention of childhood diseases and provide primary health
 care services. Due to poor or nonexistent sanitation in rural areas, many children
 are at risk from severe and fatal illnesses.
 The Children's Act of 1992 provides legal protection for children in the workplace
 and in criminal proceedings. Although it calls for the establishment of child welfare
 committees and orphanages, the Government has established few such facilities.
 The Labor Act of 1992 prohibits the employment of minors less than 14 years of
 age, but employers, particularly in the informal sector and in agriculture, widely ig-
 nore the law.
 Children under the age of 16 work in all sectors of the economy. Children's rights
 groups estimate that up to half of all children work. As recently as early 1994, the
 carpet industry employed an estimated 23,000 children, or nearly one-third of all
 workers in that industry. Due to negative publicity in consumer nations, these fig-
 ures have declined and children now account for approximately 2 to 5 percent of the
 carpet industry's employees, or about 6,000 workers (see Section 6.d.). In 1996 a
 consortium of carpet manufacturers established a certification system for carpets
 made without child labor. The Ministry of Labor is increasing its efforts to monitor
 the use of child labor. Children continue to work in the agriculture, pottery, basket
 weaving, sewing, weaving, and iron smithing industries. There also were reports
 that the UPF uses children as messengers and runners. Forced child labor also is
 a problem (see Section 6.c.).
 Prostitution and trafficking in young girls remain serious problems.
 Social attitudes view a female child as a commodity, to be bartered off in mar-
 riage, or as burden. Some people, in fact, consider marrying a girl before menarche
 an honorable, sacred act that increases one's chances of a better afterlife. As a re-
 sult, child-brides are common. According to the UNICEF's Regional Office for South
 Asia, 40 percent of all marriages are consummated with a girl under 14 years of
 age. The age difference in marriage is often cited as one cause of domestic violence.
 
 
 1932
 
 A local NGO reports that approximately 100 children considered delinquents or
 accused of public offenses are incarcerated with adults because the Government has
 not established juvenile homes. Some of these delinquent children allegedly are as
 young as 9 years old, even though, under the law, children under 18 cannot be
 charged with crimes; the Government maintains that there are no persons under
 the age of 18 that are incarcerated for crimes they have committed. However, ac-
 cording to the Government, 85 children are in jails as noncriminal dependents of
 incarcerated adults (see Section 1.c.).
 People With Disabilities.-The disabled face widespread discrimination. Families
 often are stigmatized by and ashamed of disabled family members, who may be hid-
 den away or neglected. Economic integration is further hampered by the general
 view that the disabled are unproductive. The mentally retarded are associated with
 the mentally ill. Sometimes, mentally ill and retarded persons are placed in prisons
 due to the lack of facilities or support.
 The Government has long been involved in providing for the disabled, but the
 level of government assistance has not met the needs of the disabled. The 1982 Dis-
 abled Persons Protection and Welfare Act and additional 1994 rules mandate acces-
 sibility to buildings, to transportation, to employment, to education, and to other
 state services. However, despite government funding for special education programs,
 the Government does not implement or enforce laws regarding the disabled. A num-
 ber of NGO's working with the disabled receive significant funding from the Govern-
 ment, but persons who are physically or mentally disabled rely almost exclusively
 on family members to assist them.
 National/Raciall/Ethnic Minorities.-Nepal has over 75 ethnic groups that speak
 50 different languages. The Constitution provides that each community "shall have
 the right to preserve and promote its language, script, and culture." The Constitu-
 tion further specifies that each community has the right to operate schools up to
 the primary level in its mother tongue.
 Discrimination against lower castes is especially common in the rural areas of
 western Nepal. Although the Government has outlawed the public shunning of "un-
 touchables," an exception was retained for traditional practices at Hindu religious
 sites. Economic, social, and educational advancement tend to be a function of histor-
 ical patterns, geographic location, and caste. Better education and higher levels of
 prosperity, especially in the Kathmandu valley, are slowly reducing caste distinc-
 tions and increasing opportunities for lower socioeconomic groups. Better educated
 urban-oriented castes (Brahmin, Chhetri, and certain elements of the Newar com-
 munity traditionally. dominant in the Kathmandu valley) continue to dominate poli-
 tics and senior administrative and military positions, and to 1control a disproportion-
 ate share of natural resources in their territories.
 In remote areas, school lessons and national radio broadcasts are often conducted
 in the local language. However, in areas with nearby municipalities, education at
 the primary, secondary, and university levels is conducted almost exclusively in Ne-
 pali, which is constitutionally mandated as the official language of the State.
 Human rights groups report that the languages of the small Kusunda, Dura, and
 Meche communities are nearly extinct and that non-Hindu peoples are losing their
 culture.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the freedom to estab-
 lish and to join unions and associations. It permits restriction of unions only in
 cases of subversion, sedition, or similar conditions. Despite the political trans-
 formation in 1990, trade unions are still developing their administrative structures
 to organize workers, to bargain collectively, and to conduct worker education pro-
 grams. The prior UML government "automatically" registered its own affiliated
 unions but interfered in the registration of unions associated with the Nepali Con-
 gress Party's labor organization.
 Union participation in the formal sector is significant, but it accounts for only a
 small portion of the labor force. In 1992 Parliament passed the Labor Act and the
 Trade Union Act, and formulated enabling regulations. However, the Government
 has not yet fully implemented the laws. The Trade Union Act defines procedures
 for establishing trade unions, associations, and federations. It also protects unions
 and officials from lawsuits arising from actions taken in the discharge of union du-
 ties, including collective bargaining.
 The law permits strikes, except by employees in essential services such as water
 supply, electricity, and telecommunications. The law empowers the Government to
 halt a strike or to suspend a union's activities if the union disturbs the peace or
 if it adversely affects the nation's economic interests. Under the Labor Act, 60 per-
 
 
 1933
 
 cent of a union's membership must vote in favor of a strike in a secret ballot for
 the strike to be legal.
 The Trade Union Act prohibits employers from discriminating against trade union
 members or organizers. There have been few reports of discrimination against union
 members.
 The Government does not restrict unions from joining international labor bodies.
 Several trade federations and union organizations maintain a variety of inter-
 national affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Act provides for
 collective bargaining, although the organizational structures to implement the Act's
 provisions have not been established. Collective bargaining agreements cover an es-
 timated 20 percent of wage earners in the organized sector. However, labor remains
 widely unable to use collective bargaining effectively due to inexperience and em-
 ployer reluctance to bargain.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery,
 serfdom, forced labor, or traffic in human beings in any form. The Department of'
 Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the small formal sector, but remains un-
 able to enforce the law outside that sector.
 Large numbers of women still are forced to work against their will as prostitutes
 (see Section 5). Bonded labor is a continuing problem, especially in agricultural
 work. Bonded laborers are usually members of lower castes. An estimated 100,000
 persons are forced to work under the "Kamaiya" or bonded labor system in the
 southern Terai region. These "Kamaiyas" generally are agricultural workers who
 work for the same landlords their family may have served for many generations.
 The Government has not yet enacted legislation or taken other significant steps to
 address the problem.
 The Nepal Labor Act specifically prohibits forced or bonded child labor, but en-
 forcement of this law is inadequate. Forced child labor exists in many sectors of the
 economy, and an estimated 40,000 children work as bonded laborers. Each year, an
 estimated 5,000 to 7,000 girls between the ages of 10 and 18 are trafficked to India
 to work as prostitutes (see Section 5). On December 27, police raided a small wool
 spinning factory in Kathmandu and freed approximately 12 children from forced
 labor, some as young as 8 years of age. The children worked 18-hour days, without
 bathroom or other breaks, and they complained of inadequate food and no pay.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution stipulates that children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or simi-
 lar-hazardous work. The law also establishes a minimum age for employment of mi-
 nors at 16 years in industry and 14 years in agriculture. The Constitution limits
 children between the ages of 14 and 16 years to a 36-hour work week. The law also
 mandates acceptable working conditions for children. However, both the resources
 and the commitment devoted to the enforcement of these provisions are limited and
 child workers are found in many sectors of the economy (see Section 5). Although
 the law prohibits forced or bonded labor by children, it exists in many sectors (see
 Section 6.c.).
 Up to half of all children work, mostly in agriculture. In 1996 a certification sys-
 tem for carpets made without child labor was established. Of the 207 carpet fac-
 tories that export, approximately 30 have signed on to this or a similar agreement
 (see Section 5). Partially as a result of this initiative, and of consumer pressure,
 children now reportedly constitute only 5 percent of the work force in the export-
 oriented carpet industry. However, children's rights activists say that, in the smaller
 factories, children are still a large part of the work force. In December police freed
 several children from forced labor in a Kathmandu carpet factory (see Section 6.c.).
 Children continue to work in the agriculture, pottery, basket weaving, sewing, weav-
 ing, and iron smithing industries. Few or no children work in the garment industry.
 The Ministry of Labor's enforcement record is improving. In the urban formal sec-
 tor, it has had some success in enforcing laws relating to tenure, minimum wage,
 and holidays. Government inspectors are also increasing their monitoring of the use
 of child labor in carpet factories.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In 1997 legislation was passed that raised the
 minimum wage for unskilled labor to $22 (1,300 rupees) per month from $19 (1,150
 rupees). The law also defined monthly minimum wages for semi-skilled labor at $23
 (1,350 rupees), skilled labor at $25 (1,460 rupees), and highly skilled labor at $28
 (1,650 rupees). The minimum wage for children ages 14 to 16 was set at $17 (1,025
 rupees). These wages are sufficient only for the most minimal standard of living.
 Wages in the unorganized service sector and in agriculture are often as much as
 50 percent lower.
 
 
 1934
 
 The Labor Act calls for a 48-hour work week, with 1 day off per week, and limits
 overtime to 20 hours per week. Health and safety standards and other benefits such
 as a provident fund and maternity benefits are also established in the act. Imple-
 mentation of the new Labor Act has been slow, as the Government has not created
 the necessary regulatory or administrative structures to enforce its provisions.
 Workers do not have the right to remove themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions. Although the law authorizes labor officers to order employers to rectify unsafe
 conditions, enforcement of safety standards remains minimal.
