 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy which began to function as a
 parliamentary democracy following national elections held on
 May 12. The King retains important residual powers under the
 new Constitution but disassociated himself from the exercise of
 power in 1991. The Parliament consists of the House of
 Representatives (lower house) and the National Council (upper
 house). From 1960, when an elected party-based government was
 dismissed, until 1990, Nepal was an absolute monarchy and
 political parties were banned. The success of the Movement to
 Restore Democracy (MRD) in April 1990 initiated Nepal's
 transition to democracy. Responding to popular pressure, the
 King dismissed the partyless "Panchayat" government and invited
 the formation of an interim government made up of Nepali
 Congiess and Communist party leaders. This government presided
 over the promulgation of a new Constitution and Nepal's first
 multiparty elections since 1959. International observers
 described these elections, in which all citizens over 18 were
 allowed to vote, as "generally conducted in a manner fair,
 free, and open enabling the full expression of the will of the
 people." The Nepali Congress Party won a majority in the House
 of Representatives with 110 of 205 seats, while the Communist
 parties, receiving almost the same total popular vote as the
 Congress Party, won a combined total of 82 seats. The parties
 led by former leaders of the discredited Panchayat system were
 routed, winning only four seats and joining a group of regional
 and special interest parties having only token representation
 in the Parliament. The Nepali Congress Party Government headed
 by Prime Minister G. P. Koirala is now in the first year of a
 5-year term.
 Internal security is maintained by the Nepal police, under the
 Home Minister, and, as necessary, by the Royal Nepal Army, of
 which the King is Commander in Chief. During the elections the
 army provided major logistical and security support, which by
 all accounts helped both to minimize election violence and to
 guarantee an orderly electoral process. Because communication
 links in Nepal are limited, local officials have a great deal
 of autonomy and exercise wide discretion in handling law and
 order. There were sporadic incidents in which police used
 excessive lethal force, and police mistreatment of criminal
 suspects continued.
 Nepal is one of the world's poorest countries, with per capita
 gross national product estimated at $160. Over 90 percent of
 its 19 million people are engaged in subsistence agriculture.
 Economic development varies widely: the Kathmandu Valley and
 the Terai (the lowland area adjacent to India) are developing
 more rapidly, but population pressures, physical isolation, and
 environmental degradation in the hills between the Terai in the
 south and the Himalaya mountain range in the north keep the
 hills the poorest region of the country.
 As witnessed by the carrying out of free elections in May,
 Nepal today is a far more open society than it was before the
 political transformation began in 1990. The new Government has
 also made measurable progress in its top priority of restoring
 law and order, which had deteriorated during the previous
 year. Prime Minister Koirala also stressed that the protection
 of human rights is a central tenet of his Government. The 1990
 Constitution guarantees a broad range of fundamental human
 rights, and during the summer Parliament passed a number of
 bills to bring the law into conformity with the Constitution.
 The principal human rights problem in 1991 concerned the abuse
 of police powers. Police fired into crowds on several
 
 
 1-52'7
 NEPAL
 occasions and police beatings of prisoners continued to occur,
 particularly in more remote areas, both as punishment and to
 extract confessions. In addition, broad powers of detention,
 which authorities still enjoy under the Public Security Act,
 were used widely during the 55-day protest by the Nepal Civil
 Servants' Association (NCSO) and remain an important problem.
 Freedom of religion, although permitted in practice, is-still
 not enshrined in law. Trafficking in women remains a
 significant social problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I- Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Following the civil.strife of February-April 199a in which
 dozens of persons were killed, the incidence of political and
 extrajudicial killing dropped sharply. Nevertheless, during
 the period leading up to the May 12 elections there were
 several hundred incidents of campaign violence in which
 injuries or fatalities occurred. Most incidents resulted from
 interparty conflict, several escalating to the point where
 police fired on crowds. After violence dwindled to almost
 nothing on election day, two deaths were attributed to
 interparty conflict in the months following the election, and
 political7 tensions have continued to erupt into violence from
 time to time. Police fired on crowds in Argakhanchi or July 6
 and in Khotang on July 31, resulting- in one death and several
 injuries on each occasion. Th4 first case was apparently
 touched off by an argument over requl-ations on the consumption
 of alcohol; the second case came when an organized
 demonstration in support of the NCSO protest became unruly and
 abusive. In both instances the H6me Minister supported the
 police justification of its behavior but then provided
 compensation to the victims' families. Both incidents involved
 supporters of competing political parties. An investigation
 team comprised of three members of'Parliament, from both the
 Nepali Congress and Communist parties, concluded that in"
 Khotang. a genuine provocation was met by excessive force.
 There are conflicting.views on the Argakhanchi incident. No-
 disciplinary action has been taken against the police in either
 instance, and a Home Ministry 'nquiry, while not technicalry
 closed-, had produced no results by year's end.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no- new reports of disappearances. Soon after coming
 to power, the interim government formed a five-person
 commission to, investigate the whereabouts of those missing or
 dead since December 1960. The commission presented its report
 to the Parliament in August; however, it has not been
 published, and few details of its conclusions are- available.
 According to press reports, the-commission found that a few of
 the More than 30 missing people had been found in police
 custody and released. The commission's report was apparently
 inconclusive, however, regarding most of the cases under
 consideration. No further investigation is anticipated.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Allegations of torture dropped markedly after the fall of the
 Panchayat government. In April the Government acceded to the
 
 
 1528
 NEPAL
 Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or
 Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Nepal's Constitution now
 provides for compensation to those subjected to physical or
 mental torture.
 Police beating is still reported to be a routine means of
 extracting confessions from common criminals, particularly in
 rural areas. In addition, there were several reports of police
 beating Tibetan refugees transiting Nepal en route to India and
 taking their possessions. These incidents have occurre in
 areas where oversight by senior government officials is thin.
 However, the Government has rarely conducted investigations
 into allegations of police brutality or acknowledged public
 concern about its prevalence.
 During the civil servants' protest, human rights groups
 reported that detainees were held under very crowded conditions
 with minimal ventilation, and that some were denied medical
 attention. Three classes of prison facilities exist in Nepal.
 Class "C" cells--which generally hold common criminals,
 suspected terrorists, and low-level political workers--are the
 worst.. They often have dirt floors, sparse or no furnishings,
 and poorer food than in class "B" or "A" cells. The use of
 handcuffs and fetters is sometimes reported.
 Prisoners in the class "C" cells reportedly suffer the most
 abuse, such as beatings and being forced to kneel for long
 periods. Conditions in "B" and "A" cells are markedly better,
 with the latter reserved for "prominent" persons. Women are
 incarcerated separately from men, in equally poor conditions.
 In September the Government announced that jail administration
 and management would be shifted from the police to the Home
 Ministry, a move that some observers thought would improve
 prison conditions and respect for prisoners' rights.
 Reflecting the low level of general medical facilities in this
 impoverished country, facilities for care and treatment of the
 mentally ill are inadequate. Such persons are often placed in
 jails under conditions that are degrading and sometimes inhuman
 by international standards.
 The three-person Mallick Commission appointed by the interim
 government to investigate the loss of life and property during
 the MRD agitation period and to look into charges of torture
 and other mistreatment completed its report on December 31,
 1990, and submitted it to the Attorney General. The report,
 which has not been published, recommended legal action against
 individual civil and police officials responsible for deaths
 and injuries during the MRD agitation in the spring of 1990.
 In February the Government seized the passports of many
 high-ranking officials likely to be indicted by the report to
 prevent them from leaving the country. The Supreme Court later
 declared this action unconstitutional. The Attorney General
 later determined that the Mallick Report supplies neither firm
 evidence.nor a legal basis for prosecution.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 During the NCSO protests in July and August, the Government
 frequently resorted to arbitrary detention and arrest under the
 Public Offenses and Penalties Act in an effort to intimidate
 and demoralize the protesters. Credible sources reported
 upward of 500 arrests under the Act during this period, with
 many of those detained spending the full 25 days of police
 investigation in preventive detention. At the end of the 25
 
 
 1529
 NEPAL
 days, most were released on bail, a few were held and charged,
 and some of the leaders were released and then quickly
 rearrested. Virtually all detainees were released within days
 of the NCSO protest's termination on August 24.
 The law which had been used most often to detain and arrest
 persons during the-MRD agitation was the Public Security Act.
 This Act was amended in April but was not repealed. Under the
 Act as amended, the Home Ministry may prohibit a person from
 leaving the Kingdom or, upon presentation of a notice stating
 that he is being detained, a person may be held for up to 6-
 months. This initial period may be extended once by the court
 for an additional 6 months before charges must be filed. A,
 written detention order with "grounds and reason" must be
 presented at the time of detention, and the district court must
 be notified within 24 hours. The listed grounds for detention
 are open to broad interpretation. A person may be detained if
 it is suspected that his actions might affect the security of
 Nepal; order and tranquility inside Nepal; amicable relations
 between Nepal and other friendly states; or amicable relations
 among people of different classes or religions within Nepal.
 Persons detained under the Act are not brought to trial. This
 law was not invoked in 1991.
 Other existing laws may be used as the basis for arrest and
 detention. Persons detained for the expression of views
 critical of, or different from, those of the Government may be
 charged under the Treason Act; the National Security Act a-iso
 allows preventive detention in an emergency.
 Under current law, persons are permitted access to a lawyer of
 their choosing only after they are no longer technically in
 police custody, which can be up to 25 days in criminal cases.
 Those detained under the Publie Security Act are to be
 presented with documentation stating they are being' held under
 the Act when they are imprisoned. For common crimes, the law
 provides that a suspect must be brought before a court within
 24 hours and must be informed of the general grounds for the
 arrest or be released. A 7-day extension may be granted for
 the completion of the police investigation. The law generally
 provides a person in detention with the right to a judicial
 determination of the legality of the detention, but instances
 of abuse reportedly occur. There is a functioning- system of
 bail, but bail levels were substantially increased in 1987,
 making bail too expensive for most impoverished Nepalese.
 ,Tudges often do not set bail, and many accused persons are held
 throughout their trial period.
 Exile is prohibited by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Nepalese law provides for the right to a public trial except in
 some security and customs cases. The Constitution provides for
 the right to counsel, protection from double jeopardy, and
 protection from retroactive application of the law. There were
 no reported instances of abuse in this area under either th&
 interim government or thenewly elected Government. The
 judiciary is legally independent. Although in the past the
 judicial system had always been weak and subject to political
 influence, efforts are being made by the new Government to
 strengthen it. The right of constitutional review was
 introduced in the 1990 Constitution- Also, the Constitution
 allows the Supreme Court to initiate contempt proceedings and
 to impose punishment for contempt of the Supreme Court or
 
 
 1530
 NEPAL
 subordinate courts. All lower court decisions, including
 acquittals, are subject to appeal. The Supreme Court is the
 court of last appeal, but the King may grant pardons and may
 suspend, commute, or remit any dentence by any court.
 Nepal's judicial system consists of three layers: the Supreme
 Court, appellate courts, and district courts. The judges of
 all three layers are appointed by the King upon the
 recommendation of the Judicial Council, a constitutional body
 chaired by the Chief Justice, which makes recommendations and
 gives advice on matters of appointment, transfer, disciplinary
 action against judges, and other matters relating to judicial
 administration. In 1990 the judicial system virtually ceased
 to function as a result of the political upheaval, causing an
 enormous case backlog; by the end of 1991, over 2,000 cases
 were still pending review by the Supreme Court.
 Military and civilian courts are separate. Military courts
 generally deal only with military personnel who are immune from
 prosecution in civilian courts. Pending review of the law to
 bring it into conformity with the Constitution, civilians may
 also be tried in military courts for crimes involving the
 military. In the past, cases of terrorism or treason were
 often dealt with under the Treason Act in closed trials held
 before specially constituted tribunals. No such cases were
 tried in 1991, but the Treason Act remains in effect.
 Fifteen persons who had been convicted by the Supreme Court in
 connection with bomb explosions in 1985 received royal pardons
 on June 23. Of the 15, 4 were facing death sentences and 4
 faced life imprisonment. Although some groups continued to
 claim there were political prisoners being held on false
 charges of murder and banditry, there was no confirmation of
 this claim.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The new Government generally has respected the privacy of the
 home and family, principles bolstered by Nepalese law and
 tradition. Search warrants are required before search and
 seizure, except in cases involving suspected security or
 narcotics violations. The Police Act of 1955 empowers the
 police to issue warrants for search and seizure in criminal
 cases upon receipt of information about criminal activities.
 The Chief District Officer (CDO) in misdemeanor cases and court
 judges in felony cases must approve warrants within 24 .hours
 after they are issued. An amendment to the Police Act was
 passed and, although its provisions have not been published,
 they reportedly retain the warrant requirements.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall have freedom
 of thught and expression; it also guarantees that no news
 item, article, or any other reading material shall be
 censored. These rights are circumscribed, however, as the
 Constitution permits restriction of speech or press in four
 instances: if they undermine the sovereignty and integrity of
 the Kingdom of Nepal; if they disturb the harmonious relations
 subsisting among people of different castes or communities; if
 they represent sedition, defamation, contempt of court, or
 
 
 1531
 
 NEPAL
 instigation to commit crime-; or if they are against decent
 public behavior or morality.
 The sole radio and television stations in Nepal are government
 owned and controlled. While programming reflected a much
 broader range of interests and political viewpoints than it had
 before the democracy movement, it still followed closely the
 views of the Government.
 In May a new Press and Publication Act was enacted. It
 provides for the licensing of publications and the granting of
 credentials to journalists. It includes penalties for
 violating these requirements. In addition, it prohibits
 publication of materials that foment hatred, disrespect,
 contempt, or malice, toward the King or the royal family or
 undermine the dignity of-the King; undermine the integrity and
 sovereignty of the Kingdom of Nepal; undermine the security,
 peace, and order of the Kingdom of Nepal; create animosity and
 spread communal ill-feelings among people belonging to
 different castes and communities, religions, classes, regions,-
 and sects; or adversely affect the good conduct, morality, and
 social decorum of the public. A similar list regulates the
 basis of banning the importation of foreign publications.
 Notwithstanding the law, a large number of Nepal's more than
 400 publications (some political party mouthpieces, some
 independent, and many small family operations with circulation
 limited to a few hundred copies) remained vigorous and candid
 in their criticism of the Government. A few have published
 direct attacks on the monarchy, without being prosecuted or
 closed down. The two Nepalese dailies with the largest
 circulations are- government organs.. Their coverage broadeneT
 over the past year to reflect a wider range of viewpoints.
 While their editors may publish critical views and alternate
 policies, editorial views still tend to reflect government
 policy. During the interim government this was entirely a
 function of self-censorship, and under the elected Government
 there has also been occasional direction from the Ministry of
 Communication. While the Government can exert pressure on the
 independent print media through its control of the price of
 newsprint and through the high proportion of advertising it
 purchases, there was no evidence that such pressure was applied
 in 1991.
 During the year there were no reported abridgments of freedom
 of speech, and there were no reported restrictions on academic
 freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Under the Constitution freedom of assembly is guaranteed.
 However, a caveat allows restrictions on such vague grounds as
 undermining the "sovereignty and integrity" of Nepal or
 disturbing "law and order."
 During the NCSO protests some of the activists were arrested
 while demonstrating peacefully, while in other cases the
 demonstrations degenerated into public disturbances before any
 arrests took place. There were no other reports of arrest or
 detention for exercising the freedoms of assembly or
 association.
 
 
 1532
 NEPAL
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The majority of Nepalese are Hindus, and Nepal is officially
 described as a Hindu Kingdom. There is a large minority of
 Buddhists, a smaller number of Muslims, and a small but growing
 number of Christians. Non-Hindus are allowed to practice their
 religion and to maintain places of worship. Many foreign
 Christian clergymen reside and work in Nepal in various
 fields. Religious education is offered by non-Hindus,
 including Muslims and Christians. Religious publications are
 imported mainly from India and widely circulated.
 The new Constitution, unlike the previous one, provides that
 "every religious demonimation shall have the right to maintain
 its independent existence," but proselytizing remains
 prohibited. In addition, the current legal code now provides a
 maximum penalty of 1 year in prison for any Hindu who converts
 to another religion and 3 to 6 years for any person who seeks
 to proselytize a Hindu. The State views the conversion of
 Hindus as a more serious crime than the conversion of
 non-Hindus because conversion from Hinduism is regarded as
 undermining the religious and ideological underpinnings of the
 State. There is no penalty if a non-Hindu converts.
 In the past, Nepalese authorities, particularly in conservative
 rural areas, have taken the prohibition on conversion very
 seriously. The newly elected Government has continued the more
 tolerant policy of the interim government that took power in
 1990, and Christians and other non-Hindu groups have freely
 engaged in a wide variety of religious activities. Christmas
 and Id-ul Fitr have been made legal holidays for Christians and
 Muslims, respectively, and religious groups may establish their
 own organizations and acquire their own places of worship.
 Over a dozen cases of "attempting to proselytize" have been
 thrown out of court; there have been no reports of prosecution
 for religious reasons since April 1990.
 Concern remains that continuing the prohibition against
 religious conversion in the new Constitution raises the
 possibility that it may be used against people solely for the
 expression of their religious beliefs. For this reason,
 various non-Hindu groups continue to urge amendment of this
 provision of the Constitution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Citizens of Nepal may generally move freely and reside where
 they wish, a right guaranteed in the Constitution. Foreigners
 (including Tibetans resident in Nepal) and journalists are
 restricted from traveling to some areas on the Chinese border;
 this restriction was lifted in October for licensed trekking
 groups escorted by a police liaison officer. Nepalese abroad
 are free to return home. Although it is not explicitly
 prohibited by the Constitution, there are no known cases of
 revocation of citizenship for political reasons. Travel
 outside of Nepal is generally not restricted for Nepalese
 citizens. Tibetans resident in Nepalmay only-travel to India,
 although exceptions are routinely granted for business travel
 to other countries.
 Nepal has no stated refugee policy and is not a party to the
 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. The United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has maintained
 *an office in Kathmandu since 1989. The Government is aiding
 
 
 1533
 NEPAL
 UNHCR's efforts by facilitating its access to the asylum
 seekers from both China and Bhutan. In the past, Nepal has
 accepted and assimilated approximately l4,00O Tibetan
 refugees. Border restrictions, tightened in 1986 by a joint
 Nepalese/Chinese agreement, are observed haphazardly on the
 Nepal side of the border. Tibetan refugees- transiting through
 Nepal to India are usually permitted passage, although there
 are frequent reports of police demanding payments from, and
 occasionally administering beatings to, these refugees.
 Credible reports continue to be heard of some Tibetan refugees
 being turned back by Nepalese authorities near the Nepal-China
 border. One estimate suggested that about quarter of the total
 who attempted to flee through Nepal were turned back; the same
 source claimed that this was a 50 percent improvement over 1990.
 There was a large increase in the number of Nepalese-ethnic
 Bhutanese fleeing into Nepal reportedly after suffering abuses
 or being expelled from Bhutan. Those refugees with family ties
 in Nepal returned to their native villages. Nearly 10,000
 others arrived in camps in southeastern Nepal where they faced
 unhealthful conditions of poor sanitation and nutrition. Their
 presence there is tolerated by the Government, although it can
 offer them little except a place to stay. The UNHCR monitors
 the condition of these refugees and provides assistance for
 their basic needs.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Under the Constitution promulgated in 1990, Nepal is a
 constitutional monarchy with sovereignty vested in the people.
 The people, through their elected representatives, have the
 right to amend the Constitution to change all but the most
 basic aspects of the body politic--sovereignty vested in the
 people, the multiparty system, fundamental rights, and the
 constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections are to be held every 5 years based on
 universal adult suffrage (for citizens over the age of 18) and
 the secret ballot. On May 12, the people exercised their
 franchise for the first time in 32 years in a general election
 that domestic and over 60 international observers described as
 basically free and fair. The Nepali Congress Party won 110 out
 of 205 seats in the House of Representatives and was able to
 form the Government without need for a coalition. The King
 appointed G.P. Koirala, leader of the Nepali'Congress Party in
 the Parliament, as Prime Minister. The next parliamentary
 elections are scheduled to be held in 1996.
 The King continues to exercise certain executive powers "with
 the advice and consent of the Council of Ministers." These
 powers include exclusive power in enacting, amending, and
 repealing laws relating to succession to the throne. The
 King's income and property are tax exempt and inviolable. No
 question may be raised in any court about any act performed by
 the King. The new Constitution also permits the King to
 exercise emergency powers in the event of war, external
 aggression, armed revolt, or extreme economic depression. The
 emergency powers allow him to suspend the freedoms of
 expression and assembly, freedoms from censorship and
 preventive detention, and other basic freedoms without judicial
 review. The rights to form associations and of habeas corpus
 may not be suspended. A state 6f emergency may be maintained
 for up to 3 months without legislative approval, and up to 6
 
 
 1534
 NEPAL
 months, renewable only once for an additional 6 months, if
 legislative approval is granted.
 The new Constitution bars the registration and participation in
 elections of any political party that is based on caste or
 community or that does not operate openly and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women or minorities
 from participating in the Government or political parties, but
 lingering conservative traditions limit the influence of both
 women and some castes and tribes in the political process. The
 Constitution requires that at least 5 percent of the candidates
 for the House of Representatives from each registered political
 party be women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Nepal has over a dozen nongovernmental human rights
 organizations. The major organizations are the Forum for the
 Protection of Human Rights (FOPHUR) and the Human Rights
 Organization of Nepal (HURON), although the activities of the
 latter dropped off considerably following the success of the
 prodemocracy movement. Both are considered to be relatively
 unbiased in their reporting despite the fact that FOPHUR is
 associated informally with the left-leaning parties and HURON
 with the Nepali Congress Party. In addition, the Institute for
 Human Rights, Environment, and Development (INHURED) was active
 and organized an international conference on human rights,
 law-making, and transition to democracy in Kathmandu in July.
 The Nepal Law Society also monitors human rights issues. Both
 government-appointed commissions and nongovernmental human
 rights groups report that police authorities are not
 cooperative with their efforts to gather information.
 The interim government welcomed international observers from 22
 countries at the time of the May general elections. During the
 civil servants' protest, Amnesty International published a
 report criticizing the Government for detaining trade
 unionists; the Government has not commented on this report
 publicly.
 The interim government affirmed its commitment to human rights
 by acceding to the International Covenant on Civil and
 Political Rights; the Optional Protocol to that Covenant; the
 Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or
 Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the International Convention
 on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the Convention on the
 Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; and
 the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Following the May
 12 election, the newly elected Prime Minister reaffirmed
 international respect for human rights as a cornerstone of
 Nepal's foreign policy.
 In September the Government established an Abuse of Authority
 Investigation Commission under legislation passed by the
 Parliament as required by the Constitution. This organ will be
 used primarily to investigate corruption in government, but any
 citizen may bring a complaint to it, including allegations of
 human rights abuses.
 
 
 1535
 NEPAL
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution specifies the right to equality whereby the
 State shall not discriminate against citizens on grounds of
 religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology. However, Nepal is
 still largely a traditional society and remains wedded to the
 caste system. Discrimination on the basis of caste,
 particularly the public shunning of "untouchables," is outlawed
 but is still common, particularly in the rural areas of western
 Nepal. Differentiation in economic, social, and educational
 levels tends to be a function of historical patterns,
 geographical location, and class origin. The spread of
 education and higher levels of prosperity, especially in the
 Kathmandu Valley, are slowly reducing caste distinctions and
 increasing opportunities for lower socioeconomic groups-
 Although politics and senior jobs in the government
 administration and army in Nepal continue to be dominated by
 higher and better educated urban-oriented castes (Brahmin,
 Chhetris, and certain elements of the Newar community), the
 representation of other castes is slowly increasing.
 Women in Nepal also face discrimination based on sex,
 particularly in rural areas, where the weight of tradition,
 lack of education, and ignorance of the law remain severe
 impediments to the exercise of basic rights, such as the right
 to vote or to hold property in their own names. The female
 literacy rate in 1988 was 18 percent, compared to the average
 literacy rate of 33 percent.
 Over the years, women have benefited from various changes in
 marriage and inheritance laws. The divorce law grants Nepalese
 women the right to divorce, but on more narrow grounds that
 those available to men. The new Constitution strengthened
 provisions regarding women, including equal pay for equal work.
 Wife beating is said to be common, though little is known about
 its extent. Abuses occurring within the family are seldom
 mentioned owing to the value attached to personal privacy in
 Nepal's traditional society. In general, there is little
 public attention to or discussion of violence against women in
 the home.
 Trafficking in women is a deeply ingrained social problem in
 several of Nepal's poorest areas. Estimates of the total
 number of Nepalese girls and women working as prostitutes in
 the red-light districts of India's major cities vary widely but
 average around 100,000. Coercion is often involved, although
 it is impossible to gauge its extent. Newspapers occasionally
 report the arrest of men attempting to abduct young women or
 trick them into going to India. Economic incentives also
 entice many other women. In certain parts of Nepal, mothers
 raise their daughters with the expectation that they will spend
 several years in the brothels of India and then return with
 their earnings and settle in their native villages. In
 addition, the tradition of religious prostitution among the
 Badini and Devaki of western Nepal is an ongoing concern of the
 Government. The Government prosecutes instances of coercive
 trafficking brought to its attention, and the issue was
 seriously discussed in the Parliament, but few active measures
 have been taken to stop it.' The reported spread of the
 acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in India's red-light
 districts has discouraged the Government from aggressively
 promoting the return and rehabilitation of Nepalese
 prostitutes. Government efforts thus far focus more on
 
 
 1536
 NEPAL
 preventing voluntary prostitution than on rehabilitation. The
 Women's Development Division of the Ministry of Labor and
 Social Welfare sponsors income-generating skill training
 programs in several districts known for producing prostitutes
 to be sent to India. In Nepal's new open political atmosphere,
 a growing number of women's advocacy groups are taking up
 women's issues. Nearly all political parties have their own
 women's groups to press for women's causes. Article 114 of the
 Constitution requires that at least five percent of the
 parliamentary candidates from any given party must be women.
 Section 6 Worker-Rights
 .a. The Right of Association
 Article 12 of the Constitution provides for the freedom to form
 and to join unions and associations. The Constitution permits
 restriction of unions only through legal measures in cases of
 subversion, sedition, or similar conditions. Since the
 political transformation begun in 1990, there has been an
 increase in trade union activity in every sector, with
 virtually all of the unions closely linked to one of the
 political parties. Due to their recent formation, trade unions
 are still developing effective structures for collective
 bargaining, organizing, and education.
 Under current law, strikes are permitted except in "essential
 services" such as water supply, electricity, and
 telecommunications. A number of strikes took place in 1991,
 but most received little publicity and were ultimately resolved
 through compromise between labor and management.
 In June the leftist-backed Nepal Civil Servants' Organization
 (NCSO) launched a protest movement demanding an increase in
 salary and other fringe benefits. The Nepali Congress-backed
 Nepal Civil Servants Association (NCSA), however, did not
 support the NCSO, and the protest became more of a political
 issue than a labor issue. When the Government refused to raise
 civil servants' salaries without the recommendation of a pay
 commission, the NCSO agitation spread to all 75districts of
 the kingdom, supported by the Communist parties and other
 leftist unions. The NCSO held a series of job actions which
 were at times illegal, including "pen down" strikes, sit-ins
 while wearing black armbands, and burning of the Civil Service
 Code. The Government responded by firing about 400 workers and
 suspending as many as 1,000 others. In addition, over 500 NCSO
 members were arrested for their activities. After 2 months the
 NCSO ended its protest to resume negotiations with the
 Government. Following the end of the protest, those workers
 who had been arrested were released, those suspended returned
 to work, and some of those fired were reinstated..
 There are no restrictions in current law on forming
 confederations or joining international labor bodies. The
 largest trade union federation is affiliated with the
 Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions, and the
 application of the next largest trade union organization, the
 Nepali Trade Union Congress, to join the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions is pending. Some individual
 Nepali unions are affiliated with International Trade
 Secretariats.
 In June the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA)
 renewed its review of a 1985 complaint against the Government
 of Nepal presented by the World Confederation of Organizations
 
 
 1537
 NEPAL
 of the Teaching Profession on behalf of the Nepal National
 Teacher's Association (NNTA). The CFA noted the important
 political changes which had taken place in 1990, but expressed
 deep regret that the Government had not replied to its urgent
 request for up-to-date information, including assurances that
 the NNTA is no longer deemed to be an "illegal association."
 Negotiations were under way between the Government and the NNTA
 by which the NNTA would withdraw its case before the ILO if the
 Government reinstated NNTA member teachers dismissed by the
 previous government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 At present there is no legal provision in force for collective
 bargaining, although the draft Dispute Settlement Act addresses
 both discrimination and collective bargaining. In practice,
 collective bargaining has been the primary mechanism for
 setting wages since April 1990. There are no current legal
 provisions prohibiting discrimination by employers against
 union members or organizers.
 There are no special economic zones in Nepal.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Article 20 of the 1990 Constitution prohibits traffic in human
 beings, slavery, serfdom, or forced labor in any form. The
 Department of Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the
 organized sector of the economy. However, bonded labor is an
 aspect of traditional society, and over 100,000 low caste
 ethnic Tharus are estimated to be under the "Kamaiya" system of
 bonded labor in the Terai region. (See also the discussion of
 trafficking in women in Section 5.)
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legally defined minimum age for employment of minors is 16
 in industry and 14 in agriculture. The Constitution stipulates
 that children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or
 similar hazardous work. There is no compulsory education
 legislation or specific child protection act in Nepal, but the
 Government has proposed a program that will phase in, over a
 5-year period, 5 years of compulsory education and 10 years of
 free education.
 The Department of Labor enforces the minimum age law only in
 the larger enterprises of the formal sector; however, child
 workers are found in all sectors of the rural and urban
 economies. In 1990 Child Workers in Nepal (CWIN), the only
 national social action group dedicated to child rights and
 welfare, estimated that 4.8 million Nepali children work at
 least part time. As with the population at large, the
 overwhelming majority of these children are engaged in family
 subsistence agriculture, but children can be found, usually
 doing menial jobs, in almost every occupation. Child
 employment is particularly common in the smaller enterprises in
 construction, carpet weaving, restaurants, garment
 manufacturing, and domestic work.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government sets a minimum monthly wage in factories and.'d  ..
 the organized labor sector. This wage, which has not been"'.
 increased since July 1990, is sufficient only for the most
 
 
 1538
 NEPAL
 minimal standard of living. Rates in the unorganized service
 sector and in agriculture are often as much as 50 percent lower.
 The Factory Workers Act stipulates a 48-hour workweek, with 1
 day off per week, plus 30 holidays or leave days, 15 days of
 sick leave, overtime limited to 15 hours per week, health and
 safety standards, and other benefits such as the provision of a
 provident fund and maternity benefits.
 Implementation of the Act has improved as a result of the
 successful pressing of demands by active labor unions since
 1990. The Labor Department is charged with enforcing
 compliance and, although performance is uneven, it has
 intervened effectively in response to labor union demands in
 some of the larger enterprises. Enforcement is less likely to
 take place in smaller enterprises of 50 workers or fewer and is
 nonexistent in the informal sector. There are no accurate data
 on industrial accident rates.
 
 
 1539
