 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government.
 Formerly an absolute monarch, the King in 1990 legalized political parties and in-
 vited formation of an interim government that promulgated a new Constitution.
 Under the Constitution, the King retains important residual powers but has effec-
 tively dissociated himself from the exercise of governing. The democratically elected
 Parliament consists of the House of Representatives (lower house) and the National
 Council (upper house). In multiparty elections held in May 1991, the Nepali Con-
 gress Party won a majority in the House of Representatives and chose G.P. Koirala
 as Prime Minister.
 Internal security is maintained by Nepal's National Police Force, under the Home
 Minister, and, as necessary, by the Royal Nepaese Army, of which the King is Com-
 mander in Chief. Because communication links in Nepal are limited, local officials
 have a great deal of autonomy and exercise wide discretion in handling law and
 order. In 1993, as in previous years, the police on several occasions used excessive
 lethal force in quelling demonstrations, and police mistreatment of criminal suspects
 continued.
 Nepal is one of the world's poorest countries, with per capita gross domestic prod-
 uct estimated at around $170. Over 80 percent of its 20 million people are supported
 by subsistence agriculture. Carpet and ready-made garment sales and tourism reve-
 nues are the major sources of foreign exchange, and foreign aid covers more than
 half of Nepal's development budget. Under the new Government, major efforts are
 under way to liberalize the economy and provide a greater role for the private sec-
 tor.
 Progress has been achieved in the transition to a more open society and greater
 respect for human rights since political reform began in 1990; however, there was
 no significant change in the human rights situation in 1993 from the previous year,
 and substantial problems remain. During periods of leftist-inspired unrest in June
 and July, groups of brick-throwing youths clashed with police on several occasions.
 
 
 1361
 Poorly trained police forces fired indiscriminately into crowds in at least three in-
 stances and unnecessarily resorted to the use of lethal force at other times. Overall
 at least 20 persons were killed. There were reports of torure under detention and
 widespread reports of custodial abuse. The Government's unwillingness to inves-
 tigate or enforce accountability for recent and past abuses remained a concern.
 Some restrictions continued on freedom of expression. Trafficking in women and
 child labor remained serious problems. Discrimination against women and lower
 castes was prevalent.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-On several occasions, government
 security forces responded with excessive force to demonstrations, some of them vio-
 lent, organized by the principal opposition party, the Communist Party of Nepal/
 United Marxist-Leninist (CPN/UML). A number of demonstrators were killed. On
 March 8, police fired into a crowd that was violently protesting the Tanakpur agre-
 ment between Nepal and India concerning water rights, after tear gas and the firing
 of blanks failed to disperse the demonstrators. One 15-year-old girl was killed, and
 two persons were wounded.
 More serious political violence erupted in June after a government commission in-
 vestigating the deaths of two senior UML leaders released its finding that the two
 died in an accident when their vehicle plunged into a river. The UML conducted
 its own investigation which claimed that their leaders were the victims of a political
 conspiracy. However the party did not release its report or provide evidence to sup-
 port its allegations. Between June 24 and 28, a series of protests were called by leg-
 ist parties to pressure the Government into forming a new investigative commission.
 The demonstrations turned violent in several places in Kathmandu and its suburb
 Patan. In some instances, groups of young men destroyed public and private prop-
 erty, attempted to set fire to government buildings, and attacked police with stones
 and bottles. Police initially exercised restraint, but by the third and fourth day of
 the protests police fired indiscriminately into crowds or at specific curfew violators.
 At least 16 people were killed, including several innocent bystanders.
 Violence reignited on July 19-20, when a Communist-led call to halt all transport
 led to violent clashes with the police. The police killed three boycotters in Janakpur,
 Chitwan, and Jhapa districts and two more on August 23 in Sarlahi district.
 The Government compensated some of the families of those killed in the dem-
 onstrations with approximately $500 each and paid the medical expenses for some
 of those injured in the violence. The Government compensated the families of 10
 people killed in the 1993 summer violence after the families made claims through
 the Ministry of Home Affairs. Some families refused the offers of compensation.
 However, the Government refused to initiate a formal investigation into the events
 of June 26-29 or July 19-20 and did not initiate legal proceedings against the police
 officers responsible for the killings. The Government claimed the use of lethal force
 was justified on those occasions in order to safeguard the police who were heavily
 outnumbered. Independent human rights monitors faulted both sides for the vio-
 lence. The police overreacted in firing into crowds indiscriminately and using deadly
 force before exhausting other options, while the demonstrators resorted to violence
 and stone throwing.
 Police also shot and killed a Tibetan monk and wounded several others on June
 15 when a group of about 60 Tibetans were intercepted after crossing the border
 from China without valid travel documents. The Government investigated the inci-
 dent and promised to punish those responsible but took no action, nor did it release
 a report of the investigation by year's end.
 On March 10, two policemen beat to death a man taken into custody in Hetauda.
 They were arrested and now await trial. On November 1, 1992, the police in Gorkha
 district beat to death one of five persons arrested on suspicion of theft (see Section
 1.c.).
 According to numerous human rights groups, an 18-year-old male was reportedly
 arrested and taken into police custody during a demonstration in Bhaktapur on July
 5. Another detainee later reported seeing him in the Khaktapur police station and
 stated that his body was covered with blood. After vomiting twice, the 18-year-old
 became unconscious and was left unattended overnight. The following morning, po-
 lice brought him to Kathmandu's Bir Hospital where he died. Apparently no post-
 mortem was conducted and police cremated the body soon after death. One hospital
 employee later stated that the youth died of head injuries. The Government denied
 this and claimed the youth was found lying unconscious in the street and died after
 authorities took him to the hospital.
 
 
 1362
 
 Human rights observers also report that a 26-year-old male was arrested by police
 on July 29 in Butwal. Reportedly drunk and disorderly, he was detained overnight.
 On the next morning, police took him to the hospital where he died later that day.
 No postmortem was conducted, but witnesses say that the man's face and feet were
 grossly swollen.
 b. Disappearance.-Numerous reports suggest that a student activitist may have
 disappeared after being taken into police custody on June 25 in central Kathmandu.
 During a crowded street demonstration, several eyewitnesses claim they saw the
 student being beaten by police. Jounalists later published photographs that appear
 to show him being carried off by armed police. Police deny taking him into custody,
 but family members say he has been missing ever since. A local student group has
 petitioned the Supreme Court to file a writ of habeas corpus in this case, but the
 Court, without explanation, has postponed its decision several times. Several inter-
 national human rights groups have written to the government to express concerns
 about this case.
 The report of the Disappearances Commission, established to look into all dis-
 appearances between December 1960 and the political transformation that began in
 1990, remains unpublished. Human rights groups have expressed skepticism about
 the Government's claim that the report's findings do not warrant governmental ac-
 tion. They continue to express concern that persons responsible for disappearances
 remain in positions of authority.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture, physical abuse by police is reported to
 be a common means of punishing or extracting confessions from those suspected of
 wrongdoing. The Government rarely conducted investigations into allegations of po-
 lice brutality or punished police officers responsible for abuses. The Constitution
 provides for compensation to those subjected to physical or mental torture. However,
 a torture compensation bill introduced in Parliament remained in committee at the
 close of the session and was not passed in 1993 The bill, an initiative to provide
 quick monetary relief to victims of abuse by the authorities, has been opposed by
 some human rights groups for "putting a price on torture." It remains in committee
 and is to be discussed in the next session of Parliament.
 Information developed by local and international human rights groups in 1993
 shed light on sever  instances of torture that occurred in late 1992. In one case,
 seven men and one woman were taken into custody on October 29, 1992, in connec-
 tion with a murder in Sindhuli district. The police tortured six of them in an at-
 tempt to force confessions; three were beaten until unconscious, while two were
 threatened with death if they did not sign confessions. Another incident took place
 in Kathmandu on October 30, 1992, after five persons were charged with bank
 fraud. The police tortured two persons by electrical shocks, beat them with a pipe,
 and dragge them about by their hair. On November 1, 1992, five persons were ar-
 rested on suspicion of theft in the Gorkha district and severely beaten. Medical doc-
 tors verified that all five received wounds consistent with torture. One victim died
 6 days later. On November 23, 1992, five persons in Pokhara were arrested after
 a demonstration to protest the dismissal of a school's headmaster and were severely
 beaten by police with bamboo sticks. On January 13, 1993, the deputy superintend-
 ent of Pokhara's Kaski district was discharged because of the incident. No criminal
 proceedings are known to have been brought against him, and he has not been dis-
 qualified from future government service.
 On December 13, 1992, five policemen in Kathmandu, including a subinspector,
 raped a young woman who had been detained for questioning. As part of a govern-
 ment investigation, medical evaluations indicated that her injuries were consistent
 with sexual assault and severe beatings. The subinspector was subsequently dis-
 charged in January 1993, but no criminal proceedings were brought against him or
 others who participated in the rape.
 According to a number of human rights groups, during the demonstrations that
 occurred in the Kathmandu valley June 26-29, there were instances when police ad-
 ministered beatings indiscriminately to both adults and children in police custody.
 The police beat 17 of the 60 children (15 years old or younger) detained during the
 protests. Medical examinations of the 17 indicated that their injuries were consist-
 ent with beatings. The police reportedly denied food and water to all 60 children
 for 3 of their 7 days of detention. Human rights groups report that they were denied
 permission to enter the detention facility where the children were held.
 In the incident in which a Tibetan monk was killed near the Nepal-China border
 on June 15 (see Section l.a.), seven Tibetans taken into police custody were severely
 beaten, two of them to the point of unconsciousness. In September four prisoners
 who tried to escape from an 11am District jail reportedly were beaten severely with
 
 
 1363
 
 clubs by four policemen. On examination by doctors, one man was found to have
 35 lash marks on his back.
 Overcrowding is common in Nepalese prison facilities, and the use of handcuffs
 and fetters is sometimes reported.-Women are incarcerated separately from men, in
 equally poor conditions. A provision in the 1992 Children's Act calling for the estab-
 lis  ent of a juvenile home and juvenile court for children has not been imple-
 mented. Consequently, children are sometimes incarcerated together with adults,
 both when they commit crimes themselves or when a parent has committed a crime
 and they have no other place of lodging. There were reports that 6 infants and about
 150 children below the age of 16 were in prison in 1993.
 Reflecting the low level of general medical facilities in this developing country, fa-
 cilities for care and treatment of the mentally ill are inadequate. Such persons are
 often placed in jails under conditions that are degrading and inhumane by inter-
 national standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest Detention, or Exile.-According to the Constitution, a suspect
 must be brought beore a court within 24 hours aer arrest and informed of-the
 general grounds for the arrest or be released. Under the Public Offenses Act of 1970,
 warrants are required for an arrest unless a person is caught in the act of commit-
 ting a crime. For many offenses, the case must be filed in court within 7 days of
 arrest. If the court upholds the detention, the police are authorized up to 25 days,
 with a possible 7-day extension, to complete their investigation. The Supreme Court
 on occasion ordered the release of detainees held longer than 24 hours without a
 court appearance. However, in practice, the police often violate this provision of the
 law. Under current law, persons are permitted access to a lawyer only after they
 are no longer in police custody. Lawyers report that family members do not have
 a legal right of access to detainees. Rather, the granting of access is haphazard and
 varies from prison to prison. There is a functioning system of bail, but bail is too
 expensive for most Nepalese.
 The Public Security Act was often used to detain and arrest persons during the
 1990 Movement to Restore Democracy. The Act was used primarily in 1993 to de-
 tain groups of youths and mob leaders before scheduled demonstations. Most detain-
 ees were released within 24-48 hours. Under the 1991 amendments, police must
 present written notice to the Home Ministry to extend the period of detention.
 The district court must be notified of the detention within 24 hours. It may extend
 the period of detention once, for an additional 6 months, before official charges must
 be filed. The grounds for detention are open to broad interpretation: to ensure the
 security of Nepal; order and tranquility inside Nepal; amicable relations between
 Nepal and other friendly states; or amicable relations among people of different
 classes or religions within Nepal. Persons detained under the Act are considered to
 be held in preventive detention and are not brought to trial. Human rights groups
 report that persons supportive of the CPN/UML and other opposition parties are
 sometimes arrested and detained arbitrarily and are subjected to unwarranted
 criminal investigations because of their political affiliation.
 The revised Public Offenses Act and other laws allow for arbitrary detention. It
 was under this Act that hundreds of civil servants were detained in 1991 during
 a 55-day protest strike against the Government. Despite the Act's revision in 1992,
 human rights monitors continued to express concern that it vests too much power
 in the Chief District Officer (CDO), the highest ranking civil servant in each of Ne-
 pal's 75 districts. In addition to a wide range of administrative powers, CDO's are
 accorded the power to order detentions, issue search warrants, and specify fines and
 other punishments for misdemeanor crimes without judicial review. The Public Of-
 fenses Act and its many amendments (the latest in 1992) cover such crimes as dis-
 turbing the peace, vandalism, rioting, and fighting. CDO's continue to act as mag-
 istrates in these cases and are empowered to decide questions of guilt and to set
 penalties. Their decisions may be appealed to appellate courts.
 Exile is prohibited by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system consists of three levels: dis-
 trict courts, appellate courts, and the Supreme Court. The judges of all three levels
 are appointed by the King upon the recommerdation of the Judicial Council, a con-
 stitutional body chaired by the Chief Justice that makes recommendations and gives
 advice on matters of appointment, transfer, disciplinary action against judges, and
 other matters relating to judicial administration.
 Military and civilian courts are separate. Military courts generally deal only with
 military personnel who are immune from prosecution in civilian courts. In 1992 the
 Supreme Court ruled that civilians may no longer be tried in military courts for
 crimes involving the military. In the past, cases of terrorism or treason were often
 dealt with under the Treason Act in closed trials held before specially constituted
 tribunals. No such cases were tried in 1993, but the Treason Act remains in effect.
 
 
 1364
 The judiciary is legally independent. In 1993 the process of judicial strengthening
 continued. Human rights lawyers in Nepal report that the Supreme Court increas-
 ingly has demonstrated its independence. For example, as the court of final appeal,
 the Supreme Court has ruled important prvisions in the 1992 Labor Act and the
 1991 Nepal Citizenship Act to be unconsitutional. Further, the Supreme Court over-
 ruled the ruling party's contention that the Tanakpur Agreement with India was
 an "agreemententary approval. Appellate
 and district courts are also becoming increasingly independent, although they still
 bend to political pressures at times.
 There is no articulated presumption of innocence under the 1990 Constitution.
 There is the right to a public trial except in some security and customs cases. The
 Constitution provides for the right to counsel, protection from double jeopardy, and
 protection from retroactive appication of the law. All lower court decisions, includ-
 ing acquittals, are subject to appeal. The Supreme Court is the court of last appeal,
 but the King may grant pardons and may suspend, commute, or remit any sentence
 by any court.
 The Government declared that it has no political prisoners, and there is no credi-
 ble evidence that any political prisoners are being held.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government generally respected the privacy of the home and family. Search war-
 rants are required before search and seizure except in cases involving suspected se-
 curity and narcotics violations. The Police Act of 1955, as amended, empowers the
 police to issue warrants for search and seizure in criminal cases upon receipt of in-
 ormation about criminal activities. The Chief District Officer in misdemeanor cases
 and court judges in felony cases must approve warrants within 24 hours of issuance.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall
 have freedom of thought and expression; it also provides that no news item, article,
 or any other reading material shall be censored. However, Article 13 of the Con-
 stitution prohibits speech and press that would threaten the sovereignty and integ-
 rity of the Kingdom; disturb the harmonious relations among people of different
 castes or communities; promote sedition defamation, contempt of court, or
 instigation to commit crime; or contradict decent public behavior or morality. The
 Press and Publications Act provides for the licensing of publications and the grant-
 ing of credentials to journalists and includes penalties for violating these require-
 ments. In August 1992, regulations issued to enforce this Act further circumscribed
 Nepal's journalists by setting specific requirements of education and experience in
 order to hold particular jobs in journalism. The Act also prohibits publication of ma-
 terials that, inter alia, promote disrespect toward the King or royal family or under-
 mine the dignity of the King; undermine the integrity and sovereignty of the King-
 dom; undermine the security, peace, and order of the Kingdom; create animosity
 among people of different castes religions, etc.; or adversely affect the good conduct
 or morality of the public. A similar list provides a basis for banning foreign publica-
 tions.
 Two journalists were arrested in April for offending the royal family. One writer
 quoted from a book that suggested the King's brother may have been involved in
 drug smuggling. The other published a retouched photo of the King's daughter and
 an Indian movie star with an insulting caption. Both journalists were released on
 bail after 3 days. They were charged under the State Offenses Act and the Press
 Act for offending members of the royal family. A trial has not yet been held.
 The two Nepalese dailies with the largest circulation are government organs.
 While their editors may on occasion publish critical views and recommend alter-
 native policies, their views usually tend to reflect government policy. The Ministry
 of Communication also has provided occasional guidance to editors. There are
 scores, if not hundreds, of fully independent papers representing points of view
 across the political spectrum. The Government subsidizes newsprint materials to
 allow less profitable papers to stay in business and is considering allowing duty-free
 entry of computer and fax machines for the registered newspaper "industry" in
 order to encourage further the flow of information.
 The Government owns and controls the sole radio and television stations. Pro-
 gramming reflects a broader range of interests and political viewpoints than before
 the political transformation began in 1990, but it still follows the government line
 closely. Access to foreign radio is extremely widespread and is in no way controlled
 or restricted by the Government. Access to television satellite reception is limited
 only bythe high osts involved; nowgovernment restrictions exist. At the end of the
 year, the Government moved towards the licensing of private radio stations and dis-
 cussed the entry of private television and cable services.
 
 
 1365
 Academic freedoms are, in general, subject to the same limitations as the media.
 However, no overt efforts by the Government to enforce these limitations were re-
 ported in 1993.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association. However, freedom of assembly ma.y be legally
 restricted on such vague grounds as undermining the "sovereignty and integrity" of
 Nepal or disturbing "law and order." There were no reports of arrest or detention
 for exercising the freedoms of peaceable assembly or association in 1993. However
 hundreds of persons were arrested at violent strikes and demonstrations organized
 over the summer by the CPN/UML (see Section 1.d.). On several occasions, a few
 opposition leaders were placed in preventive detention before scheduled demonstra-
 tions. They were released within 48 hours.
 c. Freedom ofRel'gion.-The majority of Nepalese are Hindu and the Constitu-
 tion describes Nepal as a Hindu Kingdom, although Hinduism as not been made
 the state religion. There is a large minority of Buddhists, a smaller number of Mus-
 lims, and a small number of Christians. The 1990 Constitution protects the func-
 tioning of all religions but prohibits discrimination on the basis of caste, except for
 traditional practice at Hindu temples. Non-Hindus are allowed to practice their reli-
 gion and to maintain places of worship. Religious education is offered by non-Hin-
 dus, including Muslims and Christians. Religious publications are imported mainly
 from India and are widely circulated. Religious gups may establish their own or-
 ganizations and acquire their own places of worship.
 A 1992 law allows self-conversion but outlaws proselytizing. It provides a maxi-
 mum penalty of 6 years for converting a person to another religion and a maximum
 sentence of 3 years for attempting to convert someone. No arrests were made under
 this provision in 1993. A number of foreign Christian clergymen and religious work-
 ers reside in Nepal and are active in various fields.
 The current Government adopted relatively tolerant policies which allowed Chris-
 tians and other non-Hindu groups to freely engage in a wide variety of religious ac-
 tivities. Christmas and Id-Ul Fitr have been made legal holidays for Christians and
 Muslims, respectively. There is continuing concern, however, about the prohibition
 against religious conversion in the new Constitution. Various non-Hindu groups pro-
 posed amending this provision of the Constitution. They are concerned that it rep-
 resents an undue restriction on a person's right freely to express his or her religious
 beliefs.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens of Nepal may move freely within the country and reside where
 they wish, a right provided for in the Constitution. Foreigners (including Tibetan
 residents) and journalists are restricted from traveling to some areas on the Chinese
 border unless they are part of a licensed trekking group escorted by a police liaison
 officer.
 Travel outside of Nepal is not restricted for Nepalese citizens. Some Tibetans re-
 siding in Nepal have been prevented from traveling by air to India due to a lack
 of travel documents or a Nepali identification card. However, they may pass freely
 into India by road. Travel to other countries is restricted by the Tibetans' lack of
 valid travel documents. For Tibetans to travel abroad, there is a complex process
 often involving invitation letters from foreign governments and the issuance of tem-
 porary travel documents. Some Tibetans do travel beyond India but obtaining the
 necessary visas and documents can take months of effort.
 All Nepalese abroad are free to return home. Although not explicitly prohibited
 by the Constitution, there are no known cases of revocation of citizenship for politi-
 cal reasons.
 Nepal has no official refugee policy and is not party to the 1967 Protocol Relating
 to the Status of Refugees. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) has maintained an office in Kathmandu since 1989. The Government aids
 UNHCR efforts by facilitating its access to refugees from both China and Bhutan.
 In the past, Nepa accepted and assimilated approximately 18,000 Tibetan refugees,
 who still reside there. Over 12,000 Tibetan residents, however, are without legal
 proof that they live in Nepal since the Government ceased issuing identification
 cards in the mid-1970's. The Government is now working with them to issue refugee
 identity cards to Tibetans in 1994.
 Border restrictions, tightened in 1986 by a joint Nepalese/Chinese agreement, are
 observed haphazardly by both sides. Some Nepalese border officials occasionally de-
 manded bribes from Tibetan refugees intercepted inside the country, and in several
 instances fighting broke out between the police and the refugees. On June 15, Nepa-
 lese police shot and killed a Tibetan monk during an extortion attempt (see Section
 l.a.). According to government policy Tibetans intercepted inside Nepal are to be
 conveyed to UNHCR facilities in Kathmandu for refugee screening. However, as in
 
 
 1366
 previous years, Tibetans continue to be repatriated involuntarily to China, espe-
 cially from remote border regions.
 Ethnic Nepalese fleeing lBhutan ontinued to arrive after suffering abuses or
 being expelled by Bhutanese authorities. (See the report on Bhutan.) Al the end of
 1993, the camps in southeastern Nepal housed 86,000 refugees, representing almost
 one-fifh of Bhutan's estimated population before the exodus began. The UNHCR
 monitors the condition of these refugees and provides assistance for their basic
 needs. The Government tolerates their presence on a humanitarian basis, although
 it can offer them little except a place to stay.
 Conditions in the refugee camps have unproved dramatically since 1992, and the
 contrast in living conditions between Ul.HCR-housed refugees and relatively poorer
 local residents has created tensions that occasionally result in violence between the
 two communities. Relief organizations in charge of day-to-day camp administration
 have begun distributing token relief supplies to local communities in an attempt to
 defuse the situation.
 In July the governments of Nepal and Bhutan formed a joint committee to resolve
 the refugee problem. Its first task was to determine different categories of refugees
 in Nepal in preparation for the future repatriation to Bhutan of those refugees
 found to be eligible. Little concrete progress had been made by year's end.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Under the Constitution promulgated in 1990, Nepal is a constitutional monarchy
 with sovereignty vested in the people. The people, through their elected representa-
 tives, have the right to amend the Constitution with the exception of certain basic
 principles of the body politic which may not be changed- sovereignty vested in the
 people, the multiparty system, fundamental rights, and the constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections are to be held at least every 5 years. Midterm elections
 may be called if the ruling party loses its majority, or loses a vote of no confidence,
 or if it calls for elections. Universal suffrage by secret ballot is provided for all citi-
 zens over the age of 18. On May 12, 1991, the people exercised their franchise for
 the iust time in 32 years in a general election that domestic and international ob-
 servers described as basically free and fair. The Nepali Congress Party won 112 out
 of 205 seats in the House of Representatives (the lower house) and formed the Gov-
 ernment. The King appointed Girija Prasad Koirala, a leader in the Nepali Congress
 Party, as Prime Minister.
 The upper house comments on lower house bills (although it may also introduce
 legislation and send it to the lower house for consideration). If the upper house con-
 siders legislation passed by the lower house and returns it with amendments (or re-
 jects it outright), the lower house may vote on it again and, with a 50 percent or
 better majority, bypass the upper house and send the legislation directly to the King
 for his assent.
 The King exercises powers "with the advice and consent of the Council of Min-
 isters." These powers include exclusive authority to enact, amend, and repeal laws
 relating to succession to the throne. The King's income and property are tax exempt
 and inviolable. No question may be raised in any court about any act performed by
 the King. The Constitution also permits the King to exercise emergency powers in
 the event of war, external aggression, armed revolt, or extreme economic depression.
 The emergency powers allow him to suspend without judicial review many basic
 freedoms, including the freedoms of expression and assembly, freedom from censor-
 ship, and freedom from preventive detention. The rights to form associations and
 of habeas corpus may not be suspended. The King's declaration of a state of emer-
 gency must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the lower house of the Par-
 liament. If the lower house is not in session, the upper house exercises this power.
 A state of emergency may be maintained for up to 3 months without legislative ap-
 proval and up to 6 months, renewable only once for an additional 6 months, if legis-
 lative approval is granted. There were no known instances in 1993 in which a politi-
 cal iarty was denied registration or participation in an election.
 The Constitution bars the registration and participation in elections of any politi-
 cal party that is based on "religion, community, caste, tribe, or region," or that does
 not operate openly and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict indigenous people, women, or minorities
 from participating in the government or political parties, but lingering conservative
 traditions limit the influence of women and some castes and tribes in the political
 p=ress. The Constitution requires that at least 5 percent of the candidates for the
 House of Representatives from each reistered political party be women. In 1993,
 5 percent of party candidates were female and there were 7 female Members of Par-
 liament.
 
 
 1367
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Nepal has over a dozen local nonpvernmental human rights organizations, in-
 cluding the Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON), the Forum for the Pro-
 tection of Human Rights (FOPHUR), and the International Institute for Human
 Rights, Environment, and Development (INHIRED). The Nepal Law Society also
 monitors human rights issues. In addition there are a number of single-issue non-
 governmental organizations (NGO's) which focus on issues such as torture, child
 labor, women's rights, or ethnic minorities.
 Human rights organizations contend that at times the Government was unco-
 operative in 1993. For example, they report that the Government has been reluctant
 to transfer funds provided by the United Nations Center for Human Rights to ap-
 propriate organizations which won the funds as financial awards for programming.
 Several human rights organizations also claimed that a few Chief District Officers
 seized documentation from local human rights monitors that was to be used in a
 Nepal-wide human rights yearbook.
 However, the Government is working with foreign aid agencies to initiate human
 rights and nonlethal crowd control training for police, and it cooperates with inter-
 national human rights groups. Amnesty International (A) visited Nepal in 1993,
 and Al staff met with a large number of government officials.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution specifies that the State shall not discriminate against citizens
 on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology. In practice, however, discrimina-
 tion against women and lower castes is widespread.
 Women.-Women face gender discrimination, particularly in rural areas, where
 the weight of religious and cultural tradition, lack of education, and ignorance of
 the law remain severe impediments to the exercise of such basic rights as the right
 to vote or to hold property in their own names.
 According to the 1991 census, the female literacy rate is 26 percent, compared to
 a male literacy rate of 57perent. Human rights groups report that throughout the
 country girls attend secondary schools at halithe rate boys do.
 Over the years, women have benefited from various changes in marriage and in-
 heritance laws. The new Constitution strengthened provisions regarding women, in-
 cluding eual pay for equal work, although the Government had not effectively im-
 plemented this provision by year's end. Moreover, many laws remain discriminatory.
 Divorce law grants women the right to divorce, but on narrower grounds than those
 available to men. Likewise, the law governing property rights favors men in a num-
 ber of ways, including in the division of family property, the disposition of property,
 inheritance, and land tenancy.
 Women's rights groups report that wife beating is common. Little public attention
 is given to violence against women in the home, and the Government made no spe-
 cific efforts to combat it. However, human rights monitors, including Members of
 Parliament, are working to teach women about their rights under the Constitution,
 and several have offered free legal services in court cases involvng violence against
 women.
 Abortion is illegal even in cases involving rape or incest. Only when the health
 of the mother would be in jeopardy by giving birth is an abortion legally allowed.
 Illegal abortion, reportedy not uncommon, is one of the main reasons for imprison-
 ment of women in Nepal.
 Trafficking in women is a deeply ingrained social problem in several of Nepal's
 poorest areas. Estimates of the total number of Nepalese girls and women working
 a   is ie     in the red-light districts of India's major citmes vary widely but range
 between 150,000 to 200,000. A children's human rights group in Nepal states that
 20 percent of these prostitures are younger than 16 ears old. Coercion is usually
 involved, although it is difficult to gauge its extent. cwspapers occasionally report
 the arrest ofprsois attempting to abduct young women or trick them into going
 to India. In January a man was sentenced to 5 years in prison, and in March a
 woman was sentenced to 3 years, for trafficking. In many cases, parents or relatives
 sell women into sexual slavery. The tradition of religious prostitution among the
 Badini and Devaki of western Nepal is a continuing concern.
 The Government prosecutes cases of coerive trafficking brought to its attention,
 but has taken few active measures to stop it. The spread of the Acquired
 Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) in India's red-light districts has discouraged
 the Government from aggressively promoting the return and rehabilitation of Nepa-
 lese prostitutes.
 
 
 1368
 Government efforts thus far focus more on preventing voluntary prostitution than
 on rehabilitation or prevention of coercive trafficking. The Women's Development
 Division of the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare sponsors income-generating
 skill training programs in several districts known for sending prostitutes to India.
 Several nongovernmental organizations have similar programs.
 A growing number of women's advocacy groups are taking up women's issues.
 Nearly all political parties have their own women's groups which press for women's
 causes. In Parliament, women members have begun working for the passage of
 tougher laws for crimes of sexual assault but with little success.
 C..ildren.-The Child Act of 1992 establishes legal protections for children in the
 workplace and in criminal proceedings. It calls for the establishment of child welfare
 committees and orphanages, although many of these facilities are not yet in place.
 The Labor Act of 1992 prohibits employment of minors under 14 years of age and
 provides that nurseries must be established in workplaces with more than 50peo-
 ple. Also, the Government has worked closely with NGO's and the private sector to
 create a "child labor-free" certification to be used in the carpet industry.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Nepal is still largely a traditional society
 wedded to the caste system, and caste discrimination is common, especially in the
 rural areas of western Nepal. Although the public shunning of "untuchables" has
 been outlawed, an exception was retained for traditional practices at Hindu reli-
 gious sites. Economic, social, and educational discrimination tend to be a function
 of historical patterns, geographical location, and caste. The spread of education and
 higher levels of prosperity, especially in the Kathmandu valley, are slowly reducing
 caste distinctions and increasing opportunities for lower socioeconomic groups. Pol-
 tics and senior jobs in the government administration and army in Nepal continue
 to be dominated by higher and better educated urban-oriented castes (Brahmin,
 Chhetri, and certain elements of the Newar community). However, the representa-
 tion of other castes and ethnic groups is increasing slowly.
 Nepal has over 75 ethnic groups speaking 50 languages. The Constitution pro-
 vides that "each community residing within the Kingdom of Nepal shall have the
 right to preserve and promote its language, script, and culture.' Furthermore, the
 Constitution specifies that each community has the right to operate schools up to
 the primary level in its mother tongue.
 Despite these constitutional provisions, the Government has not enacted legisla-
 tion or established programs to safeguard the rights of ethnic groups that are not
 a part of the ruling class. Most government administrators are Brahmin, Chhetri,
 or Newar. Other ethnic groups and castes not in the governing elite are unable to
 participate fully in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allo-
 cation of natural resources in the territories they inhabit. In remote rural areas,
 school lessons are conducted in the native language of the community. In less re-
 mote areas and in areas with nearby municipalities, education at primary, second-
 ary, and university levels is conducted almost exclusively in the Nepali language.
 Human rights organizations report that the languages of the small Kusunda, Dura,
 and Meche communities are nearly extinct and that non-Hindu peoples are losing
 their culture over time.
 People with Disabilities.-Persons who are physically disabled normally rely on
 family members to assist them. There are no government programs specifically de-
 signed to deal with the problems faced by disabled persons, nor has legislation been
 enacted to mandate accessibility for the disabled to public buildings.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Article 12 of the Constitution provides for the free-
 dom to form and to join unions and associations. According to the Constitution,
 unions may be legally restricted only in cases of subversion, sedition, or similar con-
 ditions. Since the political transformation began in 1990, there has been an increase
 in trade union activity in every sector.
 Nepal's trade unions were initially linked closely to political parties. However, as
 the unions develop their administrative structures, they are becoming increasingly
 independent of political influence. Nepal's largest trade unions are the National
 Trade Union Congress and the General Federation of Nepalese Trade Unions. The
 first is associated with the ruling Nepali Congress Party, the second with the oppo-
 sition Communist Party of Nepal.
 Union participation in the formal sector is significant, but this sector accounts for
 only a very small portion of Nepal's overall labor force. Due to their recent forma-
 tion and the country's lack of experience with trade unionism, unions are still devel-
 oping effective structures for organizing, collective bargaining, and education. The
 Parliament passed new labor and trade union acts in 1992, and the Government
 passed regulations to implement these acts.
 
 
 1369
 Under the law, strikes are permitted except in "essential services" such as water
 supply, electricity, and telecommunications. The Government is legally empowered
 to stop a strike or suspend the functioning of a trade union if it disturbs peace and
 security or adversely affects the nation's economic interests. Under the new Labor
 Act, a secret vote must be held to determine whether to strike and 60 percent of
 the members must favor a strike for it to be legal. A number ofillegal strikes took
 place in 1993, especially to protest retrenchment in public enterprises under the
 Government's program of administrative reform. Most received little publicity and
 were ineffective.
 The 1992 Labor Act presents several ste ps to strengthen workers' rights, but it
 specifies that an employee's wages may be limited, or that he may be dismissed, if
 he"oson strike without fulfilling t e legal formalities .  " Similarly the Act
 specfis that a manager may be ined up to approximately $100 if he illegally re-
 moves workers, continues a lockout, or "provokesT workers. Labor officers and labor
 curts have wide powers, in theory, to order managers to comply with their deci-
 sions.
 TheTre Union Act of 1992 establishes the procedures and requirements for
 forming and registering trade unions, associations  and federations, including the
 previsions required in all union constitutions. It aIso protects unions and officials
 from lawsuits arising from a  ctions taken in the discharge of official duties, in-
 cluding collective bargaining.
 There are no restri~ctions on forming confederations or joining international labor
 bodies. Several federations exist, andNepalese trade union organizations maintain
 a variety of international affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-The Labor Act provides for
 collective bargaining and stipulates that an organization must have the signatures
 of at     51 percent of the eligible workers in order to negotiate collectively. The
 Government has passed implementingregulations, but the appropriate agencies
 must be funded and staffed. Although the organizational structures (e.g. labor
 courts) to implement the Act's provisions have not been created, collective bargain-
 ingthas been the primary mechanism for setting wages since April 1990.
 Other than the Trade Union Act (see above , theredre no clear legal provisions
 prohibiting discrimination against union members or organizers by employers.
 There are no special economic zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Article 20 of the Constitution pro-
 hibits forced labor in any form. The Department of Labor enforces laws against
 forced labor in the small formal sector of the economy. However, bonded labor is
 an aspent of traditional Nepalese society and is especially prevalent in agricultural
 work. Over 100,000 ethnic Thars are estimated to be bonded laborers in the Terai
 region of southern Nepal. (See also the discussion of trafficking in women in Section
 5).
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution stipulates that
 children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or similar hazardous woi, and
 the law establishes a minimum age for employment of miors at 16 in industry and
 14 in agriculture. Despite the law, child workers are found in all sectors of the econ-
 omy. According to a childrens rights group, Child Workers in Nepal, 57 percent of
 children are employed. Most child laborers are employed in the agricultural sector,
 though reports suggest that as many as half of the workers in Nepal's growing car-
 pet industry are children. Under the 1992 Labor Act, minors aged 14 to 18 are not
 allowed to work more than 6 hours per day nor more than 36 hours per week and
 are not allowed to work outside of the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. For adults,
 working hours are 8 hours per day and 48 hours per week. Overtime for adults is
 to be paid at 150 percent of usual wages.
 The Department of Labor's enforcement record is spotty. It has had some sutcess
 in enforcing laws in the urban formal sector relating to permanency, minimum
 wage, and holidays. In 1993 the Department fe d 23 factories for employing child
 labor. Discussion in a number of Western countries about banning imports produced
 by child labor has had an impact in Nepal, where carpet exprts to the West provide
 the largest source of foreign exchange. Concerned that Western countries might
 sooniben  to ban carpets produced by children, Nepali manufacturers, NGO's, and
 government agencies announced a certification program under which "child lar-
 free" carpets are to be produced and sold. Overall, however, the Government's action
 has been inadequate to reduce the incidence of child labor. After raids and the sub-
 sequent fining of the 23 factories employing child labor, the Government charged
 no other companies with violations in this area, despite the fact that child labor is
 endemic.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Act sets a minimum monthly wage
 in factories and in the organized labor sector. This wage is sufficient only for the
 
 
 1370
 most minimal standard of living. Rates in the unorganized service sector and in ag-
 riculture are often as much as 50 percent lower.
 The Labor Act calls for a 48-hour workweek, with 1 day off per week, and limits
 overtime to 20 hours per week. Health and safety standards and other benefits such
 as a provident fund and maternity benefits are also stipulated in the Act. Imple-
 mentation of the Act has been slow, as the Government has not created the nec-
 essary regulatory or administrative structures to enforce its provisions. The Act and
 its implementing regulations spell out health and safety features that employers
 must put in place, bu. the right of workers to remove themselves from dangerous
 work situations is not mentioned. Labor officers are empowered to order employers
 to rectify unsafe conditions and to close facilities where unsafe conditions persist.
