 NEPAL
 Following the promulgation of a new Constitution on November 9,
 Nepal became a constitutional monarchy with sovereignty vested
 in the people. From 1960, when an elected party-based
 government was dismissed, until April 1990, Nepal had been an
 absolute monarchy. Political parties had been legally banned,
 though limited party activity was tolerated in practice.
 Members of the National Panchayat (legislature), which was
 subordinate to the King, were elected on an individual, rather
 than a party, basis. The political transformation began in
 February with a campaign by the Movement for the Restoration
 of Democracy (MRD), led by a coalition of the moderate Nepali
 Congress Party and seven Communist factions linked together in
 the United Left Front. The Government initially attempted to
 intimidate and punish those taking part in the MRD, responding
 to the increasingly widespread public agitation with
 repressive measures which included the preventive detention of
 hundreds of'political activists and brutal treatment of
 demonstrators. Several thousand demonstrators and political
 activists were held for varying periods of time over the
 course of 7 weeks. The Government used press precensorship
 and the seizure of published editions to stifle public debate,
 and 40 journalists were arrested nationwide. Police fired on
 demonstrators, causing an undetermined number of deaths,
 though reliable investigations place the number at 45 between
 the period from February 18 to April 9, and injuring many
 more..
 These measures proved ineffective in halting the popular
 movement. King Birendra then dismissed the Panchayat
 Government and on April 8 invited the formation of an interim
 Government made up of the leaders of the MRD. The new
 administration abolished the Panchayat system and its
 associated organizations and is scheduled to hold multiparty
 elections with multiple candidates in the spring of 1991.
 Internal security in Nepal is maintained by the national
 police and, as necessary, by the Royal Nepal Army. Because
 communication links in Nepal are limited, local officials have
 a great deal of autonomy and exercise wide discretion in
 handling law and order.
 Nepal is one of the world's poorest countries. Over 90
 percent of its 20 million people are engaged in subsistence
 agriculture. Economic development.varies widely: the
 Kathmandu valley and the Terai (the lowland area adjacent to
 India) are developing more rapidly, but population pressures,
 physical isolation, and environmental degradation in the hills
 between the Terai in the south and the Himalaya mountain range
 in the north keep the hills the poorest region of the country.
 With the sweeping changes taking place in the political
 system, human rights conditions improved dramatically,
 affecting all spheres of public life and all major groups of
 the society. Following the formation of the interim
 Government, the ban on political parties and trade unions was
 ended. The Organizations and Associations (Control) Act and
 other authoritarian statutes were abolished, and almost all
 existing restrictive laws ceased to be enforced., Political
 and religious detainees were released. Since April there have
 been no reported incidents of religious harassment. In
 general, almost all limitations on the exercise of the
 freedoms of religion, speech, press, and association were
 ended. Worker rights improved dramatically. The interim
 
 
 1563
 NEPAL
 Government's public statements reiterated a firm commitment to
 respect human rights. A Constitutional. Recommendations
 Commission was established in June to draft a new charter
 vesting sovereignty in the people rather than in the King and
 providing a constitutional monarchy, democratic parliamentary
 institutions, and fundamental civil and political rights. The
 King will continue to exercise certain powers "with the advice
 and consent of the Council of Ministers."
 The principal-area of human rights abuse remained police
 treatment of prisoners. Beatings, sometimes severe, continue
 to occur in criminal and political cases, as punishment and to
 extract confessions. The interim government has paid little
 attention to this situation. There also remain important
 human rights concerns such as the broad powers of detention
 which the authorities still enjoy under the law, and
 restrictions on the right to a fair public trial and on
 freedom of religion.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 During the MRD demonstrations, police used excessive force in
 several incidents, killing and injuring an unknown number of
 persons. Two human rights organizations, a government-
 appointed commission, and several other commissions were
 formed by political parties to conduct investigations to
 determine the number involved.
 The government-appointed commission to investigate the loss of
 life and property during the spring prodemocracy movement
 submitted its report to the Government on December 31. It
 found the death toll to have been 45; 2,300 were injured. The
 commission recommended legal action against civil and police
 officials responsible for the harsh tactics resulting in death
 and injury. It will be the Government's responsibility to
 decide whether to accept this recommendation and in what
 manner to act. Neither of Nepal's primary human rights
 organizations--the Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON)
 and the Forum for the Protection of Human Rights (FOPHUR)--
 have disputed these findings.
 HURON and other human rights organizations state that more
 than 200 were injured by police firing on demonstrators in 10
 separate incidents. Of these, over 50 were shot and injured
 by police on April 6 in Kathmandu during the massive protest
 rally that capped the demonstrations. The government
 commission noted above documented two deaths. A minimum of
 three more died during the agitation movement as a result of
 police beatings. In late April, angry mobs killed at least
 six policemen during a brief period of reprisals.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of government-instigated disappearances.
 However, the Government has established a five-person
 commission to investigate the whereabouts of those missing or
 dead since December 1960, when the'late King Mahendra
 abolished the elected Parliament and instituted the Panchayat
 system. This will include the investigation of 24 people
 still unaccounted for who disappeared during the prodemocracy
 
 
 1564
 NEPAL
 agitation in 1990 and of eight persons arrested in the
 previous 5 years, whom local press and human rights
 organizations reported missing. The commission does not
 expect to complete its work until 1991.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Reliable sources, including eyewitnesses and medical
 professionals who examined victims, report that hundreds of
 the detainees during the MRD agitation in February-April were
 beaten both during the arrest process and after
 incarceration. Numerous human rights groups and other
 credible sources reported these beatings of demonstrators and
 arrestees, as well as widespread inhuman and humiliating
 treatment by the police. Less widespread were reports of
 torture. There are confirmed reports of people being made to
 stand for long periods in ditch water during the cold months
 of February and March. Others were beaten on the soles of
 their feet. Under crowded jail conditions, detainees often
 were denied minimal bedding. In other cases, meals brought by
 families were withheld. There were also reports of
 psychological torture. One prominent lawyer was transferred
 from one facility to another in the middle of the night in a
 manner which led him to believe that he was about to be
 executed. His family was not informed of the transfer. Human
 rights activists report that beatings were used most often to
 intimidate youthful demonstrators and to discourage and punish
 those believed to be political activists.
 There are no accurate statistics on the number of people
 beaten and badly mistreated during the MRD agitation.
 Reliable human rights observers place the number of those
 severely beaten nationwide at between 500 and 2,000. The
 HURON estimates that approximately 500 were badly mistreated
 in Chitwan in southern Nepal, 1,000 in the Kathmandu area, and
 about 500 more elsewhere in the country. Since the change of
 government in April, there has been one reported incident
 involving beatings for politically motivated offenses. Twelve
 political activists arrested in connection with the August 23
 stoning of a royal entourage claim they were beaten, some
 severely, while in police custody.
 The three-person commission appointed by the Government to
 investigate the loss of life and property during the
 prodemocracy agitation and to look into charges of torture and
 other mistreatment completed its work on December 31. It
 recommended legal action against civil and police officials
 responsible for deaths and injuries during the MRD agitation.
 Police beating is still reported as a routine means of
 extracting confessions from common criminals, particularly in
 rural areas where police are often poorly trained and
 supervised. The Government has rarely conducted
 investigations into allegations of police brutality or
 acknowledged public concern about its prevalence. Nepal's new
 Constitution provides for compensation to those subjected to
 physical or mental torture.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C"
 cells--which generally hold common criminals, suspected
 terrorists, and low-level political workers--are the worst.
 They often have dirt floors, sparse or no firnishings, and
 poorer food than in class "B" or "A" cells. The use of
 handcuffs and fetters is sometimes reported. Prisoners in the
 
 
 1565
 
 NEPAL
 class "C" cells reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as
 beatings and being forced to kneel for long periods.
 Conditions in "B" and "A" cells are markedly better, with the
 latter reserved for "prominent" persons.
 Facilities for care and treatment of the mentally ill are
 inadequate; such persons are often placed in jails under
 conditions that are degrading and sometimes inhuman by
 international standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 During the Fcbruary-April MRD agitation, the Government
 frequently resorted to arbitrary detention and arrest in order
 to intimidate and to discourage antigovernment political
 activity. Following the change in political system in April
 1990, the new Government established an investigative
 commission to examine abuses during the period leading to the
 overturn of the Government. By year's end, the commission had
 begun its investigation. It is expected to take several
 months to complete its work and report to the Government.
 FOPHUR has estimated that there were between 20,000 and 30,000
 instances of arbitrary arrest and detention nationwide for
 periods of over 24 hours during that period. The most
 conservative estimate by a human rights observer places the
 total at a minimum of 5,000. These numbers include many
 instances of repeat arrest or detention. The great majority
 of detainees were held for 1 or 2 days and released without
 being charged and tried. Others, particularly those suspected
 of being activists, were held for periods of up to 2 months.
 All of these detainees were released after the change in
 government in April.
 The law used most often to detain and arrest was the Public
 Security Act. Under the Act, upon presentation of a notice
 stating that he is being detained, a person can be held for up
 to 9 months. This initial period can be extended once by the
 court for an additional 9 months before'charges must be
 filed. A written detention order with "grounds and reason"
 must be presented at the time of detention and the district
 court must be notified within 24 hours. The listed grounds
 for detention are open to broad interpretation. A person may
 be detained if it is suspected that his actions might affect
 1) the security of Nepal; 2) order and tranquility inside
 Nepal; 3) amicable relations between Nepal and other friendly
 states; or 4) amicable relations among people of different
 classes or religions within Nepal. Persons detained under the
 Act are not brought to trial. This law still exists but has
 not been invoked since April. Like all other laws and
 regulations, it will be reviewed within the coming year to
 determine its compatibility with the new Constitution and
 changed accordingly.
 On August 27 the interim Government revoked the preventive
 detention powers of district level officials and limited such
 powers under the Public Security Act to the Home Minister.
 Other existing laws have often been used to limit human
 rights. The Public Offenses Act, aimed in part at limiting
 public protest or demonstration, permits a district official
 to issue an order for up to 6 months' detention, or a sizable
 fine. This law still exists but was not used for political
 offenses in 1990.
 
 
 1566
 NEPAL
 Persons detained for the expression of views critical of, or
 different from, those of the Government could also be charged
 under the Treason Act. Its various clauses were used
 periodically against political opponents and against persons
 who criticized the King or the Government. It was invoked in
 September to indict 12 people for the stoning of the royal
 entourage at the Pashupatinath temple in Kathmandu. Charges
 against the 12 were dropped in November following promulgation
 of the Constitution. In addition, the previous government
 sometimes charged persons under the Organizations and
 Associations (Control) Act of 1962, which provided for the
 prosecution of persons who violated the constitutional ban on
 political parties. This Act was repealed in July.
 Under current law, persons are permitted access to a lawyer of
 their choosing only after they are no longer technically in
 police custody, which can he up to 25 days in criminal cases.
 Those detained under the Public Security Act are to be
 presented with documentation rtating they are being held under
 the Act when they are imprisoned. For common crimes, the law
 provides that a suspect must be brought before a court within
 24 hours, and must be informed of the general grounds for the
 arrest or be released. A 7-day extension may be granted for
 the completion of the police investigation. The law generally
 provides a person in detention with the right to a judicial
 determination of the legality of the detention, but under the
 former government this right was often disregarded. The
 situation improved dramatically under the new Government, but
 instances of abuse still occur. After the August 23 stoning
 of a royal entourage, a minimum of 66 persons were detained.
 Of the 12 who were eventually charged, all claimed that they
 had been detained for at least 1 week before being charged,
 and that they had not been allowed to see a lawyer for more
 than 2 weeks.
 There is a functioning system of bail, but bail levels were
 substantially increased in 1987, making bail too expensive for
 most Nepalese. Judges often do not set bail, and many accused
 persons are held throughout their trial period.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Nepalese law provides for the right.to a public trial except
 in some security and customs cases. The Constitution provides
 for the right to counsel, protection from double jeopardy, and
 protection from retroactive application of the law. These
 rights were not always respected during the Panchayat era.
 Under the new Government, there have been no reported
 instances of abuse in this area.
 Military and civilian courts are separate. Military courts
 generally deal only with military personnel, but civilians may
 also be tried in military courts for crimes involving the
 military. Under the new Constitution, Nepal's judicial system
 consists of three layers: the Supreme Court, appellate
 courts, and district courts. The judges of all three layers
 are appointed by the King upon the recommendation of the
 Judicial Council. Article 93 of the Constitution provides for
 this Council, whose function is to make recommendations and
 give advice on matters of appointment, transfer, disciplinary
 action against judges, and other matters relating to judicial
 administration. The Judicial Council comprises the Chief
 Justice of the Supreme Court, the Minister of Justice, the two
 
 
 1567
 
 NEPAL
 most senior judges of the Supreme Court, and one distinguished
 jurist to be nominated by the King. As is the case for
 virtually all important executive branch actions, the
 Constitution does not grant the King specific veto power over
 Judicial Council decisions. However, these decisions are
 submitted to the King for approval in the form of
 recommendations. The King may also authorize the Chief
 Justice to appoint district judges on the recommendation of
 the Judicial Council.
 In the past, cases of terrorism or treason were often dealt
 with under either the Destructive Crimes (Special Control and
 Penalties) Act (1985) or the Treason Act. Both provided for
 closed trials before specially constituted tribunals. The
 Destructive Crimes Act was repealed in July. The Treason Act
 remains in effect.
 The judiciary is legally independent. Under the Panchayat
 system, it was generally not assertive in challenging the
 King. In the past, law enforcement officials frequently
 ignored writs and orders issued by the Supreme Court. The new
 Constitution allows the Supreme Court to initiate contempt
 proceedings and impose punishment for contempt of itself or
 subordinate courts. All lower court decisions, including
 acquittals, are subject to appeal. The Supreme Court is the
 court of last appeal, but the King may grant pardons and may
 suspend, commute, or remit any sentence by any court.
 FOPHUR claimed in June that 51 political prisoners imprisoned
 under the former Government remained in detention. The claim
 is based on FOPHUR's assertion that the charges under which
 most were convicted--murder, attempted murder, illegal
 possession of weapons--were fabricated. Most of these persons
 had been arrested, tried, and convicted on charges of
 participating in terrorist acts. The new Government promised,
 in June to appoint a special commission to investigate. In
 early November, HURON also called for the release of these
 prisoners on grounds similar to those cited by FOPHUR. As of
 the end of the year, the commission had not yet been
 appointed. On December 29, King Birendra, on the occasion of
 his birthday, granted amnesty to at least nine of the persons
 whom FOPHUR and HURON considered to be political prisoners.
 Others remain in custody.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 While the Government has generally respected the privacy of
 the home and family, principles bolstered by Nepalese law and
 tradition, there have been exceptions. Search warrants are
 required before search and seizure, except in, cases involving
 suspectedsecurity or narcotics violations. The Police Act of
 1955 empowers the police to issue warrants for search and
 seizure in criminal cases upon receipt of information about
 criminal activities. The Chief District Officer (CDO) in
 misdemeanor cases and court judges in felony cases must
 approve warrants within 24 hours after they are issued. Homes
 were often searched without warrants during the MRD agitation
 period. Before the April revolution, the correspondence of
 some persons, both Nepalese and foreign, was opened with
 little attempt at concealment. No similar incidents have been
 reported under the new Government.
 Under the Panchayat system, the government frequently
 confiscated foreign publications and periodicals containing
 
 
 1568
 
 NEPAL
 articles critical of the government or the monarchy. There
 were no reports of such confiscations under the new Government.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under the former constitution, freedom of speech and of the
 press were both provided for, with the major exception that
 they could not be exercised in support of a political party or
 "to the detriment of the common good, the monarch, or members
 of the royal family." In practice, this rule was broadly
 interpreted to permit criticism of the government but not of �
 the monarchy or of the royal family. In addition, provisions
 of the Freedom of Speech and Publication Act (1980) placed
 limits on material which might undermine the interests or
 sovereignty of the nation; contravene principles which
 underlie the Constitution; or encourage, abet, or propagate
 party politics. This Act was repealed in July. Under the new
 Constitution, the freedoms of speech and of the press are
 guaranteed, though restrictions exist citing vague grounds,
 such as undermining the "sovereignty and integrity" of the
 nation and disturbing "harmonious relations" among the
 people.
 The sole radio and television stations in Nepal are government
 controlled. Prior to the MRD unrest, their programming
 closely reflected the views of the government. While coverge
 of criticism of the government remains inadequate, programming
 now reflects a broader range of interests, and political
 viewpoints.
 The two Nepalese dailies with the largest circulations are
 government organs. Under the Panchayat system, they carried
 limited coverage of opposition activities and muted criticism
 of the Government. Since the political changes of April,
 their coverage, too, has broadened to reflect a wider range of
 viewpoints. In most circumstances, editorial views reflect
 government policy, but editors possess and at times exercise
 the right to publish critical views and alternate policies.
 A large number of Nepal's 4Q0.publications (some of whose
 circulation is only in the hundreds of copies) have always
 been vigorous and candid in their criticism of the
 Government. The Nepal Journalists'. Association reports that
 between January and April, 40 journalists were arrested for
 comments critical of'the Government. In the MRD's early days,
 several papers halted publication to protest government
 attempts to precensor the press. Over 10 papers had entire
 runs of issues seized by authorities when they ran articles
 judged to be overly critical. Several papers were pressed
 into severe financial straits after the Government seized
 successive editions.
 Since the political changes of April, there have been no
 reported abridgments of freedom of speech. Freedom of the
 press has come into question only once, when authorities in
 Janakpur charged two persons with slandering the royal family
 in print. Charges were dismissed in December following
 protests by the Nepal Journalists' Association to the Prime
 Minister. Separately, an editor was detained overnight in
 November for publishing "insulting" remarks against the Queen,
 but no charges were pressed. There have beqn no new reports
 of the former practice under the Panchayat system of seizing
 
 
 1569
 
 NEPAL
 or banning foreign publications deemed to carry articles
 unfavorable to the Government or to the monarchy.
 Academic freedom under the Panchayat system was limited.
 Professors at both of Nepal's universities are essentially
 civil servants and therefore had limited autonomy under the
 political restrictions of the past. The tenure system
 provided little protection from government intrusion, and
 self-censorship was prudently practiced by many academics.
 Three lecturers were dismissed at one campus on February 13
 for engaging in political activities. After the Panchayat
 system ended, the three were reinstated. Since that time,
 there have been no reported restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Under the Panchayat system, there were strict limitations on
 both assembly and association. Regulations permitted local
 authorities to prohibit meetings, speeches, and posters if
 they were found not to be "for the convenience or good of the
 general public." These regulations were frequently invoked.
 Various laws and regulations also prohibited activities
 detrimental to the monarchy, relations among people, or
 national security. The Organizations and Associations
 (Control) Act (1962) specifically required that all
 organizations be registered with the Government and stipulated
 that the members of applying organizations receive a police
 report stating that they were not "antisystem." All political
 parties were illegal under the Panchayat system, although in
 practice political party members were generally permitted to
 assemble privately and to express their views in the
 independent .press. During the MRD agitation, people were
 often prevented from, or punished for, gathering for political
 purposes. On March 16, police arrested 158 artists and
 writers taking part in a peaceful demonstration with tape over
 their mouths to protest restrictions on the freedom of
 speech. They were released later in the day. On March 20,
 over 500 intellectuals and human rights activists were
 arrested at a university symposium on the MRD. Several
 prominent MRD leaders arrested that day were jailed. Most
 were released after 1 or 2 days.
 The Organizations and Associations (Control) Act (1962) was
 repealed in July 1990. %ince the lifting of the ban on
 political parties on April 8, there have been no reports of
 arrest or detention for exercising the freedoms of assembly or
 association. Under the new Constitution, freedom of assembly
 is guaranteed. However, a caveat allows restrictions on vague
 grounds such as undermining the "sovereignty and integrity" of
 Nepal or disturbing "law and order..
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The majority of Nepalese are Hindus, and Nepal is officially
 described as a Hindu kingdom. There is a large minority of
 Buddhists, a smaller number of Muslims, and a small but
 growing number of Christians. Non-Hindus are allowed to
 practice their religion and to maintain places of worship.
 Many foreign Christian clergymen reside and work in Nepal in
 various fields. Religious education is offered by non-Hindus,
 including Muslims and Christians. Religious publications are
 imported mainly from India and are widely circulated.
 Article 19 of Nepal.'s new Constitution contains language
 identical to Article 14 of the former constitution in
 
 
 1570
 NEPAL
 providing that "every person, having regard to the traditions,
 may profess and practice his own religion as handed down from
 ancient times," and that "no person shall be entitled to
 convert another person from one religion to another." The new
 Constitution also has a new clause which provides that "every
 religious denomination shall have the right to maintain its
 independent existence and for that purpose to manage and
 protect its religious places and trusts as provided under the
 law." In addition, the current legal code now provides a
 maximum penalty of 1 year in prison for any Hindu who converts
 to another religion and 3 to 6 years for any person who seeks
 to proselytize a Hindu. The Stace views the conversion of
 Hindus as a more serious crime than the conversion of
 non-Hindus because conversion from Hinduism is regarded as
 undermining the religious and ideological underpinnings of the
 State. There is no penalty if a non-Hindu converts.
 In the past, Nepalese authorities, particularly in the
 conservative countryside, have taken the prohibition on
 conversion very seriously. At the time of the MRD
 demonstrations, local Christian leaders reported that at least
 23 Nepalese Christians and 1 Muslim were serving prison
 sentences of 3 months to 7 years for proselytization. An
 additional 24 Christians were in custody awaiting trial for
 religious offenses. On June 11, King Birendra granted amnesty
 to all those who were imprisoned for religious offenses "in
 view of the new political environment obtaining in the
 country." All pending cases for religious activities were
 dropped. Since the political changes of April, Christians and
 other non-Hindu groups have freely engaged in a wide variety
 of religious activities, including an Easter Day procession
 and the sale of religious publications. Apart from some
 incidents of harassment of Christians in Nepal's conservative
 rural areas, there have been no new reports of religious
 persecution since April.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Citizens of Nepal may generally move and reside freely,
 although the Constitution provides for restrictions which are
 "in the interest of the general public" and restrictions on
 acts "which disturb harmonious relations." Foreigners
 (including Tibetans resident in Nepal) and journalists are
 restricted from traveling to several border areas. Nepalese
 abroad are free to return home. There are no known cases of
 revocation of citizenship for political reasons.
 Travel outside of Nepal is generally not restricted for
 Nepalese citizens. However, it is limited in the case of
 Tibetans resident in Nepal who wish to visit India, with
 occasional exceptions. Prior to April, there were reported
 instances. of the government sometimes delaying or otherwise
 making it more difficult for students to travel to Commmunist
 countries, either at their own expense or through host
 government scholarships not administered by the Nepalese
 Government. Since April, there have been no reports of such
 difficulties.
 Nepal has no stated refugee policy. The United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees opened an office in Kathmandu in
 October 1989. The Government is aiding its efforts by sharing
 lists of newly registered refugees and asylum seekers from
 China. In the past it has accepted and assimilated
 approximately 14,000 Tibetan refugees. Border restrictions,
 
 
 1571
 
 NEPAL
 tightened in 1988 by a joint Nepalese/Chinese agreement,
 continued to be stringent on the Nepal side of the border in
 early 1990. There was a reported relaxation after the change
 in government, as many of the checkpoints on the road between
 the border and Kathmandu were removed. However, 103 Tibetans
 who attempted to cross from China into Nepal in the period
 August through November without appropriate documentation were
 turned back by local authorities at the border in 10 separate
 incidents. The largest group had 43 people and the smallest
 numbered 2.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Under the Panchayat system, Nepalese citizens did not have the
 right to change their government. Political legitimacy flowed
 from the King, who dominated the political scene, and who was
 established in the previous constitution as the "sole source
 of power." There was no mechanism by which they could legally
 change the political system. Under the new Constitution,
 promulgated on November 9, Nepal is a constitutional monarchy
 with sovereignty vested in the people. The people, through
 their elected representatives, have the right to change all
 but the most basic aspects of the body politic--sovereignty
 vested in the people, the multiparty system, fundamental
 rights, and the constitutional monarchy--through
 constitutional amendment.
 Nepal is now governed by a party-based coIitior interim-
 Cabinet appointed by the King- After elections, expected to
 be held in the spring of 1991 (the first multiparty elections
 with multiple candidates in 30 years), it will be governed
 under a bicameral parliamentary system, with the King
 appointing as Prime Minister the leader of the Parliament's
 majority party. In the case of no clear majority, the King
 will appoint the leader of the party most likely to command a
 majority in combination with one or more other parties
 represented in the House. The King will continue to exercise
 certain executive powers "with the advice and consent of the
 Council of Ministers." These include exclusive power in
 enacting, amending, and repealing laws relating to succession
 to the throne. The King's income and property are tax exempt
 and inviolable. No question can be raised in any court about
 any act performed by the King. The new Constitution also
 permits the King to exercise emergency powers in the event of
 war, external aggression, armed revolt, or extreme economic
 depression. The emergency powers allow him to suspend the
 freedoms of expression and assembly, freedoms from censorship
 and preventive detention, and other basic freedoms without
 judicial review. The rights to form associations and of
 habeus corpus may not be suspended. A state of emergency may
 be maintained for up to 3 months without legislative approval,
 and up to a total of 6 months if legislative approval is
 granted.
 Elections are to be held every 5 years at various levels based
 on universal suffrage and with a secret ballot. The new
 Constitution bars registration, and thus participation in
 elections, of any political party based on caste or community
 or which does not operate openly and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women or minorities
 from participating in the Government or political parties, but
 lingering conservative traditions serve to limit the influence
 of both women and some castes and tribes in the political
 
 
 1572
 NEPAL
 process. The new Constitution requires that at least 5
 percent of the candidates for the House of Representatives
 from each registered political party be women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The interim Government created several commissions to
 investigate incidents of torture and loss of life under the
 previous Government. These include the three-person
 "Commission to Investigate the Loss of Life and Property"
 during the agitation period; the five-person "Commission to
 Investigate Dead and Missing since December 15, 1960," and the
 one-person "Commission to Investigate Brutalities in the
 Period from February 16 to April 22." The first commission
 submitted a report to the Government in December and the third
 reported in September. As of the end of the year, neither
 report had been made public.
 Nepal has over a dozen nongovernmental human rights
 organizations. The two main organizations are the Forum for
 the Protection of Human Rights (FOPHUR) and the Human Rights
 Organization of Nepal (HURON). Both are considered to be
 accurate and relatively unbiased in their reporting despite
 the fact that FOPHUR is associated in the public mind with the
 left-leaning parties and HURON with the middle-of-the-road
 Nepali Congress Party. In September 1989, the Government
 accepted the registration of a human rights group known as the
 Human Rights Association of Nepal (HURAN)--the first to be
 granted official status. (Registration has not been required
 since the repeal in July 1990 of the Organizations and_
 Association (Control) Act). While considered by some to be
 "government-sponsored," HURAN's board of directors includes
 members who were actively opposed to the Panchayat system as
 well as those who accepted or supported it. HURAN has been
 basically inactive during and since the MRD demonstrations.
 The government-appointed commission to investigate dead and
 missing since December 1960 includes representatives from
 major human rights organizations. In addition to these,
 FOPHUR, HURON, and several political parties have set up
 independent investigations of torture and killings during the
 MRD demonstrations. Without exception, the latter all report
 noncooperation from police authorities in their efforts to
 gather information.
 Over the past few years, the Government appeared to grow more
 sensitive to international opinion on human rights issues and
 allowed visits by international human rights organizations
 such as Asia Watch (AW) and Amnesty International (AI). In
 March, during the height of the MRD demonstrations, a
 two-member AW investigative team visited Nepal for 10 days. A
 three-member AI team visited Nepal for 10 days in April,
 immediately after the restoration of party politics. Both
 teams met with political activists who had been arbitrarily
 detained, relatives of those shot by the police, victims of
 police torture, government officials, and others. Neither
 investigative team was hindered in its movements within Nepal.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on sex. Women
 in Nepal have the right to vote and to hold property in their
 
 
 1573
 NEPAL
 own names. However, women do not enjoy these rights fully in
 many rural areas, where the weight of tradition, lack of'
 education, and ignorance of the law remain severe inpediments
 to the exercise of these rights. The female literacy rate in
 1988 was 18 percent, compared to the average literacy rate of
 33 percent. Women are engaged chiefly in agriculture and, to
 a lesser extent, small trading.
 Over the years, women have benefited from various changes in
 marriage and inheritance laws. The Divorce Law grants
 Nepalese women the right to divorce, but on more narrow
 grounds that those available to men. For example, the
 marriage "will terminate automatically" if a woman commits
 adultery, but the reverse is not true. A man may also divorce
 his wife if she fails to bear children. There is no provision
 for divorce if the man is infertile. Child custody laws also
 discriminate against women. A woman must give up her child to
 her former husband if she remarries or when the child reaches
 the age of 16, whichever comes first, unless the husband
 chooses to give up his rights to the child. Alimony is
 awarded if the divorcee has no means- of support for a period
 of 5 years or until she remarries, whichever comes first. In
 December the Government acceded to the 1979 United Nations
 Convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination
 against women. By signing this Convention, and by
 strengthening provisions in the Constitution regarding women
 (such as equal pay for equal work), the Government committed
 itself to improving further the positionof women in Nepalese
 society.
 Wife beating is said to be common, though little is known
 about its extent. Abuses occurring within the family are
 seldom mentioned owing to the value attached to personal
 privacy in Nepal's traditional society. In generaL, there is
 virtually n public attention to or discussion of violence
 against women, nor do any government policies focus on it as
 an issue.
 Trafficking in women is a deeply ingrained social problem in
 several of Nepal's poorest areas. Estimates of the total
 number of Nepalese girls and women working as prostitutes in
 the red-light districts of India's major cities vary between
 10,000 and 100,000. Coercion is often involved, although it
 is impossible to gauge its extent. Newspapers occasionally
 report the arrest of men attempting to abduct young women or
 trick them into going to India. Economic incentives also
 entice many other women. In certaim parts of Nepal, mothers
 raise their daughters with the expectation that they will
 spend several years in the brothels of India and then return
 with their earnings and settle in their native villages.
 While the Government prosecutes instances of coercive
 trafficking brought to its attention, there are few active
 measures to stop it. The reported spread of AIDS within
 India's red-light districts has discouraged the Government
 from aggressively promoting the return and rehabilitation of
 Nepalese prostitutes. Government efforts thus far focus more
 on preventing voluntary prostitution than on rehabilitation.
 The Women's Development Division of the Ministry of Labour and
 Social Welfare sponsors income-generating skill training
 programs in several districts known for producing India-bound
 prostitutes. One specific aim is to provide an alternative
 means of income.
 
 
 1574
 
 NEPAL
 Under the Panchayat system, the Nepal Women's Organization
 (one of six "class" organizations set up by the former
 Government) was charged with protecting women from
 exploitation and making women aware of the legal protections
 available to them. The Organization was dissolved after the
 restoration of party politics in Nepal. In Nepal's new open
 political atmosphere, a growing number of women's advocacy
 groups are taking up women's issues. Nearly all political
 parties have their own women's group to press for women's
 causes. In its time,.the Panchayat Government had adopted
 policies designed to encourage women's participation in family
 planning, adult education programs, and small-scale
 income-generating enterprises.
 Still largely a traditional society, Nepal remains wedded to
 the caste system. Public discrimination on the basis of
 caste, particularly the public shunning of "untouchables," has
 been outlawed and is officially discouraged. However, it is
 still common, particularly in the rural areas of western
 Nepal. Differentiation in economic, social, and educational
 levels tends to be a function of historical patterns,
 geographical location, and class origin. The spread of
 education and higher levels of prosperity, especially in the
 Kathmandu Valley, are slowly reducing caste distinctions and
 increasing opportunities for lower socioeconomic groups.
 Politics and senior jobs in the government administration and
 army in Nepal continue to be dominated by higher and better'
 educated urban-oriented castes (Brahmin, Chhetris, and certain
 elements of the Newar community), but the representation of
 other castes is slowly increasing.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Prior to the change of government in April, the sole legal
 trade union body was the Nepal Labor Organization (NLO), one
 of six "class organizations" set up by the regime both to
 maintain control and represent group interests. The NLO was
 abolished by the new Government. Article 12 of the new
 Constitution provides for the freedom to form and to join
 unions and associations.
 Organized labor itself is in a state of transition. Frbed
 from previous restrictions and with the backing of the newly
 functioning political parties, 14 trade and professional
 unions linked to these parties (including Communist factions)
 were formed after April, along with dozens of ad hoc employee
 organizations in individual enterprises. Most have drawn up
 extensive demands, ranging from large salary increases to
 special benefits of all kinds. Following the change of
 government, strike action became widespread, especially in
 Kathmandu and among private sector enterprises.
 The Government in June formed a 27-member National Labor
 Advisory Committee, which includes trade union as well as
 management and government representatives. The Government
 fixes minimum wages on the recommendation of the National
 Labor Advisory Committee. Another government commission was
 established to review the legal rights, working conditions,
 and collective bargaining status of civil service employees.
 The employees of state corporations formed many unions after
 April.
 A code defining and regulating worker rights is included in a
 pending major overhaul of labor law. At.present, the primary
 
 
 1575
 
 NEPAL
 reference for labor rights is the 1977 version of the
 Factories and Factory Workers Act. A new Trade Union Act
 drafted with the assistance of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) is expected in 1991, along with a separate
 Disputes Settlement Act and legislation governing civil
 service.
 The Organization and Control Act of 1963, which restricted
 formation of unions and political parties, was repealed in
 July. The new Trade Union Act is expected to require
 registration of unions but without prior government approval.
 The Constitution permits restriction of unions only through
 legal measures in cases of subversion, sedition, or similar
 conditions.
 According to the Department of Labor, labor organizations have
 so far embraced about 3 percent of Nepal's 9.2 million
 economically active population, or approximately 30 percent of
 nonagricultural workers. Unions exist in the industrial
 sector, the civil service, public enterprises, among teachers,
 garment, and carpet workers, and in service sectors such as
 tourism. About 10 percent of the working population is
 employed in these formal sector activities, with the remaining
 90 percent engaged in agriculture and the informal sector.
 Most of the strikes which occurred after April were resolved
 through direct labor-management negotiation, generally with
 substantial benefits granted. Others, including stnikes at
 state enterprises, required Labor Department mediation, and in
 a few cases the Cabinet's involvement. The Government has
 attempted with some success to encourage sector-wide
 negotiations, for example with hotel and restaurant workers.
 The draft Trade Union Act is expected to recognize the right
 to strike, as does the original 1959 Factory Workers Act.
 There are no restrictions on forming confederations or joining
 international labor bodies. The Nepali Trade Unions Congress
 (NTUC), which is linked to the Nepali Congress Party, has
 applied to join the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions. The General Federation of Nepalese Trade Unions,
 which is linked to the Communist Party of Nepal
 (Marxist-Leninist), is affiliated with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. It is
 expected that the new Trade Union Act will stipulate
 procedures for affiliations.
 In June the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association recognized
 the positive developments in Nepal's 1-abor situation and
 adjourned without examining a case filed against Nepal. It
 requested the Government to provide details regarding alleged
 repression of the Nepal National Teachers Association (NNTA)
 under the previous government before it could make a final
 determination. As of the end of the year, the Government had
 not yet responded. Negotiations were under way between the
 Government and the NNTA by which the NNTA would withdraw its
 case before the ILO if the Government reinstated NNTA member
 teachers dismissed by the previous government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 At present, there is no legal provision for collective
 bargaining, although the contemplated Dispute Settlement Act
 may address both discrimination and collective bargaining. In
 practice, collective bargaining has been the primary mechanism
 for setting wages since April. Of the dozens of shop-floor
 level associations that have sprung up, many have been
 
 
 1576
 NEPAL
 successful in winning wage increases of up to 80 to 100
 percent,-mostly as a result of walk-outs, sit-ins, or
 threats. Often' settlements reached one week have been
 followed by immediate demands for new wage increases. There
 are no legal provisions prohibiting discrimination by
 employers against union members or organizers, but antiunion
 discrimination by employers in the current atmosphere is
 unlikely.
 There are no special economic zones in Nepal, and labor law
 and practice is the same throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Article 20 of the 1990 Constitution prohibits traffic in human
 beings, slavery, serfdom, or forced labor in any form. This
 is consistent with the previous constitution. The Department
 of Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the organized
 sector of the economy. However, although its extent is not
 known, bonded labor is an aspect of traditional society in
 some parts of the west and the south. (See also the
 discussion of trafficking in women in Section 5.)
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legally defined minimum age for employment of minors is 16
 in industry and 14 in agriculture. The Constitution
 stipulates that children shall not be employed in factories,
 mines, or similar hazardous work. There is no compulsory
 education legislation or specific child protection act in
 Nepal. The Department of Labor enforces the minimum age law
 only in the larger enterprises of the formal sector; however,
 child workers are found in all sectors of the rural and urban
 economies. Child Workers in Nepal (CWIN), the only national
 social action group dedicated to child rights and welfare,
 estimates that 4.8 million Nepali children work at least part
 time. As with the population at large, the overwhelming
 majority of these children are engaged in family subsistence
 agriculture, but children can be found, usually doing menial
 jobs, in almost every occupation. Child employment is
 particularly common in the smaller enterprises in
 construction, carpet weaving, restaurants, garment
 manufacturing, and domestic work.
 Child labor in Nepal is encouraged by such factors as
 poverty, rural-urban migration, demand for cheap and easily
 controlled labor, and traditional culture where child
 employment is considered a normal feature of apprenticeship or
 family survival. The interim Government has taken some
 measures to protect the rights of the child. These include
 acceding to the United Nations' Convention on the Rights of
 the Child in August, and to the World Declaration on the
 Survival, Protection, and Development of Children in December
 1990. By gigning these two documents, the Government of Nepal
 formally committed itself to the goals set out in them.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 In July the Government agreed to an NLAC recommendation to
 increase the minimum wage in four categories by an average of
 41 percent. Monthly minimum wages are: unskilled--$26;
 semiskilled--$28, skilled--$32; highly skilled--$38 (at
 September 1990 exchange rates). These rates are generally
 adhered to in the urban organized sector, but these wages are
 
 
 1577
 NEPAL
 sufficient only for the most minimal standard of living. Wage
 rates in the unorganized service sector and in agriculture are
 generally lower.
 The Factory Workers Act stipulates a 48 hour workweek, 1 day
 off per week plus 30 holidays or leave days, 15 days of sick
 leave, overtime limited to 15 hours per week, health and
 safety standards, and other benefits such as the provision of
 a provident fund and maternity benefits. Implementation of
 the Act has improved as a result of the successful pressing of
 demands by new active labor unions in the past 6 months. The
 Labor Department is charged with enforcing compliance and,
 although performance is uneven, it has intervened effectively
 in response to labor union demands in some of the larger
 enterprises. Enforcement is .less likely to take place in
 smaller enterprises of 50 workers or fewer and is nonexistent
 in the informal sector. There are no accurate data on
 industrial accident rates.
 
 
 1578
