 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government and
 an independent judiciary. In 1990 the King, formerly an absolute monarch, legalized
 political parties after which an interim government promulgated a new constitution.
 The King retains important residual powers but has dissociated himself from the
 direct exercise of governance. The democratically elected Parliament consists of the
 House of Representatives (lower house) and the National Council (upper house).
 Since the restoration of democracy in 1990, Nepal has held three national elections,
 two for the Parliament and one for local officials. International observers consider
 these elections to have been generally free and fair. The Government changed hands
 in September, and the transfer of power to the new coalition was peaceful.
 
 
 1327
 The national police force maintains internal security, assisted as necessary bythe
 Royal Nepalese Army. The army is traditionally loyal to the King and avoids in-
 volvement in domestic politics. The police are subject to civilian control, but local
 officials have wide discretion in maintaining law and order. While the police con-
 tinue to exercise restraint in handling violent political demonstrations (with one no-
 table exception), they continue to be responsible for abuses in custody.
 Nepal is an extremely poor country, with an annual per capita gross domestic
 product estimated at around $200. Over 80 percent of its 20 million people support
 themselves through subsistence agriculture. Principal crops include rice, wheat,
 maize, :jute, and potatoes. Tourism and the export o carpets and garments provide
 the major sources of foreign exchange. Foreign aid accounts for more than half of
 the development bud get. The economy is mixed with 60 public sector industries,
 some of which the Government has privatized.
 Since political reform began in 1990, Nepal has progressed in its transition to a
 more open society with greater respect for human rigts. However, problems remain
 because the Government fails to enforce all of the Constitution's provisions. The po-
 lice continue to abuse detainees, often using physical abuse as punishment or to ex-
 tract confessions. The Government remains unwilling to investigate allegations of
 police brutality or to take action against those involved. The authorities employ ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention, and prison conditions remain poor. The Government
 continues to impose some restrictions on freedom of religion and expression. Lower
 castes and women suffer widespread discrimination. Trafficking in women and girls
 and child labor remain serious problems. Violence against women and forced labor
 are also problems. The previous Government, run by the Communist Party of Nepal
 United Maixist-Leninist (UML), detained and forcibly repatriated Tibetan asylum
 seekers.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrty of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Iling.-There were no reports of political or
 extrajudicial killings. However, in June a man died while in police custody in
 Hetauda Sentral   epa). The authorities detained the man as part of the investiga-
 tion of a traffic accident despite injuries that he sustained in the accident. The fol-
 lowing day the police rushed the unconscious man to a hospital, where doctors de-
 clared him dead on arrival. In Bharatpur (Central Nepal) a 37-year-old man ar-
 rested for drunkenness died in police custody in December. Police said he cut him-
 self on brken glass and bled to death. It is unclear whether he died from police
 abuse or medical neglect. In January a young girl incarcerated with a parent report-
 edly died from lack of medical treatment (see Sctions 1.c. and 5).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 Two student activists that the police took into custody in 1993 and 1994 remain
 missing. The Supreme Court has investigated these disappearances, but the police
 maintain that they are not holding the students.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture, the law does not defime torture as a
 criminal offense. The police commonly use physical abuse to punish suspects or to
 extract confessions. Credible evidence indicates that an arrested American was
 kicked and beaten with bamboo sticks by police in March. The Government has
 failed to conduct thorough and independent investigations of reports of police brutal-
 ity and refused to take significant disciplinary action against officers involved. The
 Constitution provides for compensation for victims, but a compensation bill intro-
 duced in Parliament in 1993 remains in committee.
 On July 24, police fired into a crowd in Mugu (western Nepal) protesting a speech
 by the Deputy Prime Minister. The police injured 21 Nepali Congress Party (NCP)
 members dunng this incident.
 Political groups engaged in physical abuse and violence. Members of opposition
 parties stoned bus drivers and attacked shop owners who refused to honor nation-
 wide strikes. On July 25, a UML member and a Nepal Workers and Peasants Party
 (NWPP) supporter suffered injuries during a clash between UMLparty members
 and a group composed of NCP and National Democratic Party (NDP) supporters in
 Junmla during another speech by the Deputy Prime Minister.
 Prison conditions are poor. Overcrowding is common, and authorities sometimes
 handcuff or fetter detainees. Women are incarcerated separately from men, but in
 similar conditions. The Government has not implemented a prvision in the 1992
 Children's Act calling for the establishment of a juvenile home and juvenile court.
 Consequently, children are sometimes incarcerated with adults-either as criminals
 or with an incarcerated parent. Concerned groups estimate that 74 children re-
 
 
 1328
 mained in prison in 1995. In January a 5-year old girl, the daughter of an inmate,
 died from lack of medical treatment for a respiratory infection, according to a
 human rights group (see Sections l.a. and 5).
 There has been some improvement in prison conditions. The authorities are more
 likely to transfer sick prisoners to hospitals than they were in the past. Due to the
 inadequacy of medical facilities in the country, the authorities often place the men-
 tally ill in jails under inhumane conditions. The Government permits local human
 rights groups to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that the au-
 thorities must arraign or release a suspect within 24 hours of arrest, but the police
 often violate this provision. Under the Public Offenses Act of 1970, the police must
 obtain warrants for an arrest unless a person is caught in the act of committing
 a crime. For many offenses, the case must be filed in court within 7 days of arrest.
 If the court upholds the detention, the law authorizes the police to hold the suspect
 for 25 days to complete their investigation, with a possible extension of 7 days. The
 Supreme Court on occasion ordered the release of detainees held longer than 24
 hours without a court appearance. The police often violate this provision by arbitrar-
 ily holding suspects.
 Detainees do not have the legal right to receive visits by family members and are
 permitted access to lawyers only after the authorities file charges. In practice, the
 police grant access to prisoners on a haphazard basis that varies from prison to pris-
 on. There is a system of bail, but bonds are usually too expensive for most citizens.
 Under the Public Security Act, the authorities may detain persons who allegedly
 threaten domestic security and tranquility, amicable relations with other states, and
 relations between citizens of different classes or religions. Persons that the Govern-
 ment detains under the Act are considered in preventive detention and are not
 brought to tris.
 The 1991 amendments to the Public Security Act allow the authorities to extend
 periods of detention after submitting written notices to the Home Ministry. The po-
 lice must notify the district court of the detention within 24 hours, and the court
 may order an additional 6 months of detention before authorities file official
 charges.
 Other laws, including the Public Offenses Act, permit arbitrary detention. This
 Act and its many amendments cover such crimes as disturbing the peace, vandal-
 ism, rioting, and fighting. Under this Act, the Government detained hundreds of
 civil servants during a 55-day antigovernment strike in 1991. Human rights mon-
 itors express concern that the Act vests too much discretionary power in the Chief
 District Officer (CDO), the highest ranking civil servant in each of the country's 75
 districts. The Act authorizes the CDO to order detentions, to issue search warrants,
 and to specify fines and other punishments for misdemeanors without judicial re-
 view. Detainees may appeal the decisions of the CDO's.
 There were no reports of political detainees.
 The Constitution prohibits exile; it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The judiciary has shown independence at the level
 of the Supreme Court, but is vulnerable to pressure from political parties and brib-
 ery at lower levels.
 The Supreme Court ruled that important provisions in the 1992 Labor Act and
 in the 1991 Nepal Citizenship Act are unconstitutional. The Court decided that the
 dissolution of the Parliament at the request of the former Prime Minster in June
 1995 was unconstitutional and ordered the body restored on August 28.
 Appellate and district courts have also become increasingly independent, although
 they sometimes bend to political pressure. In a recent example, a district court com-
 plied with a central Government request to withdraw two murder charges against
 the current Home Minister in November. The Home Minister holds the highest law
 enforcement position in the land, and several human rights organizations have criti-
 cized this action, even though the request is legally permissible.
 The judicial system consists of three levels: district courts, appellate courts, and
 the Supreme Court. The King appoints judges on the recommendation of the Judi-
 cial Council, a constitutional body chaired by the chief justice. The Council is also
 responsible for the assignment of judges, disciplinary action, and other administra-
 tive matters.
 The Constitution provides for the right to counsel, protection from double jeopardy
 and retroactive application of the law, and public trials, except in some security and
 customs cases. All lower court decisions, including acquittals, are subject to appeal.
 The Supreme Court is the court of last appeal, but the King may grant parons,
 and he can suspend, commute, or remit any sentence.
 
 
 1329
 Military courts adjudicate cases concerning military personnel, who are immune
 from prosecution in civilian courts. In 1992 the Supreme Court ruled that military
 courts may no longer try civilians for crimes involving the military.
 The authorities may prosecute terrorism or treason cases under the Treason Act.
 Specially constituted tribunals hear these trials in closed sessions. However, no such
 trials took place during the year.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government generally respected the privacy of the home and family. Search war-
 rants are required before search and seizure except in cases involving suspected se-
 curity and narcotics violations. As amended, the Police Act of 1955 empowers the
 police to issue warrants for search and seizure in criminal cases upon receipt of in-
 formation about criminal activities. Within 24 hours of their issuance, warrants in
 misdemeanor cases must be approved by the CDO. Court judges must approve them
 in felony cases.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall
 have freedom of thought and expression and that the Government may not censor
 any news item or cther reading material. Nevertheless, the Constitution prohibits
 speech and writing that would threaten the sovereignty and integrity of the King-
 dom; that would disturb the harmonious relations among people of different castes
 or communities; that would promote sedition, defamation, contempt of court, or
 instigation to commit crime; or that would contradict decent public behavior or mo-
 rality.
 The Press and Publications Act provides for the licensing of publications and the
 granting of credentials to journalists. The Act includes penalties for violating these
 requirements. The Act also prohibits publication of material that promotes dis-
 respect toward the King or royal family; that undermines security, peace, order, the
 dignity of the King, and the integrity or sovereignty of the kingdom; that creates
 animosity among people of different castes and religions; or that adversely affects
 the good conduct or morality of the public. The regulation also provides a basis for
 banning foreign publications.
 Athoufgh ere are hundreds of independent vernacular and English newspapers
 representing various political points of view, most have a small circulation and lim-
 ited impact. The Government owns the vernacular daily paper with the largest cir-
 culation. Editors and writers at the government paper practice self-censorsbip and
 generally reflect government policy. Ruling political parties have influenced the edi-
 torial policy of the government paper to their advantage.
 The Government owns and controls the major radio and television stations. Radio
 reaches the greatest number of people and has the largest influence. Programming
 currently reflects a broader range of interests and political viewpoints than prior to
 the political transformation in 1990, but stil closely follows the government line.
 The Government does not restrict access to foreign radio broadcasts or to the pur-
 chase of television satellite dishes which can access international news from the
 British Broadcasting Corporation and Cable News Network. The Broadcast Act of
 1993 allows private parties to broadcast television and FM radio. There are two pri-
 vate television stations (cable and microwave) which have been operating for over
 a year in the Kathmandu Valley. They provide mainly entertainment programming
 and do no local research or reporting.Noprivate FM radio licenses have yet been
 granted, although at least seven have been requested. Some broadcasters, who have
 purchased equipment a     re ready to begin broadcasting, have been awaiting  -
 censes for 2 years. A Government station began broadcasting in November.  an
 There has been much debate about       iberalizing the media generally
 privatizing government-owned media in particular. This debate has put pressure, so
 far successfully resisted, on successive governments to open up the air waves and
 sell off government-controlled printing press operations.
 The Government limits academic freedom to the same extent as the media. No
 overt efforts to enforce these limitations were reported this year.
 b. Freedom of Peace   Assembly and Association.-Although the Constitution pro
 vides for freedom of assembly, this right may be restricted by law on such vague
 grounds as undermining the sovereignty and integrity of the State or disturbing law
 and order. There were no reports of arrest or detention for exercising these free-
 doms.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The majority of citizens are Hindu. The Constitution de-
 scribes Nepal as a Hindu kingdom, although it does not establish Hinduism as the
 state religion. The Constitution permits the practice of all religions and prohibits
 discrimination on the basis of caste except for traditional reaigious practices at
 
 
 1330
 Hindu temples. Although the Government has generally not interfered with the
 practices of other religions, conversion is prohibited and punishable with fines or
 imprisonment, and police occasionally harass members of minority religions. Some
 goups are concerned that the ban on proselytizing limits the expression of non-
 ureligious belief. Foreigners convicted of proselytizing can be expelled from the
 country.
 Eleven Christians were arrested in September 1994 for proselytizing and sen-
 tenced to 2 years' imprisonment in August. The case received considerable inter-
 national attention. The 11 were pardoned by the King and released on Constitution
 Day, November 9.
 dFreedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement and residence, and
 the Government generally does not restrict travel abroad. However, the Government
 restricts travel to some areas on the Chinese border to foreign tourists and to for-
 eign residents, such as Tibetans residing in Nepal. The Government allows citizens
 abroad to return home and is not known to revoke citizenship for political reasons.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has maintained
 an office in Kathmandu since 1989. The Government aids UNHCR's efforts by facili-
 tating access to refugees from Bhutan.
 The Government has no official refugee policy and is party to neither the 1951
 U.N. Convention nor the 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. Since
 1959 the Government has accepted approximate!, 20,000 Tibetan refugees many of
 whom still reside in the country. In the mid-1970 s, the Government suspended issu-
 ance of identification cards to Tibetans. Undocumented Tibetan residents face dif-
 ficulties in obtaining basic citizens' rights and are unable to travel abroad or access
 such services as banking. Some also face possible deportation. The UNHCR now do-
 nates blank resident identification cards to the Government for Tibetans. Issuance
 resumed in early 1995. By mid-July, issuance of identification cards to about 5,000
 out of an estimated 7,000 Tibetan residents outside the Kathmandu Valley was com-
 pleted. Due to logistical and political obstacles, issuance of identification cards to
 Kathmandu's approximately 13,000 Tibetan refugees has been suspended.
 China and the Government of Nepal tightened movement across their border in
 1986, but both sides have observed such restrictions haphazardly. The authorities
 continued to harass Tibetan asylum seekers who tried to cross the border from
 China. Border police often turn back asylum seekers or extort money from Tibetans
 in exchange for passage. Early in the year, the UML Government reversed a tacit
 policy of conveying Tibetan asylum seekers to the UNHCR facility in Kathmandu
 or processing and onward travel to India. Although the UML Government officially
 denied any change in policy, some Tibetans apprehended in border areas were
 turned over to Chinese officials and others, who had reached the capital, were de-
 ported.
 Through late July, the UNHCR had confirmed reports of forced repatriation of
 about 200 Tibetan asylum seekers. The reduced number of Tibetan asylum seekers
 processed by UNHCR this year reflects this change. From February to May, only
 one-third of the 1993 and 1994 volume of refugees for the corresponding period was
 processed by UNHCR.
 Various embassies and the UNHCR protested the Government's "deny and de-
 port" actions. As a result of these protests, the UML Government appeared to im-
 prove its cooperation with UNHCR since July, at least in cases that came to
 UNHCR's attention. In October the head of the new coalition Government
 reaffirmed the previous policy of respect for internationally respected rights for asy-
 lum seekers.
 The number of ethnic Nepalese fleeing Bhutan declined in 1995. Nevertheless, the
 camps in southeastern Nepal house 90,000 refugees. Upwards of an estimated
 15,000 reside outside the camps in either Nepal or India. The total represents over
 one sixth of Bhutan's estimated population before the exodus began.
 The UNHCR monitors the condition of the Bhutanese refugees and provides for
 their basic needs. The Government accepts the refugee presence on humanitarian
 grounds but offers little more than a place to stay. Living conditions in the camps
 have improved dramatically since 1992. Adequate clean water is available and
 health, sanitation, and nutrition standards are acceptable. Violence has sometimes
 broken out between camp residents and the local population. Relief organizations
 working in the camps sometimes distribute token relief supplies to defuse the situa-
 tion. The German Government recently agreed to fund a 4-year program aimed at
 improving conditions in communities adjacent to the camps.
 In 1993 the governments of Nepal and Bhutan formed a joint committee to resolve
 the refugee problem and to determine different categories of refugees in preparation
 
 
 1331
 for future repatriation. Six rounds of bilateral talks have been held with little con-
 crete progress.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens, through their elected representatives, have the right to amend the Con-
 stitution with the exception of certain basic principles that they may not change-
 sovereignty vested in the people, the multiparty system, fundamental rights, and
 the constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections are scheduled every 5 years. Midterm elections may be
 called if the ruling party loses its majority, loses a vote of no confidence, or calls
 for elections. The Constitution grants suffrage to all citizens age 18 and over.
 The November 1994 elections were generally fair, but some irregularities oc-
 curred, including vote tampering. A three-party coalition now has a majority in Par-
 liament after passingin September a no-confidence motion against the previous mi-
 nority government.n June the minority Prime Minister had attempted to block the
 motion by asking the King to dissolve Parliament and call midterm elections. The
 current coalition parties challenged this action. In Auust the Supreme Court ruled
 the former Prime Minister's request unconstitutional and ordered Parliament re-
 stored. The transfer of power was generally peaceful.
 The House of Representatives, or lower house, may send legislation directly to the
 King by majority vote. The National Council, or upper house, may amend or reject
 lower house legislation but the lower house can overrule its objections. The upper
 house may also introduce legislation and send it to the lower house for consider-
 ation.
 The King exercises certain powers with the advice and consent of the Council of
 Ministers. These include exclusive authority to enact, amend, and repeal laws relat-
 ing to succession to the throne. The King's income and property are tax-exempt and
 inviolable, and no question may be raised in any court about any act performed by
 the King. The Constitution also permits the King to exercise emergency powers in
 the event of war, external aggression, armed revolt, or extreme economic depression.
 In such an emergency, the King may suspend without judicial review many basic
 freedoms, including the freedoms of expression and assembly, freedom from censor-
 ship and freedom from preventive detention. However, he may not suspend habeas
 corpus or the right to form associations. The King's declaration of a state of emer-
 gency must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the lower house of Parliament.
 If the lower house is nct n session, the upper house exercises this power. A state
 of emergency may be maintained for up to 3 months without legislative approval
 and up to 6 months renewable only once for an additional 6 months, if the legisla-
 ture grants approval.
 The Constitution bars the registration and participation in elections of any pliti-
 cal party that is based on "religion, community, caste, tribe or region," or that does
 not operate openly and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women, indigenous people, or minorities
 from participating in the Government or in political parties. Lingering conservative
 traditons limit the roles of women and of some castes and tribes in the political
 process. The Constitution requires that 5 percent of each party's candidates for the
 House of Representatives must be women. Seven of the 205 members of the lower
 house of the current Parliament are women. In the upper house, 4 of 60 members
 are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of  muman Rights
 There are a dozen nongovernmental human rights organizations in Nepal. These
 include the Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON), the Informal Sector
 Services Center (ISEC), and the International Institute for Human Rights, Envi-
 ronment and Development (INHURED). The Nepal Law Society also monitors
 human rights abuses and a number of nongoverental organizations (NGO's) focus
 on specific areas such as torture, child labor, women's rights, or ethnic minorities.
 The police regularly loan vehicles to human rights monitors to observe political dem-
 onstrations. Human rights organizations contend, however, that the Government
 sometimes interferes with their operations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution specifies that the state shall not discriminate against citizens on
 grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology. However, there is still a caste sys-
 tem. Discrimination against lower castes and women remains common, especially in
 the rural areas of western Nepal.
 
 
 1332
 Women.-Women's rights groups report that wife beating is common. Little public
 attention is given to violence against women in the home; the Government makes
 no special effort to combat it. Rape and incest are also problems, particularly in
 rural areas.
 Trafficking in women and girls remains a deeply ingrained social problem in sev-
 eral of the country's poorest areas. Estimates of the number of girls and women
 working as prostitutes in India range between 150,000 and 200,000. The best avail-
 able data suggest that approximately 5,000 to 7,000 girls between the ages of 10
 and 18 are abducted into prostitution each year. Prostitution is also a problem in
 the Kathmandu valley. A children's human rights  Oup in Nepal states that 20 per
 cent of prostitutes are younger than 16 years old. Economic incentives entice many
 women to become prostitutes. In many cases, parents or relatives sell women and
 young girls into sexual slavery. Among the Badini and Devaki of western Nepal, re-
 ligious rostitution remains a problem.
 The Gvernment prosecutes some cases of coercive trafficking but takes few active
 measures to stop it. The fear of the spread of AIDS by returning prostitutes has
 discouraged the Government from promoting the rehabilitation of prostitutes.
 Government efforts focus more on preventing voluntary prostitution than on reha-
 bilitation or prevention of coercive trafficking. The Ministry of Labor and Social
 Welfare sponsors job and skill training programs in several poor districts known for
 sending prostitutes to India. Several NGO's have similar programs.
 Although the Constitution strengthened laws regarding women, including equal
 pay for equal work, the Government has not taken effective action to implement its
 provisions. Women have benefited from various changes in marriage and inherit-
 ance laws. In 1994 the Supreme Court struck down as unconstitutional provisions
 of the Citizenship Law that discriminated against foreign spouses of Nepalese
 women. However, many discriminatory laws remain. The law grants women the
 right to divorce, but on narrower grounds than those applicable to men. The law
 onproperty rights also favors men in its provisions for inheritance land tenancy,
 and the division of family property. In August the Supreme Court ordered the Coun-
 cil of Ministers to enact legislation within a year giving women equal rights consist-
 ent with the Constitution.
 Women face discrimination, particularly in rural areas, where religious and cul-
 tural tradition, lack of education, and ignorance of the law remain severe impedi-
 ments to their exercise of basic rights such as the right to vote or to hold property
 in their own names.
 According to the 1991 census, the female literacy rate is 26 percent, compared
 with 57 percent for men. Human rights groups report that girls attend secondary
 schools at a rate one-half that of boys.
 A gwing number of women's advocacy groups now take up women's issues, and
 nearly all political parties have their own women's group. Female members of Par-
 liament have begun working for the passage of tougher laws for crimes of sexual
 assault, but have had little success so far.
 Children.-Poverty severely limits the Government's ability to support the care of
 children. Primary education for children ages 6-12 is free, but many families cannot
 afford school supplies or clothing. Schools charge fees for further education. Free
 health is provided through Government clinics, but the clinics are ill equipped and
 too few in number to meet the demand. Community based health programs assist
 in the prevention of childhood diseases and provide some measure of prmary health
 care and family planning services. Due to poor or non-existent sanitation in rural
 areas, many children are at risk from severe and fatal illnesses.
 The Child Act of 1992 provides legal protection for children "1 the workplace and
 in criminal proceedings. Although it calls for the establishment of child welfare com-
 mittees and orphanages, the Government has established few such facilities. The
 Labor Act of 1992 prohibits the employment of minors under 14 years of age, but
 employers, particularly in the informal sector or agriculture, widely ignore the law.
 Children under the age of 16 work in all sectors of the economy. Children's rights
 groups estimate that up to one-half of children are engaged in income generating
 activities. As recently as early 1994, the carpet industry employed large numbers
 of children, an estimated 23,000 or approximately one-third of all workers in the in-
 dustry. Due to negative publicity in consumer nations, children now account for ap-
 proximately 5 percent of the carpet industrys labor force, about 6,000 workers (see
 Section 6.d.). The Ministry of Labor has undertaken no effective initiatives against
 child labor.
 Prostitution and trafficking in young girls remain serious problems (see above).
 Approximately 75 innocent children under the age of 12 are incarcerated with
 their parents because the Government has not established juvenile homes. A young
 
 
 1333
 girl incarcerated with her parent reportedly died in prison in January from lack of
 medical treatment (see Sections L.a. and l.c.).
 People With Disabilities.-There are no government programs specifically de-
 signed to deal with the problems faced by disabled persons. Ilor has legislation been
 enacted to mandate accessibility to public buildings, or to employment, education,
 and other state services. Persons who are physically disabled normally rely on fam-
 ily members to assist them.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Nepal has over 75 ethnic groups speaking
 50 languages. The Constitution provides that each community "shall have the right
 to preserve and promote its language, script, and culture." It further specifies that
 each community has the right to operate schools up to the primary level in its moth-
 er tongue.
 Discrimination against lower castes is especially common in the rural areas of
 western Nepal. Although the Government has outlawed the public shunning of "un-
 touchables, an exception was retained for traditional practices at Hindu religious
 sites. Economic, social, and educational advancement tend to be a function of histor-
 ical patterns, geographic location and caste. Better education and higher levels of
 prosperity, epeciall y in the Kathmandu Valley, are slowly reducing caste distinc-
 tions and increasing opportunities for lower socioeconomic groups. Better educated,
 urban-oriented castes (Brahmin, Chhetri, and certain elements of the Newar com-
 munity tra ditionally dominant in the Kathmandu valley) continue to dominate poli-
 tics and senior administrative and military positions and to control a disproportion-
 ate share of natural resources in their territories.
 In remote areas, school lessons and national radio transmissions are often con-
 ducted in the local language. However, in areas with nearby municipalities, edu-
 cation at the primary, secondary, and university levels is conducted almost exclu-
 sively in Nepali. Human rights groups report that the languages of the small
 Kusunda, Dura, and Meche communities are nearly extinct, and that non-Hindu
 peoples are losing their culture.
 Section 6. Workers Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the freedom to estab-
 lish and join unions and associations. It permits restriction of unions only in cases
 of subversion, sedition, or similar conditions. Despite the political transformation in
 1990, trade unions are still developing their administrative structures to organize
 workers, bargain collectively, and conduct worker education programs. The prior
 UML government "autmatically" registered its own affliated unions but interfered
 in the registration of unions associated with the NCP labor organization.
 Union participation in the formal sector is significant, but it accounts for only a
 small portion of the labor force. In 1992 Parliament passed the Labor Act and the
 Trade Union Act, and formulated enabling regulations. However, the Government
 has not yet fully implemented the laws. The Trade Union Act defines procedures
 for establishing trade unions, associations and federations. It also protects unions
 and officials from lawsuits arising from any action taken in the discharge of union
 duties, including collective bargaining.
 The law permits strikes, except by employees in essential services. The law em-
 powers the Government to halt a strike or suspend a union's activities if the union
 disturbs the peace or if it adversely affects the nation's economic interests. Under
 the Labor Act, 60 percent of a union's membership must vote in favor of a strike
 in a secret ballot for it to be legal.
 The Government does not restrict unions from joining international labor bodies.
 Several trade federations and union organizations maintain a variety of inter-
 national affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Act provides for
 collective bargaining, although the organizational structures to implement the Act's
 prvisions have notbeen established. Collective bargaining agements cover an es-
 timated 20 percent of wage earners in the ornized sector. However, labor remains
 widely unable to use colrective bargaining effectively due to inexperience and em-
 player reluctance to bargain.
 Other than the Trade Union Act, there are no legal provisions prohibiting employ-
 ers from discriminating against union members or organizers.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery,
 serfdom, forced labor or traffic in human beings in any form. The Department of
 Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the small formal sector, but remains un-
 able to enforce the law outside that sector.
 Large numbers of women are still forced to work against their will as prostitutes
 (see Section 5). Bonded labor is a continuing problem, especially in agricultural
 
 
 1334
 work. Bonded laborers are usually members of lower castes. Over 25,000 ethnic
 Thar families are estimated to be under the "Kamaiya" or bonded labor system in
 the southern Terai region. The Government has not yet enacted legislation or taken
 other significant steps to address the issue.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution stipulates that
 children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or similar hazardous work. The
 law also establishes minimum ages for employment of minors at 16 in industry and
 14 in agriculture. The Constitution limits children between the ages of 14 and 16
 to a 36-hour workweek. Despite the law, child workers are found in all sectors of
 the economy (see Section 5).
 Up to half of all children are engaged in income generating activities, mostly in
 agriculture. Children constitute ony an estimated 5 percent of the employees in the
 export-oriented carpet industry, down from one-third in early 1994. A consortium of
 carpet factory owners are moving to establish a certification system for carpets
 made without child labor (see Section 5). Few or no children work in the garment
 industry.
 The Ministry of Labor's enforcement record is improving. In the urban formal sec-
 tor, it has had some success in enforcing laws relating to permanency, minimum
 wage, and holidays. Government inspectors are also increasing their monitoring of
 use of child labor in carpet factories.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Act sets a minimum monthly wage
 of $23 (1,150 rupees) for unskilled workers in factories and in the organized labor
 sector. This wage is sufficient only for the most minimal standard of living. Wages
 in the unorganized service sector and in agriculture are often as much as 50 percent
 lower.
 The Labor Act calls for a 48-hour workweek, with 1 day off per week, and limits
 overtime to 20 hours per week. Health and safety standards and other benefits such
 as a provident fund and maternity benefits are also established in the Act. Imple-
 mentation of the new Labor Acthas been slow, because the Government has not
 created the necessary regulatory or administrative structures to enforce its provi-
 sions. Workers do not have the right to remove themselves from dangerous work
 situations. Although the law authorizes labor officers to order employers to rectify
 unsafe conditions, enforcement of safety standards remains minimal.
