Nepal
The human rights situation in Nepal worsened markedly in 2005. On
February 1 King Gyanendra staged a coup against the civilian government,
which he claimed was a necessary step to tackle the nine-year-old Maoist
insurgency. Security forces arrested all leaders of major political parties.
Authorities severed all communications links within Nepal and with the outside
world. Many civil and political rights, including freedom of movement
and freedom of assembly, were suspended.
Approximately three thousand political, human rights, and student activists
were detained for months after the coup. The crackdown forced many
human rights defenders to leave the country and others to curtail their work.
After months of internal bickering, the political parties in September 2005
organized a series of protests against the king’s usurpation of power.
However, a renewed clampdown on the press towards the end of 2005
demoralized the political opposition and the otherwise vibrant and defiant
media.
Despite the king’s promise to resolve the civil war, the conflict continued
with the same brutal intensity until September 2005, when the Maoists
declared a unilateral ceasefire. The government said that it doubted the sincerity
of the ceasefire and at this writing had not reciprocated. In spite of
renewed commitments to abide by international standards, both sides continue
to engage in serious violations of international humanitarian law. The
establishment of a U.N. human rights office has generated some hope that
the tide of abuses might be curtailed through vigorous monitoring and public
censure of violations.
Abuses Associated with the February Coup
The royalist government has further clamped down on civil and political
rights since February 1, 2005. The government prevents political parties and
trade and student unions from operating freely, the media is restricted, and
individuals have almost no recourse to the law. Extrajudicial killings, illegal
detentions, and “disappearances” continue to be instigated by the Royal Nepalese Army (RNA) while the Maoists continue to engage in extortion,
murder, forced displacement of civilians, and abductions. While these abuses
existed before the coup, the ability of human rights defenders and the media
to document abuses is now more difficult.
New laws and institutions have been designed to anchor the government’s
new restrictions in place. In the months after the takeover, the king maintained
emergency powers through legislative changes that solidified control
over key institutions, such as the National Human Rights Commission
(NHRC), civil service, and media. The Human Rights Commission Act was
amended to allow the king to change the composition of the NHRC
appointment committee, undermining its independence and neutrality.
Human Rights Watch found that the government and the RNA have consistently
hampered the work of the judiciary and NHRC, despite cosmetic steps
designed to give a contrary impression. Strict media regulations have prohibited
the broadcasting of any news critical of the king and the royal family.
FM radio stations, often the only source of news for most Nepalis, have been
banned from broadcasting news. A code of conduct restricting the activities
of national and international social organizations was introduced in
November. The code of conduct is another legal tool which can be used to
curtail the work of human rights NGOs and any other critic of the government.
The king’s refusal to cede any authority to political parties has polarized the
parties and reduced any chance of dialogue. The government has reacted violently
to peaceful demonstrations instigated by the increasingly frustrated
parties. As a result, the parties have reached out to the Maoists in a bid to
isolate the king, which has resulted in the government labeling of them as
“terrorists.”
Abuses Associated with the Civil War
Both sides continue to commit abuses against civilians. Assisting or refusing
to assist either side puts villagers at risk of reprisals by the army or the
Maoists. Both sides use civilian militias, and the RNA has provided support
for Village Defense Forces. The threat posed by these militias was starkly demonstrated in Kapilvastu where mobs associated with the Village Defense
Force went on a three-day rampage in retaliation for a Maoist attack on two
village officials. At least 46 people were killed, most of them unarmed civilians,
and a 14-year-old girl was raped. Six hundred private houses were
burned and destroyed.
In 2005 Nepal continued to have the largest reported number of enforced
“disappearances” in the world. In almost all cases, the disappeared persons
were last seen in the custody of government security forces in informal places
of detention, making it virtually impossible for family members and lawyers
to locate or gain access to them. While the NHRC declared that it had good
access to detention centers after the coup, interviews with NHRC members
revealed that they had to give prior written notice of visits, and that detainees
were removed prior to the visits. The ICRC, which has faced similar obstacles,
decided in May to halt its inspection of places of detention.
While there has been a limited degree of compliance with habeas corpus
orders, individuals are frequently rearrested without charges immediately
upon release. The army staged a few high profile courts martial in 2005, but
even individuals convicted of egregious crimes received light sentences. In
the Doramba case, the major responsible for the company which summarily
executed nineteen captured Maoists received just two years of imprisonment.
In the widely publicized case of the torture and killing of fifteen-year-old
Maina Sunuwar by government soldiers, a military tribunal only found only
three army officers guilty of negligence and sentenced them to six months in
prison; the court then set the men free for time served in pre-trial detention.
The RNA’s human rights cell, instead of investigating these cases, has
engaged in a concerted campaign to denounce those, including the NHRC,
who have documented and investigated allegations of war crimes. In
September 2005 the U.N. special rapporteur on torture visited Nepal and
said that torture and ill-treatment is systematically practiced in Nepal by the
police, armed police, and the RNA in order to extract confessions and to
obtain intelligence. In the case of the Maoists, he found “shocking evidence
of torture and mutilation” in order to extort money, punish non-cooperation, Maoist Abuses
The Maoists continue to perpetrate serious abuses. These include summary
executions of civilians, often preceded by torture, in many cases in front of
villagers and family members. The Maoists have assassinated or executed suspected
government informants, local political activists and non-Maoist party
officials, local government officials and civil servants, and individuals who
refuse extortion demands from the Maoists. The Maoists have also executed
off-duty army and police officers, often capturing them when they go to their
villages to visit family members. In April and May the Maoists carried out
several summary executions in Nawalparasi, Kapilvastu, and Chitwan districts.
In June, the Maoists detonated a bomb that exploded in the path of a
civilian bus carrying 150 passengers, claiming as justification the presence of
armed soldiers on the bus. At least thirty-nine civilians were killed. Basic civil
and political rights such as freedom of speech and association are essentially
nonexistent in Maoist-held areas.
The Maoists regularly abduct students from schools for political indoctrination.
Most students are released, although some remain behind in what the
Maoists describe as “voluntary” recruitment. In April 2005 Maoists carried
out attacks on several schools as part of a campaign for the closure of all private
schools. Hundreds of schools across the country remain closed due to
threats by Maoists.
There are reports of the Maoists using children in combat, particularly as
spies, couriers, and messengers. Human Rights Watch interviewed a twelveyear-
old year old girl who was forcibly abducted and forced to cook for a
Maoist unit. In spite of vehement denials by Maoists, journalists who have
traveled through Maoist-controlled areas describe meetings with children
being trained in their camps and engaging in front-line combat.
Violence and Discrimination Based on Gender and Sexual
Orientation
Gender-based violence—including domestic violence, sexual assault, and trafficking
into forced labor and forced prostitution—remains pervasive and
and intimidate others.
Maoist Abuses
The Maoists continue to perpetrate serious abuses. These include summary
executions of civilians, often preceded by torture, in many cases in front of
villagers and family members. The Maoists have assassinated or executed suspected
government informants, local political activists and non-Maoist party
officials, local government officials and civil servants, and individuals who
refuse extortion demands from the Maoists. The Maoists have also executed
off-duty army and police officers, often capturing them when they go to their
villages to visit family members. In April and May the Maoists carried out
several summary executions in Nawalparasi, Kapilvastu, and Chitwan districts.
In June, the Maoists detonated a bomb that exploded in the path of a
civilian bus carrying 150 passengers, claiming as justification the presence of
armed soldiers on the bus. At least thirty-nine civilians were killed. Basic civil
and political rights such as freedom of speech and association are essentially
nonexistent in Maoist-held areas.
The Maoists regularly abduct students from schools for political indoctrination.
Most students are released, although some remain behind in what the
Maoists describe as “voluntary” recruitment. In April 2005 Maoists carried
out attacks on several schools as part of a campaign for the closure of all private
schools. Hundreds of schools across the country remain closed due to
threats by Maoists.
There are reports of the Maoists using children in combat, particularly as
spies, couriers, and messengers. Human Rights Watch interviewed a twelveyear-
old year old girl who was forcibly abducted and forced to cook for a
Maoist unit. In spite of vehement denials by Maoists, journalists who have
traveled through Maoist-controlled areas describe meetings with children
being trained in their camps and engaging in front-line combat.
Violence and Discrimination Based on Gender and Sexual
Orientation
Gender-based violence—including domestic violence, sexual assault, and trafficking
into forced labor and forced prostitution—remains pervasive and deeply entrenched in Nepal. Legal discrimination continues to prevent
women from equal property, marriage, and divorce rights and from passing
citizenship to their children or foreign spouses. There is no domestic violence
law, and several limitations in the rape and sexual offense laws prevent
victims from seeking redress through the justice system.
Nepali authorities continue to turn a blind eye to a persistent pattern of
police abuse of metis (biological males who cross-dress), men suspected of
having sex with men; women suspected of having sex with women;, and
HIV/AIDS outreach workers. In other cases, police have deliberately failed
to protect such individuals against abuses.
Humanitarian Concerns
The conflict and coup led to increased concerns about the humanitarian situation
in 2005, the primary concern being the rising numbers of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). Recent IDPs have tended to be poor, often lower
caste people, fleeing threats from either Maoists or security forces. Many
have fled from the hills to urban centers in the Terai or India.
Nepal continues to host over one hundred thousand refugees from Bhutan
and has failed to make progress in finding a durable solution to the fifteenyear
impasse. The office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees is
planning to withdraw assistance in 2005, leaving the fate of the refugees
uncertain. This population is at high risk of statelessness. Tibetan refugees
also were affected by the January 21 closure of the Tibetan Refugee Welfare
Office (TWRO), ostensibly because it was not registered. Only Nepali
nationals are permitted to register an organization.
Key International Actors
On April 11, 2005, the Government of Nepal and the U.N. Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) reached an agreement to
establish an office in Nepal to monitor and investigate abuses of human
rights by both parties to the conflict. The office has a mandate to independently
monitor the human rights situation as well as support the NHRC and civil society organizations. On September 16, the High Commissioner issued
a report on the office’s activities in Nepal which provided an overview of the
human rights situation. The report charged the government with extra-judicial
executions, disappearances, arbitrary arrests, and curbs on the rights of
free speech, assembly, and association.
With the exception of Chinese and Pakistani officials, who called the King’s
actions an internal matter for Nepal, international reaction to the King’s
takeover was uniformly critical. The United States., United Kingdom, and
India recalled their ambassadors following the coup. Several other governments
issued statements condemning the King’s actions. All major arms-supplying
countries suspended lethal assistance.
In late 2004, the U.S. Congress passed provisions linking further security
assistance to Nepal with government efforts to resolve disappearances, comply
with habeas corpus orders, cooperate with the NHRC, and take steps to
end torture by security forces. The U.S. has determined that these conditions
have not been met.
Donors have had difficulty implementing their programs given the security
situation and the political uncertainty. The government has also acknowledged
lower levels of development spending due to the security situation.
Since February 1, 2005, most donors have opted to focus on direct service
delivery rather than budgetary support.