 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy. Its society is
 highly traditional. Under the Constitution the King
 is the sole source of authority for all governmental
 institutions. The Constitution of 1962, as amended,
 provides for the protection of many internationally
 recognized human rights. The Government has released
 most political detainees and liberalized the political
 environment. Nonetheless, those laws and provisions of
 the Constitution which restrict basic rights, or provide
 the Government with the means to restrict those rights,
 have not been amended or repealed.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by law in Nepal. There have been
 one or two unsubstantiated reports of police brutality
 in the past few years, but the Department of State does
 not believe torture is practiced in Nepal's prisons.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Capital punishment is permitted under the Treason Act of
 1961. Under its provisions, four persons have been
 sentenced to death, only one of whom was executed (in
 1964 under the previous King) when he failed to request
 the King's mercy. Nepalese prison conditions are poor,
 reflecting the general standard of living, but political
 prisoners have usually received better treatment than
 those convicted of criminal acts, in terms of visita-
 tions, reading and writing material'and meals from home.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Public Security Act of 1971 provides for preventive
 detention and "other measures" as may be required to
 
 (0 )
 
 
 600
 "maintain peace and security." Opponents of the mon-
 archy have in the past been jailed for long periods
 of time without charge or access to courts. To the
 knowledge of the Department of State, fewer than ten
 people continue to be held under the Security Act.
 Nepalese opposition figures estimate that approximately
 one hundred prisoners currently held under criminal
 statues may have been arrested for politically-inspired
 actions. Most have been arrested for political activi-
 ties which we would not consider criminal.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Judges are appointed by the Government. In any signifi-
 cant case involving political consideration, a judge
 would not rule in favor of the defense without at least
 tacit Government approval. Most non-political cases
 are considered on their merits. The Government occa-
 sionally loses cases. Trials in recent years have
 usually been held in public, but the Government may
 decide that a case will be tried in camera.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Arbitrary search and seizure has not been a significant
 human rights problem in Nepal. Except in the few
 instances where the police are relieved of such obli-
 gations by specific laws, including the narcotics
 control legislation, arrest and search warrants are
 required prior to search and seizure.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The economic policies of the Government of Nepal have
 attempted, with some success, to allocate scarce
 resources to meet the basic needs of its people. Total
 anticipated expenditures by the Government for develop-
 ment projects have increased from 64 percent to 71
 percent of the national budget over the past three years.
 The emphasis has been on seeking to increase the economic
 growth rate and on building the communications and trans-
 portation networks required to integrate isolated areas
 
 
 601
 of the country. Nepalese decision makers have in the
 past few years reoriented their development programs to
 deal more directly with poverty. This goal is given
 particular emphasis in the current budget, with
 projected expenditure increases of over fifty percent
 for programs in agriculture, health, rural water and
 local government. The King has assumed the leadership
 of the economic development effort. His insistence
 that programs be spread among the four development
 regions, rather than concentrated in Kathmandu and the
 lowlands, tends to benefit the poorer areas of the
 country.
 Corruption is a problem which continues to demand the
 Government's attention. The Government is now committed
 to enforcing its anti-corruption laws.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of speech and the press in Nepal is restricted
 by the principle that the monarchy as an institution
 and the Royal Family in their persons are above criti-
 cism. The Press and Publication Act permits the Govern-
 ment to ban summarily any newspapers for violating this
 principle or for actions deemed harmful to the present
 political system. This power has been utilized only
 once during the past year, in a case of a cartoon attack
 on the King. The Act serves as a check on the local
 press, as does the dependence of the newspapers on
 advertising. The two principal daily newspapers, one
 Nepali and the other English, are government organs,
 but approximately twenty other newspapers carry on a
 spirited critique of governmental actions. Foreign
 publications, usually individual editions of Indian
 newspapers, were occasionally banned last year because
 they published articles the Government regarded as
 offensive.
 Political parties are banned. The Government permits
 individuals to criticize the system privately but organized
 criticism of the Government is discouraged. The
 
 
 602
 advocacy and protection of the interest of such groups
 as women and labor is the responsibility of organiza-
 tions established under the Constitution. These organi-
 zations are generally ineffective. The Government made
 changes in the legal code in favor of women's rights
 during the International Women's Year (1975), but the
 implementation of these changes in the face of social
 traditions has been slow.
 The Nepalese are proud of a long tradition of religious
 tolerance, exemplified by Hindus and Buddhists worshipping
 in each other's shrines, but Nepalese law prohibits
 religious proselytizing. Under the law all persons
 are to be treated as equals, but caste and other social
 barriers remain. The Government is using its influence,
 through speeches and symbolic acts, to attempt to
 dismantle these impediments to social mobility.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no general restrictions on movement within
 the country. The Government exercises tight control over
 the issuance of passports and has restricted their valid-
 ity to specified countries.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Political parties were banned in 1960 and replaced by
 the Panchyat (assembly) system of indirect elections,
 which is designed to involve the people in public affairs
 while protecting the Crown's authority. The Government
 continues to exercise considerable influence over the
 selection of candidates for the village, district and
 national Panchyats. This interference was eased somewhat
 by the decision last year to permit competition in those
 elections in which a genuine consensus in favor of a
 single candidate does not exist. In the past year the
 Government has demonstrated a more tolerant attitude
 towards criticism and other political activities by. those
 associated with formerly legal political parties, but
 loyalty to the King and to the Panchayat system continues
 to be a prerequisite for legal political activity.
 B. P. Koirala, Nepal's former Prime Minister and primary
 opposition figure, has twice been temporarily released
 from prison for medical treatment in the United States.
 
 
 603
 He was not rearrested when he returned to Nepal in
 August 1978, as he had been on the previous occasion.
 He has been acquitted of five of the seven criminal
 charges against him and remains free on parole in
 Kathmandu pending the outcome of his continuing trial
 and the appeal process.
 4. Government Attitudes and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The Government of Nepal allowed representatives of
 Amnesty International to visit the country in late 1977
 to report on human rights violations. Amnesty Inter-
 national had expressed concern about the arrest of
 specific individuals. All but two of the individuals
 mentioned in the 1975-77 Amnesty International Reports
 have subsequently been released.
 
 
